--- Page 2 ---
Learning iOS Security
Enhance the security of your iOS platform and 
applications using iOS-centric security techniques
Allister Banks
Charles S. Edge
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI

--- Page 3 ---
Learning iOS Security
Copyright © 2015 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the authors, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: February 2015
Production reference: 2240215
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-78355-174-3
www.packtpub.com

--- Page 4 ---
Credits
Authors
Allister Banks
Charles S. Edge
Reviewers
Jeremy Agostino
William Smith
Commissioning Editor
Ashwin Nair
Acquisition Editor
Hemal Desai
Content Development Editor
Mamata Walkar
Technical Editor
Menza Mathew
Copy Editors
Jasmine Nadar
Wishva Shah
Project Coordinator
Shipra Chawhan
Proofreaders
Safis Editing
Paul Hindle
Indexer
Tejal Soni
Production Coordinator
Melwyn D'sa
Cover Work
Melwyn D'sa

--- Page 5 ---
About the Authors
Allister Banks is an enthusiast. He's very excited to be in the exceedingly  
limited, exclusive club of coauthors of Charles S. Edge. After working for a  
decade with IT consulting companies on both the coasts of the U.S., he now  
works for a medical-focused institution with education and data center aspects. 
He has given speeches at LOPSA-East, MacTech Conference, and MacAdmins 
Conference at Penn State. He lives in New York. He contributes to various open 
source projects and speaks enough Japanese to order food.
Charles S. Edge has been working with Apple products since he was a child. 
Professionally, Charles started with the Mac OS and Apple server offerings in 1999 
after working of years with various flavors of Unix. Charles began his consulting 
career with Support Technologies and Andersen Consulting. As the chief technology 
officer of 318, Inc., a consulting firm in Santa Monica, California, Charles built and 
nurtured a team of over 50 engineers, which was the largest Mac team in the world 
at that time. Charles is now a product manager at JAMF Software, with a focus on 
Bushel (http://www.bushel.com).
Charles has spoken at a variety of conferences including DefCon, BlackHat, 
LinuxWorld, MacWorld, MacSysAdmin, and Apple Worldwide Developers 
Conference. Charles has also written 12 books, over 3,000 blog posts, and a  
number of printed articles on Apple products.

--- Page 6 ---
About the Reviewers
Jeremy Agostino is a longtime Mac and iOS developer with a professional 
focus on hardware support and device drivers. He has assisted in the design and 
implementation of custom technical solutions to manage some of the largest iOS 
deployments in the U.S. Jeremy is currently leading the engineering team at Ground 
Control Solutions, where he is developing a powerful deployment and management 
tool for iOS devices.
William Smith is a solutions architect for 318, Inc., which is an IT consultancy that is 
based in Santa Monica, California. He is a technology veteran with more than 20 years 
of experience. He lives in Saint Paul, Minnesota, where he has provided training and 
consulting services on behalf of customers such as Apple and JAMF Software.
William enjoys writing and presenting on technology topics and he has spoken at 
JAMF Nation User Conference, MacIT, PSU MacAdmins, and other conferences. He 
has been a Microsoft MVP for more than 11 years and is co-owner of OfficeforMacHelp.
com. Currently, he is a part of the steering committee for the new Twin Cities Mac 
Admins professionals group—a community that supports all things Apple, from 
education to enterprise.

--- Page 7 ---
www.PacktPub.com
Support files, eBooks, discount offers, and more
For support files and downloads related to your book, please visit www.PacktPub.com.
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF 
and ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.
com and as a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. 
Get in touch with us at service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles,  
sign up for a range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers  
on Packt books and eBooks.
TM
https://www2.packtpub.com/books/subscription/packtlib
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital 
book library. Here, you can search, access, and read Packt's entire library of books.
Why subscribe?
• Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
• Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content
• On demand and accessible via a web browser
Free access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access 
PacktLib today and view 9 entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials for 
immediate access.

--- Page 8 ---
Table of Contents
Preface 1
Chapter 1: iOS Security Overview 5
Pairing 6
Backing up your device 8
iCloud backups 8
Taking backups using iTunes 9
Viewing iOS data in iTunes 11
Initial security checklist 13
Configuring a passcode 14
Configuring privacy settings 17
Safari and built-in App protections 21
Predictive search and spotlight 24
Summary 26
Chapter 2: Introducing App Security 27
Installing apps 28
Blocking access to the App Store 29
Single App mode, App Lock, and Guided Access 31
App communication 33
Handoff and Continuity 34
Keybags and keychains 35
Keyboards and extensions 36
Securing what extensions can access 36
User context 37
Sandboxing and App data storage 37
Introduction to in-house App development 38
Summary 40

--- Page 9 ---
Table of Contents
[ ii ]
Chapter 3: Encrypting Devices 41
Secure boot and activating iOS 42
Passbook and Touch ID for Apple Pay 43
Introduction to iOS network communication 46
AirDrop 47
A bug or a feature? 48
VPN (Always-On, APN, Per-App, On-Demand) 49
Global HTTP Proxy, caching, and the web content filter 51
Privacy-related concerns 52
Lesser-known ways for Apple to gather diagnostics 53
Health app 54
Configuration profiles 57
Signing, encryption, and delivery 61
Summary 63
Chapter 4: Organizational Controls 65
Apple Configurator 66
Intended workflows 67
The interaction modes – Prepare, Supervise, and Assign 68
The importance of supervision 70
Apps, VPP, and Apple Configurator 73
Mass restoring and naming of devices 74
Backup concerns 75
Configurator as chaperone 76
Activation Lock and Find My iPhone 77
Addressing the rough spots 79
DEP versus Apple Configurator 80
Guided Access versus App Lock versus Single App Mode 81
ActiveSync 81
Summary 82
Chapter 5: Mobile Device Management 85
Introducing MDM 86
Configurator versus MDM 86
The Profile Manager 87
Preparing the Profile Manager Server 87
Preparing Profile Manager 90
Completing Post Configuration tasks 94
Using Profile Manager 95
Enrolling into Profile Manager 96
Device management 98
Passcode policies 99

--- Page 10 ---
Table of Contents
[ iii ]
Introducing Bushel 101
Setup 102
The enrollment process 103
Restrictions 104
Volume Purchasing Program and MDM 105
Summary 106
Chapter 6: Debugging and Conclusion 107
Xcode 107
Dive deeper with libimobiledevice 111
Installing libimobiledevice using Homebrew 112
Using idevicesyslog and idevicepair 112
Using idevicedate and ideviceinstaller 113
App communications 116
Identifying devices 116
Listening to network communications 116
Apple IDs and Apps 117
Forensics 119
Application security 122
Viewing an App 122
Summary 124
Index 125

--- Page 12 ---
Preface
Nowadays, iOS is becoming more and more prevalent in companies and larger 
organizations. Whether this is a trend that is driven by Bring Your Own Device 
(BYOD) or something that is coming from within the IT department, our knowledge 
of platforms is being stretched more and more all the time. It's getting harder and 
harder to be an expert on every platform that is in use in our organizations!
You need to secure your iOS devices. Learning iOS security gives you the knowledge 
to build security into large-scale iOS deployments. This book takes you through 
good security practices; these include configuring privacy options to keep personal 
data away from prying eyes, learning about encryption options to keep data safe 
at rest, securing apps to reduce the risks introduced by third-party apps, and then 
laying down practical steps and procedures for carrying out these steps, both  
on-screen on devices and at scale using Apple Configurator, profiles, and Mobile 
Device Management (MDM) solutions.
This book also includes a section on debugging and viewing data so that you can 
check out how to further secure items not covered in detail in the book. We teach 
you how to provide enterprise-class security to your iPhone, iPad, and iPod Touch 
deployments. This includes a quick run-down of basic security steps and mass 
deployment of these steps to aid in your large-scale deployment of iOS devices.
This book is meant to be an easy-to-digest guide that follows real-world examples  
to implement best security practices. Each topic is covered in a theoretical context 
and further resources are provided where they are needed/applicable.

--- Page 13 ---
Preface
[ 2 ]
What this book covers
Chapter 1, iOS Security Overview, is a quick-and-dirty overview of the many steps to 
take to initially secure an iPad, iPhone, and iPod Touch. The purpose of this chapter 
isn't to go into too much depth with any given technology, but to provide a cheat 
sheet of sorts to get you started with iOS security.
Chapter 2, Introducing App Security, is a more thorough review of how to choose 
apps and secure them during an iOS deployment. Here, we look at an overview of 
sandboxing techniques and how to use Single App Mode and keybags. We also look 
at in-house Apps.
Chapter 3, Encrypting Devices, explains the encryption types and techniques that  
are used in iOS. Here, we look at Touch ID, Apple Pay, network encryption, and 
privacy concerns.
Chapter 4, Organizational Controls, introduces Apple Configurator and profile 
management. Here, we also look at the Find My iPhone app as it pertains to 
Activation Lock, ActiveSync policies (EAS Policies), and device supervision.
Chapter 5, Mobile Device Management, looks at Apple's Profile Manager and a  
simple third-party MDM called Bushel. Here, we look at Over the Air (OTA)  
profile management.
Chapter 6, Debugging and Conclusion, covers ways to troubleshoot and debug  
devices in larger deployments. In this chapter, we'll look at how to find logs and 
interpret them, how to get more data than you can use from devices, and then we 
will wrap up the book.
What you need for this book
This book focuses on using a Mac to manage Apple iOS devices. Therefore, you should 
have a Mac that runs OS X 10.10 or a higher version and an iOS device that runs iOS 8 
or a higher version. You can use a Windows or Linux computer instead of a Mac, but 
not all of the content covered in this book will be applicable if you do this.
Who this book is for
This book is intended for systems administrators and security professionals who 
want to learn how to implement good security practices on iOS devices. The readers 
should know something about the Information Technology industry, but they need 
not be veterans who have an experience of more than 30 years.

--- Page 14 ---
Preface
[ 3 ]
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish between 
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an 
explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text, database table names, folder names, filenames, file extensions, 
pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles are shown as follows: 
"While not exactly simple, one could use openssl on various operating systems,  
in tandem with a root certificate from a trusted certificate authority, to apply 
signatures to configuration profiles, which devices will then see as trusted."
Any command-line input or output is written as follows:
codesign -d -vv /Users/abanks/Music/iTunes/iTunes\ Media/Mobile\ 
Applications/Dropbox\ 3.5.2/Payload/Dropbox.app
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the 
screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: "This is 
exposed to end users with a Send All Traffic slider when optional.
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for  
us to develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, 
and mention the book title via the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.

--- Page 15 ---
Preface
[ 4 ]
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things  
to help you to get the most from your purchase.
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or 
the code—we would be grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so, you can 
save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this 
book. If you find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.
com/submit-errata, selecting your book, clicking on the errata submission form link, 
and entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your submission 
will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded on our website, or added to any list of 
existing errata, under the Errata section of that title. Any existing errata can be viewed 
by selecting your title from http://www.packtpub.com/support.
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. 
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you 
come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can 
pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected  
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem  
with any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.

--- Page 16 ---
iOS Security Overview
Out of the box, iOS is one of the most secure operating systems available. There are a 
number of factors that contribute to the elevated security level. These include the fact 
that users cannot access the underlying operating system. Apps also have data in a 
silo (sandbox), so instead of accessing the system's internals they can access the silo. 
App developers choose whether to store settings such as passwords in the app or on 
iCloud Keychain, which is a secure location for such data on a device. Finally, Apple 
has a number of controls in place on devices to help protect users while providing an 
elegant user experience.
However, devices can be made even more secure than they are now. In this chapter, 
we're going to get some basic security tasks under our belt in order to get some basic 
best practices of security. Where we feel more explanation is needed about what we 
did on devices, we'll explore the technology itself either in this chapter, or others.
This chapter will cover the following topics:
• Pairing
• Backing up your device
• Initial security checklist
• Safari and built-in app protection
• Predictive search and spotlight
To kick off the overview of iOS security, we'll quickly secure our systems by initially 
providing a simple checklist of tasks, where we'll configure a few device protections 
that we feel everyone should use. Then, we'll look at how to take a backup of our 
devices and finally, at how to use a built-in web browser and protections around  
a browser.

--- Page 17 ---
iOS Security Overview
[ 6 ]
Pairing
When you connect a device to a computer that runs iTunes for the first time, you 
are prompted to enter a password. Doing so allows you to synchronize the device 
to a computer. Applications that can communicate over this channel include iTunes, 
iPhoto, Xcode, and others.
To pair a device to a Mac, simply plug the device in (if you have a passcode, you'll 
need to enter that in order to pair the device.) When the device is plugged in, you'll 
be prompted on both the device and the computer to establish a trust. Simply tap on 
Trust on the iOS device, as shown in the following screenshot:
Trusting a computer

--- Page 18 ---
Chapter 1
[ 7 ]
For the computer to communicate with the iOS device, you'll also need to accept 
the pairing on your computer (although, when you use libimobiledevice, which 
is the command to pair, does not require doing so, because you use the command 
line to accept. This command is covered in Chapter 6, Debugging and Conclusion). 
When prompted, click on Continue to establish the pairing, as seen in the following 
screenshot (the screenshot is the same in Windows):
Trusting a device
When a device is paired, a file is created in /var/db/lockdown, which is the UDID 
of the device with a property list (plist) extension. A property list is an Apple 
XML file that stores a variety of attributes. In Windows, iOS data is stored in the 
MobileSync folder, which you can access by navigating to \Users\(username)\
AppData\Roaming\Apple Computer\MobileSync. The information in this file sets 
up a trust between the computers and includes the following attributes:
• DeviceCertificate: This certificate is unique to each device.
• EscrowBag: The keybag of EscrowBag contains class keys used to decrypt  
the device.
• HostCertificate: This certificate is for the host who's paired with iOS 
devices (usually, the same for all files that you've paired devices with, on 
your computer).
• HostID: This is a generated ID for the host.
• HostPrivateKey: This is the private key for your Mac (should be the same in 
all files on a given computer).
• RootCertificate: This is the certificate used to generate keys (should be the 
same in all files on a given computer).
• RootPrivateKey: This is the private key of the computer that runs iTunes for 
that device.
• SystemBUID: This refers to the ID of the computer that runs iTunes.
• WiFiMACAddress: This is the Mac address of the Wi-Fi interface of the device 
that is paired to the computer. If you do not have an active Wi-Fi interface, 
MAC is still used while pairing.

--- Page 19 ---
iOS Security Overview
[ 8 ]
Why does this matter? It's important to know how a device interfaces with a 
computer. These files can be moved between computers and contain a variety  
of information about a device, including private keys.
Having keys isn't all that is required for a computer to communicate with a device. 
When the devices are interfacing with a computer over USB, if you have a passcode 
enabled on the device, you will be required to enter that passcode in order to unlock 
the device.
Once a computer is able to communicate with a device, you need to be careful as the 
backups of a device, apps that get synchronized to a device, and other data that gets 
exchanged with a device can be exposed while at rest on devices.
Backing up your device
What do most people do to maximize the security of iOS devices? Before we do 
anything, we need to take a backup of our devices. This protects the device from us 
by providing a restore point. This also secures the data from the possibility of losing 
it through a silly mistake. There are two ways, which are most commonly used to 
take backups: iCloud and iTunes. As the names imply, the first makes backups for 
the data on Apple's cloud service and the second on desktop computers.
We'll cover how to take a backup on iCloud first.
iCloud backups
An iCloud account comes with free storage, to back up your Apple devices. An iOS 
device takes a backup to Apple servers and can be restored when a new device is set 
up from those same servers (it's a screen that appears during the activation process 
of a new device. Also, it appears as an option in iTunes if you back up to iTunes over 
USB—covered later in this chapter).
Setting up and checking the status of iCloud backups is a straightforward process. 
From the Settings app, tap on iCloud and then Backup. As you can see from the 
Backup screen, you have two options, iCloud Backup, which enables automatic 
backups of the device to your iCloud account, and Back Up Now, which runs an 
immediate backup of the device.

--- Page 20 ---
Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
iCloud backups
Allowing iCloud to take backups on devices is optional. As you'll see in Chapter 5, 
Mobile Device Management, and Chapter 6, Debugging and Conclusion, you can disable 
access to iCloud and iCloud backups. However, doing so is rarely a good idea as you 
are limiting the functionality of the device and putting the data on your device at 
risk, if that data isn't backed up another way such as through iTunes. Many people 
have reservations about storing data on public clouds; especially, data as private as 
phone data (texts, phone call history, and so on). For more information on Apple's 
security and privacy around iCloud, refer to http://support.apple.com/en-us/
HT202303. If you do not trust Apple or its cloud, then you can also take a backup of 
your device using iTunes, described in the next section.
Taking backups using iTunes
Originally, iTunes was used to take backups for iOS devices. You can still use iTunes 
and it's likely you will have a second backup even if you are using iCloud, simply for 
a quick restore if nothing else.
Backups are usually pretty small. The reason is that the operating system is not part 
of backups, since users can't edit any of those files. Therefore, you can use an ipsw 
file (the operating system) to restore a device. 

--- Page 21 ---
iOS Security Overview
[ 10 ]
These are accessed through Apple Configurator (which is covered further in  
Chapter 4, Organizational Controls), or through iTunes if you have a restore file  
waiting to be installed. These can be seen in ~/Library/iTunes, and the name  
of the device and its software updates, as can be seen in the following screenshot:
IPSW files
Backups are stored in the ~/Library/Application Support/MobileSync/Backup 
directory. Here, you'll see a number of directories that are associated with the 
UDID of the devices, and within those, you'll see a number of files that make up the 
modular incremental backups beyond the initial backup. It's a pretty smart system 
and allows you to restore a device at different points in time without taking too long 
to perform each backup.
Backups are stored in the \Documents and Settings\USERNAME\Application 
Data\Apple Computer\MobileSync\Backup\ directory on Windows XP and in 
the \Users\USERNAME\AppData\Roaming\Apple Computer\MobileSync\Backup\ 
directory for newer operating systems.
To enable an iTunes back up, plug a device into a computer, and then open iTunes. 
Click on the device for it to show the device details screen. The top section of the 
screen is for Backups (in the following screenshot, you can set a back up to This 
computer, which takes a backup on the computer you are on).
I would recommend you to always choose the Encrypt iPhone 
backup option as it forces you to save a password in order to 
restore the back up.

--- Page 22 ---
Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
Additionally, you can use the Back Up Now button to kick off the first back up, as 
shown in the following screenshot:
iTunes
Viewing iOS data in iTunes
To show why it's important to encrypt backups, let's look at what can be pulled out 
of those backups. There are a few tools that can extract backups, provided you have a 
password. Here, we'll look at iBackup Extractor to view the backup of your browsing 
history, calendars, call history, contacts, iMessages, notes, photos, and voicemails.

--- Page 23 ---
iOS Security Overview
[ 12 ]
To get started, download iBackup Extractor from http://www.wideanglesoftware.
com/ibackupextractor. When you open iBackup Extractor for the first time, simply 
choose the device backup you wish to extract in iBackup Extractor. As you can see 
in following screenshot, you will be prompted for a password in order to unlock the 
Backup keybag. Enter the password to unlock the system.
Unlock the backups
Note that the file tree in the following screenshot gives away some information on 
the structure of the iOS filesystem, or at least, the data stored in the backups of the 
iOS device, which we'll cover in detail in Chapter 6, Debugging and Conclusion. For 
now, simply click on Browser to see a list of files that can be extracted from the 
backup, as you can see in the next screenshot:

--- Page 24 ---
Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
View device contents using iBackup Extractor
Note the prevalence of SQL databases in the files. Most apps use these types 
of databases to store data on devices. Also, check out the other options such as 
extracting notes (many that were possibly deleted), texts (some that have been 
deleted from devices), and other types of data from devices.
Now that we've exhausted backups and proven that you should really put a 
password in place for your back ups, let's finally get to some basic security tasks  
to be performed on these devices!
Initial security checklist
Apple has built iOS to be one of the most secure operating systems in the world. This 
has been made possible by restricting access to much of the operating system by end 
users, unless you jailbreak a device. In this book, we don't cover jail-breaking devices 
much due to the fact that securing the devices then becomes a whole new topic. 
Instead, we have focused on what you need to do, how you can do those tasks,  
what the impacts are, and, how to manage security settings based on a policy.

--- Page 25 ---
iOS Security Overview
[ 14 ]
The basic steps required to secure an iOS device start with encrypting devices, which 
is done by assigning a passcode to a device. We will then configure how much inactive 
time before a device requires a PIN and accordingly manage the privacy settings. 
These settings allow us to get some very basic security features under our belt, and set 
the stage to explain what some of the features actually do, and how we can set them 
via a policy in subsequent chapters of this book.
Configuring a passcode
The first thing most of us need to do on an iOS device is configure a passcode for  
the device. Several things happen when a passcode is enabled, as shown in the 
following steps:
1. The device is encrypted.
2. The device then requires a passcode to wake up.
3. An idle timeout is automatically set that puts the device to sleep after a few 
minutes of inactivity.
This means that three of the most important things you can do to secure a device are 
enabled when you set up a passcode.
Best of all, Apple recommends setting up a passcode during the initial set up of new 
devices. You can manage passcode settings using policies (or profiles as Apple likes 
to call them in iOS), which we will cover in Chapter 4, Organizational Controls, and 
Chapter 5, Mobile Device Management.
Best of all—you can set a passcode and then use your fingerprint on the Home 
button instead of that passcode. We have found that by the time our phone is out 
of our pocket and if our finger is on the home button, the device is unlocked by the 
time we check it. With iPhone 6 and higher versions, you can now use that same 
fingerprint to secure payment information, which is covered in Chapter 2, Introducing 
App Security.
Check whether a passcode has been configured, and if needed, configure a passcode 
using the Settings app. The Settings app is by default on the Home screen where 
many settings on the device, including Wi-Fi networks the device has been joined to, 
app preferences, mail accounts, and other settings are configured.
• To set a passcode, open the Settings app and tap on Touch ID & Passcode
• If a passcode has been set, you will see the Turn Passcode Off (as seen in the 
following screenshot) option
• If a passcode has not been set, then you can do so at this screen as well

--- Page 26 ---
Chapter 1
[ 15 ]
• Additionally, you can change a passcode that has been set using the Change 
Passcode button and define a fingerprint or additional fingerprints that can 
be used with a touch ID
There are two options in the USE TOUCH ID FOR section of the screen. You can 
choose whether, or not, you need to enter the passcode in order to unlock a phone, 
which you should use unless the device is also used by small children or as a kiosk. 
In these cases, you don't need to encrypt or take a backup of the device anyway. 
The second option is to force the entering of a passcode while using the App Store 
and iTunes. This can cost you money if someone else is using your device, so let the 
default value remain, which requires you to enter a passcode to unlock the options.
Configure a Passcode

--- Page 27 ---
iOS Security Overview
[ 16 ]
The passcode settings are very easy to configure; so, they should be configured when 
possible. Scroll down on this screen and you'll see several other features, as shown 
in the next screenshot. The first option on the screen is Simple Passcode. Most users 
want to use a simple pin with an iOS device. Trying to use alphanumeric and long 
passcodes simply causes most users to try to circumvent the requirement. To add a 
fingerprint as a passcode, simply tap on Add a Fingerprint…, which you can see in 
the preceding screenshot, and follow the onscreen instructions.
Additionally, the following can be accessed when the device is locked, and you can 
choose to turn them off:
• Today: This shows an overview of upcoming calendar items
• Notifications View: This shows you the recent push notifications  
(apps that have updates on the device)
• Siri: This represents the voice control of the device
• Passbook: This tool is used to make payments and display tickets for  
concert venues and meetups
• Reply with Message: This tool allows you to send a text reply to an incoming 
call (useful if you're on the treadmill)
Each organization can decide whether it considers these options to be a security  
risk and direct users how to deal with them, or they can implement a policy around 
these options.
Passcode Settings

--- Page 28 ---
Chapter 1
[ 17 ]
There aren't a lot of security options around passcodes and encryption because by 
and large, Apple secures the device by giving you fewer options than you'll actually 
use. Under the hood, (for example through Apple Configurator and Mobile Device 
Management, covered in Chapter 4, Organizational Controls and Chapter 5, Mobile 
Device Management, respectively) there are a lot of other options, but these aren't 
exposed to end users of devices. For the most part, a simple four-character passcode 
will suffice for most environments. When you complicate passcodes, devices become 
much more difficult to unlock, and users tend to look for ways around passcode 
enforcement policies. The passcode is only used on the device,  
so complicating the passcode will only reduce the likelihood that a passcode would 
be guessed before swiping open a device, which typically occurs within 10 tries.
Finally, to disable a passcode and therefore encryption, simply go to the  
Touch ID & Passcode option in the Settings app and tap on Turn Passcode Off.
Configuring privacy settings
Once a passcode is set and the device is encrypted, it's time to configure the privacy 
settings. Third-party apps cannot communicate with one another by default in iOS. 
Therefore, you must enable communication between them (also between third-party 
apps and built-in iOS apps that have APIs). This is a fundamental concept when it 
comes to securing iOS devices.

--- Page 29 ---
iOS Security Overview
[ 18 ]
To configure privacy options, open the Settings app and tap on the entry for Privacy. 
On the Privacy screen, you'll see a list of each app that can be communicated with by 
other apps, as shown in the following screenshot:
Privacy Options

--- Page 30 ---
Chapter 1
[ 19 ]
As an example, tap on the Location Services entry, as shown in the next screenshot. 
Here, you can set which apps can communicate with Location Services and when. If 
an app is set to While Using, the app can communicate with Location Services when 
the app is open. If an app is set to Always, then the app can only communicate with 
Location Services when the app is open and not when it runs in the background.
Configure Location Services

--- Page 31 ---
iOS Security Overview
[ 20 ]
On the Privacy screen, tap on Photos. Here, you have fewer options because unlike 
the location of a device, you can't access photos when the app is running in the 
background. Here, you can enable or disable an app by communicating with the 
photo library on a device, as seen in the next screenshot:
Configure what Apps can access your Camera Roll
Each app should be configured in such a way that it can communicate with the 
features of iOS or other apps that are absolutely necessary.
Other privacy options which you can consider disabling include Siri and Handoff. 
Siri has the voice controls of an iOS. Because Siri can be used even when your phone 
is locked, consider to disable it by opening the Settings app, tapping on General and 
then on Siri, and you will be able disable the voice controls. To disable Handoff, you 
should use the General System Preference pane in any OS X computer paired to an 
iOS device. There, uncheck the Allow Handoff between this Mac and your iCloud 
devices option.

--- Page 32 ---
Chapter 1
[ 21 ]
Safari and built-in App protections
Web browsers have access to a lot of data. One of the most popular targets on other 
platforms has been web browsers. The default browser on an iOS device is Safari.
Open the Settings app and then tap on Safari. The Safari preferences to secure iOS 
devices include the following:
• Passwords & AutoFill: This is a screen that includes contact information,  
a list of saved passwords and credit cards used in web browsers. This data  
is stored in an iCloud Keychain if iCloud Keychain has been enabled in  
your phone.
• Favorites: This performs the function of bookmark management. This shows 
bookmarks in iOS.
• Open Links: This configures how links are managed.
• Block Pop-ups: This enables a pop-up blocker.
Scroll down and you'll see the Privacy & Security options (as seen in the next 
screenshot). Here, you can do the following:
• Do Not Track: By this, you can block the tracking of browsing activity  
by websites.
• Block Cookies: A cookie is a small piece of data sent from a website to a 
visitor's browser. Many sites will send cookies to third-party sites, so the 
management of cookies becomes an obstacle to the privacy of many. By 
default, Safari only allows cookies from websites that you visit (Allow from 
Websites I Visit). Set the Cookies option to Always Block in order to disable 
its ability to accept any cookies; set the option to Always Allow to accept 
cookies from any source; and set the option to Allow from Current Website 
Only to only allow cookies from certain websites.
• Fraudulent Website Warning: This blocks phishing attacks (sites that only 
exist to steal personal information).
• Clear History and Website Data: This clears any cached history, web files, 
and passwords from the Safari browser.

--- Page 33 ---
iOS Security Overview
[ 22 ]
• Use Cellular Data: When this option is turned off, it disables web traffic 
over cellular connections (so web traffic will only work when the phone is 
connected to a Wi-Fi network).
Configure Privacy Settings for Safari

--- Page 34 ---
Chapter 1
[ 23 ]
There are also a number of advanced options that can be accessed by clicking on the 
Advanced button, as shown in the following screenshot:
Configure the Advanced Safari Options
These advanced options include the following:
• Website Data: This option (as you can see in the next screenshot) shows 
the amount of data stored from each site that caches files on the device, and 
allows you to swipe left on these entries to access any files saved for the site. 
Tap on Remove All Website Data to remove data for all the sites at once.
• JavaScript: This allows you to disable any JavaScripts from running on sites 
the device browses.

--- Page 35 ---
iOS Security Overview
[ 24 ]
• Web Inspector: This shows the device in the Develop menu on a computer 
connected to the device. If the Web Inspector option has been disabled,  
use Advanced Preferences in the Safari Preferences option of Safari.
View website data on devices
Browser security is an important aspect of any operating system.
Predictive search and spotlight
The final aspect of securing the settings on an iOS device that we'll cover in this 
chapter includes predictive search and spotlight. When you use the spotlight feature 
in iOS, usage data is sent to Apple along with the information from Location Services. 
Additionally, you can search for anything on a device, including items previously 
blocked from being accessed. The ability to search for blocked content warrants the 
inclusion in locking down a device.

--- Page 36 ---
Chapter 1
[ 25 ]
That data is then used to generate future searches. This feature can be disabled by 
opening the Settings app, tap on Privacy, then Location Services, and then System 
Services. Simply slide Spotlight Suggestions to Off to disable the location data from 
going over that connection. To limit the type of data that spotlight sends, open the 
Settings app, tap on General, and then on Spotlight Search. Uncheck each item you 
don't want indexed in the Spotlight database. The following screenshot shows the 
mentioned options:
Configure What Spotlight Indexes
Now that we've looked at some basic tactical tasks that secure devices, it's time to 
turn our attention to the theory behind some of these and to make sure your apps  
are secure, in the next chapter.

--- Page 37 ---
iOS Security Overview
[ 26 ]
Summary
This chapter was a whirlwind of quick changes that secure a device. Here, we paired 
devices, took a backup, set a passcode, and secured app data and Safari. This is by 
far the simplest chapter of this book, but also lays the groundwork to cover some 
of the more esoteric content. In this chapter, we showed how to manually do some 
tasks that we will set via policies later in the book.
In the next chapter, we will move on to securing apps and learn how apps 
communicate with one another.

--- Page 38 ---
Introducing App Security
In this chapter, we will look at one of the most important things to secure on iOS: 
apps. This includes data within apps, the context in which apps are allowed to run, 
how apps communicate via extensions, and how newer features in OS continue to put 
the focus on an Apple ID as the most important account to control on your device. 
However, the reason why most people sign up for an Apple ID is to install apps.
Many of the concepts discussed in this chapter will be an addition to or a 
reinforcement of our knowledge about the OS X architecture upon which iOS is based, 
which will be especially helpful if you are coming from the Windows or Blackberry 
platforms. Even Linux, with its process model echoing Unix, still has enough notable 
differences with the appliance-style computing experience showcased on iOS that it 
will be helpful to cover these more fundamental points. We will also briefly touch on 
in-house app development, which can be augmented by the management systems  
that we will be discussing in Chapter 4, Organizational Controls, and Chapter 5, Mobile 
Device Management.
The topics that we will cover in this chapter, which underpin app security, include: 
• How apps are distributed, installed, and restricted
• Single app mode (also known as Lock to App) and Guided Access
• Traditional and current inter-app (and device) communication
• Clarification of when keybags are utilized by iOS
• Keyboards, sandboxing, and extensions
• Introduction to securely distributing custom in-house apps

--- Page 39 ---
Introducing App Security
[ 28 ]
Installing apps
How to install an app is considered a trivial exercise at this point, with common 
advertisements doing nothing more than showing the icons of the platform to 
suggest that they want you to get their app from the corresponding store. That being 
said, there are other ways to download and install an app than simply opening an 
app store on a device and tapping on Get. An app can be pushed over the air with 
management systems, put on the device with tools such as Apple Configurator 
(discussed in Chapter 4, Organizational Controls), and installed once it is compiled 
from the source code with Xcode (Apple's Integrated Development Environment 
(IDE), which is discussed with other tools that can perform installations in Chapter 6, 
Debugging and Conclusion).
There is no concept of sideloading apps on iOS in comparison to other platforms 
where you may be able to place a device into developer mode. Likewise you will 
likely never have implicit or otherwise stated encouragement to gain root access to 
the device. We'll discover the lengths to which Apple goes to ensure this in the next 
chapter, but suffice it to say that you simply cannot transfer a binary to an iOS device 
and bring about a system-wide change in any but the endorsed ways while playing 
within Apple's so-called walled garden.
Apps themselves can only be distributed by Apple via the App Store that's available 
on the device, and in iTunes on a Mac or PC, through a special Business-to-Business 
store with the Volume Purchase Program, or when explicitly associated with an 
Apple Developer Program. These limited options decrease the routes through which 
applications can be acquired, but if you have a developer account, you can compile 
applications released as open source and install them on devices at will. Similarly, 
the compressed .ipa archive that contains an iOS application can be transferred like 
any data, but getting the installer process in the OS to pick up on it is another matter.
Security around app installation manifests itself in the fact that the kernel performs 
verification at installation time and every subsequent launch to ensure that the 
executable bundle and frameworks inside the archive have been signed with an 
approved developer's certificate that Apple trusts. There is no installer binary for 
IPA files on iOS, so verification like the one that is done with the pkg encapsulation 
format on the Mac is not a part of the process .As long as the code delivered by an 
archive checks out as signed, it is allowed to be installed and run. One can speculate 
that this allows more caching possibilities since there is less likelihood of corruption, 
as all you need to change is the Digital Rights Management (DRM) software upon 
delivery to a new device.

--- Page 40 ---
Chapter 2
[ 29 ]
You can see the app signature verification process on a Mac using the following steps:
1. First, download an app from iTunes and navigate to it in the Finder. 
Normally, it can be found by navigating to /Users/your username/Music/
iTunes/Mobile Applications, Duplicate the file (if you'd like to keep a 
fresh, unaltered version) and highlight the copy. Then, from the File menu, 
choose Open With | Archive Utility to expand it.
2. You will then see a folder of the same name with several things inside it, one 
of which is a folder labeled Payload.
3. Launch the Terminal application that you will find in the Other folder in 
Launchpad. You would first type codesign –d –vv and then drag and drop 
the application you find inside the Payload folder, and then hit return. On 
executing the command, you will see something like the following:
codesign -d -vv /Users/abanks/Music/iTunes/iTunes\ Media/Mobile\ 
Applications/Dropbox\ 3.5.2/Payload/Dropbox.app
Executable=/Users/abanks/Music/iTunes/iTunes Media/Mobile 
Applications/Dropbox 3.5.2/Payload/Dropbox.app/Dropbox
Identifier=com.getdropbox.Dropbox
Format=bundle with Mach-O universal (armv7 arm64)
CodeDirectory v=20200 size=54086 flags=0x0(none) hashes=2695+5 
location=embedded
Signature size=3487
Authority=Apple iPhone OS Application Signing
Authority=Apple iPhone Certification Authority
Authority=Apple Root CA
An output such as the preceding one will appear, which will show the chain of trust 
in action. Apple's Root Certificate Authority (CA) is present as a trusted authority 
to verify that the application inside the .ipa file that we acquired has not been 
tampered with.
Blocking access to the App Store
One can potentially hide the App Store application on the device, but if the device 
can still connect to an end users computer that is running iTunes, you will not be 
able to effectively cut off the installation of apps.

--- Page 41 ---
Introducing App Security
[ 30 ]
There have been additional, undocumented ways to hide features 
and apps that are actually present on a device in certain jurisdictions, 
most of which rely in some part on configuration profiles, but that is 
beyond the scope of this book.
As demonstrated by the access granted to data on the device by backing it up to  
a computer in the last chapter, when allowing end users to directly interact with  
the backup process, it should be thoroughly examined and accounted for in a  
written policy.
The most simplistic form of applying management to an iOS device is to navigate 
to Settings | General | Restrictions, tap on Enable Restrictions, and then set a 
new password that is distinct from the one used to unlock the device. Then, you 
can granularly disable Installing Apps, Deleting Apps, and In-App Purchases 
and essentially shut off all interactions with the apps on a device, as shown in the 
following figure:
Restricting App Store Functionality

--- Page 42 ---
Chapter 2
[ 31 ]
Management tools such as Apple Configurator and iTunes will also not be able to 
install or remove apps once these settings are enabled, which makes controlling access 
to Restrictions of particular importance to educational environments.
Single App mode, App Lock, and Guided 
Access
When devices are made to work a shared-usage model, for example, many nurses 
using the same iPad during shifts at a hospital, one method to restrict access and 
standardize the experience would be to lock the device to a single app. This is 
referred to by different names based on how it is initiated, and it can be achieved 
with the tools that we will discuss in future chapters. The device shows only the 
designated app and never goes to the home screen (also referred to internally as the 
Springboard). The Home button is essentially disabled and Control Center (which is 
accessed by swiping up from the bottom edge of an iOS device) is also not accessible. 
This can also enable a kiosk-type experience, where the device is protected from 
misuse by dictating that only a single app can run.
In recent releases of iOS, developers have been granted APIs to enable app lock when 
they enter a certain state within the app or until a specific requirement is met; however, 
this is applicable only for apps distributed via Mobile Device Management (MDM). 
This meets the criteria for educational use where you do not want students to look 
up answers. It can also prevent exfiltration of data within the apps on a device if you 
can coordinate with a developer to enable this feature. Financial processing, secure 
document viewing, and other sensitive app interaction may benefit from this as well.
You can simulate how a locked device will perform at any time by enabling a feature 
called Guided Access. You can initiate this mode by pressing the Home button three 
times from within an app. You will then be presented with options to control motion 
(the ability to rotate the screens' orientation) and the use of the keyboard. It detects 
screen elements, so you can designate specific regions of the screen to be off-limits, 
for example, the in-app purchase button or ads. Exiting Guided Access requires 
yet another distinct four-digit password, but it can be disabled with the fingerprint 
unlock feature on devices that are equipped with Touch ID. 

--- Page 43 ---
Introducing App Security
[ 32 ]
You can find more information about this at http://support.apple.com/
HT202612. The following screenshot shows the Guided Access configuration  
screen on an iPhone:
Enabling Guided Access
Now, the following screenshot shows how the controls of an app can be  
selectively disabled:
Disabling Controls in an App

--- Page 44 ---
Chapter 2
[ 33 ]
One of the things that people utilizing this functionality discover as a support 
concern is that you cannot turn off the device nor put the screen in sleep mode.  
This makes powering the device of critical importance, as does ensuring a consistent 
Wi-Fi connection; there is no way to re-enter credentials or switch networks. The 
preceding screenshots show how you can enable Guided Access and what you 
would see when you configure it, whereas no configuration is presented when using 
MDM or in-app functionality to Lock to App; further restrictions may be necessary if 
you would like to disable in-app purchases or unnecessary web views.
Documenting an obscure feature like Guided Access is actually quite 
a challenge, as the normal, simple to use screenshot controls on the 
device are effectively disabled. Instead of messing about with video 
capture via a physical adapter or cable, Apple's AirPlay feature can 
be paired with an app like Reflector by Squirrels (http://www.
airsquirrels.com/reflector/) to mirror the screen to a Mac, 
PC, or an Android device from which you can then take screenshots.
App communication
Historically, very few affordances were made when one developer wanted to 
communicate with the application data of another developer. URL schemes were 
manipulated for this purpose and they allowed a developer's app to be summoned 
by an identifier that was usually based on the bundle ID. In the last few major 
releases of iOS, there was at least the affordance for shared credentials to be accessed 
between apps by the same developer. This sharing of a keychain by an app group 
now also includes the sharing of file storage and preference data, which was 
previously accomplished by separate accounts with third-party sync services like 
Dropbox. iCloud Drive has been introduced to perform similar ad hoc file storage 
and sharing tasks. If this sounds somewhat limiting, it's because historically it has 
been, but we will touch upon the new ways in which app functionality and data can 
leak out from the one-app-at-a-time silo after we discuss how app data can now pass 
more easily between devices. The following screenshot shows a web page in Safari 
on an iOS 8 device that is being offered to a Mac running OS X 10.10:
A web page in Safari on an iOS 8 device that is being offered to a Mac running OS X 10.10

--- Page 45 ---
Introducing App Security
[ 34 ]
Handoff and Continuity
Let's start by signing into the same Apple ID on a Mac running OS X 10.10 
(Yosemite) and an iPhone or iPad running iOS 8. Open a web page in Safari on 
the iOS device and you will see an icon in your Dock (analogous to the taskbar on 
Windows) to continue viewing the web page on the Mac. This is Handoff in action. 
It's also referred to under the Continuity heading in Apple's marketing material.  
Many Apple apps are shipping with this functionality in iOS 8, and the developers  
of popular apps like Google's Chrome web browser are rapidly adopting it as well.
iCloud and the newest operating systems are the glue that hold all this together 
and these features work between iOS devices. For other Continuity features such 
as phone/text message relay, you may need to explicitly set up the relationship 
between devices when prompted, as shown in the following figure:
Authorizing an iPad to receive text messages (SMS and MMS)

--- Page 46 ---
Chapter 2
[ 35 ]
As a troubleshooting step, make sure that any device that will 
piggyback on an iPhone's service is using the phone number of 
an iPhone and the e-mail address of the Apple ID to identify itself 
to iCloud-based services. You can find more details about this at 
http://support.apple.com/HT6337.
Some people have criticized this duplication of possibly redundant or sensitive 
application states across devices, which you would be automatically opted-in to use 
if you have an iPhone and which uses the same Apple ID and phone number as the 
primary identifier of iCloud-based services such as iMessage and FaceTime. This 
increases the moving parts that need to be secured and the importance of the device 
wipe feature that is present in ActiveSync, Find My iPhone, and the MDM-based 
enterprise wipe.
Keybags and keychains
As discussed in the previous chapter, the keychain is known as a way to centrally 
store and manage credentials and other secret data that are in use by applications on 
the behalf of the user, carried over from OS X. There is also the concept of a keybag, 
which in practice is a grouping of secrets (or more practically, keys) that allow the 
system to manage the moving parts around specific interactions. Besides, when used 
by the system itself to manage the encryption of the data, these deal with primarily 
when a backup will run either over Wi-Fi to iTunes, when tethered by USB to iTunes, 
or while the device is plugged into a power source and locked as a requirement to 
send to iCloud Backup.
Explaining keybags as a concept is a minor point, but there has been terminology 
confusion regarding things such as the securing of apps with digital rights 
management and the use of the keychain, neither of which are directly related. To 
summarize, keybags are an abstraction for secrets like keychain items, so they can 
be secured independent of the data within. This allows for more flexible security by 
adding an interaction-specific layer to events such as the rotation of credentials, among 
other common interactions. 
Some keychain items can be marked as tied to a specific device 
when they are created by an application, disallowing them from 
being restored to another device. Google appears to be using this 
in their popular two-step authentication app Google Authenticator, 
whereas other services do not impose this limitation.

--- Page 47 ---
Introducing App Security
[ 36 ]
Keyboards and extensions
One of the greatly anticipated features of iOS 8 was the concept of Extensions.  
While shuttling around the state of an application is all well and good, extensions 
allow apps to have their functionality appear in new places.
This is implemented through the addition of specific abilities presented to developers 
that are referred to as extension points, with the most anticipated being third-party 
keyboards. A more popular keyboard that is available for other platforms is Swype 
(though I am personally waiting for the return of Palm's Graffiti), which allows more 
fluid, one-handed text entry.
Apple grouped other possible extension categories under Today widgets (Today 
being a newly expanded view in Notification Center on iOS and Mac), photo editing 
enhancements (for example, filters from popular apps like VSCO Cam), document 
providers for importing files from popular sync services like Dropbox, and share 
providers like the pre-existing but system provided Facebook sharing functionality. 
More broadly, the vaguely named custom actions allow apps to be interactive even 
when the screen is locked, and from within a small drop-down interface when they 
receive notifications while the screen is unlocked.
The security and privacy concerns that Apple has addressed for keyboards in particular 
are how inputs for password fields and network communication are handled, so 
that a keyboard app cannot send keystrokes over the network and become the least 
imposing-looking keylogger. Extensions are distributed in regular app bundles and 
follow common privacy and security controls. In addition, one must explicitly allow 
network traffic for a keyboard in Settings, but even Apple's own Predictive Text 
keyboard add-on cannot enter text in a designated ( properly coded) password field.
Note that much of the Apple Watch's preliminary app functionality 
is enabled via extensions and all the processing happens in the 
iPhone. These are then sent to the device over Bluetooth Low Energy. 
Very little is stored about an app on the watch itself (UI storyboards 
that can contain dynamically updating content like watch faces), so 
securing the iPhone will be sufficient.
Securing what extensions can access
The ability to enforce these expanded privacy and network access controls was 
prepared by having interapplication communication (under the protocol name 
XPC) added as part of iOS 5 (and OS X 10.7). The specific APIs for this type of 
communication ensure that apps will not share the same file or memory space  
with an extension. 

--- Page 48 ---
Chapter 2
[ 37 ]
Essentially, both parties stay in their own sandbox but XPC arbitrates and acts as a 
proxy between them. In terms of Privacy, while any right granted to the extension's 
container app will be inherited by it, a new app will not share its privacy settings 
with another developer's extension that is accessible within it.
While we will discuss MDM in depth later, their use adds the potential to apply 
more on-the-fly controls, which include limiting the mail accounts through which 
data can be sent, or the sharing and document providers enabled on a device that 
data can be moved to. A lot of this also depends on the MDM actually supplying the 
applications, but this becomes very powerful when paired with an in-house app.
User context
The old Unix security model, from when the only way for the average person to use 
a computer was by sharing time on a mainframe, stated that nobody was trusted 
except the system administrator. When one was given a standard user account to log 
in, there was only a limited range of things that one could do to introduce instability 
to the system. iOS and its precursor OS X are descendants of NeXT, and BSD before 
that. This puts the concept of system processes running under user accounts with 
their associated privileges into focus.
iOS runs apps on behalf of a standard user account named mobile, and unlike OS X, 
it doesn't help to enable an awareness of multiple users on the system. When using 
an iOS device, we do not think about traditional user accounts (there is no interface 
to add more users), as the design assumption is that there is only one owner of this 
highly personalized device and therefore, there is only one actual user. Role accounts 
that would run daemons on behalf of third-party application processes are absent, as 
what is allowed to run is strictly limited on iOS (as it is on a Mac now; with the many 
restrictions that have been imposed on the apps that are allowed in its corresponding 
App Store).
Sandboxing and App data storage
As we mentioned in the beginning of the chapter, a code signature is placed on the 
app bundle itself with additional protection, so that the signature is verified not only 
when the app is installed, but also at runtime when the app is launched, to make 
sure that it has not been modified in the meantime. This is for stability as much as it 
is for security, since code that has been modified or allowed to run roughshod on the 
system can cause the device, which we might just want to be able to use to call 911 in 
an emergency, to crash.

--- Page 49 ---
Introducing App Security
[ 38 ]
We spoke about a mobile user which would have a home folder. Unlike the common 
consumer computer OS, the data storage location of an app is randomly generated 
and kept separate from the user (besides the containerization of specific preferences 
that help sharing among a developer's apps, so those settings persist even if an app 
is deleted). There are frameworks, which are shipped by Apple in its SDK, that 
encourage storing app data in an encrypted format. However, some exploits have 
used an impersonation of an app's bundle identifier to make it trustworthy to other 
applications that will be able to exchange data with it. To date, forensic deconstruction 
of these attempts has found that users must explicitly enable non-standard behavior 
through several extenuating circumstances for exploits to work. The potential for data 
leakage has not been substantial on non-jailbroken devices, but security professionals 
should be aware of this shortcoming where end users are involved in the installation  
of apps.
Plain file storage is not the only way in which data is segregated and treated 
discriminately on the system; other privacy or device usage-related permissions 
must be requested by an app through entitlements. The previously introduced 
extensions can be contrasted with Android intents, as they are both initiated by the 
end-user and are focused from that perspective (although Android apps tend to 
broadcast their capabilities to receive data without a strict or clear oversight, which 
some would argue is actually beneficial due to a perceived increases in productivity 
and functionality). Entitlements are only slightly different from Windows phone 
contracts, and Apple's stated model mentions that apps should ask for as few rights 
as possible, which end users should be (as unobtrusively as possible) prompted to 
explicitly grant access for, and even then, only when it is absolutely necessary for the 
full usage of an app's capabilities. These are specified in the application bundle and 
can be investigated with the codesign binary on a Mac.
Introduction to in-house App 
development
So, you have found a need to deploy a custom app to the devices in your organization 
and have received the go-ahead to build one. Apple encourages organizations and 
their developers to sign up with its Enterprise Developer Program so that they can be 
granted the capability to build and distribute custom-built apps outside the App Store. 
Many IT departments have already signed up individuals to not only test a release of 
the operating system, but the tinkerers amongst us can also build open source apps 
for personal use, which can also be achieved with a standard, standalone developer 
account. You can find more information about this at https://developer.apple.
com/enterprise/.

--- Page 50 ---
Chapter 2
[ 39 ]
The process of tying the required certificates and identifiers for an app to the 
desired devices for testing is referred to as provisioning. Creating and managing 
provisioning profiles will not always be necessary; however, it depends on how 
close to in-house your actual development may be. When you use Apple's approval 
process to clear an in-house developed app for internal use, you will most often 
use the Business Volume Purchase program and leverage Apple's infrastructure to 
distribute it. This is by far the easiest way from a procurement and ongoing support 
perspective, and this is often the case for white-labeled apps that are made by 
professional app development companies. Apps in the Business-to-Business, Volume 
Purchase app store are not visible to the general public, which may also be beneficial 
depending on the situation. 
Ad hoc distribution allows limited beta testing on registered devices. This requires 
all the same steps that an individual will perform to get an app on the App Store, 
including registering as a developer, applying to have their app ID considered as 
unique, acquiring the correct certificates so that devices trust the app when it is 
installed, and preparing the built application for deployment once all the mentioned 
requirements are complete. You will additionally need to go through the process of 
building a team entity to identify the developers working on your behalf and grant 
them access to your account when they build the applications. When it comes to 
wider testing with many devices, Apple has recently acquired an outside service 
called TestFlight that makes this process easier for a large number of testers, although 
a number of other solutions still exist outside of Apple that optimize different parts 
of the testing process. You can find more information at https://developer.
apple.com/testflight/.
Enterprise distribution does not require every device to be registered with Apple, but 
it must be delivered with MDM. Therefore, it is required to have direct access or some 
communication with the folks who manage the device, whether company-owned or 
otherwise. One point to keep in mind is that different MDM providers need different 
levels of involvement when they are asked to distribute apps on your behalf. They 
can make you shoot yourself in the foot, so to speak, by allowing a mismatch of the 
provisioning profile you would upload and the associated app bundle, resulting in 
an app with a pretty icon that won't launch. Other MDMs insist on direct interaction 
with your development team to reduce the possibility of issues. Keep in mind that 
certificates are an integral part of the process as well; therefore, they need to be 
renewed so that apps continue to function.

--- Page 51 ---
Introducing App Security
[ 40 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we went over how apps are distributed and how they prove their 
integrity to the system once they are installed. We demonstrated the concept of locking 
a device into an app with Guided Access. Inter-app (and device) communication via 
extensions and Continuity was also discussed along with the new complimentary 
privacy controls for things like keyboards. As this chapter was about the customization 
and controls you'd want to place on apps, we gave a brief introduction to securely 
distributing your own in-house apps.
Since the time the iPhone first came along, the way many people interact with apps 
has changed significantly. Limited methods of installation, silos for categories of 
data and the capabilities of apps, and the keychain concept from OS X have all come 
to bear on iOS' overall security. You should now have enough background on how 
apps function to begin to understand why the limitations are the way they are, and 
what to keep in mind when you are tasked with securing app data.
In the next chapter, we will cover how iOS takes advantage of its hardware to create 
a secure environment even before we get to run any apps, starting from the moment 
the device is turned on.

--- Page 52 ---
Encrypting Devices
In this chapter, we will be looking at iOS device encryption. You might think this 
would be the shortest chapter, as the filesystem itself has been fully encrypted for 
many revisions of the OS. This makes wiping the device when giving it away or 
selling it a very quick process, as all you're doing in essence is forgetting the master 
encryption key to unlock the already scrambled data and rendering it irretrievable. 
Wear leveling concerns for flash storage like those which are used in mobile devices 
nowadays makes this practical for another reason, as scrubbing all blocks (or pages) 
on the storage device is not necessary to ensure that the data is unrecoverable. We'll 
look into more topics than just the data bits at rest though, including network traffic 
and VPN.
While it may seem consumer-focused, we can now use these devices along with NFC 
(short for Near Field Communication) for payments, and concerns over employer 
liability for identity theft on a company-owned device can raise serious concerns. 
Security professionals must be even more in touch with what their company's 
policies are on protecting the company's best interests, while still allowing end users 
to be productive and enjoy full use of the "perk" that an iOS device might provide. 
Luckily many aspects of the iOS security model allow us to let the device roam 
untethered, and we can inform the end user how much data their device exposes 
when it is used normally and for everything a policy doesn't cover. Privacy also 
comes into play, so we'll touch on that as well.
To break it down, we'll discuss the following topics in this chapter:
• Revisiting OS initialization
• Passbook and Touch ID for Apple Pay
• Introduction to iOS network communication
• Privacy concerns with the Health App, HIPAA, and diagnostics
• Configuration Profile Encryption

--- Page 53 ---
Encrypting Devices
[ 42 ]
Secure boot and activating iOS
In a concept not unlike that of how Chrome OS ensures both the integrity of its 
firmware and that its kernel hasn't been tampered with, field upgrades can similarly 
proceed in a secured fashion with a feature called verified boot. When an iOS device 
starts up, it verifies the kernel and the rest of the read-only OS partition to confirm 
that it matches a particular signature. The process would be halted and the device 
would go back to Device Firmware Upgrade mode or DFU (which would also be 
accompanied by the 'Connect to iTunes' screen) if the main OS partition is found to 
be nonfunctional. This can also be initiated if a wipe and reinstall is interrupted when 
initiated by iTunes, Apple Configurator, or the user themselves by going into the 
General section of Settings and navigating to Reset | Erase All Content and Settings.
The process from the time you power on the device to when you land in user space 
is referred to as the secure boot chain. A low-level bootloader performs verification 
to confirm whether the OS partition has not been tampered with, and as a whole, 
whether it has been signed by Apple. It uses on-board keys (which includes a 
root key, device-specific key, and group key to establish the chain of trust for 
cryptographic operations) that are included in the factory at time of manufacture. 
This low-level bootloader process finishes, and then, the iBoot process starts, which 
in turn starts the OS kernel.
On cellular devices that include the A7 or greater AMD architecture processor 
(which is in use in devices since the iPhone 5s), there is a region on the CPU that is 
responsible for cryptographic operations and this is referred to in marketing as the 
Secure Enclave. While it is not physically distinct, the highest importance is placed 
on making its functionality logically walled off from the processor's main function. 
The Secure Enclave interacts with the boot process by being called upon to start the 
cellular baseband through a separate but similar sequence, which is also responsible 
for checking the system software authorization.
Specifically, upon reactivation that is initiated by a manual erase or an OS 
restore, a validation process referred to as System Software Authorization is 
performed, which requires Internet access. A computer running iTunes or Apple 
Configurator can provide that conduit, or since iOS 5 and its PC Free features 
came along, you can connect to a Wi-Fi or cellular network to activate the device. 
As documented by Apple for some time in its iOS Security – White Paper, there is 
a specific, cryptographically secured process through which an individual device 
identifies itself to Apple while requesting activation to continue. Since Apple is 
the clearinghouse through which devices are allowed to run a specific OS version, 
previous OSes with any known security flaws are disallowed from being reapplied 
to an upgraded device that is capable of running it.

--- Page 54 ---
Chapter 3
[ 43 ]
As we'll discuss in the next chapter, restoring a backup can skip this activation step 
on supervised devices, but that is a concern separate from the OS itself. A device 
running an older iOS version can therefore be erased without upgrading it, assuming 
that it has not been tampered with to fail verification.
Note that when an activation is required after an iOS installation on a 
cellular-capable device, a SIM card must be present. Apple uses this to 
generate a valid ECID to identify the device, so even when the device is 
prepared with iTunes or Apple Configurator but has no SIM card, this 
will result in an error and cause it to fail.
One may ask, of the many devices still being sold by Apple with the older processor 
architecture, how does it perform the cryptographic operations that are necessary 
to function? While this was not previously outlined by Apple, a common technique 
that is used is to gather entropy (or unpredictable results) from the many sensors on 
the device such as its gyroscope, accelerometer, or compass. The need for random 
numbers is obvious to anyone who is trying to make a secure system, since many 
implementations of a key generation process start by getting something distinct and 
sufficiently random to base its identity on.
Passbook and Touch ID for Apple Pay
We briefly touched on Touch ID in Chapter 1, iOS Security Overview, but more 
implementation details around timeouts and other key-related interactions are better 
describe Apple's own iOS Security – White Paper (as they go to great lengths to make 
things as understandable as possible). At the time of writing, the most recent PDF 
was from October 2014 and it can be found at https://www.apple.com/privacy/
docs/iOS_Security_Guide_Oct_2014.pdf.
As Touch ID should still just be considered an added convenience, sufficiently complex 
passcodes are, as always, recommended in all things that are security-related.
If your customers or users are like ours, they will forget their devices' 
passcodes after getting used to using Touch ID. Therefore, make 
sure that you do not leave your customers in a situation without 
MDM management (or backups, if your organization encourages it), 
especially if the ActiveSync-based "failed password attempt" limit is 
configured. Once the threshold is reached, it will cause their device to 
be wiped. This happens without adequate time to get assistance more 
often than we would like.

--- Page 55 ---
Encrypting Devices
[ 44 ]
In the White Paper mentioned earlier, the importance and utility of the Secure 
Enclave is detailed. It may have come into existence in part to make the Touch ID 
fingerprint functionality as quick and seamless as possible, so that there would be no 
bottleneck for the required computation. One may think from Apple's marketing of 
the Secure Enclave that it is dedicated hardware, but just like the jailing of parts of 
the filesystem, this is mostly implemented as a technique to ensure that the software 
operations are wholly distinct and cannot run in the same memory or processor 
space when carrying out its functions.
How does this relate to Passbook? And how does a feature that most folks use for 
plane tickets (if ever) come into a discussion about security? Well, as we discussed 
previously, identity theft on a company-owned device could affect the company 
that provides the device to the employee, as evidenced by network equipment and 
mail systems that detect dangerous behavior like social security numbers being sent 
in plain text e-mail correspondence. With its early popularity and probable success 
of, Apple Pay, which is Apple's solution for NFC-based payments akin to Google 
Wallet, became an attractive target. Since Passbook is where Apple Pay stores the 
details of its credit and debit cards, securing it is important. Luckily, there are a few 
allowed vectors to get into Passbook, including the much-maligned QR code, and 
even then, there is limited functionality once a pass is installed.
The Passbook application has a built-in scanner that you can access 
by tapping on Scan Code from its splash screen, or by tapping the 
plus button in the top-right corner (if there's only one pass; otherwise, 
you'll see the plus button at the top, and it can be scrolled when in 
the list view). This is the same process through which you would add 
payment cards. For security reasons, neither addition stores the image 
to the Camera Roll on the device.

--- Page 56 ---
Chapter 3
[ 45 ]
A Passbook pass and one process by which passes or cards can be added
Among other restrictions, you cannot, for instance, have an active hyperlink on 
the front of a pass. You can, however, send a notification to a device with the pass 
installed, and push updates to the pass so that it will dynamically change its content. 
Passbook passes with an active state (such as the lead up to boarding a plane) can be 
accessed when the device is locked, but updates to it can optionally be disabled in the 
pass itself, or both access to and notifications for Passbook can be disabled in the Touch 
ID and Passcode section of the Settings app or via a management system, along the 
lines of the restrictions that we'll demonstrate in Chapter 5, Mobile Device Management.

--- Page 57 ---
Encrypting Devices
[ 46 ]
The attack vectors for Apple Pay haven't been exercised to the point that any 
working proof-of-concepts have been disclosed, but another quirk is that a pass can 
respond to location information. This could trigger a push notification when it is in 
the proximity of an iBeacon, Apple's branding for Bluetooth low energy transmitters, 
which can achieve something along the lines of a supplemental technology to GPS. 
While iBeacons themselves don't collect any information, Passbook will continue to 
evolve as an area of the phone to remain interested in. Neither NFC-based Apple Pay 
nor Passbook is yet available on the iPad; however, in-app or browser-based Apple 
Pay purchases work with the newest iPad hardware that has Touch ID.
Finally, one other note about purchases on the device is that when checking out 
from a web store, it may (when the site is a valid HTTPS one and certain fields are 
detected within the form) trigger a prompt to use the camera to take a picture of the 
card that you'd like to make the purchase with and fill in the detected information.
Card payment systems and fraud in general in the U.S. has always been a sore 
spot when compared to other countries, in particular things like ATM transactions 
that are the poorest version of two-factor authentication: something you have (the 
physical card) and something you know (PIN). While it's not particularly relevant to 
us as we are not as concerned from a payment processing perspective, but this seems 
to require the same amount of vigilance. Theoretically, one could take a photo of 
someone else's card, and through a coordinated attack involving social engineering, 
use it to authorize purchases. Apple can police this process, but as many concerns as 
there are about identity theft in general, there will always be that tradeoff between 
ease of use and protecting the system from abuse.
Introduction to iOS network communication
We discussed Safari and the predictive search features that are enabled by default 
as the most obvious network traffic, besides e-mail and applications like Twitter 
and Facebook that can be accessed from more places on the device due to having 
account information built into the OS. Weather, Stocks, and Siri's data providers, 
are also allowed to use the network by default although you can disable just cellular 
access granularly. Speaking of which, depending on the carrier, swapping SIM cards 
(if the slot is unlocked on that particular cellular-capable iOS model) can be used 
to supplant international roaming plans by providing a number that is local to that 
place, or even just the data service as desired.
Besides this grab bag of overarching, networking-related concerns, we'll zoom in on 
Airdrop using wired connections on iOS, VPN, proxying, and filtering.

--- Page 58 ---
Chapter 3
[ 47 ]
AirDrop
A peer-to-peer way to share files on demand over an ad hoc Wi-Fi network with little 
or no setup has been present in the Mac OS for some time and it was added to iOS 
7. AirDrop is this feature's branding and it now does the initial detection of nearby 
devices based on Bluetooth proximity and identifies information with Apple, again 
as the backend clearinghouse through which Apple ID identities are processed. This 
adds anonymity to the process of checking whether we know the person to whom 
we are sending the file, and can populate the round icon representing the other 
device with the contact's locally assigned image.
As of iOS 8 and OS X 10.10, Yosemite, computers can also perform this handshake 
and transfer of data. Due to its ease of use and lack of authentication before allowing 
the sending end to transmit (among other reasons), many IT departments disabled 
the early implementations of AirDrop on the Mac. Multicast traffic is less of a 
network-related concern when it is peer-to-peer and restricted to Wi-Fi, but identity 
verification with its associated metadata among many other cryptographic processes 
that do hit the network, requires a significant amount of trust in Apple.
Note that this is one of the bigger issues that people with privacy 
and security concerns express about vendors who have made choices 
similar to Apple. This is also commonly discussed in relation to their 
iMessage service; part of the condition of using the service is that you 
must implicitly trust that Apple is properly securing and restricting 
access to the keys that the participants use.
Depending on the type of file that is being transferred, compatible applications are 
displayed on the receiving end to then take action. The following screenshot shows  
a device that has received a file over AirDrop:
Options presented when a ringtone is received over AirDrop

--- Page 59 ---
Encrypting Devices
[ 48 ]
A bug or a feature?
We long ago made the assertion that Apple cheats by being able to synchronize 
its software with its own hardware. Another maxim of Apple IT is that in general, 
Apple doesn't care about the developer community, Apple doesn't care about us. 
Their priorities could reasonably be arranged as follows:
• The customers 
• Themselves and their side of the overlap between partners and their platforms
• Lastly, anybody else who would wish them well along the way to improve 
the experience of the first two
This is not new, nor should anyone expect them to change in the light of their 
success. However, they sometimes make it easier for all the parties involved by 
having an extensively shared code base between iOS devices. This includes another 
product, the Apple TV, which is often overlooked or discarded as not a serious 
endeavor, but which we in IT get a surprise benefit: it includes Ethernet drivers to 
support its hardware, which in turn is present across all iOS installations ever since 
its smaller, hockey puck form factor was introduced.
An unintentional bit of functionality that we gain from this is through a technique 
that involves the following things:
• A powered USB hub
• The Lightning to USB Camera Adapter (intended to connect a camera with 
an iOS device to import photos into iPhoto or other iOS applications)
• An Apple USB Ethernet Adapter
By connecting the Lightning to USB Camera Adapter to the upstream port of the USB 
hub and the Ethernet Adapter in any downstream port, a device should be able to 
use this configuration to get on the wired network. While this part of the networking 
stack doesn't seem particularly optimized, forensic capture through more traditional 
means (mirroring ports, and so on) is possible without the involvement of any 
computer. (We will, however, cover Apple's supported processes to accomplish iOS 
packet tracing in Chapter 6, Debugging and Conclusion.) An illustration of this setup 
is documented in terms of passcode removal via MDM at https://www.afp548.
com/2014/05/07/mdm-passcode-removal-from-an-offline-ios-device/.

--- Page 60 ---
Chapter 3
[ 49 ]
Common human input devices such as barcode scanners or keyboards 
can be used with the Lightning to USB Camera Adapter for ease of input 
and they are a great way to prevent folks from having to use their thumbs 
for data entry en masse. While the iOS device may bark that the accessory 
is not supported, you may add a hidden functionality and significantly 
streamline interactions if all the hardware is compliant and it all goes well.
VPN (Always-On, APN, Per-App, On-Demand)
Since very early on, you have been able to configure and initiate a VPN connection 
in the Settings of an iOS device, which started with the more prevalent gateways in 
use (including flavors of Cisco IPSec, and the raccoon-based L2TP or PPTP projects 
which OS X Server relies on). Now, there are more ways to tunnel traffic than 
you can figuratively shake a metaphorical stick at. As the demand to enable more 
functionality on iOS is ever increasing, Apple has added support for RSA SecurID 
two-factor tokens in the built-in configuration settings as well.
As with other complex settings, you could also use a configuration profile to  
simplify the setup for end users, which we will touch on in Chapter 5, Mobile  
Device Management.
A newer feature, also available for use when configured with a profile or manually, 
is the ability to lock the device into tunneling all its traffic through a VPN tunnel 
with an AlwaysOn configuration. This is exposed to end users with a Send All 
Traffic slider when optional. For it to be managed so that it is locked into the ON 
position, the appropriate configuration profile needs to be in place and the device 
needs to be in a state called Supervision, which we will describe in detail in the  
next chapter. 

--- Page 61 ---
Encrypting Devices
[ 50 ]
The following screenshot shows a VPN connection, with options for RSA SecurID, 
Send All Traffic, and so on:
A VPN connection with options for RSA SecurID tokens and Send All Traffic
An older, more obscure method of securing data service access with the cooperation 
of your cellular provider is via an Access Point Name configuration, but it's not 
something that the authors of this book come across very often any more in the real 
world. You may forgive the comparison of APN to an extension of the corporate LAN, 
although with the popularity and toolset around VPNs becoming so commonplace, it's 
understandable that this cellular-only technique would fall by the wayside.

--- Page 62 ---
Chapter 3
[ 51 ]
When paired with proper certificates and a configuration profile to define the 
domains that require a VPN connection, VPN On Demand enables on-the-fly 
connections to be made when a device tries to connect to a given domain. Many 
elaborate checks are also possible on a network state change, including SSID, 
reachable server detection, and DNS server settings so that On Demand can be 
turned off when it's 'on-network'. This is especially useful in split-domain  
DNS configurations.
Per-App is by far the most attractive app, as when an organization has provided an 
app they commonly also want to secure all the traffic that the app will generate. As 
always, however, the devil is in the details. A few VPN gateways and fewer apps 
are set to enable this behavior. Organizations may find any of the more advanced 
implementations tricky, as you need a more sophisticated gateway setup with 
compatible hardware and software, which can also require significant preparation 
from a certificate infrastructure perspective.
The most simple and possibly hardest to manage are the specific apps on the App 
Store from VPN gateway vendors, some of which merely embed a web browser that 
allows you to connect to sites on a remote network once the connection is established.
Otherwise, you can just build all your workflows into an app such as Good, enables 
or wrap them into a container app that does all the network traffic and business 
interactions for you. Even more attractive is securing the transport and data at rest 
when interacting with your organization's applications and sidestepping all of this 
tomfoolery. Conjure to mind the meme of the character Boromir from The Lord of 
the Rings saying that one does not simply walk into Mordor, the twist being that one 
does not simply trust any client accessing your data to be properly secured even if 
they have provided valid credentials. But we can only go so crazy until it becomes 
prohibitive to restrict access that folks need to do their jobs.
Global HTTP Proxy, caching, and the web  
content filter
Due to concerns over and regulation of the network traffic of iOS devices in school 
environments, Apple started with a Global HTTP Proxy feature to enable the caching 
and proxying of traffic, with the additional benefit of working off-campus and on 
cellular devices. Vendors that specialize in ensuring the uptime of the service's 
gateway are important to partner with, and commonly network security appliances 
have taken on this role among their other services. As this is only HTTP, it doesn't 
address many mandated regulations for protecting students in certain jurisdictions, 
but it was a start at alleviating some network inspection and caching needs.

--- Page 63 ---
Encrypting Devices
[ 52 ]
Apple included a Caching Service in the 2.2 release of its Server application, which 
is distributed as an add-on to regular OS X. You can set this up and cache content for 
a NAT's local network in order to improve performance during OS updates or when 
other frequently accessed data is requested by many devices. We do not get many 
features with this solution though, as you cannot poison the cache to ensure that 
certain applications or content are made unavailable on your network. Some have 
resorted to hijacking DNS requests on port 80 to mesu.apple.com, for example, so 
that OS updates cannot take place while on-network. Other content that is enabled 
by default with this service is iTunes, iOS App Store, Mac App Store, and iBooks 
Store purchases along with Mac and iOS Updates.
This is all, of course, only HTTP and it is more about relieving network load than 
limiting the type of content that is accessible on the devices. Only recently did Apple 
add the ability to subscribe to content filter updates for HTTPS sites, or granularly 
whitelist or blacklist sites. As discussed earlier, a reliable partner who understands 
your organization's policies is critical to implement a filter that doesn't become a 
hindrance or a block to your customers' productivity.
As discussed with the locking of AlwaysOn VPN settings, devices must be in the 
supervised state to use either Global HTTP Proxy or the web content filter. (This 
makes sense as a supervised device can have settings locked that end users cannot 
disable at will.)
Privacy-related concerns
Just as earlier when we discussed Apple Pay, you may find it odd to see a section 
on privacy, but as we said, these days with identity theft and other ways customers 
can leak data through social engineering, the concerns for organizations are more 
pressing. Practically speaking, it's just a lot of overhead when directory harvest 
attacks catch the less-astute employees who fall for tricks that cause them to hand 
over their credentials, and then administrators need to go through the process of 
locking them out and fixing their mailboxes.
Administrative overhead is the least of the concerns for larger, well-
known internet companies that would be very embarrassed, at the 
very least, if their employees were phished or were clumsy with their 
credentials. It became public that one company in particular had 
deployed a plug-in to the web browser that they developed whose 
purpose was to detect when network credentials were being entered in 
an insecure or bogus form, thereby effectively preventing that method 
of exposure. The Mac admin community gets a lot of their ideas and 
best practices from this company, which rhymes with "froogle".

--- Page 64 ---
Chapter 3
[ 53 ]
Just as there are regulations around processing credit cards—the most commonly 
known is PCI (short for the Payment Card Industry) Security Standards Council— 
there are healthcare industry standards around privacy which are included as part 
of HIPAA (or the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act). Part of this 
statute classifies certain pieces of health-related information to be protected, which 
includes a surprisingly broad range of data—even something as simple as names, 
when attached to data in a particular context become sensitive and important to 
control access to.
We'll cover two examples of new ways the data is collected on iOS devices  
(and the iPhone in particular) to demonstrate how this is a constantly evolving 
topic that requires appropriate attention based on your dealings with the healthcare 
industry. Even colleges are trying to reduce the risk of lawsuits due to information 
in student records getting into the wrong hands, so hopefully you can work with the 
policymakers at your institution to craft appropriate policies.
Lesser-known ways for Apple to gather 
diagnostics
First, you may not realize how easy it is for Apple to be invited into the goings-on of 
their devices. Just recently we came across an iOS device that needed to be serviced. 
If you go to Apple's site and say that you would like to set up a Genius Bar, in-store 
technical support appointment, they can prompt you to send in identification and 
diagnostic data right there on the spot (presumably to deliver a better, more efficient 
experience). Further, to prove ownership over the phone, Apple can send a push 
notification with a PIN to a device logged into the iCloud account if you provide 
other identification information about the device.
Now, in the scenario that we just described for collecting identification and diagnostic 
data, you may think that there would be a high bar to have access to the mechanism 
that collects this data. However, there are self-servicing organization statuses that can 
be granted to large companies and institutions that do not want to get service through 
third-party service providers or the Apple Store's Genius Bar. While improving the 
repair experience for the customers of an organization, the devices that diagnostics  
can be run on are not, to our knowledge, limited to the ones purchased by  
the organization.

--- Page 65 ---
Encrypting Devices
[ 54 ]
One would think the binding agreements placed on those with access to self-service 
organization status through a service provided by Apple called Global Service 
Exchange would prevent foul play. Through conversations with those who do have 
access to these diagnostics, we can report that there are little differences in what can 
be seen in diagnostic logs on the device. This service has a bit more hardware repair-
related information that would be helpful for participating in recall or warranty 
upgrade programs that Apple is forced to do from time to time. For example, in the 
case of certain models of iPhone 5, there was a known issue where the home button 
lost functionality after being in use for a certain period of time, which was therefore 
made eligible for exchange.
As we will drive home in Chapter 6, Debugging and Conclusion regarding the attack 
vectors a device is exposed to once pairing to a computer is allowed, one may 
consider this an acceptable trade-off for a better experience when the average 
consumer needs their device fixed. The data gathered and collectable is limited, 
but Apple will continue to dance this line between things like not showing their 
third-party developers much in the way of feedback from customers, to preventing 
too much exposure like the well-publicized deletion of the devices of a prominent 
journalist for Wired whose iCloud account was hacked into.
Health app
Another class of data that many would consider private is their activity. iOS 8 
introduced frameworks to help the various healthcare companies that develop 
hardware accessories to interact with health data.
Glaringly missing at launch, however, was a class of period tracking 
data for women. As third-party iOS apps have been built to track 
this from the beginning of the existence of the App Store, with recent 
standouts covering narrowly-targeted tasks relating to breastfeeding, 
this is rather odd. Developers couldn't even submit apps leveraging 
the framework until several revisions of iOS 8, and still, Nike Fuel 
is a notable third-party that is able to leverage its data with a named 
inclusion in the Health app.
As of the launch of the iPhone 5s, a sensor which functions as a pedometer is included 
in all iPhones. Apple's marketing team branded the hardware that manages the 
caching and processing of health sensor-specific data the M7 motion coprocessor, 
with version numbering in sync with its in-house ARM line of processors, which is 
currently A8. This removes the need for as many external sensors on devices, like those 
left out of the design of the Apple Watch (that was proposed at the time of writing). 
Additionally, as of the Health app bundled with iOS 8, step and running data is 
tracked and displayed by default, whether you explicitly enable it or not.

--- Page 66 ---
Chapter 3
[ 55 ]
You can see this combination of GPS and accelerometer sensors in action for yourself 
by noticing the step data logged in the Health app without any opt-in on your part. 
There are, in fact, no settings for the app whatsoever. Only privacy settings can 
be managed to disallow apps that have requested access to the warehouse of data 
stored within, whether the phone's own sensors logged it or an accessory was the 
original source. In the following screenshot, you will get to see automatically logged 
step and distance data:
Automatically logged step and distance data
One other thing that you can interact with could be a potential source of information 
leakage, but is implemented as an opt-in feature: an "in case of emergency" function.

--- Page 67 ---
Encrypting Devices
[ 56 ]
A story from a popular site by Dave Pell titled 'My Head is in the 
Cloud' recounts how his babysitter doesn't have her boyfriend's 
cell phone number memorized, and when she was injured and her 
cell phone was wrecked, they had no way to contact him. It's as if 
this feature was designed with this scenario (minus the destroyed 
phone) in mind.
You can add your information separately to what is then accessible by apps that 
tie into the Health app (and the HealthKit framework therein) so that from the lock 
screen's emergency call function (which has been there since the first iPhone, as 
federally mandated in the US) there will be a new text label in the lower left-hand 
corner: Medical ID. The following screenshot shows the screen that shows the 
information to aid first responders in case of emergencies:
Information to aid first responders in case of emergencies
This tells some vital statistics, and most importantly, in case the phone's owner is 
unable to communicate, whom to contact (or to be completely maudlin, the next of 
kin) with a handy call button next to it so that they are more likely to pick up the call.

--- Page 68 ---
Chapter 3
[ 57 ]
Configuration profiles
If you have any familiarity with how OS X stores its configuration files, it would 
not be too much of a surprise to hear that a profile that was implemented for 
iOS management is also a specific flavor of XML. Instead of a central registry 
like you have on Windows, there's different, often granularly set files or (often 
sqlite3) databases with which an application or the operating environment itself is 
customized. However, this is not as important as the framework with which changes 
are enforced on the system, and so, a trip back to OS X would actually be useful,  
as that was what inspired much of the architecture of iOS.
Without management, changes can still be applied by touching key-value pairs 
in these XML files in what are called preference domains. The files themselves 
are referred to as property lists and carry the .plist file extension. A common 
binary used to interact with these .plist files at the command line is the defaults 
command, although system frameworks are exposed to scripting languages to 
directly interact with the underlying API.
As with a traditional directory service, however, settings can be inherited from a 
network-based central database, the payload for which on Windows is commonly 
group policy objects or GPOs. Macs have a framework that is referred to as Managed 
Client for OS X or MCX. By applying MCX settings to a computer or computer 
group, they would all have the same settings enforced no matter who used the 
device, but user or group-level settings would depend upon who's logged in. Just as 
with non-network aware preference domains, MCX-enforced property list files are 
stored near the local user and group database on the filesystem, where it is cached 
to maintain the settings off network. Admin users could optionally override any 
settings when logging in, for quick troubleshooting of configurations.
Instead of MCX as the delivery method, profiles came to the Mac as an additional 
way to manage settings in OS X 10.7 and became more powerful; now, a 
configuration profile can affect changes that MCX had not previously been able to 
such as networking-related settings among others. The idea was to go back to the 
Mac and allow management systems to use the same format, XML files with the 
mobileconfig extension, in many cases applying the same settings. So, to recap, 
configurations can be set on the Mac through the following ways:
• Simple .plist files residing at the same location where they'd be found in a 
default installation and can be interacted with via the defaults command
• The .plist files with specific MCX stanzas, which was the previous way 
in which you could implement management from a central user/group/
computer database like LDAP

--- Page 69 ---
Encrypting Devices
[ 58 ]
• Configuration profiles, which is the newer, cross-platform (between iOS  
and Mac) method of applying management settings
With configuration profiles, just like MCX, you can group computers and users 
or manage them individually. As we will demonstrate in Chapter 5, Mobile Device 
Management, the terminology used with the Server application's Profile Manager 
service is to use a device to refer to an iOS device or a Mac, and you can even inherit 
users and groups from Active Directory. The device level of management within a 
profile is called the System scope, whereas anything that would apply granularly  
to a User is called just that. The following screenshot shows an example of an  
Apple-flavored XML file, with the System Payload scope, which means that it  
will take effect device-wide, instead of being scoped to a particular user:
An example of an Apple-flavored XML file, with the System Payload scope, meaning it is to take effect device-
wide instead of being scoped to a particular user

--- Page 70 ---
Chapter 3
[ 59 ]
Notice that the DOCTYPE in the preceding screenshot specifically calls out Apple,  
and settings are structured with no particular ordering since it has a hash or dict 
(short for dictionary) as the base type. The following screenshot has more details  
on this 802.1x-specific configuration:
A Wi-Fi configuration profile, which would tell the radius controller that Active Directory credentials will be 
used for 802.1x authentication 
There is, however, no concept of binding an iOS device to a directory service, nor of 
different users having customized settings, whereas Macs can take both into account. 
Products even exist to manage settings for Macs within the same interface as GPO 
for PCs. For iOS though, the MDM service itself needs to be aware of the groupings 
and management settings which it can then act upon to hand down configurations to 
devices. This is in contrast to Macs, which can even be told to provide authentication to 
radius controllers over Wi-Fi with Active Directory credentials at the login window, as 
shown in the preceding screenshot. If you deployed the profile pictured previously to 
an iOS device, it may very well ignore the unused options or fail altogether.

--- Page 71 ---
Encrypting Devices
[ 60 ]
Now that we have seen more about the format and how it's scoped to devices, let's 
look into the history of this management format. Apple's canonical reference of an 
interface with which to construct the settings available for managing iOS devices 
first appeared in a tool for Windows and Mac called iPhone Configuration Utility 
(or iPCU for short, which makes it sound like one of those places you can get an 
associate's degree on the internet). It was originally released back when the OS 
was called iPhone OS 2. (Really, it was OS/2 Warp. Now that was an OS!) When 
constructing a configuration profile, you would see management options grouped 
into sections in a sidebar on the left, and you would interact with various fields on 
the right. The following screenshot shows the configuration profile creation/editing 
in the iPCU interface:
Configuration profile creation/editing in the iPCU interface
You could even view logs (unlike the mere diagnostic reports we did earlier), which 
came in handy while you applied a profile to see where things went off the track 
when a configuration wasn't valid. The following screenshot shows the logged 
output (essentially syslog output in a console running on the device) displayed  
while applying a profile:

--- Page 72 ---
Chapter 3
[ 61 ]
Logged output (essentially syslog output in a console running on the device) displayed while applying a profile
iPCU has been discontinued. It can no longer view logs on iOS 8 devices and it 
is no longer available to download for Windows or Mac. This is probably a good 
thing as it hadn't been updated since iOS 6. It launched the interface paradigm for 
many configuration profile interfaces and no Apple tool has yet replaced the ease-
of-use of its console feature. See Chapter 6, Debugging and Conclusion, for details on 
libimobiledevice, which may have a similar functionality.
For essentially opening a console on an iOS device and viewing logs 
(as long as the device has been paired), one of our excellent technical 
reviewers, Jeremy Agostino, recommends iOS Console, which is 
available at http://lemonjar.com/iosconsole.
Signing, encryption, and delivery
When a properly configured and secure MDM pushes a configuration profile to 
a device, it will be signed as any piece of code should be that wants to prove its 
identity and be trusted by devices. It should also encrypt its payload to protect  
any sensitive data contained within. However, the usual delivery method, pulled 
over-the-air by the device once told to check in by Apple's Push Notification Service, 
is not the only transport mechanism.

--- Page 73 ---
Encrypting Devices
[ 62 ]
When iPCU was the only way to construct a profile, you could either apply it locally 
over USB, or you could use one of the following options:
• E-mail it to each applicable device by way of the associated end user
• Put it on a properly configured web server (which would treat the mime type 
accordingly for access from mobile safari on devices)
• Send it by a text message (remember, this predated iMessage)
Now, there are a few other tools that can apply a profile to a device, but otherwise, 
the non-MDM delivery mechanisms are unchanged.
To break down the format of configuration profiles that are available, you can leave 
the profile in plain text with no signature and edit it at will. This may be rejected 
or just not applied if folks refuse to continue after being presented with warning 
prompts when asked to install it.
You could sign but not encrypt the profile, leaving the payload and other contents 
able to be inspected in plain text. A barely recognizable text blob would precede and 
close the profile's main text, which is its signature, ensuring that it was not tampered 
with. If it was altered after signing, any subsequent installations would be refused.
Finally, the entire profile could be encrypted, making it rely on a working, compatible 
PKI relationship that is normally based on a Remote Management profile being 
installed on the device, which an MDM service would put on at enrollment time.
Configuration profile signatures use the Cryptographic Message 
Syntax (CMS) standard. While not exactly simple, one could use 
openssl on various operating systems in tandem with a root 
certificate from a trusted certificate authority to apply signatures to 
configuration profiles, which devices will then see as trusted.

--- Page 74 ---
Chapter 3
[ 63 ]
Summary
This chapter was a bit of a grab bag of the more fundamental concepts of how the 
device handles encryption. Instead of being a complete derivative of Apple's iOS 
Security White Paper, we presented the newer quirks and real-world application of 
some of the topics around encrypting the main functions of the device. We discussed 
how the system is prepared at the factory with security in mind through its secure boot 
process. The addition of NFC payments via Apple Pay led us to investigate Passbook 
and its integration with Touch ID. Networking-related concerns like VPN, AirDrop, 
Proxies, and Filters were also discussed along with a way of utilizing a wired network 
connection. The Health app and Medical ID were toured briefly. Finally, we prepared 
for applying management by detailing what the actual files and formats are that 
manage settings on both iOS and Mac.
Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) programs often overlap with how regular 
consumers want to use what is, in fact, their device. While keeping that in mind,  
as professionals we need to balance control over our data with taking full advantage 
of the utility of the device. Hopefully, this also gets you thinking about privacy 
as a topic that goes hand-in-hand with security, and lays the groundwork for the 
application of management settings to bring about productivity in employees,  
which we'll be covering over the next two chapters.

--- Page 76 ---
Organizational Controls
Now, we'll move on to explore the concepts involved in managing iOS devices from 
a central location on-premises. This includes device supervision, Activation Lock, 
Single App Mode, and more basic options presented by the old stalwart, ActiveSync. 
For most of the time, we will be looking at a tool called Apple Configurator that 
is developed by Apple. We consider it to be one of the easiest tools to recommend 
for environments that need more hands-on control when officially supporting 
iOS, either when migrating to a BYOD (short form for bring your own device) 
environment or in conjunction with an MDM. It fits a couple of specific workflows 
very well and has some features that are vital for hardening devices.
Besides Apple Configurator, which at the very least can provide a good reference 
for showing Apple's acknowledged use cases for starting with device management, 
we will also introduce Apple's Device Enrollment Program or DEP. Activation 
Lock is a thornier topic now, so we'll touch on this as well. Just to transition from 
Guided Access, which was covered in Chapter 2, Introducing App Security, we'll 
also discuss App Lock when we explain the difference between it interacting with 
Guided Access and Single App Mode. And, before we get into full-blown MDM in 
the following chapter, we will discuss ActiveSync as one of the original over-the-air 
management frameworks.
In brief, this chapter's topics are as follows: 
• Apple Configurator
• Preparation, supervision, and assignment of iOS devices
• The distribution of apps with Apple Configurator and the  
Volume Purchase Program
• Activation Lock and Find My iPhone
• The Device Enrollment Program versus Apple Configurator
• App Lock and Single App Mode in contrast to Guided Access
• Refresher on what ActiveSync provides on iOS

--- Page 77 ---
Organizational Controls
[ 66 ]
Apple Configurator
Before the release of Apple Configurator on the Mac App Store, there were three other 
sanctioned applications for interaction with iOS devices: iTunes, Xcode, and iPhone 
Configuration Utility (iPCU). Xcode had the capability to connect multiple devices 
simultaneously, but even that functionality was limited for running tests on devices or 
for restoring a version of iOS. Still, we were without any concept of efficient, directly 
connected management tools, nor even the hint of integration with a directory service.
When the iPad was released, it did not come with a manual like a lawn mower, 
which shows you what its intended usage is and how to sharpen the blades. 
Apple just about said the same thing to its customers that it says to its developers, 
something to the effect of "we can't wait to see what YOU do with it", as if it was 
still an open question as to what its most popular use would be. Apple products 
have, however, historically been used extensively in education and the price was 
commonly a half to a third of the least expensive laptop Mac. This led to an influx 
of iPads in environments that might not have been particularly prepared to have so 
many computing devices on Wi-Fi. This leads us back to the lack of applications that 
allow tethered preparation and maintenance of many devices at once.
Perhaps, if customers that used Apple products for educational purposes in 
particular were asked what they wanted, as the paraphrased saying attributed 
to Henry Ford goes, they would have said a faster horse; instead they got Apple 
Configurator. We do not want to be repetitive, but we must recall that Apple's 
priorities are its customers first and foremost, and they sell an astounding amount  
of products to regular consumers. One may be inclined to cut them, and companies 
like Amazon who are selling to the general public with success, some slack, which 
is hard. Amazon's not trying to be CDW and Apple can't be everything to everyone; 
(although it has never stopped the sprawl of iTunes, which the Apple TV Assistant 
built into Apple Configurator which has a faint whiff of.)
Back in Chapter 2, Introducing App Security, we mentioned about the Volume 
Purchase Program (VPP) that Apple offers. This was an integral part of what was 
considered going into designing Apple Configurator, along with the Supervision 
concept that we've been hinting at throughout the book so far. However,  
before we get into that, let's discuss workflows.

--- Page 78 ---
Chapter 4
[ 67 ]
Intended workflows
Of all the iOS form factors, at 9.6", the original and canonical iPad screen is comparably 
sized to 8.5" x 11" or an A4 sheet of paper, if you lose the margins and enjoyed staring 
at a light bulb all the time. (What? you don't prefer emissive screens?) If a telecom field 
worker has visited your home or business recently, you might have noticed that they 
now almost exclusively use tablets. Similarly, airlines have been giving their staff 
handheld devices for some time. When taking this rapid adoption of mobile devices 
into account, and recalling who Apple usually cares about when designing solutions,  
it may make more sense as to how Apple Configurator came into being.
An iPad can conceivably replace a utility worker's clipboard or a student's three-ring 
binders and streamline processes along the way. Airline pilots began demanding 
iPads to replace their ungainly and heavy binders of airport and route maps, which 
actually saved fuel due to the drop in weight. We can start to see that devices will 
be used in a multitude of ways, but a particularly apt case is high-service and quick-
turnaround environments, loaded with the apps and data people need to get their 
work done.
Apple Configurator's release was groundbreaking in that it was a series of firsts: 
• Applications could be handed out in bulk without MDM, and these apps could 
then be reclaimed
• Backups could be created and restored without iTunes and restored or refreshed 
en masse 
• New, more locked-down restrictions could be enabled
Educational institutions segment time into classes and they often gather devices in 
labs or carts. Hospitals and utility workers have shifts and can make a station around 
a time clock or a gathering place for devices, from where they can be checked in and 
out from. It is widely reported that Apple does not have a colossal R&D footprint, so 
when they make a tool they have to please as many end users as possible. They don't 
have the resources to quality assure and develop features that can serve every market. 
Please keep all of this in mind as we discuss what Apple Configurator can do, with at 
least an understanding of why it doesn't make French fries four different ways.

--- Page 79 ---
Organizational Controls
[ 68 ]
The following screenshot shows the splash screen on starting Apple Configurator for 
the first time, which graphically introduces its three modes:
The splash screen on starting Apple Configurator for the first time graphically introduces its three modes
The interaction modes – Prepare, Supervise, 
and Assign
After acquiring Apple Configurator from the Mac App Store (it is free, but requires a 
Mac at this time), you're greeted with an image that breaks down its three cumulative 
modes of operation. First, there are the capabilities of the Prepare mode, which are  
as follows:
• Naming the device (this includes the option of sequential, numeric naming if 
you are preparing multiple devices at once, as it can handle up to 30 devices 
concurrently)
• Creating a (unsupervised) backup

--- Page 80 ---
Chapter 4
[ 69 ]
• Applying a software update (which caches that version) and optionally, 
wiping the device in the process
• Importing, creating, exporting and/or applying configuration profiles
Finally, flipping a switch to move the device to the next mode, Supervision
Flipping this switch to make the device become supervised changes the behavior of 
Apple Configurator's options. Therefore, you must then wipe the device and apply 
the most recent iOS update.
One might say that these distinctions help to prove that the device is indeed owned 
and under the control of the institution managing these devices, as it is assumed that 
regular people wouldn't let IT seize their property and remove all personalization or 
customization. (If they are like our customers at least.) However, Apple Configurator 
can easily be used in Prepare mode to lightly run an OS update, install a configuration 
profile, or even perform a backup and restoration.
Our technical editor points out that the device must trust the 
computer running Apple Configurator first to even do these light 
tasks, as we'll exploit in Chapter 6, Debugging and Conclusion.
This helps us to clearly define the distinction between preparation and supervision, 
as the second layer's powerful functionality rests on top of the first. The last mode, 
Assign, has just two additions:
• First, you can leverage a local or network-based directory service
• Second, the data created by a user from the directory can be stored on the 
computer running Apple Configurator
This allows the user to check in or check out of data as well as sets of apps, and it 
can also aid in the distribution of documents to devices that have compatible apps 
installed on them. It may seem like we're jumping ahead to discuss the Assign mode, 
but that's really the only additional feature.

--- Page 81 ---
Organizational Controls
[ 70 ]
Other than that, as whiz-bang features go, if users from the directory service have 
images associated with their LDAP records, there is a preference to show these 
images on the lock screen when assigning devices. You will access it from the Apple 
Configurator menu in the top left-hand corner of the screen, under Preferences. 
However, the stars have never aligned to the point that we've seen that in use in the 
real world. The following screenshot shows, in Preferences, where an assigned device 
can be configured to use an image from LDAP:
In Preferences, where an assigned device can be configured to use an image from LDAP
The importance of supervision
Once the device has been wiped and updated by being tethered to a computer running 
Apple Configurator, you can take advantage of several options. These include:
• Customizing the lock screen image, as shown in the preceding image, 
optionally with the device's name or some other static text
• Enabling various network-related features including Always-On VPN, 
Content filters, Global HTTP proxy (as discussed in the previous chapter), 
and cellular data modifications

--- Page 82 ---
Chapter 4
[ 71 ]
• Restricting various features such as the manual installation of configuration 
profiles, AirDrop, account modifications including Find My Friends, enabling 
other on-device restrictions, education-specific concerns like Siri's profanity 
filter, and whitelisting destinations or presetting passcodes for AirPlay
• Hide (by which we mean disable, to bring about the effect that the app is 
not shown) built-in applications like Game Center, iTunes Store, iMessage, 
Podcasts, or store components like In-App Purchase or the iBooks Store
• Stop the removal of any other apps, including the ones that Apple 
Configurator may have installed, or prevent the addition of any so-called 
Internet accounts (such as Facebook, Twitter, and so on) or e-mail accounts
Restricting Safari does not require supervision, but it is 
a common error to believe that you'll allow all the web 
functionality you want by using a Web Clip payload in a 
configuration profile. For example, for accessing your intranet 
only. If you restrict Safari, the app will be removed and Web 
Clips will not even launch if present.
A bigger point than even these settings, which were advocated by so many of Apple's 
customers in large institutions, is the ability to install profiles with zero taps. If the 
device is still in Prepare mode, you'll need to respond to the prompts on the screen 
to accept certificate notifications, learn about what the profile will do to the device, 
and eventually, install, and then tap on done, per profile. Loading a profile onto a 
supervised device is silent. In fact, when restoring the backup to supervised devices, 
you don't even need to go through any setup or activation steps. (More recent versions 
of Apple Configurator can allow similar behavior without restoring a backup, by 
selecting which prompts to skip.)
If this wasn't a security book, we could probably stop here. However, by far the biggest 
point from a security perspective is the fact that, by default, a supervised device can 
be disabled from connecting to any other computer running Apple Configurator. An 
attacker cannot piggyback on iTunes to target another device too. This mitigates many 
of the pairing-based complications that we'll be discussing in Chapter 6, Debugging 
and Conclusion. In fact, if it was desirable to allow moving any content to the device 
from another computer, the device must be designated at time of supervision to Allow 
devices to connect to other Macs (by which they imply PCs as well).

--- Page 83 ---
Organizational Controls
[ 72 ]
Further, if a specific configuration profile with a restriction payload is applied, Allow 
pairing with non-Configurator hosts must also be selected. If you want to, this can 
allow you to optionally disable pairing later via MDM, in case it is not clear whether 
your end users will need it at the time of supervision, but if you are using Apple 
Configurator to supervise the device, then it must be connected to the computer 
again. You can see each of these settings in the following screenshot:
The two settings that must align for devices to be allowed to pair with any computer
When discussing workflows, we said Apple Configurator is a good fit for high-service, 
fast-turnaround use cases, which leads to another big feature of supervision: the ability 
to refresh the device to a stored state upon reconnection. If this includes the restoration 
of a larger backup with many apps, this can be a more lengthy process, but in any case, 
all of the ingredients are cached locally in Apple Configurator's support directories. 
(Apps such as iMovie and Keynote run in to hundreds of MBs and flash storage in 
general is optimized for reading and not writing, so it's good to measure if the cycle 
time meets your expectations.) This can essentially reimage the iOS device if Apple 
Configurator is open on the computer to which the device is attached. 
Optionally, in the event you are not restoring a backup, you can also have apps and 
profiles that may have been added to the deleted device, so user training regarding 
supervised devices is very important. If this behavior is not desired for any reason, 
you must at least temporarily turn off these settings in Apple Configurator's 
Preferences, as shown in the following screenshot:

--- Page 84 ---
Chapter 4
[ 73 ]
In Preferences where supervised devices are configured to automatically refresh when they are connected
Apps, VPP, and Apple Configurator
When the usage model is one customer for one device, an MDM can prompt an end 
user for their Apple ID. Apple Configurator doesn't require a user that receives a 
device prepared by it to plug anything in, allowing shared usage models that just 
weren't possible before.
If an Apple ID is authorized for use on the computer running Apple Configurator, 
even if it is not associated with VPP, you can go ahead and import and distribute 
free applications. The recommended way to go about obtaining the .ipa files (the 
archived bundles that are iOS applications, as discussed in Chapter 2, Introducing App 
Security) is to download them from the App Store section in iTunes. However, no 
matter what ID the app was downloaded with (for example, if an iOS device already 
synched with the computer and backed up its purchases with iTunes), the DRM 
can be removed from the app bundle and imported with whatever Apple ID Apple 
Configurator wants to use. However, if you forget to authorize the computer in 
iTunes, you'd see the following error:
When an app to be installed on a device is imported without the associated Apple ID authorized in iTunes

--- Page 85 ---
Organizational Controls
[ 74 ]
Keep in mind that the updates for any application installed with 
Apple Configurator are tied to the Apple ID it was imported with, 
which may have unintended consequences when it prompts for 
updates on every device.
This is especially true when the Apple ID has an e-mail address for 
the username that is not associated with your institution, because 
end users see it when prompted. We're not saying that this has 
happened to any of our customers.
If you have different groups that are sharing the same set of supervised devices, apps 
can go out and come back in if another setup is required where these apps shouldn't 
be present. Apple Configurator can group devices arbitrarily as you choose and apply 
settings as needed, and apps are one of the things that can come along for the ride. 
These processes are just the same for paid apps that have been purchased under  
the VPP. It becomes very important, however, to follow Apple's guidance as to  
what version of VPP purchases should be chosen based on your use case. Also,  
you should be careful to not apply an app to a device if it has not been first put  
into the Supervise mode, as this will not allow you to reclaim the app code if  
you're relying on this method of app distribution.
While this is not necessarily pertinent for a security discussion, the online VPP portal 
from Apple provides an interface to download redemption codes for use with Apple 
Configurator, and it inquires internally how many of these have ever been applied 
to devices. The Apple Configurator interface helpfully provides feedback about how 
many have been redeemed per product and it provides a spreadsheet of codes as 
well. It may seem obvious, but do not use the same spreadsheet of codes with an 
MDM or other distribution methods.
Mass restoring and naming of devices
From a branding or support standpoint, having the icons consistently arranged with 
a standard home screen background is desirable. Although MDMs are supposedly 
gaining this functionality, the original way to do these customizations, whether in the 
Prepare or Supervise modes, is to create a backup. (Backups made from a device in 
one mode cannot be restored to another with Apple Configurator.) This often requires 
manual interaction and if you have an MDM, it would make sense to allow it to 
perform any applicable configurations. It's very straightforward in the interface where 
you would initiate the creation of a backup when you are in either mode, and you can 
even access the stored backups.
Apple Configurator also protects the throughput of the USB bus by limiting concurrent 
operations to somewhere in the range of three at a time.

--- Page 86 ---
Chapter 4
[ 75 ]
Note that the application is limited to 30 concurrent USB connections over 
a powered hub, which is obviously not the maximum for the protocol.
Also, keep in mind that except with very recent, specialized hardware, USB hubs 
can practically be considered addressless except for physical identification. The most 
reliable way to be confident that devices on a large hub are being named or otherwise 
prepared in a particular order is to attach each cable to the device in the sequence that 
you like.
Note that if you supervised a device and it is lost, stolen, or broken to the point that it 
cannot reconnect to Apple Configurator, you will lose any applicable app codes if you 
are using VPP. (Which is to say the original "redemption codes" version in comparison 
to the licenses model referred to in the VPP portal as "managed distribution", for 
use with MDM.) To reclaim the previously supervised device's name to keep your 
inventory neat, you can select it from the list in Apple Configurator and under the 
Devices menu, hold down the Option key. Unsupervise will change to Remove and 
you can prepare a new device to take that slot in the sequence. The same goes when a 
device is repaired and replaced with a device that has a different serial number, if you 
were not able to unsupervise the previous device before it left your possession.
Backup concerns
When there is a supervision relationship between many of your devices and you 
realize that only small workgroups or sets of devices fit in the Apple Configurator 
usage model, backups become crucial, and alternatives to prevent over-reliance or 
an abundance of hacky workarounds become attractive. Taking backups as the first 
topic, Apple ships built-in backup software called Time Machine that can be used to 
protect the computer that runs Apple Configurator, but it is limited in its capabilities. 
You can either directly connect a hard drive (which can be encrypted), or send the 
backup over the local network to a machine running a compatible endpoint. It is not 
optimized for over-the-WAN offsite backup, among other shortcomings.
To separately understand the files in use, first we'll reprise our talk about sandboxing. 
In a rare reversal of the "do as I say, not as I do" maxim, Apple is following its own 
rules with Apple Configurator by using the container model for its data storage, which 
puts the files it operates with away from the view of the user. It is literally deep within 
a hidden folder. You can reach it by navigating to Users | CurrentUser (the current 
user's name) | Library | Containers | com.apple.configurator | Data | Library.  
Yes, the repetition is intentional.

--- Page 87 ---
Organizational Controls
[ 76 ]
Similar to Time Machine, Apple Configurator leverages links to refer to files outside 
of its sandbox for which it doesn't need write access. (Time Machine uses hard links to 
stub unchanged files from previous backups, which lets it present a complete set when 
you browse the most current folder structure in its storage destination.)
Another repeated pattern is the use of SQLite as the storage mechanism for the 
database of supervised devices and other inventory-related information. This is 
located in a subdirectory of the path listed earlier and you can go to it by navigating 
to Application Support | com.apple.configurator | AppleConfigurator.storedata. 
iOS software updates that are often full OS installations get cached within Firmware 
under Caches and apps imported into the program get stored in Resources, which 
you can reach by navigating to Application Support | com.apple.configurator.
Configurator as chaperone
It is a common troubleshooting tip to turn up the verbosity of a process, look 
through the logs, and check any settings or configuration files. Mac folks have long 
gathered commands that enable hidden settings in preference files that are Apple-
flavored XML files, just as we said were the case for configuration profiles. If you run 
defaults write com.apple.configurator LogLevel ALL (with the preference 
domain mapping to the path of com.apple.configurator.plist at Preferences by 
navigating to Users | CurrentUser (the current user's name)| Library | Containers 
| com.apple.configurator | Data | Library), you will cause informational text built 
into the debug output of the application to be written to logs. You can then sift 
through this information by viewing system.log in the Console application inside 
the Utilities folder in Applications, if you're running as an admin user on Mac. 
(Otherwise, you can tail the system.log file by navigating to var | log if you can 
elevate yourself to an admin user from a shell.)
Sometimes, old codenames for apps, devices, or features stick around in the  
inner workings of applications, and if you run defaults read on the preceding file 
(or open it in a binary plist compatible text editor such as Xcode), you'll notice 
the ChaperoneCertificateIssuer and ChaperoneCertificateSerial key/value pairs. 
Supervision may very well have used this Chaperone naming internally at Apple 
during development. Similarly, the name of the profile that Apple Configurator 
installs when supervising the device is referred to as com.apple.configurator.
chaperoneprofile. The following screenshot shows the settings on a supervised 
device; this is an example of Apple Configurator's installed profile:

--- Page 88 ---
Chapter 4
[ 77 ]
In Settings on a supervised device, this is an example of what Apple Configurator's installed profile looks like
In past versions of Apple Configurator, you would see that the console output 
also mentions the Boolean (true/false) value for the "chaperoned" property of a 
device that is being interacted with. This concept of a host having a responsibility 
relationship with the device helps further stress the importance of guarding the 
computer that is running Apple Configurator. If this machine is ever compromised, 
(or perhaps even worse, experiences data loss) you would be in quite a pickle indeed.
Activation Lock and Find My iPhone
A boon for theft prevention (or a bust for the iOS device resale market), is the 
implementation of a new feature, as of iOS 7, by Apple called Activation Lock, 
which is  an extension of iCloud's previous Find My iPhone feature. If you had an 
iCloud account configured with the setting on an iOS 7 device and it needed to be 
reactivated from scratch after a restore, the process would not have been able to 
proceed until that account's password was entered. This was felt to be a burden 
and a management headache for those who lent out devices regularly, but by some 
municipality's statistics, this alone reduced theft of iOS devices as they became 
practically useless.

--- Page 89 ---
Organizational Controls
[ 78 ]
A few links to note 
The citation for the claim that thefts (and the iPhone resale market) are 
impacted by this feature can be found at http://arstechnica.com/
apple/2014/06/ios-7-activation-lock-cutting-iphone-
theft-damages-resale-market/.
Apple's Check Activation Lock Status page at https://www.
icloud.com/activationlock/ for use before you buy or receive a 
phone.
Look at Apple's guidance on how to deal with a device that is still 
locked (http://support.apple.com/en-us/HT201441) or 
preparing your own device for sale (http://support.apple.com/
en-us/HT201351).
Apple, as the central clearinghouse of devices that must come onto the network and 
check in before being allowed to be activated, can theoretically ensure that devices 
can only be activated by their rightful owners.
To address the problem of institutions that want control over whether customers  
can enable this feature and do not find it desirable when they'd like to reprovision 
the device to another user, two techniques exist. The first one is that an MDM can 
block Activation Lock until a bypass code can be generated for the device and sent  
to the service for a certain window of time after an enrollment that is akin to a full 
disk encryption key escrow, which provides a distinct, non-identifying "get out  
of jail free" card so that you can reactivate the device without the presence of the 
previous iCloud-identified user. You can find more details at http://support.
apple.com/en-us/HT202804 in Apple's documentation about how they recommend 
folks mix tools such as an MDM or Apple Configurator into their support procedures 
around Activation Lock.
The reference implementation of MDM for Apple, the Profile Manager service in 
their OS X Server app, has specific documentation on the Activation Lock bypass 
code at
http://help.apple.com/profilemanager/mac/4.0/#/apd94BD5B2E-6448-450D-
B76F-605AEEEEC9D7.
The other technique to deal with Activation Lock is that by default supervision does 
not allow this feature to be enabled in the first place. Are you getting the idea that 
Apple really wants you to supervise your devices? Only if you then use an MDM 
that enables the feature (via escrowing a bypass code or otherwise) can devices use 
the feature. Even if the end user enables Activation Lock on a supervised device, 
putting the device into Recovery mode will allow you to wipe (or prepare or refresh) it 
as you see fit. If you're given a device that was not supervised before Activation Lock 
was enabled, you will get an error message that says that it is "Unable to check iOS".

--- Page 90 ---
Chapter 4
[ 79 ]
Recovery mode is a state where the device has booted to its firmware and has been 
told that it needs a fresh OS installation. It previously showed a Connect to iTunes 
message with a USB connector, but now it shows an arrow from a lightning connector 
to the new red iTunes icon (http://support.apple.com/en-us/HT1212). You 
can also use a utility like RecBoot or others if you often find yourself recovering a 
forgotten password, but be sure to carefully evaluate and inspect applications that 
purport to do cool things to iOS devices, as they are not officially sanctioned by Apple 
and may be from compromised sources (http://jaxov.com/2010/05/recboot-
iphone-recovery-mode/). The following screenshot shows a prompt that displays 
the error encountered when you try to prepare a device with Activation Lock enabled:
The error presented when you try to prepare a device with Activation Lock enabled
Addressing the rough spots
For years, Apple said you could try a stick-and-carrot approach, using HR policy 
and enticements to stop end users from removing MDM or supervision profiles, 
with the ultimate caveat being that end users could always wipe the device. iOS 8 
finally delivered a more comprehensive way to ensure that the devices are managed 
after being given to end users. Now, there is a restriction on access to the setting that 
erases all data and settings if the device is supervised, but only DEP, which we'll 
discuss later, truly keeps the device locked to your MDM. You can also restrict the 
removal of profiles by setting passwords as needed for removal in an ad hoc manner.
Between the small (intended) workgroup scale, inflexibility regarding interaction 
with things like backups, and the singular, fat client-based point of failure, many 
have hoped that there were other options. GroundControl  is a new product that  
can provide some of the powerful features and functionality of Configurator 
without its limitations. (Disclaimer: one of our technical editors is the lead 
developer on this project.) This cloud-based solution aims to put tight control  
of the deployment process in the hands of the stakeholders. You  can learn more 
about this at https://www.groundctl.com.

--- Page 91 ---
Organizational Controls
[ 80 ]
DEP versus Apple Configurator
The Device Enrollment Program (DEP) is provided by Apple to alter the setup 
assistant so that devices can be unboxed by end users, but they are then forced to 
enroll into the MDM. DEP can also enable supervision without Apple Configurator. 
In fact, Apple recommends that you are not supposed to use devices that have 
DEP with Apple Configurator, at least while they are assigned to an MDM. Just as 
Activation Lock would cause trouble with Apple Configurator; DEP would like to 
kick in when the device is being activated, and this is not currently engineered into 
the product. Apple's documentation regarding the example use cases where DEP  
can be used with Apple Configurator is found at http://support.apple.com/en-
us/HT201092.
To get going with DEP, a significant amount of paperwork is required such as 
associating Apple IDs, tracking down purchases, getting a D-U-N-S number if you 
don't already have one for your Apple Enterprise Developer account, and then 
connecting the DEP portal to your MDM. And even before all that, it may not be 
available in your country. The complete list of countries that have DEP can be  
found at https://deploy.apple.com/qforms/open/register/country/aws.
The actual moving parts for setting up DEP with your MDM are mostly concerned 
with what you want to see as part of the setup assistant. There is also the option to 
lock the MDM profile and enable supervision. 
Keep in mind that things such as supervision and locking down devices shouldn't be a 
concern when you're only supporting a BYOD program. However, there are certainly 
many important considerations to keep in mind when you transition from previously 
deployed and supervised devices to DEP. Just like supervision, you must wipe the 
device so that it always points to your MDM during setup. This brings us to a bit of a 
show-stopper for many, and that is the fact that you are not supposed to restore the 
backup taken from the same device that is now being associated with DEP.
This makes it sound like there isn't a real migration path for pre-existing managed 
devices. We are not making this up. For more information, you can refer to http://
support.apple.com/en-us/HT202977. You are even expected to MDM-wipe 
or Apple Configurator-unsupervise devices before they can be considered active 
within DEP. For moving data, the following choice quote is included under Apple 
Configurator: Transitioning to Apple Deployment Programs:

--- Page 92 ---
Chapter 4
[ 81 ]
When an iCloud backup is restored to the same device, all supervi-
sion and profiles come from the backup regardless of how it was  
configured in the Device Enrollment Program. For this reason, 
when restoring backups each user should transition to a new or  
different device to ensure Device Enrollment Program supervision 
and MDM enrollment are enforced.
When we filed a radar (bug report) on this behavior, the response received "works  
as intended".
Guided Access versus App Lock versus 
Single App Mode
The previous section on Guided Access in Chapter 2, Introducing App Security, 
introduced us to the concept of putting the device into a mode where very little  
can go wrong with it, but this also limits it to a single purpose—locking the device 
to run only one app. Note that this would only be applicable for supervised devices. 
Apple Configurator can be told which app to run and the device will bypass the 
home screen after the device is woken from sleep. The previous guidance applies  
for making sure that you can get access to the Apple Configurator station in case it 
needs maintenance, or to make sure that the network access is reliable if  
using Single App Mode with MDM. In addition, ensure that the power settings  
are applied, as end users would need to put the screen to sleep manually since  
they don't have access to settings.
As Single App Mode allows ad hoc, over-the-air application of the profile to make 
the device enter this locked-to-app mode, you can first allow end users to set a 
passcode on the device before the home screen becomes inaccessible. While this 
allows it to remain locked when unattended, make sure you consider apps that 
prompt for authentication and allow you to log out if sensitive data or systems  
are to be used.
ActiveSync
You may get along very well without any of these tools that we've discussed so far. 
In addition, MDM is not particularly necessary if the ActiveSync protocol delivers 
the restrictions and security features that you need. The protocol was also adopted 
by paid versions of the Google Apps product and it is natively supported when you 
configure an Exchange e-mail account on iOS.

--- Page 93 ---
Organizational Controls
[ 82 ]
Many aspects of the server and Outlook Web Access interface work in exactly the 
same manner with iOS as they would with Blackberry, Symbian, Windows Mobile, 
Windows Phone, or an Android device. However, while the 14.0 version of the 
specification should be supported, the actual applicable settings have remained 
somewhat unchanged for years. Recently, Microsoft has been promoting various 
new products to manage mobile devices, which support the native management 
frameworks of each of the popular platforms.
As a refresher, management settings enforceable via the ActiveSync protocol are  
as follows:
• Wiping the device (if the device is lost or stolen)
• Enforcing a device passcode, with complexity, expiration, history, timeout 
before prompt, and failed attempt thresholds
• Allowing use of the camera (which was originally focused around courts  
or government-related buildings and contractors)
• Disabling sync while the device is roaming to help with data usage while  
you are outside normal cellular coverage
Further, via a configuration profile, you can limit how far in the past your mail is 
synced, along with other account-specific settings like certificates.
Summary
Over the course of this chapter, we spent a lot of time investigating Apple 
Configurator. We discussed the Prepare mode, which can make lightweight,  
one-off changes as per your need. Supervision and user check out or assignment  
sets up long-term management "chaperone" relationships with iOS devices. We  
went over how Apple Configurator distributes the older version of VPP app codes 
and how it can lock the device into an app. As Activation Lock helped to make 
a device's theft become less effective, supervision also provided a safety net for 
institutions by allowing them to reclaim devices via the Recovery mode. We also 
reminded you that before evaluating an MDM, many restriction-related features  
are actually available to ActiveSync as an alternative.

--- Page 94 ---
Chapter 4
[ 83 ]
For security professionals, it may seem like Apple is clueless about the needs of 
large enterprises, and Apple Configurator may not help with that impression. But 
by providing best practices we're left with the most supportable management, which 
works with the platform instead of against it. Apple has pushed the idea of "tier 
zero" or "the new IT" as a hands-off, infinitely scalable solution where IT lets end 
users perform maintenance tasks and it doesn't need to build walls between work 
and personal data in everyone's devices. We can do our best work when we are 
protecting devices by concentrating on how little of the device needs to be managed, 
even if they are owned by institutions. Even when it seems that the controls that are 
available aren't of industrial strength, practical concerns are going to trump a tightly 
locked-down experience. Apple, its customers, and its developers still need room to 
experiment and bring real innovation and productivity to mobile devices.

--- Page 96 ---
Mobile Device Management
Mobile Device Management (MDM) refers to the technology that allows the 
centralized management of mobile devices, including those that run Apple's 
iOS. Centrally controlling iOS devices is an absolute requirement for many large 
organizations. Centralized management is also becoming a necessity in smaller 
environments. There are a lot of products that can be used to manage devices. These 
range from tools such as the inexpensive Profile Manager built into the Mac OS X 
Server application to third-party tools such as AirWatch, MaaS360 (by IBM), Mobile 
Iron JAMF's Casper Suite, and Bushel.
In the interest of full disclosure, Bushel is being developed by one of 
the authors of this book. Bushel is represented here because of the 
depth of knowledge that the authors have of the product.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
• Introducing MDM
• Using configurator versus mobile device management
• Profile Manager
• Introducing Bushel
These are meant to showcase the technology and are not an endorsement of any 
single solution. The reason that it's hard to endorse any single solution is that each 
has specific strengths and weaknesses, and each should be considered independently 
according to the environment.

--- Page 97 ---
Mobile Device Management
[ 86 ]
Introducing MDM
As mentioned, MDM is a technology that empowers you to centrally manage mobile 
devices. MDM's framework is developed by Apple and works using the Apple Push 
Notification service (APNs) to send messages from Apple. The notifications by the 
APNs do not actually contain commands or settings, but instead notify the device to 
look back at an MDM server, to pull commands that are waiting on the server.
MDM commands can wipe, lock, and perform other tasks on devices. MDM 
commands can also leverage profiles to configure settings on devices, similar to 
how we configured settings using Apple Configurator in this chapter. However, 
when configuring settings via an MDM solution, the profiles are installed over the 
air. This allows you to change settings daily or based on a device meeting a specific 
requirement. For example, with some third-party tools, you can wipe a device based 
on the geographic location of the device. MDM refers to the myriad of technologies 
that go into facilitating these transactions.
Configurator versus MDM
In Chapter 4, Organizational Controls, we looked at managing devices locally using 
the Apple Configurator. The Apple Configurator works by installing profiles on 
devices using the USB connection from the computer to the devices. This works great 
in certain environments, such as when you just want to load settings onto a device 
prior to giving it out to a user. However, for a number of scenarios, you will want to 
update devices over the air. And, for a number of other scenarios, you need to use 
Apple Configurator or a combination of Apple Configurator and an MDM solution.
As mentioned, there are a number of tasks that cannot be managed using an MDM 
solution. These include the following:
• Restoring data to devices
• Setting the background image of devices
• Upgrading devices
• Enabling supervision, with the exception of Device Enrollment Program 
(DEP) devices (DEP allows Apple devices to be tied to an MDM solution)

--- Page 98 ---
Chapter 5
[ 87 ]
Apple Configurator, on the other hand, can be used for all of the preceding points, 
as well as enrolling into an MDM solution. It can also be used to supervise devices 
without an MDM, the benefits of which we discussed in the previous chapter. This 
makes using Apple Configurator a viable use case for the tasks it can perform; it also 
helps to automate the setup of a lot of devices.
The Profile Manager
There are a lot of providers with MDM solutions, such as Symantec, IBM, Sophos, 
JAMF Software, and others. We're going to use Profile Manager in this chapter, not 
because it's the best of them, but because it's an Apple product. The features of each 
MDM solution can be quickly and easily compared at http://www.enterpriseios.
com/wiki/Comparison_MDM_Providers.
In this chapter, we will look at two solutions. The first is Apple's Profile Manager. 
This is a service included as part of the Server application, which runs on Mac OS X 
and is built by Apple. The Server app can be purchased from the Mac App Store for 
around 20 dollars (USD). However, the Profile Manager is not a complete solution 
for many; it lacks some scalability and ease of use that other vendors have built 
into their products. The second is a newcomer called Bushel. The Profile Manager 
requires an OS X Server, whereas Bushel is a SaaS solution.
Preparing the Profile Manager Server
As mentioned, Profile Manager requires a Mac running OS X Server. In many cases, 
this server is a simple Mac mini server. Before we get started with installing the 
Server application and showing how to use Profile Manager, prepare the computer 
that will be used as the server.
For testing, the server can be a virtual machine when 
running on Apple hardware.
Setting up the Profile Manager involves preparing the server by configuring a static 
IP address on the OS X Server. Once you have installed the Server app from the 
Mac App Store, configure a static IP address using the Network System Preferences 
pane. Once done, you will need to properly configure a hostname. 

--- Page 99 ---
Mobile Device Management
[ 88 ]
The hostname in this example will be Yosemiteserver.krypted.com. When initially 
set up, a self-signed certificate is installed. It's simple to generate a CSR and install a 
certificate from a Certificate Authority (CA); however, doing so is beyond the scope 
of this example. Perform the following steps:
1. First, elevate your privileges by invoking bash with sudo:
sudo bash
2. Next, configure the hostname using the scutil command:
sudo scutil --set HostName Yosemiteserver.krypted.com
3. Then, configure the computer name using the ComputerName option with the 
scutil command:
sudo scutil --set ComputerName Yosemiteserver
4. Finally, configure the local host name using the LocalHostName option  
with scutil:
sudo scutil --set LocalHostName Yosemiteserver
The preceding ComputerName and LocalHostName operations can 
be performed using the Sharing System Preference pane; however, 
we are doing it here since we are already in the command line and its 
one less screenshot to take up half a page.
Once the names are properly configured, check whether they function properly 
using the changeip command:
sudo changeip -checkhostname
The output of the changeip command should appear similar to the following example:
Primary address = 192.168.210.201
Current HostName = Yosemiteserver.krypted.com
DNS HostName = Yosemiteserver.krypted.com
The names match. There is nothing to change.
dirserv:success = "success"

--- Page 100 ---
Chapter 5
[ 89 ]
If you're unsuccessful and don't see success, you may need to do some work to 
resolve the domain names:
1. When hosting your own DNS from within the Server app on the Profile 
Manager server, verify that the DNS server is set using the IP address used 
on the server.
2. When hosting a DNS on an Active Directory-based DNS server or other 
non-local DNS server, verify that you have properly working, forward and 
reverse records for the hostname and IP address combination in use on the 
OS X Server or the Active Directory integrated server.
3. From the Server app on the Profile Manager server or other Mac, click on the 
Websites service and then on the ON button (which would say OFF to start 
with). Don't configure anything else for the web server.
4. When the service starts, you will see the path to the default websites  
(/Library/Server/Web/Data/Sites/Default) and a View Server Website 
link will be displayed on the screen, as shown in the following figure:
The setup of the web service
Click on the View Server Website link at the bottom of the Server app. Then verify 
that the Welcome to OS X Server page loads. Doing so verifies that the web service 
(Apache) starts properly and is accessible.

--- Page 101 ---
Mobile Device Management
[ 90 ]
Preparing Profile Manager
Once you see the Welcome to OS X Server page, click on Profile Manager  
in the Server app sidebar. Then, click on the Configure button, shown in the 
following screenshot:
The Profile Manager Service
The Configure Device Management assistant appears. Click on the Next button.
Many environments will have an existing directory service that the Profile Manager 
server connects to. If you connect to Active Directory, then Profile Manager will 
require an Open Directory master or replica to be accessible. If there is none, then click 
on the Create a New Open Directory domain in the Configure Network Users and 
Groups screen (or go on to create the Directory Administrator account if prompted 
to do so instead). This directory service will be used for Profile Manager. If you have 
an existing directory service, then the existing service will be used for usernames and 
passwords and this one you just created will only be used for Profile Manager.

--- Page 102 ---
Chapter 5
[ 91 ]
If you're creating an Open Directory domain, click on the Next button. Then, 
provide an administrative username and password for Open Directory. The default 
username is diradmin. Click on the Next button.
When prompted on the Organization Information screen, provide the name of your 
organization and an administrator's e-mail address (the e-mail address to put on 
certificates), as in the following screenshot, and then click on the Next button.
Providing an organization's information
The settings you used are then displayed on the Confirm Settings screen.

--- Page 103 ---
Mobile Device Management
[ 92 ]
Click on the Set Up button. If prompted to do so, choose a certificate (the next 
screenshot) and then click on Next.
Configuring an SSL Certificate
For this example, we will use the self-signed certificate created by Open Directory 
and click on Next.
The APNs certificate establishes a trust relationship between Apple and your Profile 
Manager server so that push notifications can be sent to devices. You should use 
an institutional Apple ID for your organization (for example, apns@krypted.com) 
rather than a private one (for example, charlesedge@krypted.com). Once you have 
entered the credentials for a valid Apple ID, click on the Next button.
Provided the Apple ID authenticates and everything works as intended, click on the 
Finish button to complete and exit the configuration assistant. The Configure button 
should then be gone. Once back at the Profile Manager settings in Server, select Sign 
Configuration Profiles, displayed in the following screenshot:

--- Page 104 ---
Chapter 5
[ 93 ]
Signing up your configuration profile
From the Code Signing Certificate sheet, choose the appropriate certificate, and click 
on the OK button:
Choosing a code signing certificate

--- Page 105 ---
Mobile Device Management
[ 94 ]
You can also import a certificate here if you have purchased 
a code-signing certificate.
Completing Post Configuration tasks
Enable the Include configuration for services option to automatically build your 
configuration profile settings for services hosted on the server (Mail, Calendars, VPN, 
and so on). If you use the Profile Manager server for other services, leave this option 
enabled; otherwise, disable it as seen in the following screenshot.
Enabling configuration for services running on the server
Apple's Volume Purchase Program (VPP) allows you to buy apps on the Mac App 
Store or iOS App Store in bulk and distribute them to users. You can also revoke 
apps when employees leave your organization. VPP also allows you to manage 
iBooks as well. Profile Manager can help you distribute these apps and iBooks.
To enable the VPP features of Profile Manager, you will first need a VPP account, 
which can be obtained from deploy.apple.com. Once you have created this account, 
download your unique token file. Then, back in Profile Manager, enable the 
checkbox for Distribute apps and books from the Volume Purchase Program. Click 
on the Choose button and select the token file you downloaded earlier from Apple.

--- Page 106 ---
Chapter 5
[ 95 ]
Once these apps are added, click on the ON slider (which would say OFF until 
clicked). Doing so starts the Profile Manager service. Once you see the URL to access 
your web interface, you can start managing devices using Profile Manager:
Accessing the Profile Manager service
Once the Profile Manager service is started, click on Open Profile Manager at the 
bottom of the Profile Manager settings screen. Authenticate yourself on the login 
page to manage your iOS and OS X devices.
Using Profile Manager
Once you log in, there is a ton of options. You can configure policies for devices and 
placeholders and get lost pretty quickly. Hence, we're going to provide a primer 
on configuring profiles and managing devices. The easiest way to get started is to 
use the Everyone profile. This profile allows you to configure profiles for services 
running on the server to deploy settings to all users enrolled on the server.
The Everyone group has a Restrictions section, which allows administrators to 
restrict access to various Profile Manager options. These include restricting access 
to the My Devices portal (we'll cover using My Devices for enrollment later in this 
chapter), locking for devices (an option within My Devices), and the ability for users 
to wipe their own Apple device.

--- Page 107 ---
Mobile Device Management
[ 96 ]
The DEP is a system that automatically configures Apple devices to join 
an MDM upon setup, which begins a process that users can complete. 
You can allow your users to automatically enroll via DEP here.
Activation Lock is a feature in iOS that restricts a device from being erased and 
reactivated without the Apple ID that was used to originally set up the Activation 
Lock features. This can be challenging if users do not actually own their devices. 
When running supervised devices, you can disable Activation Lock or generate a 
bypass code to unlock a device that has been locked through Activation Lock, as 
shown in the following screenshot:
Logging in to Profile Manager for the first time
Enrolling into Profile Manager
To manage a device, you must first enroll the device in Profile Manager. Enrollment 
is an opt-in procedure, unless the device is assigned to an MDM server via DEP. 
Use the URL of the server followed by My Devices to access the My Devices portal, 
which is how users can enroll their own devices into Profile Manager. This brings up 
a list of profiles that can be installed manually.

--- Page 108 ---
Chapter 5
[ 97 ]
Enrolling devices in Profile Manager
Tap on the Enroll button to enroll a device. When prompted, tap on Continue:
Installing profiles

--- Page 109 ---
Mobile Device Management
[ 98 ]
You will receive an error if you are installing a certificate that hasn't yet been 
trusted by a third-party Certificate Authority (CA). As can be seen in the following 
screenshot, click on the Install button:
Accepting unverified Profiles
Once you're enrolled, click on Profile in the Profiles section of the Settings app to see 
what settings are deployed and optionally unenroll devices. Users can wipe or lock 
their own devices from the My Devices portal or administrators can manage devices 
from the administrative portal.
Device management
As mentioned, you can then manage iOS devices from Profile Manager. The first 
task we'll cover here is enforcing a passcode policy for a group of devices. To do so, 
click on Device Groups in Profile Manager and select a group of devices.

--- Page 110 ---
Chapter 5
[ 99 ]
A critical aspect of any management solution is to see the inventory information. The 
information shown includes certificates installed by the MDM solution, UDID, Last 
Checkin Time, Wi-Fi MAC, Ethernet MAC addresses, Device Model, and whether 
the personal hotspot is enabled. You can also see the apps that the MDM solution has 
installed and the restrictions that have been enforced by the MDM solution.
Passcode policies
Real-time management of devices is done using the Devices screen. Here, we can 
access machine-specific information and settings using the Settings (cog) button, as 
well as wipe and lock devices. Try to always use groups to deploy policies, as we 
do here. From Device Groups, select your group and then click on the Settings tab. 
Click on the Edit button shown in the next screenshot:
Device Groups

--- Page 111 ---
Mobile Device Management
[ 100 ]
Since we're configuring a passcode policy, click on Passcode. The items in the left 
column are known as payloads. Click on Configure to setup the passcode payload. 
Check the box and enable Allow simple value, as shown in the following screenshot. 
Then, set the Minimum passcode length option to a number. We really like using 
four characters. Then, click on the OK button to save your changes.
 
Configuring passcode requirements
Okay! That didn't save your changes to the profile, only to that payload within the 
profile. Click on the Save button on the Save Changes? screen to finish the process. 
You'll know everything worked when the device prompts you for a new passcode if 
one is already configured.

--- Page 112 ---
Chapter 5
[ 101 ]
Wiping a device is another common administrative task. Make sure you're using 
a device where you don't mind losing everything before you follow along with this 
example. To wipe a device, select the device from Profile Manager and then click on 
the Settings (cog) button, as you did earlier. This time, click on Wipe:
Wiping a device
When the Wipe screen comes up, click on Wipe. Because this is destructive to data 
on the device, you'll be prompted to click on Wipe a second time. If you look at your 
device, note that it should instantly go black, and then, reboot the device.
If the device is DEP-enabled, it will automatically 
begin the enrollment process again once it joins a Wi-Fi 
network for the first time.
Introducing Bushel
In the interest of full disclosure, one of the authors of this book works at JAMF 
Software, the company that makes Bushel. It is a very simple, easy-to-use MDM 
that allows us to showcase, using a third-party solution, to make changes on devices 
using the fewest number of screenshots so we can fit them into this book.

--- Page 113 ---
Mobile Device Management
[ 102 ]
Setup
You can set up a Bushel account from signup.bushel.com. When prompted 
for your company name, provide it a subdomain name as well, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
Configuring your organization in Bushel
When the form is filled out, click on Next.
On the initial screen, provide your name, e-mail address, and a password, as shown 
in the next screenshot. The administrative username for the account will then be this 
e-mail address. Click on the Create Account button:
Configuring your Bushel account settings

--- Page 114 ---
Chapter 5
[ 103 ]
You will receive an e-mail from Bushel. Click on the Activate button in the e-mail. 
Click on Get Started and then provide the mail settings for your domain or click on 
the Skip button to provide the APNs certificate so that you can enroll iOS devices 
into your Bushel account, as shown below in the following screenshot:
Installing an APNs certificate in Bushel
The enrollment process
The enrollment process is similar to Profile Manager and other third-party MDM 
tools. Log into your Bushel account, click on Enrollment, and when prompted to 
Enroll This Device, click on the Enroll button. When prompted Who will this 
device belong to? enter the username (that is the user's name in front of their  
e-mail address, most likely, or the username for your e-mail system).
Provide the e-mail address as well, and then click on Enroll This Device.  
To enroll the device, use the default settings at each screen. You can also save the 
mobileconfig file downloaded (if using a Mac) and e-mail or text it to allow a user 
to enroll without visiting a website. You will need to leave the username field blank 
if you're distributing a profile to multiple people.

--- Page 115 ---
Mobile Device Management
[ 104 ]
Restrictions
Apple built a feature called open in management in iOS. This feature protects 
company data in mail accounts, apps, and even Safari links distributed by an MDM.
One example of open in management is if you download Numbers and Box using 
Bushel and then purchase Dropbox using your personal Apple ID on the same 
device, you can then open a document that came in through Numbers using Box. 
However, you can't open that same document using Dropbox, because it was not 
supplied via the MDM service.
Bushel enables open in management by default on all accounts. The button says 
Protect corporate data on iOS devices. To verify that open in management is 
enabled, click on the Setup tab. Then, click on Security in the sidebar and look for 
Protect corporate data on iOS devices, as seen in the following screenshot:
Configure corporate data protection

--- Page 116 ---
Chapter 5
[ 105 ]
Make sure you are using VPP to deploy your apps and verify that the iOS device is 
using the mail account deployed via your MDM, rather than a manually configured 
account. To check the mail account, open Settings, tap on Mail, and verify that the 
settings found there cannot be changed. We will cover the Volume Purchasing 
Program in the next section.
Volume Purchasing Program and MDM
VPP is a service provided by Apple that allows organizations to purchase apps in 
volume. Apps purchased in VPP and deployed through an MDM solution can also 
containerize data to only exchange data with apps deployed by that MDM solution. 
To deploy an app, simply click on Apps in the sidebar. If you have a .vpptoken file 
(a file you get from the Apple VPP portal), then you will see the apps purchased 
using the Apple VPP portal in your Library, as shown here:
Installation of Apps using VPP
Click on an app and then click on the Install button to deploy the app to all devices 
enrolled in your Bushel account. Then try to copy data out of that app into the 
one manually installed from the App Store. Provided the copy fails, you have 
successfully built a walled garden for your app-based data.

--- Page 117 ---
Mobile Device Management
[ 106 ]
Summary
We did a lot in this chapter, which is great. In Chapter 1, iOS Security Overview, we 
looked at configuring passcodes, and in Chapter 2, Introducing App Security, we 
looked at app data. Here, we managed both with very basic policies, deployed by 
inexpensive and easy-to-use MDMs. You can get a lot of complicated functionalities 
with your MDM, if you choose. You can also do much more with the tools we 
provided in this chapter, so we hope you will explore everything these tools  
(and the other third-party MDM suites) have to offer.
In the next chapter, we'll conclude the book by turning our attention to the insides of 
the device, diving into debugging tools so you can dive even deeper into the abyss, 
that is, reverse engineering how these things work.

--- Page 118 ---
Debugging and Conclusion
Every environment is different. Understanding the internal workings of an iOS 
device enables you to isolate items that you might consider to be a security threat 
for your particular environment that we haven't identified in this book. In addition, 
learning more about these devices is just plain cool! In this chapter, we're going to 
look at debugging and forensic data collection. These both showcase what kind of 
data can be pulled off from devices and teaches you more about the devices that 
you're securing.
As we've showcased throughout this book, Apple does a good job of protecting 
sensitive data on devices. In addition, application vendors have a lot of tools to keep 
your data secure as well. However, computers being what they are, some data can be 
obtained from them. In this chapter, we're going to cover the following topics:
• Xcode
• Diving deeper into libimobiledevice
• App communications such as identifying devices and network 
communications
• Apple IDs and Apps
We'll be going through the common tools for debugging iOS, reverse engineer to  
see how things run under the hood, and leverage that data for various use cases.  
This process starts with the tool that Apple provides for writing apps and this is 
called Xcode.
Xcode
Xcode is written and distributed for OS X by Apple. Xcode is used to write apps for 
both OS X and iOS and it can be used to write scripts in various languages. Xcode 
also comes with a suite of tools that can be used to debug the apps that you're 
writing. These tools can also be used to view logs and watch what happens on 
devices when you're using them.

--- Page 119 ---
Debugging and Conclusion
[ 108 ]
Xcode is available on the Mac App Store at https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/
xcode/id497799835?mt=12, as you can see in the following screenshot:
Install Xcode from the Mac App Store 
In order to install Xcode from the Mac App Store, perform the following steps:
1. Click on Install and wait for the installation to complete to get Xcode 
installed on your computer.
2. Once installed, open Xcode from the /Applications directory.
3. Choose Devices from the Window menu to see a list of devices that the 
computer can connect to.
4. Plug in the device.

--- Page 120 ---
Chapter 6
[ 109 ]
5. Click on your device to see basic information about the device and then click 
on the View Device Logs button to view the device logs, as shown in the 
following screenshot.
The Xcode DEVICES screen
Note that at the bottom left of the Device Information pane is a 
Show/Hide button. Clicking on this displays the console of the 
connected device in real time.
6. The logs are then displayed. When they are reviewed, these logs provide a 
wealth of information about devices, as you can see in the next screenshot.

--- Page 121 ---
Debugging and Conclusion
[ 110 ]
7. Right-click on a log and you can delete it from the device within Xcode. 
When you unplug the device, the log window closes.
Note that you can also obtain Xcode from the Developer 
portal of Apple if you would rather not use the Mac App 
Store to do so.
iOS Device Logs
Many of the same logs can be viewed from different Apple devices by opening 
the Settings app from the home screen, tap on Privacy, tapping on Diagnostics & 
Usage, and then tap on Diagnostics & Usage Data. From here, you can tap on entries 
to see the same debugging information that is available in Xcode, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

--- Page 122 ---
Chapter 6
[ 111 ]
Diagnostics and usage data
Dive deeper with libimobiledevice
Xcode and other tools can be used to view logs on iOS devices. Another tool  
that is used to debug devices is called libimobiledevice. This is an open source 
project that is meant to help security researchers, developers, and administrators 
track the goings-on of iOS devices. The libimobiledevice library is available at 
http://www.libimobiledevice.org

--- Page 123 ---
Debugging and Conclusion
[ 112 ]
Installing libimobiledevice using Homebrew
I usually install libimobiledevice using Homebrew, as there are a few 
dependencies that can be a little annoying to install otherwise.
To install Homebrew if you haven't already done so, perform the following steps: 
1. Elevate your privileges by running sudo and invoking a bash shell:
sudo bash
2. Run the following command:
ruby -e "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/
install/master/install)"
3. Once the command is executed, follow the prompts to complete the 
installation. Once Homebrew is installed, run the following brew command 
to download the required components and then libimobiledevice:
brew install -v --fresh automake autoconf libtool wget 
libimobiledevice
4. Then, run ideviceinstaller:
brew install -v --HEAD --fresh --build-from-source 
ideviceinstaller
Using idevicesyslog and idevicepair
Once these pair of tools are installed, you can plug in a paired device, unlock it,  
and use the following command to view the logs on the screen:
Idevicesyslog
This is akin to running a tail against the device. Again, the device must be paired. 
You can use the command line (for example, if you're running this on Linux) to view 
the logs, but if you're not paired, you'll need to use idevicepair to pair your device, 
followed by the pair verb (which is very different from the pear verb):
idevicepair pair
You can also unpair a device using the unpair command:
idevicepair unpair
When pairing and unpairing, you should see the appropriate entries in /var/db/
lockdown.

--- Page 124 ---
Chapter 6
[ 113 ]
Using idevicedate and ideviceinstaller
The next option is date (very useful when scripting unit tests using this suite). To 
obtain this, use the idevicedate command; you do not need any operators or verbs:
idevicedate
Next, let's check the apps installed on a device. We can do this with the 
ideviceinstaller command (that is also part of the ilibmobiledevice suite of tools). 
Here, we'll use the -l option to just list what's installed:
/usr/local/bin/ideviceinstaller -l
The output would show the app along with the version of the app currently installed 
on the device:
com.apple.Pages - Pages 1716
To uninstall one of the listed apps, use the --uninstall option:
ideviceinstaller --uninstall com.protogeo.Moves
You can also install apps, provided you've cached the IPA file (for example,  
via iTunes):
ideviceinstaller --install /Users/charlesedge/Music/iTunes/iTunes\ Media/
Mobile\ Applications/Box\ 3.3.0.ipa
Note that the preceding folder may change based on the 
operating system on which your library began with.
The preceding command returns the following output:
Copying '/Users/charlesedge/Music/iTunes/iTunes Media/Mobile 
Applications/Box 3.3.0.ipa' to device... DONE. 
Installing 'net.box.BoxNet' 
Install - CreatingStagingDirectory (5%) 
Install - ExtractingPackage (15%) 
Install - InspectingPackage (20%) 
Install - TakingInstallLock (20%) 
Install - PreflightingApplication (30%) 
Install - VerifyingApplication (40%) 
Install - CreatingContainer (50%) 
Install - InstallingApplication (60%) 
Install - PostflightingApplication (70%) 
Install - SandboxingApplication (80%) 
Install - GeneratingApplicationMap (90%) 
Install - Complete
When it is run against a device, the app can then open other apps, provided the user 
the Apple ID owns the app.

--- Page 125 ---
Debugging and Conclusion
[ 114 ]
A provisioning profile is a profile that is used to install apps. These apps are usually 
located on a mail server that supports the ipa MIME type and the profile defines 
the location to obtain the app. This forms the basis of the Wirelurker attack, where 
attackers replace an app by spoofing the domain of the app. There's also a command 
for ideviceprovision that can be used to view installed provisioning profiles when 
they are run with the list verb:
/usr/local/bin/ideviceprovision list
As mentioned earlier, the ideviceprovision command can also install a provisioning 
profile; therefore it can actually make the device install an app. This is done using the 
ideviceprovision command followed by the install verb and the name (and path if 
the .mobileprovision file isn't in the working directory from where you're running 
the command) of the file that is being installed:
/usr/local/bin/ideviceprovision install angrybirds.mobileprovision
You can also remove the path of the working directory by feeding in the UUID of the 
provisioning profile that is obtained by using the list verb and replacing MYUUID 
from the following code block:
/usr/local/bin/ideviceprovision remove MYUUID
You can also put a device in recovery mode so that it would need to be plugged 
into a computer that is running iTunes and get a new ipsw file installed, which is as 
simple as feeding the UDID into ideviceenterrecovery:
/usr/local/bin/ideviceenterrecovery 
af36e5d7065d4ad666bf047b6e4de26dd144578c
This brings up an interesting question. How would you get the UDID? You can use 
ideviceinfo to get this:
ideviceinfo
The preceding ideviceinfo output shows more information about a device 
than what I knew you could actually get previously. You can use grep for 
UniqueDeviceID as follows:
ideviceinfo | grep UniqueDeviceID | awk '{ print $2}'
This would just return the UDID. Since this is blank when no device is connected to 
the system, you can run a loop that waits for a few seconds when the UDID is empty 
and then uses that UDID as a $1 in some scripts. Of course, it's much easier to use a 
command that was built for this, which is called idevice_id:
idevice_id -l

--- Page 126 ---
Chapter 6
[ 115 ]
Next, you can use idevicediagnostics to obtain some information about the 
current state of the device:
idevicediagnostics diagnostics All -u 
af36e5d7065d4ad666bf047b6e4de26dd1445789
The idevicediagnostics command has an XML output with information about the 
device, such as how much battery life is still there. You can also query the ioreg file 
of the device, which shows what's plugged into the device:
idevicediagnostics ioreg IODeviceTree -u 
af36e5d7065d4ad666bf047b6e4de26dd1445789
The idevicediagnostics command can also do some basic tasks (where each task 
is sent as a verb without the required UDID) such as restart, sleep, and shutdown: 
idevicediagnostics restart
The crash reports on a device (which include reports of uninstalled apps that 
forensically provide a glimpse into what apps were removed from a device and 
when they were removed) can be extracted from a paired device as well, using 
idevicecrashreport:
idevicecrashreport -e /test
The preceding directory must exist prior to executing the command 
and the current user must have permission to write.
You can then view the logs or grep through them for specific pieces of information:
cat /Test/Baseband/log-bb-2014-08-06-stats.plist
The last command that we're going to cover in this section is idevicebackup2, 
which is used to back up devices. Here, we're going to feed the UDID to it. I'm lazily 
using the idevice_id command from earlier, in back ticks, to grab the UDID and 
back it up in that /test directory when the device is unlocked.
idevicebackup2 -u `idevice_id -l` backup /test
Here, we've backed up whatever device is plugged into the /test directory.  
The subsequent backups will be incremental.
As you can see, there are a number of tasks that can be performed on a device when 
the device has been paired to a computer. This further emphasizes the fact that you 
should never pair your device to an untrusted computer. 

--- Page 127 ---
Debugging and Conclusion
[ 116 ]
You can also use the information obtained from these commands to troubleshoot 
and research a wide variety of things with regards to devices based on iOS. Having 
a backup, crash reports, and real-time logs, and making changes such as installing 
apps on devices allows you to do regression testing, vulnerability research, and a lot 
more in general that you wouldn't be able to do otherwise.
App communications
Up until now, this chapter focused on viewing data on devices, obtaining logs, and 
making changes to devices themselves. Since listening to network traffic is the basis 
of most of the reconnaissance that is done on devices, we'll look at how to obtain 
more information about devices that are based on what goes over the network 
medium. This is done by first identifying the iOS devices on a network and then 
listening to raw network traffic using common tools such as Wireshark.
Identifying devices
For starters, you can identify all iOS devices easily as they listen on port 62078, 
which is a unique port. To verify that an iOS device is occupying an IP on a network, 
scan the IP address for that port. For example, here we use the built-in port scanner 
in OS X to scan an IP address on the network with an iPhone:
/System/Library/CoreServices/Applications/Network\ Utility.app/Contents/
Resources/stroke 192.168.0.12 62078 62078
Listening to network communications
OS X has a command called rvictl that can be used to proxy network 
communications from iOS devices through a computer over what's known as a 
Remote Virtual Interface (RVI). To set up an RVI, you'll need the UDID of a device 
and the device will need to be plugged into a Mac and have the device paired to the 
Mac. This may seem like a lot, but if you've followed what we have been doing until 
now, this should be pretty simple.
To set up an RVI, we'll perform the following steps:
1. First, we'll pair a device using the following command:
idevicepair pair
2. Then, we'll tap on Trust on the device itself. Then, we'll grab that UDID  
with idevice_id:
idevice_id -l

--- Page 128 ---
Chapter 6
[ 117 ]
3. Next, we'll set up an RVI with rvictl and the -s option (here I'm just going 
to grab the UDID since I only have one device plugged into my computer):
rvictl -s `idevice_id -l`
4. Then, we can list the connections using rvictl with the -l option:
rvictl -l
5. Next, we'll run a tcpdump command using this newly constructed rvi0:
tcpdump -n -i rvi0
6. Next, we'll get a lot of logs. Let's fire up the Nike FuelBand app and refresh 
our status. While watching the resultant traffic, we'll see a line like this:
22:42:29.485691 IP 192.168.0.12.57850 > 54.241.32.20.443: Flags 
[S], seq 3936380112, win 65535, options [mss 1460,nop,wscale 
5,nop,nop,TS val 706439445 ecr 0,sackOK,eol], length 0
There's an IP in this line— 54.241.32.20. We can look this up and we'll be able to 
see that the servers are sitting on Amazon Web Services, and on verifying it, we 
come to know that it's Nike. By watching the traffic with tcpdump, we can obtain 
GET, POST, and other information that is sent and received. Using Wireshark, we 
can get even more detailed data.
Overall, this book is meant to focus on the iOS side of information security and not 
on debugging and refining the approach to using tcpdump/wireshark. The rvictl 
tool is a great tool in the iOS development cycle and for security researchers who are 
looking into the number of the apps on iOS devices that exchange data.
While I've found that rvictl is able to show me pretty much 
anything I need access to, if you find any issues with it, go to 
https://github.com/libimobiledevice/usbmuxd. This is 
an open source project that is being developed more aggressively 
and can be used to do similar tasks.
Apple IDs and Apps
One item that is not often covered when considering iOS security is the Apple ID 
that is used to manage a device. The Apple ID can potentially be used to wipe a 
device (for example, via the Find My iPhone app), restore a device's backup, or 
even view the purchased media (songs, movies, iBooks, and apps) that may not be 
available on a device.

--- Page 129 ---
Debugging and Conclusion
[ 118 ]
When you uninstall an app, the app is still in your purchase history. As you can see 
in the following screenshot, you can get a fair amount of information about what 
someone uses a device for:
Apple IDs and Purchased History
The only way to prevent someone from looking at such information is to secure the 
Apple ID. Use strong passwords for these and change them from time to time. When 
an employee leaves an organization, you might also be able to reset their password 
using an e-mail address if the Apple ID uses a corporate e-mail address.

--- Page 130 ---
Chapter 6
[ 119 ]
Forensics
So far, we've discussed looking at data on devices. When you use a device, unless 
you made a forensic image of the device prior to using it, you are tainting evidence. 
This is not a book on forensics, but we can let you know about some tools that will 
allow you to acquire a forensically sound image of a device without much fanfare. 
Many of these tools are only available to law enforcement 
professionals. Apple has recently gone to great lengths to make their 
devices "leak" less data, even to law enforcement. Since iOS 7, it's been 
practically impossible to brute force passcodes and after Apple fixed 
the bootroom exploits of iPhone 4/iPad 2, it's no longer possible to 
obtain an image of the device's flash storage for offline analysis.
The following links are available to help you properly acquire evidence from iOS 
devices and computers that access iOS devices:
• iOS Forensic Toolkit: http://www.elcomsoft.com/eift.html
• Mobilyze: https://www.blackbagtech.com/mobilyze.html
• Access Data Forensic Toolkit: http://www.elcomsoft.com/ios-forensic-
toolkit.html
• Lantern: http://katanaforensics.com/forensics/lantern-v2-0/
• Blacklight: https://www.blackbagtech.com/forensics/blacklight/
blacklight.html
• iPhone Backup Analyzer: http://ipbackupanalyzer.com/
• Oxygen: http://www.oxygen-forensic.com/en/
• Forensic Hardware: http://www.cellebrite.com/
• iXAM: http://www.ixam-forensics.com/devices.asp/
• SecureView: http://mobileforensics.susteen.com/
Many of these tools can also brute force passwords that are 
used on devices. However, this might be a lengthy process.

--- Page 131 ---
Debugging and Conclusion
[ 120 ]
A basic tool that doesn't require to be purchased through law enforcement but can 
interact directly with a device is iExplorer from Macroplant. This tool does not 
expose items that are in secure enclaves on the device, but it allows you to have a 
lot more access than what you would otherwise have. iExplorer allows you to view 
Contacts, Messages, Notes, Safari's history, backups, and some app data. As you  
can see in the following screenshot, once it is installed, you can view Safari's 
browsing history:
Macroplant's iExplorer
As you can see in the following screenshot, you can also view books and other forms 
of media in the folders in which these items are stored on the device. A user can 
access these folders without jailbreaking a device.

--- Page 132 ---
Chapter 6
[ 121 ]
Viewing iBooks Data
To go further into a device and view preferences, operating system files, and so  
on, you will need to jailbreak it and use a tool such as iFunBox or iFile via Cydia, 
which is an app store for jail-broken devices. iFunBox is a Mac/Windows tool  
for examining the device's filesystem and iFile is an app that you can install on 
jail-broken devices. Since iOS7, you'll need to install a hacked Apple File Conduit 
(AFC2) from Cydia on a jail-broken device to access anything outside the normal 
sandboxed AFC areas of the device. (See https://cydia.saurik.com/info/com.
saurik.afc2d/ for more information on this.)
For more information on jailbreaking devices, search for the term 
Jailbreak and also provide the model of device you have on Google. 
A lot of sites on jailbreaking come and go, so we're not going to 
include a link here, but it's worth checking out how people go about 
such things and the limitations on devices once they're jail-broken.

--- Page 133 ---
Debugging and Conclusion
[ 122 ]
Application security
Earlier in this chapter, we covered how to obtain more information about how 
applications communicate with servers. Here, we're going to take a brief look at  
how you can obtain more information about the data and/or binaries within an  
app. In apps, these are usually compiled, so you will not typically see raw source 
code. Most application vendors will not provide you with access to their source  
code either.
IPA files are zipped application bundles. You can unzip them before attempting to 
disassemble the binary. To do so, you can right-click on an IPA file and open it with 
Archive Utility to quickly unzip an app bundle. Inside the resulting folder, you'll 
see a Payload folder that contains the app itself. Once you can see the app, you 
can view the package contents on the app bundle and locate the binary file within. 
Unfortunately, in many cases although you can view the strings, attempting to 
disassemble an iOS app binary with a tool like Hopper can be fruitless because apps 
from the App Store are usually encrypted.
Ad hoc and enterprise distribution apps can be examined with these tools; however, 
many enterprise app developers use obfuscation techniques or wrappers to reduce 
the usefulness of disassembly on their production binaries.
In summary, these disassembly techniques probably aren't useful to the reader in 
any meaningful way. Unless you are an experienced developer with some assembly 
language knowledge, disassembly of even a simple unencrypted binary of any sort 
isn't likely to help you learn anything.
Viewing an App
There are a number of tools that can help you to obtain more information about 
an app. You can use a command line to view the contents of a file, and when it is 
compiled, there's still a fair amount of information that can be derived from an iOS 
application file (an IPA file). To do this, simply use the cat command for a file from 
your app library:
Cat /Users/charlesedge/Music/iTunes/iTunes\ Media/Mobile\ Applications/
Amex\ 4.6.0.ipa

--- Page 134 ---
Chapter 6
[ 123 ]
You can also view data in the file without all the special characters using the  
strings command:
Strings /Users/charlesedge/Music/iTunes/iTunes\ Media/Mobile\ 
Applications/Amex\ 4.6.0.ipa
There are also disassemblers that have different levels of luck in obtaining information 
about a file. For example, Hopper Disassembler that can be purchased from the 
Mac App Store at https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/hopper-disassembler/
id422856039?mt=12. The following screenshot shows the Hopper Disassembler:
Hopper Disassembler
There's also a tool called Clutch, which is available on GitHub at https://github.
com/KJCracks/Clutch. Clutch must be run from a jail-broken device, so it requires a 
somewhat thought-out method to decompile code; however, it is able to obtain more 
data than any other tool that we've seen.
There are many books that are available online that can help you to understand 
native programming languages if you aren't already aware of them.

--- Page 135 ---
Debugging and Conclusion
[ 124 ]
Summary
There are a number of places where we stopped ourselves from writing more in this 
chapter. This chapter does not provide in-depth information about packet capturing, 
forensic acquisition, application development, or iOS systems internals. Instead, 
similar to the rest of the book, we are pointing you towards the necessary content to 
do more if you choose. 
The authors of this book are strong proponents of the hacker mentality. There really 
isn't more security information about devices that are available without jailbreaking 
devices or accessing Apple's Developer portal at http://developer.apple.com. 
We do hope that you will do them both at some point. We don't believe that you can 
fully secure a jail broken device, so you should, therefore, refrain from putting them 
into production. However, we also believe in learning as much as we can, which 
means eventually jailbreaking a device and seeing what really makes those little 
Speak-and-Spell apps tick.

--- Page 136 ---
Index
A
Access Data Forensic Toolkit
URL  119
Activation Lock
about  77, 78
references  78
ActiveSync
about  81
management settings  82
advanced options, Safari
JavaScript  23
Web Inspector  24
Website Data  23
AirDrop  47
Always-On  49
app
about  5, 73, 117, 118
communication  33
Continuity  34, 35
data storage  37, 38
Handoff   34, 35
installing  28
signature verification process  29
store access, blocking  29, 31
viewing  122, 123
app communications
about  116
devices, identifying  116
network communications  116, 117
Apple Configurator
about  65
as chaperone  76, 77
backup concerns  75, 76
devices, naming  74, 75
intended workflows  67
interaction modes  68, 69
mass restoring  74, 75
supervision, significance  70-72
versus DEP  80
versus MDM  86
Apple File Conduit (AFC2)  121
Apple IDs  117, 118
Apple Push Notification service (APNs)  86
Apple TV  48
application security  122
App Lock
about  31-33
versus Guided Access  81
versus Single App Mode  81
B
Backup keybag  12
backups
taking, iTunes used  9, 10
Blacklight
URL  119
built-in App protections
and Safari  21-24
Bushel
about  85, 101
account, setting up  102, 103
enrollment process  103
restrictions  104
BYOD  65

--- Page 137 ---
[ 126 ]
C
caching  51
Certificate Authority (CA)  29, 88, 98
Clutch  123
configuration profiles  57-60
Continuity  34, 35
Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS) 
standard  62
D
delivery  61, 62
DEP
about  80
references  80
versus Apple Configurator  80, 81
DEP use cases, Apple Configurator
URL  80
device
backing up  8
DeviceCertificate  7
Device Enrollment Program. See  DEP
diagnostics
gathering  53, 54
Digital Rights Management (DRM)  28
E
encryption  61, 62
EscrowBag  7
extensions
access, securing  36
and keyboards  36
F
Find My iPhone feature  77
Forensic Hardware
URL  119
forensics  119
G
Global HTTP Proxy  51
Global Service Exchange  54
GroundControl
about  79
URL  79
Guided Access
about  31-33
URL  32
versus App Lock  81
versus Single App Mode  81
H
Handoff  34, 35
Health app  54, 56
Homebrew
used, for installing libimobiledevice  112
Homebrew, for installing libimobiledevice
idevicedate, used for  113-116
ideviceinstaller, used for  113-116
idevicepair, used for  112
idevicesyslog, used for  112
HostCertificate  7
HostID  7
HostPrivateKey  7
I
iBackup Extractor  12
iCloud backups  8, 9
in-house app development  38, 39
initial security checklist
about  13
passcode, configuring  14-17
privacy settings, configuring  17-20
interaction modes, Apple Configurator
Assign  68
Prepare  68
Supervise  68
iOS
about  5
activating  42, 43
data, viewing in iTunes  11-13
network communication  46
iOS Console
URL  61
iOS Forensic Toolkit
URL  119

--- Page 138 ---
[ 127 ]
iPhone Backup Analyzer
URL  119
iPhone Configuration Utility (iPCU)  60, 66
iTunes
iOS data, viewing in  11-13
used, for taking backups  9, 10
iXAM
URL  119
K
keybag  35
keyboards
and extensions  36
keychains  33-35
L
Lantern
URL  119
libimobiledevice
about  111
installing, Homebrew used  112
URL  111
Lock to App. See  Single app mode
M
MDM (Mobile Device Management)
about  31, 86
and VPP  105
URL  48
versus Apple Configurator  86
Mobilyze
URL  119
N
Near Field Communication (NFC)  41
O
On Demand  51
open in management feature, iOS  104
Oxygen
URL  119
P
pairing  6-8
Passbook  44-46
passcode
configuring  14-17
Notifications View option  16
Passbook tool   16
policies  99-101
Reply with Message tool   16
Siri option  16
Today option  16
Payment Card Industry (PCI)  53
Per-App  51
PIN  46
predictive search  24, 25
preference domains  57
privacy-related concerns  52, 53
Privacy & Security options, Safari
Block Cookies  21
Clear History and Website Data  21
Do Not Track  21
Fraudulent Website Warning  21
Use Cellular Data  22
Profile Manager
about  87
device management  98
enrolling into  96-98
passcode policies  99-101
Post Configuration tasks, completing  94, 95
preparing  90-93
server, preparing for  87-89
using  95, 96
R
RecBoot  79
recovery mode  79
Remote Virtual Interface (RVI)
about  116
setting up  116
RootCertificate  7
RootPrivateKey  7

--- Page 139 ---
[ 128 ]
S
Safari
and built-in App protections  21-24
Safari preferences, for securing iOS devices
Block Pop-ups  21
Favorites  21
Open Links  21
Passwords & AutoFill  21
sandboxing  37, 38
secure boot chain  42, 43
Secure Enclave  42
SecureView
URL  119
signing  61, 62
Single App Mode
about  31, 33
versus App Lock  81
versus Guided Access  81
spotlight  24, 25
Supervision  49
SystemBUID  7
system scope  58
System Software Authorization  42
T
Touch ID  43-46
U
user context  37
V
verified boot  42
Volume Purchase Program. See  VPP
VPN On Demand  51
VPP
about  66, 73, 94, 105
and MDM  105
W
web content filter  51, 52
WiFiMACAddress  7
X
Xcode
about  107
installing  108-110
URL  108
XPC  36

--- Page 140 ---
Thank you for buying  
Learning iOS Security
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book, Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective 
MySQL Management, in April 2004, and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing 
highly focused books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting 
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution-based books 
give you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using 
to get the job done. Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have 
seen in the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, 
giving you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern yet unique publishing company that focuses on producing quality,  
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike.  
For more information, please visit our website at www.packtpub.com.
About Packt Open Source
In 2010, Packt launched two new brands, Packt Open Source and Packt Enterprise, in order  
to continue its focus on specialization. This book is part of the Packt Open Source brand,  
home to books published on software built around open source licenses, and offering 
information to anybody from advanced developers to budding web designers. The Open 
Source brand also runs Packt's Open Source Royalty Scheme, by which Packt gives a royalty 
to each open source project about whose software a book is sold.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals should 
be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you would 
like to discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, then please contact us; one of our 
commissioning editors will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

--- Page 141 ---
Mobile Security: How to Secure, 
Privatize, and Recover Your 
Devices
ISBN: 978-1-84969-360-8              Paperback: 242 pages
Keep your data secure on the go
1. Learn how mobile devices are monitored and 
the impact of cloud computing.
2. Understand the attacks hackers use and how to 
prevent them.
3. Keep yourself and your loved ones safe online.
Core Data iOS Essentials
ISBN: 978-1-84969-094-2             Paperback: 340 pages
A fast-paced, example-driven guide to data-driven 
iPhone, iPad, and iPod Touch applications
1. Covers the essential skills you need for working 
with Core Data in your applications.
2. Particularly focused on developing fast, 
lightweight, data-driven iOS applications.
3. Builds a complete example application. Every 
technique is shown in context.
4. Completely practical with clear, step-by-step 
instructions.
 
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

--- Page 142 ---
iPhone User Interface Cookbook
ISBN: 978-1-84969-114-7            Paperback: 262 pages
A concise dissection of Apple’s iOS user interface 
design principles
1. Learn how to build an intuitive interface for 
your future iOS application.
2. Avoid app rejection with detailed insight 
into how to best abide by Apple’s interface 
guidelines.
3. Written for designers new to iOS, who may  
be unfamiliar with Objective-C or coding  
an interface.
iOS 5 Essentials
ISBN: 978-1-84969-226-7             Paperback: 252 pages
Harness iOS 5's new powerful features to create 
stunning applications
1. Integrate iCloud, Twitter, and AirPlay into your 
applications.
2. Lots of step-by-step examples, images and 
diagrams to get you up to speed in no time 
with helpful hints along the way.
3. Each chapter explains iOS 5’s new features 
in-depth, whilst providing you with enough 
practical examples to help incorporate these 
features in your apps.
 
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles