--- Page 2 ---
iOS Programming: The Big
Nerd Ranch Guide
BY CHRISTIAN KEUR AND AARON
HILLEGASS
Copyright © 2020 Big Nerd Ranch
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America.
This publication is protected by copyright, and permission
must be obtained from the publisher prior to any prohibited
reproduction, storage in a retrieval system, or transmission in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or likewise. For information
regarding permissions, contact
Big Nerd Ranch
200 Arizona Ave NE, Suite 200
Atlanta, GA 30307
(770) 817-6373
https://www.bignerdranch.com
book-comments@bignerdranch.com
The 10-gallon hat is a trademark of Big Nerd Ranch.
Exclusive worldwide distribution of the English edition of this
book by
Pearson Technology Group
800 East 96th Street
Indianapolis, IN 46240 USA
http://www.informit.com

--- Page 3 ---
The authors and publisher have taken care in writing and
printing this book but make no expressed or implied warranty
of any kind and assume no responsibility for errors or
omissions. No liability is assumed for incidental or
consequential damages in connection with or arising out of the
use of the information or programs contained herein.
App Store, Apple, Cocoa, Cocoa Touch, Finder, Instruments,
iCloud, iPad, iPhone, iPod, iPod touch, iTunes, Keychain,
Mac, macOS, Multi-Touch, Objective-C, Quartz, Retina,
Safari, and Xcode are trademarks of Apple, Inc., registered in
the U.S. and other countries.
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to
distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where
those designations appear in this book, and the publisher was
aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been printed
with initial capital letters or in all capitals.
 
ISBN-10  013526555XISBN-13  978-0135265550
Seventh edition, first printing, March 2020 
Release E.7.1.1

--- Page 4 ---
Acknowledgments
While our names appear on the cover, many people helped
make this book a reality. We would like to take this chance to
thank them.
First and foremost we would like to thank Joe Conway for his work on
the early editions of this book. He authored the first three editions and
contributed greatly to the fourth edition as well. Many of the words in
this book are still his, and for that, we are very grateful.
A couple other people went above and beyond with their help on this
book. They are Amit Bijlani, Chris Downie, Chris Morris, Jacob
Bullock, Juan Pablo Claude, Mikey Ward, and Zachary Waldowski.
The other instructors who teach the iOS Bootcamp feed us a never-
ending stream of suggestions and corrections. Over the years, they have
included Ben Scheirman, Bolot Kerimbaev, Brian Hardy, Chris Downie,
Chris Morris, Drew Kreuzman, Gabe Hoffman, JJ Manton, Jacob
Bullock, John Gallagher, Jonathan Blocksom, Joseph Dixon, Juan Pablo
Claude, Mark Dalrymple, Matt Bezark, Matt Mathias, Mike Zornek,
Mikey Ward, Pouria Almassi, Robert Edwards, Rod Strougo, Scott
Ritchie, Step Christopher, Thomas Ward, TJ Usiyan, Tom Harrington,
and Zachary Waldowski. These instructors were often aided by their
students in finding book errata, so many thanks are due to all the
students who attend the iOS Bootcamp.
Thanks to all the employees at Big Nerd Ranch who helped review the
book, provided suggestions, and found errata.
Our tireless editor, Elizabeth Holaday, took our distracted mumblings
and made them into readable prose.
Simone Payment jumped in to provide proofing.
Ellie Volckhausen designed the cover. (The photo is of the bottom
bracket of a bicycle frame.)
Chris Loper at IntelligentEnglish.com designed and produced the print
and ebook versions of the book.
The amazing team at Pearson Technology Group that has patiently
guided us through the business end of book publishing.
The final and most important thanks goes to our students,
whose questions inspired us to write this book and whose
frustrations inspired us to make it clear and comprehensible.

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Introduction
Prerequisites
What Has Changed in the Seventh Edition?
Our Teaching Philosophy
How to Use This Book
Using an eBook
How This Book Is Organized
Style Choices
Typographical conventions
Necessary Hardware and Software
1. A Simple iOS Application
Creating an Xcode Project
Model-View-Controller
Designing Quiz
Interface Builder
Building the Interface
Creating view objects
Configuring view objects
Running on the simulator
A brief introduction to Auto Layout
Making connections
Creating the Model Layer
Implementing action methods
Loading the first question
Building the Finished Application
Application Icons
Launch Screen
For the More Curious: Running an Application on a
Device
2. The Swift Language
Types in Swift
Using Standard Types
Inferring types
Specifying types

--- Page 6 ---
Literals and subscripting
Initializers
Properties
Instance methods
Optionals
Subscripting dictionaries
Loops and String Interpolation
Enumerations and the Switch Statement
Enumerations and raw values
Closures
Exploring Apple’s Swift Documentation
3. Views and the View Hierarchy
View Basics
The View Hierarchy
Creating a New Project
Views and Frames
Customizing the labels
The Auto Layout System
The alignment rectangle and layout attributes
Constraints
Adding constraints in Interface Builder
Intrinsic content size
Misplaced views
Adding more constraints
Challenges
Bronze Challenge: More Auto Layout Practice
Silver Challenge: Adding a Gradient Layer
Gold Challenge: Spacing Out the Labels
For the More Curious: Retina Display
4. View Controllers
The View of a View Controller
Setting the Initial View Controller
Tab Bar Controllers
Tab bar items
Loaded and Appearing Views
Refactoring in Xcode
Accessing subviews
Interacting with View Controllers and Their Views
Bronze Challenge: Another Tab

--- Page 7 ---
Silver Challenge: Different Background Colors
5. Programmatic Views
Creating a View Programmatically
Programmatic Constraints
Anchors
Activating constraints
Layout guides
Margins
Explicit constraints
Programmatic Controls
Bronze Challenge: Points of Interest
Silver Challenge: Rebuild the Conversion Interface
For the More Curious:
NSAutoresizingMaskLayoutConstraint
6. Text Input and Delegation
Text Editing
Keyboard attributes
Responding to text field changes
Dismissing the keyboard
Implementing the Temperature Conversion
Number formatters
Delegation
Conforming to a protocol
Using a delegate
More on protocols
Bronze Challenge: Disallow Alphabetic Characters
Silver Challenge: Displaying the User’s Region
7. Internationalization and Localization
Internationalization
Formatters
Base internationalization
Preparing for localization
Localization
NSLocalizedString and strings tables
Bronze Challenge: Another Localization
For the More Curious: Bundle’s Role in
Internationalization
For the More Curious: Importing and Exporting as
XLIFF

--- Page 8 ---
8. Debugging
A Buggy Project
Debugging Basics
Interpreting console messages
Fixing the first bug
Caveman debugging
The Xcode Debugger: LLDB
Setting breakpoints
Stepping through code
The LLDB console
9. UITableView and UITableViewController
Beginning the LootLogger Application
UITableViewController
Subclassing UITableViewController
Creating the Item Class
Custom initializers
UITableView’s Data Source
Giving the controller access to the store
Implementing data source methods
UITableViewCells
Creating and retrieving UITableViewCells
Reusing UITableViewCells
Editing Table Views
Editing mode
Adding rows
Deleting rows
Moving rows
Design Patterns
Bronze Challenge: Sections
Silver Challenge: Constant Rows
Gold Challenge: Favorite Items
10. Subclassing UITableViewCell
Creating ItemCell
Exposing the Properties of ItemCell
Using ItemCell
Dynamic Cell Heights
Dynamic Type
Responding to user changes
Bronze Challenge: Cell Colors

--- Page 9 ---
Silver Challenge: Long Item Names
11. Stack Views
Using UIStackView
Implicit constraints
Stack view distribution
Nested stack views
Stack view spacing
Segues
Hooking Up the Content
Passing Data Around
Bronze Challenge: More Stack Views
12. Navigation Controllers
UINavigationController
Navigating with UINavigationController
Appearing and Disappearing Views
Dismissing the Keyboard
Event handling basics
Dismissing by pressing the Return key
Dismissing by tapping elsewhere
UINavigationBar
Adding buttons to the navigation bar
Bronze Challenge: Displaying a Number Pad
Silver Challenge: A Different Back Button Title
Gold Challenge: Pushing More View Controllers
13. Saving, Loading, and Scene States
Codable
Property Lists
Error Handling
Application Sandbox
Constructing a file URL
Scene States and Transitions
Persisting the Items
Notification center
Saving the Items
Loading the Items
Bronze Challenge: Throwing Errors
Gold Challenge: Support Multiple Windows
For the More Curious: Manually Conforming to
Codable

--- Page 10 ---
For the More Curious: Scene State Transitions
For the More Curious: The Application Bundle
14. Presenting View Controllers
Adding a Camera Button
Alert Controllers
Presentation Styles
15. Camera
Displaying Images and UIImageView
Taking Pictures and UIImagePickerController
Creating a UIImagePickerController
Setting the image picker’s delegate
Presenting the image picker modally
Permissions
Saving the image
Creating ImageStore
Giving View Controllers Access to the Image Store
Creating and Using Keys
Persisting Images to Disk
Loading Images from the ImageStore
Bronze Challenge: Editing an Image
Silver Challenge: Removing an Image
For the More Curious: Navigating Implementation
Files
// MARK:
16. Adaptive Interfaces
Size Classes
Modifying traits for a specific size class
Adapting to Dark Mode
Adding colors to the Asset Catalog
Using custom dynamic colors
Bronze Challenge: Stacked Text Field and Labels
17. Extensions and Container View Controllers
Starting Mandala
Creating the model types
Adding resources to the Asset Catalog
Extensions
Creating a custom container view controller
Creating the MoodSelectionViewController
Creating the MoodListViewController

--- Page 11 ---
Handling the embed segue
18. Custom Controls
Creating a Custom Control
Relaying actions
Using the Custom Control
Updating the Interface
Adding the Highlight View
Bronze Challenge: More Access Control
19. Controlling Animations
Property Animators
Basic animations
Timing functions
Spring animations
Animating Colors
Animating a Button
20. Web Services
Starting the Photorama Application
Building the URL
Formatting URLs and requests
URLComponents
Sending the Request
URLSession
Modeling the Photo
JSON Data
JSONDecoder and JSONEncoder
Parsing JSON data
Enumerations and Associated Values
Passing the Photos Around
Downloading and Displaying the Image Data
The Main Thread
Bronze Challenge: Printing the Response
Information
Silver Challenge: Fetch Recent Photos from Flickr
For the More Curious: HTTP
21. Collection Views
Displaying the Grid
Collection View Data Source
Customizing the Layout
Creating a Custom UICollectionViewCell

--- Page 12 ---
Downloading the Image Data
Image caching
Navigating to a Photo
Bronze Challenge: Horizontal Scrolling
Silver Challenge: Updated Item Sizes
22. Core Data
Object Graphs
Entities
Modeling entities
NSManagedObject and subclasses
NSPersistentContainer
Updating Items
Inserting into the context
Saving changes
Updating the Data Source
Fetch requests and predicates
Silver Challenge: Photo View Count
For the More Curious: The Core Data Stack
NSManagedObjectModel
NSPersistentStoreCoordinator
NSManagedObjectContext
23. Core Data Relationships
Relationships
Adding Tags to the Interface
Background Tasks
Silver Challenge: Favorites
24. Accessibility
VoiceOver
Testing VoiceOver
Accessibility in Photorama
Bronze Challenge: VoiceOver Pronunciation
25. Afterword
What to Do Next
Shameless Plugs
Index

--- Page 13 ---
Introduction
As an aspiring iOS developer, you face three major tasks:
You must learn the Swift language. Swift is the recommended
development language for iOS. The first two chapters of this book are
designed to give you a working knowledge of Swift.
You must master the big ideas. These include things like
delegation, archiving, and the proper use of view controllers. The big
ideas take a few days to understand. When you reach the halfway point
of this book, you will understand these big ideas.
You must master the frameworks. The eventual goal is to know how
to use every method of every class in every framework in iOS. This is a
project for a lifetime: There are hundreds of classes and thousands of
methods available in iOS, and Apple adds more classes and methods
with every release of iOS. In this book, you will be introduced to each of
the subsystems that make up the iOS SDK, but you will not study each
one deeply. Instead, our goal is to get you to the point where you can
search and understand Apple’s reference documentation.
We have used this material many times at our iOS bootcamps
at Big Nerd Ranch. It is well tested and has helped thousands
of people become iOS developers. We sincerely hope that it
proves useful to you.

--- Page 14 ---
Prerequisites
This book assumes that you are already motivated to learn to
write iOS apps. We will not spend any time convincing you
that the iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch are compelling pieces of
technology.
We also assume that you have some experience programming
and know something about object-oriented programming. If
this is not true, you should probably start with Swift
Programming: The Big Nerd Ranch Guide.

--- Page 15 ---
What Has Changed in the Seventh
Edition?
All the code in this book has been updated for Swift 5.2.
Throughout the book, you will see how to use Swift’s
capabilities and features to write better iOS applications. We
have come to love Swift at Big Nerd Ranch and believe you
will, too.
Other additions include new chapters on container view
controllers and custom controls and a revamped chapter on
animations. We have also updated various chapters to use the
technologies and APIs introduced in iOS 11, 12, and 13.
This edition assumes that the reader is using Xcode 11.4 or later
and running applications on an iOS 12 or later device.
Besides these obvious changes, we made thousands of tiny
improvements that were inspired by questions from our
readers and our students. Every chapter of this book is just a
little better than the corresponding chapter from the sixth
edition.

--- Page 16 ---
Our Teaching Philosophy
This book will teach you the essential concepts of iOS
programming. At the same time, you will type in a lot of code
and build a bunch of applications. By the end of the book, you
will have knowledge and experience. However, all the
knowledge should not (and, in this book, will not) come first.
That is the traditional way of learning we have all come to
know and hate. Instead, we take a learn-while-doing approach.
Development concepts and actual coding go together.
Here is what we have learned over the years of teaching iOS
programming:
We have learned what ideas people must grasp to get started
programming, and we focus on that subset.
We have learned that people learn best when these concepts are
introduced as they are needed.
We have learned that programming knowledge and experience grow best
when they grow together.
We have learned that “going through the motions” is much more
important than it sounds. Many times we will ask you to start typing in
code before you understand it. We realize that you may feel like a
trained monkey typing in a bunch of code that you do not fully grasp.
But the best way to learn coding is to find and fix your typos. Far from
being a drag, this basic debugging is where you really learn the ins and
outs of the code. That is why we encourage you to type in the code
yourself. You could just download it, but copying and pasting is not
programming. We want better for you and your skills.
What does this mean for you, the reader? To learn this way
takes some trust – and we appreciate yours. It also takes
patience. As we lead you through these chapters, we will try to
keep you comfortable and tell you what is happening.
However, there will be times when you will have to take our
word for it. (If you think this will bug you, keep reading – we
have some ideas that might help.) Do not get discouraged if
you run across a concept that you do not understand right
away. Remember that we are intentionally not providing all
the knowledge you will ever need all at once. If a concept

--- Page 17 ---
seems unclear, we will likely discuss it in more detail later
when it becomes necessary. And some things that are not clear
at the beginning will suddenly make sense when you
implement them the first (or the twelfth) time.
People learn differently. It is possible that you will love how
we hand out concepts on an as-needed basis. It is also possible
that you will find it frustrating. In case of the latter, here are
some options:
Take a deep breath and wait it out. We will get there, and so will you.
Check the index. We will let it slide if you look ahead and read through a
more advanced discussion that occurs later in the book.
Check the online Apple documentation. This is an essential developer
tool, and you will want plenty of practice using it. Consult it early and
often.
If Swift or object-oriented programming concepts are giving you a hard
time (or if you think they will), you might consider backing up and
reading our Swift Programming: The Big Nerd Ranch Guide.

--- Page 18 ---
How to Use This Book
This book is based on the class we teach at Big Nerd Ranch.
This book forms the foundation of the class you are taking
from Big Nerd Ranch. As such, it was designed to be
consumed in a certain manner.
Set yourself a reasonable goal, like, “I will do one chapter
every day.” When you sit down to attack a chapter, find a quiet
place where you will not be interrupted for at least an hour.
Shut down your email, your Twitter client, and your chat
program. This is not a time for multitasking; you will need to
concentrate.
Do the actual programming. You can read through a chapter
first, if you like. But the real learning comes when you sit
down and code as you go. You will not really understand the
idea until you have written a program that uses it and, perhaps
more importantly, debugged that program.
A couple of the exercises require supporting files. For
example, in the first chapter you will need an icon for your
Quiz application, and we have one for you. You can download
the resources and solutions to the exercises from
www.bignerdranch.com/ solutions/ 
iOSProgramming7ed.zip. Your instructor will provide
you with the resources and solutions to the exercises.
There are two types of learning. When you learn about the
Peloponnesian War, you are simply adding details to a
scaffolding of ideas that you already understand. This is what
we will call “Easy Learning.” Yes, learning about the
Peloponnesian War can take a long time, but you are seldom
flummoxed by it. Learning iOS programming, on the other
hand, is “Hard Learning,” and you may find yourself quite
baffled at times, especially in the first few days. In writing this
book, we have tried to create an experience that will ease you

--- Page 19 ---
over the bumps in the learning curve. Here are two things you
can do to make the journey easier:
Find someone who already knows how to write iOS applications and
will answer your questions. In particular, getting your application onto a
device the first time is usually very frustrating if you are doing it without
the help of an experienced developer.
Get enough sleep. Sleepy people do not remember what they have
learned.

--- Page 20 ---
Using an eBook
If you are reading this book on an eReader, we want to point
out that reading the code may be tricky at times. Longer lines
of code will wrap to a second line depending on your selected
font size. This bothers us because we are really conscientious
at Big Nerd Ranch about the way our code appears on the
page. Clear visual patterns in code make that code easier to
understand.
The longest lines of code in this book are 86 monospace
characters, like this one.
cell = tableView.dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier: "UITableViewCell", 
for: idxPath1) 
You can play with your e-reader’s settings to find the best for
viewing long code lines.
When you get to the point where you are actually typing in
code, we suggest opening the book on your Mac in iBooks or
Adobe Digital Editions. (Adobe Digital Editions is a free
eReader application you can download from http:// 
www.adobe.com/ products/ digitaleditions/.)
Make the application window large enough so that you can see
the code with no wrapping lines. You will also be able to see
the figures in full detail.

--- Page 21 ---
How This Book Is Organized
In this book, each chapter addresses one or more ideas of iOS
development through discussion and hands-on practice. For
more coding practice, most chapters include challenge
exercises. We encourage you to take on at least some of these.
They are excellent for firming up your grasp of the concepts
introduced in the chapter and for making you a more confident
iOS programmer. Finally, many chapters conclude with one or
two For the More Curious sections that explain certain
consequences of the concepts that were introduced earlier.
Chapter 1 introduces you to iOS programming as you build
and deploy a tiny application called Quiz. You will get your feet
wet with Xcode and the iOS simulator along with all the steps
for creating projects and files. The chapter also includes a
discussion of Model-View-Controller and how it relates to iOS
development.
Chapter 2 provides an overview of Swift, including basic
syntax, types, optionals, initialization, and how Swift is able to
interact with the existing iOS frameworks. You will also get
experience working in a playground, Xcode’s prototyping tool.
In Chapter 3, you will focus on the iOS user interface as you
learn about views and the view hierarchy and create an
application called WorldTrotter.
In Chapter 4, you will expand WorldTrotter and learn about using
view controllers for managing user interfaces. You will get
practice working with views and view controllers as well as
navigating between screens using a tab bar.
In Chapter 5, you will learn how to manage views and view
controllers in code. You will add a segmented control to
WorldTrotter that will let you switch between various map types.

--- Page 22 ---
Chapter 6 introduces delegation, an important iOS design
pattern. You will also add a text field to WorldTrotter.
Chapter 7 introduces the concepts and techniques of
internationalization and localization. You will learn about
Locale, strings tables, and Bundle as you localize parts of
WorldTrotter.
Chapter 8 will walk you through some of the tools at your
disposal for debugging – finding and fixing issues in your
application.
Chapter 9 introduces the largest application in the book –
LootLogger. This application keeps a record of your items in
case of fire or other catastrophe. LootLogger will take eight
chapters to complete.
In Chapter 9 and Chapter 10, you will work with tables. You
will learn about table views, their view controllers, and their
data sources. You will learn how to display data in a table,
how to allow the user to edit the table, and how to improve the
interface.
Chapter 11 introduces stack views, which will help you create
complex interfaces easily. You will use a stack view to add a
new screen to LootLogger that displays an item’s details.
Chapter 12 builds on the navigation experience gained in
Chapter 4. You will use UINavigationController to
give LootLogger a drill-down interface and a navigation bar.
In Chapter 13, you will add persistence to LootLogger, using
archiving to save and load the application data.
In Chapter 14, you will learn how to present modal interfaces
for the user to act on.
Chapter 15 introduces the camera. You will take pictures and
display and store images in LootLogger.

--- Page 23 ---
In Chapter 16, you will learn about creating interfaces that
adapt to users' preferences, and you will update LootLogger’s
interface to scale well across various screen sizes and to
support Dark Mode.
In Chapter 17, you will begin a new application, Mandala, and
learn how to separate your interfaces into multiple containers.
In Chapter 18, you will learn more about UIControl and use
that knowledge to create a custom control.
In Chapter 19, you will learn about and add different types of
animations to the Mandala project.
Chapter 20 introduces web services as you create the Photorama
application. This application fetches and parses JSON data
from a server using URLSession and
JSONSerialization.
In Chapter 21, you will learn about collection views as you
build an interface for Photorama using UICollectionView
and UICollectionViewCell.
In Chapter 22 and Chapter 23, you will add persistence to
Photorama using Core Data. You will store and load images and
associated data using an NSManagedObjectContext.
Chapter 24 will walk you through making your applications
accessible to more people by adding VoiceOver information.

--- Page 24 ---
Style Choices
This book contains a lot of code. We have attempted to make
that code and the designs behind it exemplary. We have done
our best to follow the idioms of the community, but at times
we have wandered from what you might see in Apple’s sample
code or code you might find in other books. In particular, you
should know up front that we nearly always start a project with
the simplest template project: the single view application.
When your app works, you will know it is because of your
efforts – not because of behavior built into the template.
TYPOGRAPHICAL CONVENTIONS
To make this book easier to read, certain items appear in
certain fonts. Classes, types, methods, and functions appear in
a bold, fixed-width font. Classes and types start with capital
letters, and methods and functions start with lowercase letters.
For example, “In the loadView() method of the
RexViewController class, create a constant of type
String.”
Variables, constants, and filenames appear in a fixed-width
font but are not bold. So you will see, “In
ViewController.swift, add a variable named fido
and initialize it to "Rufus".”
Application names, menu choices, and button names appear in
a sans serif font. For example, “Open Xcode and select New
Project... from the File menu. Select Single View Application and then
click Next.”
All code blocks are in a fixed-width font. Code that you need
to type in is bold; code that you need to delete is struck
through. For example, in the following code, you would delete
the line import Foundation and type in the two lines

--- Page 25 ---
beginning @IBOutlet. The other lines are already in the
code and are included to let you know where to add the new
lines.
import Foundation 
import UIKit 
 
class ViewController: UIViewController { 
 
    @IBOutlet var questionLabel: UILabel! 
    @IBOutlet var answerLabel: UILabel! 
 
} 

--- Page 26 ---
Necessary Hardware and Software
To build the applications in this book, you must have Xcode
11.4, which requires a Mac running macOS Mojave version
10.14.4 or later. Xcode, Apple’s Integrated Development
Environment, is available on the App Store. Xcode includes the
iOS SDK, the iOS simulator, and other development tools.
If you plan on shipping an app to the App Store, you will need
to join the Apple Developer Program, which costs $99/year. In
addition to being able to ship apps, you will also get access to
beta OS releases and advanced app capabilities, among other
benefits. If you are interested, go to
developer.apple.com/ programs/ enroll/ to
enroll.
What about iOS devices? Most of the applications you will
develop in the first half of the book are for iPhone, but you
will be able to run them on an iPad. In the early chapters, you
will be focused on learning the fundamentals of the iOS SDK,
and these are the same across iOS devices. Later in the book,
you will see how to make applications run natively on both
iOS device families.
Excited yet? Good. Let’s get started.

--- Page 27 ---
1 
A Simple iOS Application
In this chapter, you are going to write an iOS application
named Quiz (Figure 1.1). This application will show a question
and then reveal the answer when the user taps a button.
Tapping another button will show the user a new question.

--- Page 28 ---
Figure 1.1  Your first application: Quiz
When you are writing an iOS application, you must answer
two basic questions:
How do I get my objects created and configured properly? (Example: “I
want a button here that says Next Question.”)
How do I make my app respond to user interaction? (Example: “When
the user taps the button, I want this piece of code to be executed.”)
Most of this book is dedicated to answering these questions.

--- Page 29 ---
As you go through this first chapter, you will probably not
understand everything that you are doing, and you may feel
ridiculous just going through the motions. But going through
the motions is enough for now. Mimicry is a powerful form of
learning; it is how you learned to speak, and it is how you will
start iOS programming. As you become more capable, you
will experiment and challenge yourself to do creative things on
the platform. For now, go ahead and do what we show you.
The details will be explained in later chapters.

--- Page 30 ---
Creating an Xcode Project
Open Xcode and, from the File menu, select New → Project.... (If
Xcode opens to a welcome screen, select Create a new Xcode
project.)
A new workspace window will appear and a sheet will slide
down from its toolbar. At the top, find the iOS section and then
the Application area (Figure 1.2). You are offered several
application templates to choose from. Select Single View App.

--- Page 31 ---
Figure 1.2  Creating a project
This book was created for Xcode 11.4. The names of these
templates may change with new Xcode releases. If you do not
see a Single View App template, use the simplest-sounding
template. You can also visit the Big Nerd Ranch forum for this
book at forums.bignerdranch.com for help working
with newer versions of Xcode.

--- Page 32 ---
Click Next and, in the next sheet, enter Quiz for the Product Name
(Figure 1.3). The organization name and identifier are required
to continue. You can use Big Nerd Ranch or any organization
name you would like. For the organization identifier, you can
use com.bignerdranch or com.yourcompany.
From the Language pop-up menu, choose Swift, and from the
User Interface, choose Storyboard. Make sure that the Use Core Data
checkbox is not checked.

--- Page 33 ---
Figure 1.3  Configuring a new project
Click Next and, in the final sheet, save the project in the
directory where you plan to store the exercises in this book.
Click Create to create the Quiz project.
Your new project opens in the Xcode workspace window
(Figure 1.4). 

--- Page 34 ---
Figure 1.4  Xcode workspace window
The lefthand side of the workspace window is the navigator
area. This area displays different navigators – tools that
show you different parts of your project. You can open a
navigator by selecting one of the icons in the navigator
selector, which is the bar at the top of the navigator area.

--- Page 35 ---
The navigator currently open is the project navigator. The
project navigator shows you the files that make up a project
(Figure 1.5). You can select one of these files to open and
work with it in the editor area to the right of the navigator
area.
The files in the project navigator can be grouped into folders
to help you organize your project. A few groups have been
created by the template for you. You can rename them, if you
want, or add new ones.
Figure 1.5  Quiz application’s files in the project
navigator
The righthand side of the workspace window is the inspector
area, which you will learn about later in this chapter.

--- Page 36 ---
Model-View-Controller
Before you begin your application, let’s discuss a key concept
in application architecture: Model-View-Controller, or MVC.
MVC is a design pattern used in iOS development. In MVC,
every instance belongs to either the model layer, the view
layer, or the controller layer. (Layer here simply refers to
one or more objects that together fulfill a role.)
The model layer holds data and knows nothing about the user interface,
or UI. In Quiz, the model will consist of two ordered lists of strings: one
for questions and another for answers.
Usually, instances in the model layer represent real things in the world of
the user. For example, when you write an app for an insurance company,
your model will almost certainly contain a custom type called
InsurancePolicy.
The view layer contains objects that are visible to the user. Examples
of view objects, or views, are buttons, text fields, and sliders. View
objects make up an application’s UI. In Quiz, the labels showing the
question and answer and the buttons beneath them are view objects.
The controller layer is where the application is managed.
Controller objects, or controllers, are the managers of an
application. Controllers configure the views that the user sees and make
sure that the view and model objects stay synchronized.
In general, controllers typically handle “And then?” questions. For
example, when the user selects an item from a list, the controller
determines what the user sees next.
Figure 1.6 shows the flow of control in an application in
response to user input, such as the user tapping a button.

--- Page 37 ---
Figure 1.6  MVC pattern
Notice that models and views do not talk to each other
directly; controllers sit squarely in the middle of everything,
receiving messages and dispatching instructions.

--- Page 38 ---
Designing Quiz
You are going to write the Quiz application using the MVC
pattern. Here is a breakdown of the instances you will be
creating and working with:
The model layer will consist of two instances of [String].
The view layer will consist of two instances of UILabel and two
instances of UIButton.
The controller layer will consist of an instance of ViewController.
These instances and their relationships are laid out in the
diagram for Quiz shown in Figure 1.7.

--- Page 39 ---
Figure 1.7  Object diagram for Quiz
Figure 1.7 is the big picture of how the finished Quiz
application will work. For example, when the Next Question
button is tapped, it will trigger a method in
ViewController. A method is a lot like a function – a list
of instructions to be executed. This method will retrieve a new

--- Page 40 ---
question from the array of questions and ask the top label to
display that question.
It is OK if this diagram does not make sense yet – it will by
the end of the chapter. Refer back to it as you build the app to
see how it is taking shape.
You are going to build Quiz in steps, starting with the visual
interface for the application. 

--- Page 41 ---
Interface Builder
You are using the Single View App template because it is the
simplest template that Xcode offers. Still, this template has a
significant amount of magic in that some critical components
have already been set up for you. For now, you will just use
these components, without attempting to gain a deep
understanding of how they work. The rest of the book will be
concerned with those details.
In the project navigator, click once on the
Main.storyboard file. Xcode will open its graphical editor
called Interface Builder (be patient; it may take a few moments).
You might be asked to give permission to SimulatorTrampoline,
one of Xcode’s internal tools. If you are, grant it.
Interface Builder divides the editor area into two sections: the
document outline, on the lefthand side, and the canvas, on
the right.
This is shown in Figure 1.8. If what you see in your editor area
does not match the figure, you may have to click the Show
Document Outline button. (If you have additional areas showing,
do not worry about them.) You may also have to click the
disclosure triangles in the document outline to reveal content.
Figure 1.8  Interface Builder showing
Main.storyboard


--- Page 42 ---
The rectangle that you see in the Interface Builder canvas is called
a scene and represents the only “screen,” or view, your
application has at this time. (Remember that you used the
Single View App template to create this project.)
In the next section, you will learn how to create a UI for your
application using Interface Builder. Interface Builder lets you drag
objects from a library onto the canvas to create instances and

--- Page 43 ---
also lets you establish connections between those objects and
your code. These connections can result in code being called
by a user interaction.
A crucial feature of Interface Builder is that it is not a graphical
representation of code contained in other files. Interface Builder is
an object editor that can create instances of objects and
manipulate their properties. When you are done editing an
interface, it does not generate code that corresponds to the
work you have done. A .storyboard file is an archive of
object instances to be loaded into memory when necessary.

--- Page 44 ---
Building the Interface
Let’s get started on your interface. You have selected
Main.storyboard to reveal its single scene in the canvas.
To start, make sure your scene is sized for iPhone 11 Pro. At
the bottom of the canvas, find the View as button. It will likely
say something like View as: iPhone 11 Pro (wC hR). (The wC hR will
not make sense right now; we will explain it in Chapter 16.) If
it says iPhone 11 Pro already, then you are all set. If not, click the
View as button and find and select the iPhone 11 Pro icon
(Figure 1.9).
Figure 1.9  Selecting iPhone 11 Pro
It is time to add your view objects to that blank slate.
CREATING VIEW OBJECTS
Your application interface requires four view objects: two
buttons to accept user input and two text labels to display
information. To add them, first show the library by clicking the
 button near the top-right corner of Xcode (Figure 1.10). You
can also open it using the keyboard shortcut Command-Shift-
L. (Command-Option-Shift-L opens the library in a separate
window.)

--- Page 45 ---
Figure 1.10  Xcode library
The library contains the objects that you can add to a
storyboard file to compose your interface. Find the Label object
by either scrolling down through the list or by using the search
bar at the top of the library. Select this object in the library and
drag it onto the view object on the canvas. Drag the label
around the canvas and notice the dashed blue lines that appear

--- Page 46 ---
when the label is near the center of the canvas (Figure 1.11).
These guidelines will help you lay out your interface.
Figure 1.11  Adding a label to the canvas
Using the guidelines, position the label in the horizontal center
of the view and near the top, as shown in Figure 1.11.
Eventually, this label will display questions to the user.
Reopen the library and drag a second label onto the view and
position it in the horizontal center, closer to the middle. (Tip:
If you hold down Option while dragging the label, the library
will then stay open until you close it manually.) This label will
display answers.
Next, find Button in the library and drag two buttons onto the
view. Position one below each label.
You have now added four view objects to the
ViewController’s UI. Notice that they also appear in the
document outline. Your interface should look like Figure 1.12.

--- Page 47 ---
Figure 1.12  Building the Quiz interface
CONFIGURING VIEW OBJECTS

--- Page 48 ---
Now that you have created the view objects, you can configure
their attributes. Some attributes of a view, like size, position,
and text, can be changed directly on the canvas. For example,
you can resize an object by selecting it on the canvas or in the
document outline and then dragging its corners and edges in
the canvas.
Begin by renaming the labels and buttons. Double-click each
label and replace the text with ???. Then double-click the
upper button and change its name to Next Question. Rename the
lower button to Show Answer. The results are shown in
Figure 1.13.
Figure 1.13  Renaming the labels and buttons


--- Page 49 ---
You may have noticed that because you have changed the text
in the labels and buttons, and therefore their widths, they are
no longer neatly centered in the scene. Click on each of them
and drag to center them again, as shown in Figure 1.14.
Figure 1.14  Centering the labels and buttons
RUNNING ON THE SIMULATOR
To test your UI, you are going to run Quiz on Xcode’s iOS
simulator.
To prepare Quiz to run on the simulator, find the active scheme
pop-up menu on the Xcode toolbar (Figure 1.15).

--- Page 50 ---
Figure 1.15  iPhone 11 Pro scheme selected
If it says iPhone 11 Pro, then the project is set to run on the
simulator and you are good to go. If it says anything else, click
it and choose iPhone 11 Pro from the pop-up menu. The iPhone 11
Pro scheme will be your simulator default throughout this
book.
Click the triangular play button in the toolbar. This will build
(compile) and then run the application. You will be doing this
often enough that you may want to learn and use the keyboard
shortcut Command-R.
After the simulator launches you will see that the interface has
all the views you added, neatly centered as you configured
them in Interface Builder.
Now go back to the active scheme pop-up menu and select
iPhone 11 Pro Max as your simulator of choice. Run the
application again and you will notice that while the views you
added are still present, they are not centered as they were on
iPhone 11 Pro. This is because the labels and buttons currently
have a fixed position on the screen, and they do not remain
centered on the main view. To correct this problem, you will
use a technology called Auto Layout.
A BRIEF INTRODUCTION TO AUTO
LAYOUT

--- Page 51 ---
As of now, your interface looks nice in the Interface Builder
canvas. But iOS devices come in ever more screen sizes, and
applications are expected to support all screen sizes and
orientations – and perhaps more than one device type. You
need to guarantee that the layout of view objects will be
correct regardless of the screen size or orientation of the
device running the application. The tool for this task is Auto
Layout.
Auto Layout works by specifying position and size
constraints for each view object in a scene. These
constraints can be relative to neighboring views or to
container views. A container view is just a view object that,
as the name suggests, contains another view. For example, take
a look at the document outline for Main.storyboard
(Figure 1.16).
Figure 1.16  Document layout with a container view
You can see in the document outline that the labels and buttons
you added are indented with respect to a View object. This view

--- Page 52 ---
object is the container of the labels and buttons, and the
objects can be positioned and sized relative to this view.
To begin specifying Auto Layout constraints, select the top
label by clicking on it either on the canvas or in the document
outline. At the bottom of the canvas, notice the Auto Layout
menus, shown in Figure 1.17.
Figure 1.17  Auto Layout menus
With the top label still selected, click the 
  icon to reveal the
Align menu, shown in Figure 1.18.
Figure 1.18  Centering the top label in the container


--- Page 53 ---
In the Align menu, check the Horizontally in Container checkbox to
center the label in the container. Then click the Add 1 Constraint
button. This constraint guarantees that on any size screen, in
any orientation, the label will be centered horizontally.
You are going to position the other views horizontally by
aligning their centers with the center of the top label. The
effect will be that all the views will be centered horizontally on
the screen. Why not align them with the container, as you did
for the top label? If that position ever needs to change, you
will only need to modify the constraints on the top label and
the rest of the labels will follow suit.
Select the four views by Command-clicking them one after
another and then click the 
  icon to open the Align menu
again. Select Horizontal Centers and then click Add 3 Constraints
(Figure 1.19).
Figure 1.19  Centering the views


--- Page 54 ---
At this point, all four subviews have a horizontal position.
Now you need to add constraints to give them a vertical
position. To do this, you will lock the spacing between each
view and the one above it. With the four views selected, click
the 
  icon to open the Add New Constraints menu, shown in
Figure 1.20.
Figure 1.20  Adding constraints to fix the spacing
between views
Click the red vertical dashed segment near the top of the menu.
When you click the segment, it will become solid red (shown
in Figure 1.20), indicating that the distance of each view is
pinned to its nearest top neighbor. When you are done, click
the Add 4 Constraints button at the bottom of the menu.

--- Page 55 ---
If you made any mistakes while adding constraints, you may
see red or orange constraints and frames on the canvas instead
of the correct blue lines. If that is the case, you will want to
clear the existing constraints and go through the steps above
again. Do not just re-do the constraints; new constraints do not
replace old ones, so any bad constraints will still be there until
you clear them.
To clear constraints, first select the background (container)
view. Then click the 
  icon to open the Resolve Auto Layout
Issues menu. Select Clear Constraints under the All Views in View
Controller section (Figure 1.21). This will clear away any
constraints that you have added and give you a fresh start on
adding the constraints back in.
Figure 1.21  Clearing constraints
Auto Layout can be a difficult tool to master, and that is why
you are starting to use it in the first chapter of this book. By
starting early, you will have more chances to use it and get
used to its complexity. Also, dealing with problems before

--- Page 56 ---
things get too complicated will help you debug layout issues
with confidence.
To confirm that your interface behaves correctly, build and run
the application on the iPhone 11 Pro Max simulator. After
confirming that the interface looks correct, build and run the
application on the iPhone 11 Pro simulator. The labels and
buttons should be centered on both.
MAKING CONNECTIONS
A connection lets one object know where another object is in
memory so that the two objects can communicate. There are
two kinds of connections that you can make in Interface Builder:
outlets and actions. An outlet is a reference to an object. An
action is a method that gets triggered by a button or some
other view that the user can interact with, like a slider or a
picker.
Let’s start by creating outlets that reference the instances of
UILabel. Time to leave Interface Builder and write some code.
Declaring outlets
In the project navigator, find and select the file named
ViewController.swift. The editor area will change
from Interface Builder to Xcode’s code editor.
In ViewController.swift, start by deleting any code
that the template added between class
ViewController: UIViewController { and the
final brace, so that the file looks like this:
import UIKit 
 
class ViewController: UIViewController { 
 
} 
(For simplicity, we will not show the line import UIKit
again for this file.)

--- Page 57 ---
Next, add the following code that declares two properties.
(Throughout this book, new code for you to add will be shown
in bold. Code for you to delete will be struck through.) Do not
worry about understanding the code or properties right now;
just get it in.
class ViewController: UIViewController { 
    @IBOutlet var questionLabel: UILabel! 
    @IBOutlet var answerLabel: UILabel! 
} 
This code gives every instance of ViewController an
outlet named questionLabel and an outlet named
answerLabel. The view controller can use each outlet to
reference a particular UILabel object (that is, one of the
labels in your view). The @IBOutlet keyword tells Xcode
that you will connect these outlets to label objects using
Interface Builder.
Setting outlets
In the project navigator, select Main.storyboard to
reopen Interface Builder.
You want the questionLabel outlet to point to the instance
of UILabel at the top of the UI.
In the document outline, find the View Controller Scene section
and the View Controller object within it. In this case, the View
Controller stands in for an instance of ViewController,
which is the object responsible for managing the interface
defined in Main.storyboard.
Control-drag (or right-click and drag) from the View Controller in
the document outline to the top label in the scene. When the
label is highlighted, release the mouse and keyboard; a black
panel will appear, as shown in Figure 1.22. Select questionLabel
to set the outlet.

--- Page 58 ---
Figure 1.22  Setting questionLabel
(If you do not see questionLabel in the connections
panel, double-check your ViewController.swift file
for typos.)
Now, when the storyboard file is loaded, the
ViewController’s questionLabel outlet will
automatically reference the instance of UILabel at the top of
the screen, which will allow the ViewController to tell
the label what question to display.

--- Page 59 ---
Set the answerLabel outlet the same way: Control-drag
from the ViewController to the bottom UILabel and select
answerLabel (Figure 1.23).
Figure 1.23  Setting answerLabel
Notice that you drag from the object with the outlet that you
want to set to the object that you want that outlet to point to.
Your outlets are all set. The next connections you need to
make involve the two buttons.
Defining action methods

--- Page 60 ---
When a UIButton is tapped, it calls a method on another
object. That object is called the target. The method that is
triggered is called the action, and it contains the code to be
executed in response to the button being tapped.
In your application, the target for both buttons will be the
instance of ViewController. Each button will have its
own action. Let’s start by defining the two action methods:
showNextQuestion(_:) and showAnswer(_:).
Reopen ViewController.swift and add the two action
methods after the outlets.
class ViewController: UIViewController { 
    @IBOutlet var questionLabel: UILabel! 
    @IBOutlet var answerLabel: UILabel! 
 
    @IBAction func showNextQuestion(_ sender: UIButton) { 
 
    } 
 
    @IBAction func showAnswer(_ sender: UIButton) { 
 
    } 
} 
You will flesh out these methods after you make the target and
action connections. The @IBAction keyword tells Xcode that
you will be making these connections in Interface Builder.
Setting targets and actions
Switch back to Main.storyboard. Let’s start with the Next
Question button. You want its target to be ViewController
and its action to be showNextQuestion(_:).
To set an object’s target, you Control-drag from the object to
its target. When you release the mouse, the target is set, and a
panel appears that lets you select an action.
Select the Next Question button on the canvas and Control-drag
to the View Controller in the document outline. When the View
Controller is highlighted, release the mouse button and choose

--- Page 61 ---
showNextQuestion: under Sent Events in the connections
panel, shown in Figure 1.24.
Figure 1.24  Setting Next Question target and action


--- Page 62 ---
Now for the Show Answer button. Select the button and Control-
drag from the button to the View Controller. Choose
showAnswer: from the connections panel.
Summary of connections
There are now five connections between the
ViewController and the view objects. You have set the
properties answerLabel and questionLabel to
reference the label objects – two connections. The
ViewController is the target for both buttons – two more.
The project’s template made one additional connection: The
view property of ViewController is connected to the
View object that represents the background of the application.
That makes five.
You can check these connections in the connections
inspector. First, make sure that the inspector area within
Xcode’s window is visible (Figure 1.25). You may need to click
the rightmost button of the 
  control in the top-
right corner of the window. The inspector area is to the right of
the editor area and contains the various inspectors that display
settings for a file or object selected in the editor area.

--- Page 63 ---
Figure 1.25  Xcode inspector area
Next, select the View Controller in the document outline. Then, in
the inspector area, click the 
  tab to reveal the connections
inspector (Figure 1.26).

--- Page 64 ---
Figure 1.26  Checking connections in the
connections inspector
Your storyboard file is complete. The view objects have been
created and configured and all the necessary connections have
been made to the controller object. Let’s move on to creating
and connecting your model objects. 

--- Page 65 ---
Creating the Model Layer
View objects make up the UI, so developers typically create,
configure, and connect view objects using Interface Builder. The
parts of the model layer, on the other hand, are typically set up
in code.
In the project navigator, select ViewController.swift.
Add the following code that declares two arrays of strings and
an integer.
class ViewController: UIViewController { 
    @IBOutlet var questionLabel: UILabel! 
    @IBOutlet var answerLabel: UILabel! 
 
    let questions: [String] = [ 
        "What is 7+7?", 
        "What is the capital of Vermont?", 
        "What is cognac made from?" 
    ] 
    let answers: [String] = [ 
        "14", 
        "Montpelier", 
        "Grapes" 
    ] 
    var currentQuestionIndex: Int = 0 
    ... 
} 
The arrays are ordered lists containing questions and answers.
The integer will keep track of what question the user is on.
Notice that the arrays are declared using the let keyword,
whereas the integer is declared using the var keyword. A
constant is denoted with the let keyword; its value cannot
change. The questions and answers arrays are constants.
The questions and answers in this quiz will not change and, in
fact, cannot be changed from their initial values.
A variable, on the other hand, is denoted by the var
keyword; its value is allowed to change. You made the
currentQuestionIndex property a variable because its
value must be able to change as the user cycles through the
questions and answers.

--- Page 66 ---
IMPLEMENTING ACTION METHODS
Now that you have questions and answers, you can finish
implementing the action methods. In
ViewController.swift, update
showNextQuestion(_:) and showAnswer(_:).
... 
@IBAction func showNextQuestion(_ sender: UIButton) { 
    currentQuestionIndex += 1 
    if currentQuestionIndex == questions.count { 
        currentQuestionIndex = 0 
    } 
 
    let question: String = questions[currentQuestionIndex] 
    questionLabel.text = question 
    answerLabel.text = "???" 
} 
 
@IBAction func showAnswer(_ sender: UIButton) { 
    let answer: String = answers[currentQuestionIndex] 
    answerLabel.text = answer 
} 
... 
LOADING THE FIRST QUESTION
Just after the application is launched, you will want to load the
first question from the array and use it to replace the ???
placeholder in the questionLabel label. A good way to do
this is by overriding the viewDidLoad() method of
ViewController. (“Override” means that you are
providing a custom implementation for a method.) Add the
method to ViewController.swift.
class ViewController: UIViewController { 
    ... 
    override func viewDidLoad() { 
        super.viewDidLoad() 
        questionLabel.text = questions[currentQuestionIndex] 
    } 
} 
All the code for your application is now complete!

--- Page 67 ---
Building the Finished Application
Build and run the application on the iPhone 11 Pro simulator,
as you did earlier. You should see the first question displayed
in the top label.
If building turns up any errors, you can view them in the issue
navigator by selecting the 
  tab in the navigator area.
Figure 1.27 shows the issue navigator with errors we added as
examples.
Figure 1.27  Issue navigator with example errors
Click on any error or warning in the issue navigator to be
taken to the file and the line of code where the issue occurred.

--- Page 68 ---
Find and fix any problems (like code typos) by comparing
your code with the code in this chapter. Then try running the
application again. Repeat this process until your application
compiles.
After your application has compiled, it will launch in the iOS
simulator. Play around with the Quiz application. You should be
able to tap the Next Question button and see a new question in
the top label; tapping Show Answer should show the right
answer. If your application is not working as expected, double-
check your connections in Main.storyboard.
You have built a working iOS app! Take a moment to bask in
the glory.
OK, enough basking. Your app works, but it needs some spit
and polish.

--- Page 69 ---
Application Icons
While running Quiz, select Hardware → Home from the
simulator’s menu. You will see that Quiz’s icon is a boring,
default tile. Let’s give Quiz a better icon.
An application icon is a simple image that represents the
application on the iOS Home screen. Different devices require
different-sized icons, some of which are shown in Table 1.1.
Table 1.1  Application icon sizes by device
                          
Device Application icon sizes
             
iPhone                    
180x180 pixels (@3x)
                   
120x120 pixels (@2x)
                 
iPad and iPad mini                   
152x152 pixels (@2x)
                 
iPad Pro                    
167x167 pixels (@2x)
                 
           
(2x and 3x refer to the point sizes in Retina displays. You will
read more about display resolutions in Chapter 3.)

--- Page 70 ---
We have prepared an icon image file (size 120x120) for the
Quiz application. You can download this icon (along with
resources for other chapters) from
www.bignerdranch.com/ solutions/ 
iOSProgramming7ed.zip. Your instructor will give you
a link to download this icon (along with resources for other
chapters). Unzip the resource set and find the Quiz-
120.png file in the 0-Resources/Project App
Icons directory.
You are going to add this icon to your application bundle as a
resource. In general, there are two kinds of files in an
application: code and resources. Code (like
ViewController.swift) is used to create the application
itself. Resources are things like images, sounds, and Interface
Builder files that are used by the application at runtime.
In the project navigator, find Assets.xcassets. Select
this file to open it, then select AppIcon from the resource list on
the lefthand side (Figure 1.28).

--- Page 71 ---
Figure 1.28  Showing the Asset Catalog
This panel is the Asset Catalog, where you can manage all
the images that your application will need.
Drag the Quiz-120.png file from Finder onto the 2x slot of
the iPhone App section (Figure 1.29). This will copy the file into
your project’s directory on the filesystem and add a reference
to that file in the Asset Catalog. (You can Control-click on a

--- Page 72 ---
file in the Asset Catalog and select the option to Show in Finder
to confirm this.)
Figure 1.29  Adding the app icon to the Asset
Catalog
Build and run the application again. Switch to the simulator’s
Home screen either by selecting Hardware → Home, as you did
before, or by using the keyboard shortcut Command-Shift-H.
You should see the new icon.
(If you do not see the icon, delete the application and then
build and run again to redeploy it. To do this, the easiest option
is to reset the simulator by clicking Hardware → Erase All Content
and Settings.... This will remove all applications and reset the
simulator to its default settings. You should see the app icon
the next time you run the application.) 

--- Page 74 ---
Launch Screen
Another item you should set for the project is the launch
image, which appears while an application is loading. The
launch image has a specific role in iOS: It conveys to the user
that the application is indeed launching and depicts the UI that
the user will interact with once the application loads.
Therefore, a good launch image is a content-less screenshot of
the application.
For example, the Clock application’s launch image shows the
five tabs along the bottom, all in the unselected state. Once the
application loads, the correct tab is selected and the content
becomes visible. (Keep in mind that the launch image is
replaced after the application has launched; it does not become
the background image of the application.)
An easy way to accomplish this is to allow Xcode to generate
the possible launch screen images for you using a launch
screen file.
Open the project settings by clicking the top-level Quiz in the
project navigator. Scroll down in the editor and, under App Icons
and Launch Images, choose Main from the Launch Screen File pull-
down (Figure 1.30). Launch images will now be generated
from Main.storyboard.

--- Page 75 ---
Figure 1.30  Setting the launch screen file
It is difficult to see the results of this change, because the
launch image is typically shown for only a short time.
However, it is a good practice to set the launch image even
though its role is so brief.
Congratulations! You have written your first application and
even added some details to make it polished.

--- Page 76 ---
For the More Curious: Running an
Application on a Device
Running apps on the simulator is useful, but it is not a
substitute for running them on a hardware device. Hardware
devices have additional capabilities (cameras, for example)
and the performance of apps can vary between the simulator
and a hardware device.
You will need an Apple Developer Program account to run
apps on a device and submit apps to the App Store. A free
account will allow you to run on a device, but you will not be
able to submit apps to the App Store without a paid account.
You can enroll in the Apple Developer Program at
developer.apple.com/ programs/ enroll/.
There are four important items in the provisioning process:
                      
                 
 
                  
D
e
v
el
o
p
er 
C
er
tif
ic
at
e 
                
               
                 
 
                        This certificate file is added to your Mac’s 
keychain, which you can view in Keychain Access.  
                        It is used to digitally sign your code. 
                    
               
  

--- Page 77 ---
                
 
                  
A
p
p 
I
D 
                
               
                
                                            
 
                             
                            The application identifier is a string that 
uniquely identifies your 
                            application on the App Store. Application 
identifiers typically look 
                            like this: 
com.bignerdranch.AwesomeApp, where the 
                            name of the application follows the name of 
your company.  
                        
                 
 The App ID in your provisioning profile must match the 
bundle identifier of your application. A development 
profile can have a wildcard character (*) for its App ID and 
therefore will match any bundle identifier. To see the bundle 
identifier for the Quiz application, select the project from the 
top of the project navigator, then select the Quiz target. Finally, 
select the General pane from the menu across the top of the 
editor.
               
                 
 
                  
U
ni
q
u
e 
D
e
vi
ce 
I
D 
(
U
D
I
D
) 
                
               
                 
This identifier is unique for each iOS device.
               
                                  

--- Page 78 ---
 
                  
Pr
o
vi
si
o
ni
n
g 
Pr
of
il
e 
                
               
  
                            This is a file that lives on your development 
device and on your 
                            computer. It references a Developer 
Certificate, a single App ID, and a 
                            list of the device IDs for the devices that the 
application can be installed on. This file 
                            is suffixed with .mobileprovision. 
               
         
When an application is deployed to a device, Xcode uses a
provisioning profile on your computer to access the
appropriate certificate. This certificate is used to sign the
application binary. Then, the development device’s UDID is
matched to one of the UDIDs contained within the
provisioning profile, and the App ID is matched to the bundle
identifier. The signed binary is then sent to your development
device, where it is confirmed by the same provisioning profile
on the device and, finally, launched.
Managing these details yourself can be complicated, but
thankfully Xcode can manage it all for you.
After you have registered for a developer account, you need to
add the account to Xcode. Open Xcode and select Xcode →
Preferences. Select the Accounts tab and click the 
  button in the
bottom-left corner. Choose Apple ID and then sign in to your
developer account. Once you are done, you will see your
account listed on the lefthand side (Figure 1.31).

--- Page 79 ---
Figure 1.31  Xcode account preferences
Close the preferences window. Select the Quiz project in the
project navigator, select the Quiz target, and then open the
Signing & Capabilities pane. Make sure the Automatically manage
signing checkbox is checked. Then, from the Team drop-down
menu, select your developer account.
Plug in your device. You will be prompted on the device to
trust your computer. Once you have done that, select the
device from the active scheme pop-up menu (Figure 1.32); it
should be at or near the top of the choices.

--- Page 80 ---
Figure 1.32  Choosing the device
Back in the Signing & Capabilities pane, you will be asked to
register the device to your developer account. Click Register
Device, and Xcode will take care of the details. Once that is
complete, your Signing & Capabilities pane will look similar to
Figure 1.33.
Figure 1.33  Signing & Capabilities pane


--- Page 81 ---
At this point, you can build and run your application
(Command-R), and it will appear on your device. 

--- Page 82 ---
2 
The Swift Language
Apple introduced the Swift language in 2014, and it has
replaced Objective-C as the recommended development
language for iOS and macOS. In this chapter, you are going to
focus on the basics of Swift. You will not learn everything, but
you will learn enough to get started. Then, as you continue
through the book, you will learn more Swift while you learn
iOS development.
Swift maintains the expressiveness of Objective-C while
introducing a syntax that is safer, succinct, and readable. It
emphasizes type safety and adds advanced features such as
optionals, generics, and sophisticated structures and
enumerations. Most importantly, Swift allows the use of these
new features while relying on the same tested, elegant iOS
frameworks that developers have built on for years.
If you do not think you will be comfortable picking up Swift at
the same time as iOS development, you may want to start with
Swift Programming: The Big Nerd Ranch Guide or Apple’s
Swift tutorials, which you can find at
developer.apple.com/ swift. But if you have some
programming experience and are willing to learn “on the job,”
you can start your Swift education here and now.

--- Page 83 ---
Types in Swift
Swift types can be arranged into three basic groups:
structures, classes, and enumerations (Figure 2.1). All
three can have:
properties – values associated with a type
initializers – code that initializes an instance of a type
instance methods – functions specific to a type that can be called on an
instance of that type
class or static methods – functions specific to a type that can be
called on the type itself
Figure 2.1  Swift building blocks
Swift’s structures (or “structs”) and enumerations (or
“enums”) are significantly more powerful than in most
languages. In addition to supporting properties, initializers,
and methods, they can also conform to protocols and can be
extended.
Swift’s implementation of typically “primitive” types such as
numbers and Boolean values may surprise you: They are all
structures. In fact, all these Swift types are structures:

--- Page 84 ---
                      
                 
 
                  
Numbers
: 
                
               
                 
 
                    Int, Float, Double     
                
               
                 
 
                  
Boolean: 
                
               
                 
 
                    Bool    
                
               
                 
 
                  
Text: 
                
               
                 
 
                    String, Character    
                
               
                 
 
                  
Collectio
ns: 
                
               
                 
 
                    Array<Element>, 
Dictionary<Key:Hashable,Value>, 
Set<Element:Hashable>     
                
               
         
This means that standard types have properties, initializers,
and methods of their own. They can also conform to protocols
and be extended.
Finally, a key feature of Swift is optionals. An optional
allows you to store either a value of a particular type or no
value at all. You will learn more about optionals and their role
in Swift later in this chapter.

--- Page 86 ---
Using Standard Types
In this section, you are going to experiment with standard
types in an Xcode playground. A playground lets you write
code and see the results without the overhead of creating an
application and checking the output.
In Xcode, select File → New → Playground... (or, from the
welcome screen, choose Get started with a playground). Make sure
the platform is iOS and the template is Blank (Figure 2.2). After
clicking Next, you can accept the default name for this file; you
will only be here briefly.

--- Page 87 ---
Figure 2.2  Configuring a playground
When the file opens, notice that the playground is divided into
two sections (Figure 2.3). The larger white area to the left is
the editor, where you write code. The gray column on the right
is the sidebar, where the results of each line of code are
shown.

--- Page 88 ---
Figure 2.3  A playground
In the example code, the var keyword denotes a variable, as
you saw in your Quiz app, so the value of str can be changed.
Type in the code below to change the value of str. When you
are done, click the run button that appears next to or under the
last line of code, and you will see the results for each line
appear in the sidebar to the right. (You can also click the run
button next to any other line to run the code only up to that
point.)
var str = "Hello, playground"                           "Hello, 
playground" 
str = "Hello, Swift"                                    "Hello, Swift" 
(We are showing sidebar results to the right of the code for the
benefit of readers who are not actively doing the exercise.)
As you saw in Chapter 1, the let keyword denotes a constant
value, which cannot be changed. In your Swift code, you
should use let unless you expect the value will need to
change. Add a constant to the mix and click the run button to
see the result. (From now on, assume that you should run new
playground code as you enter it.)

--- Page 89 ---
var str = "Hello, playground"                           "Hello, 
playground" 
str = "Hello, Swift"                                    "Hello, Swift" 
let constStr = str                                      "Hello, Swift" 
Because constStr is a constant, attempting to change its
value will cause an error.
var str = "Hello, playground"                           "Hello, 
playground" 
str = "Hello, Swift"                                    "Hello, Swift" 
let constStr = str                                      "Hello, Swift" 
constStr = "Hello, world"
An error appears, indicated by the red symbol and error
message on the offending line. In this case, the error reads
Cannot assign to value: 'constStr' is a
'let' constant.
An error in the playground code will prevent you from seeing
any further results in the sidebar, so you usually want to
address it right away. Remove the line that attempts to change
the value of constStr. 
var str = "Hello, playground"                           "Hello, 
playground" 
str = "Hello, Swift"                                    "Hello, Swift" 
let constStr = str                                      "Hello, Swift" 
constStr = "Hello, world"
INFERRING TYPES
At this point, you may have noticed that neither the
constStr constant nor the str variable has a specified
type. This does not mean they are untyped! Instead, the
compiler infers their types from the initial values. This is
called type inference.
You can find out what type was inferred using Xcode’s Quick
Help. Option-click constStr in the playground to see the
Quick Help information for this constant, shown in Figure 2.4.

--- Page 90 ---
Figure 2.4  constStr is of type String
Option-clicking to reveal Quick Help will work for any
symbol.
SPECIFYING TYPES
If your constant or variable has an initial value, you can rely
on type inference. If a constant or variable does not have an
initial value or if you want to ensure that it is a certain type,
you can specify the type in the declaration.
Add more variables with specified types:
var str = "Hello, playground"                           "Hello, 
playground" 
str = "Hello, Swift"                                    "Hello, Swift" 
let constStr = str                                      "Hello, Swift" 
 
var nextYear: Int = 0                                   0 
var bodyTemp: Float = 0                                 0 
var hasPet: Bool = true                                 true 
Let’s go over these new types and how they are used.
Number and Boolean types
The most common type for integers is Int. There are
additional integer types based on word size and signedness,

--- Page 91 ---
but Apple recommends using Int unless you really have a
reason to use something else.
For floating-point numbers, Swift provides three types with
different levels of precision: Float for 32-bit numbers,
Double for 64-bit numbers, and Float80 for 80-bit
numbers.
A Boolean value is expressed in Swift using the type Bool. A
Bool’s value is either true or false.
Collection types
The Swift standard library offers three collections: arrays,
dictionaries, and sets.
An array is an ordered collection of elements. The array type is
written as Array<T>, where T is the type of element that the
array will contain. Arrays can contain elements of any type: a
standard type, a structure, or a class.
Add a variable for an array of integers:
var hasPet: Bool = true                                 true 
var arrayOfInts: Array<Int> = []                        [] 
Arrays are strongly typed. Once you declare an array as
containing elements of, say, Int, you cannot add a String
to it.
There is a shorthand syntax for declaring arrays: You can
simply use square brackets around the type that the array will
contain. Declare an array of strings using this shorthand:
var hasPet: Bool = true                                 true 
var arrayOfInts: Array<Int> = []                        [] 
var arrayOfStrings: [String] = []                       [] 
A dictionary is an unordered collection of key-value pairs. The
values can be of any type, including structures and classes.
The keys can be of any type as well, but they must be unique.

--- Page 92 ---
Specifically, the keys must be hashable, which allows the
dictionary to guarantee that the keys are unique and to access
the value for a given key more efficiently. Basic Swift types
such as Int, Float, Character, and String are all
hashable.
Like Swift arrays, Swift dictionaries are strongly typed and
can only contain keys and values of the declared type. For
example, you might have a dictionary that stores capital cities
by country. The keys for this dictionary would be the country
names, and the values would be the city names. Both keys and
values would be strings, and you would not be able to add a
key or value of any other type.
Add a variable for such a dictionary. (We have split the
declaration onto two lines to fit on the printed page; you
should enter it on one line.)
var arrayOfStrings: [String] = []                       [] 
var dictionaryOfCapitalsByCountry: 
                Dictionary<String,String> = [:]         [:] 
There is a shorthand syntax for declaring dictionaries, too.
Update dictionaryOfCapitalsByCountry to use the
shorthand:
var arrayOfStrings: [String] = []                       [] 
var dictionaryOfCapitalsByCountry: 
                Dictionary<String,String> = [:] 
                [String:String] = [:]                   [:] 
A set is similar to an array in that it contains a number of
elements of a certain type. However, sets are unordered, and
the members must be unique as well as hashable. The
unorderedness of sets makes them faster when you simply
need to determine whether something is a member of a set.
Add a variable for a set:
var winningLotteryNumbers: Set<Int> = []                Set([]) 
Unlike arrays and dictionaries, sets do not have a shorthand
syntax.

--- Page 93 ---
LITERALS AND SUBSCRIPTING
Standard types can be assigned literal values, or literals. For
example, str is assigned the value of a string literal. A string
literal is formed with double quotes. Contrast the literal value
assigned to str with the value assigned to constStr:
var str = "Hello, playground"                           "Hello, 
playground" 
str = "Hello, Swift"                                    "Hello, Swift" 
let constStr = str                                      "Hello, Swift" 
Add two number literals to your playground:
let number = 42                                         42 
let fmStation = 91.2                                    91.2 
Arrays and dictionaries can be assigned literal values as well.
The syntax for creating literal arrays and dictionaries
resembles the shorthand syntax for specifying these types. 
let countingUp = ["one", "two"]                         ["one", "two"] 
let nameByParkingSpace = [13: "Alice", 27: "Bob"]       [13: "Alice", 
27: "Bob"] 
Swift also provides subscripting as shorthand for accessing
arrays. To retrieve an element in an array, you provide the
element’s index in square brackets after the array name.
let countingUp = ["one", "two"]                         ["one", "two"] 
let secondElement = countingUp[1]                       "two" 
... 
Notice that index 1 retrieves the second element; an array’s
index always starts at 0.
When subscripting an array, be sure that you are using a valid
index. Attempting to access an out-of-bounds index results in a
trap. A trap is a runtime error that stops the program before it
gets into an unknown state.
Subscripting also works with dictionaries – more on that later
in this chapter. 

--- Page 94 ---
INITIALIZERS
So far, you have initialized your constants and variables using
literal values. In doing so, you created instances of a specific
type. An instance is a particular embodiment of a type.
Historically, this term has been used only with classes, but in
Swift it is used to describe structures and enumerations, too.
For example, the constant secondElement holds an
instance of String.
Another way of creating instances is by using an initializer
on the type. Initializers are responsible for preparing the
contents of a new instance of a type. When an initializer is
finished, the instance is ready for action. To create a new
instance using an initializer, you use the type name followed
by a pair of parentheses and, if required, arguments. This
signature – the combination of type and arguments –
corresponds to a specific initializer.
Some standard types have initializers that return empty literals
when no arguments are supplied. Add an empty string, an
empty array, and an empty set to your playground.
let emptyString = String()                              "" 
let emptyArrayOfInts = [Int]()                          [] 
let emptySetOfFloats = Set<Float>()                     Set([]) 
Other types have default values:
let defaultNumber = Int()                               0 
let defaultBool = Bool()                                false 
Types can have multiple initializers. For example, String
has an initializer that accepts an Int and creates a string based
on that value.
let number = 42                                         42 
let meaningOfLife = String(number)                      "42" 
To create a set, you can use the Set initializer that accepts an
array literal:

--- Page 95 ---
let availableRooms = Set([205, 411, 412])               {412, 205, 411} 
Float has several initializers. The parameter-less initializer
returns an instance of Float with the default value. There is
also an initializer that accepts a floating-point literal.
let defaultFloat = Float()                              0 
let floatFromLiteral = Float(3.14)                      3.14 
If you use type inference for a floating-point literal, the type
defaults to Double. Create the following constant with a
floating-point literal:
let easyPi = 3.14                                       3.14 
Use the Float initializer that accepts a Double to create a
Float from this Double:
let easyPi = 3.14                                       3.14 
let floatFromDouble = Float(easyPi)                     3.14 
You can achieve the same result by specifying the type in the
declaration.
let easyPi = 3.14                                       3.14 
let floatFromDouble = Float(easyPi)                     3.14 
let floatingPi: Float = 3.14                            3.14 
PROPERTIES
A property is a value associated with an instance of a type.
For example, String has the property isEmpty, which is a
Bool that tells you whether the string is empty. Array<T>
has the property count, which is the number of elements in
the array as an Int. Access these properties in your
playground:
let countingUp = ["one", "two"]                         ["one", "two"] 
let secondElement = countingUp[1]                       "two" 
countingUp.count                                        2 
... 
let emptyString = String()                              "" 

--- Page 96 ---
emptyString.isEmpty                                     true 
... 
INSTANCE METHODS
An instance method is a function that is specific to a
particular type and can be called on an instance of that type.
Try out the append(_:) instance method from Array<T>.
You will first need to change your countingUp array from a
constant to a variable.
let countingUp = ["one", "two"]
var countingUp = ["one", "two"]                         ["one", "two"] 
let secondElement = countingUp[1]                       "two" 
countingUp.count                                        2 
countingUp.append("three")                              ["one", "two", 
"three"] 
The append(_:) method accepts an element of the array’s
type and adds it to the end of the array.

--- Page 97 ---
Optionals
Swift types can be optional, which is indicated by appending
? to a type name.
    var anOptionalFloat: Float? 
    var anOptionalArrayOfStrings: [String]? 
    var anOptionalArrayOfOptionalStrings: [String?]? 
An optional lets you express the possibility that a variable may
not store a value at all. The value of an optional will either be
an instance of the specified type or nil.
Throughout this book, you will have many chances to use
optionals. What follows is an example to get you familiar with
the syntax so that you can focus on the use of the optionals
later.
Imagine a group of instrument readings:
    var reading1: Float 
    var reading2: Float 
    var reading3: Float 
Sometimes, an instrument might malfunction and not report a
reading. You do not want this malfunction showing up as, say,
0.0. You want it to be something completely different that
tells you to check your instrument or take some other action.
You can do this by declaring the readings as optionals. Add
these declarations to your playground.
var reading1: Float?                                         nil 
var reading2: Float?                                         nil 
var reading3: Float?                                         nil 
As an optional float, each reading can either contain a Float
or be nil. If not given an initial value, then the optional
defaults to nil.

--- Page 98 ---
You can assign values to an optional just like any other
variable. Assign floating-point literals to the readings:
reading1 = 9.8                                               9.8 
reading2 = 9.2                                               9.2 
reading3 = 9.7                                               9.7 
However, you cannot use these optional floats like non-
optional floats – even if they have been assigned Float
values. Before you can read the value of an optional variable,
you must address the possibility of its value being nil. This is
called unwrapping the optional.
You are going to try out two ways of unwrapping an optional
variable: optional binding and forced unwrapping. You will
implement forced unwrapping first. This is not because it is
the better option – in fact, it is the less safe one. But
implementing forced unwrapping first will let you see the
dangers and understand why optional binding is typically
better.
To forcibly unwrap an optional, you append a ! to its name.
First, try averaging the readings as if they were non-optional
variables:
reading1 = 9.8                                               9.8 
reading2 = 9.2                                               9.2 
reading3 = 9.7                                               9.7 
let avgReading = (reading1 + reading2 + reading3) / 3
This results in an error, because optionals require unwrapping.
Forcibly unwrap the readings to fix the error:
let avgReading = (reading1 + reading2 + reading3) / 3
let avgReading = (reading1! + reading2! + reading3!) / 3     9.566667 
Everything looks fine, and you see the correct average in the
sidebar. But a danger lurks in your code. When you forcibly
unwrap an optional, you tell the compiler that you are sure that
the optional will not be nil and can be treated as if it were a
normal Float. But what if you are wrong? To find out,

--- Page 99 ---
comment out the assignment of reading3 - which will
return it to its default value, nil - and run the code again.
reading1 = 9.8                                               9.8 
reading2 = 9.2                                               9.2 
reading3 = 9.7
// reading3 = 9.7
You now have an error. Xcode may have opened its debug area
at the bottom of the playground with information about the
error. If it did not, select View → Debug Area → Show Debug Area.
The error reads:
    Fatal error: Unexpectedly found nil while unwrapping an Optional 
value 
If you forcibly unwrap an optional and that optional turns out
to be nil, it will cause a trap, stopping your application.
A safer way to unwrap an optional is optional binding.
Optional binding works within a conditional if-let
statement: You assign the optional to a temporary constant of
the corresponding non-optional type. If your optional has a
value, then the assignment is valid and you proceed using the
non-optional constant. If the optional is nil, then you can
handle that case with an else clause.
Change your code to use an if-let statement that tests for
valid values in all three readings.
let avgReading = (reading1! + reading2! + reading3!) / 3
if let r1 = reading1, 
    let r2 = reading2, 
    let r3 = reading3 { 
        let avgReading = (r1 + r2 + r3) / 3 
        print(avgReading)
} else { 
    let errorString = "Instrument reported a reading that was nil." 
    print(errorString)
}
reading3 is currently nil, so its assignment to r3 fails,
and the sidebar shows the error string.

--- Page 100 ---
To see the other case in action, restore the line that assigns a
value to reading3. Now that all three readings have values,
all three assignments are valid, and when you run the code the
sidebar updates to show the average of the three readings.
SUBSCRIPTING DICTIONARIES
Recall that subscripting an array beyond its bounds causes a
trap. Dictionaries are different. The result of subscripting a
dictionary is an optional:
let nameByParkingSpace = [13: "Alice", 27: "Bob"]           [13: 
"Alice", 27: "Bob"] 
let space13Assignee: String? = nameByParkingSpace[13]       "Alice" 
let space42Assignee: String? = nameByParkingSpace[42]       nil 
If the key is not in the dictionary, the result will be nil. As
with other optionals, it is common to use if-let when
subscripting a dictionary:
let space13Assignee: String? = nameByParkingSpace[13]
if let space13Assignee = nameByParkingSpace[13] { 
    print(space13Assignee)
}                                                           "Alice" 

--- Page 101 ---
Loops and String Interpolation
Swift has all the control flow statements that you may be
familiar with from other languages: if-else, while, for,
for-in, repeat-while, and switch. Even if they are
familiar, however, there may be some differences from what
you are accustomed to. The key difference between these
statements in Swift and in C-like languages is that while
enclosing parentheses are not necessary on these statements’
expressions, Swift does require braces on clauses.
Additionally, the expressions for if- and while-like
statements must evaluate to a Bool.
Swift does not have the traditional C-style for loop that you
might be accustomed to. Instead, you can accomplish the same
thing a little more cleanly using Swift’s Range type and the
for-in statement:
    let range = 0..<countingUp.count 
    for i in range { 
        let string = countingUp[i] 
        // Use 'string' 
    } 
The most direct route would be to enumerate the items in the
array themselves:
    for string in countingUp { 
        // Use 'string' 
    } 
What if you wanted the index of each item in the array?
Swift’s enumerated() function returns a sequence of
integers and values from its argument:
    for (i, string) in countingUp.enumerated() { 
        // (0, "one"), (1, "two") 
    } 

--- Page 102 ---
What are those parentheses, you ask? The enumerated()
function returns a sequence of tuples. A tuple is an ordered
grouping of values similar to an array, except each member
may have a distinct type. In this example the tuple is of type
(Int, String). We will not spend much time on tuples in
this book; they are not used in iOS APIs because Objective-C
does not support them. However, they can be useful in your
Swift code.
Another application of tuples is in enumerating the contents of
a dictionary. Try it in your playground:
let nameByParkingSpace = [13: "Alice", 27: "Bob"]            [13: 
"Alice", 27: "Bob"] 
 
for (space, name) in nameByParkingSpace { 
    let permit = "Space \(space): \(name)"                   (2 times) 
    print(permit)                                            (2 times) 
}
That curious markup in the string literal is Swift’s string
interpolation. Expressions enclosed between \( and ) are
evaluated and inserted into the string at runtime. In this
example you are using local variables, but any valid Swift
expression, such as a method call, can be used.
To see the values of the permit variable for each iteration of
the loop, first click the square Show Result indicator at the far
right end of the results sidebar for the line that begins let
permit (Figure 2.5). You will see the current value of
permit under the code. Control-click the result and select
Value History. This can be very useful for visualizing what is
happening in your playground code’s loops.

--- Page 103 ---
Figure 2.5  Using the Value History to see the results
of string interpolation


--- Page 104 ---
Enumerations and the Switch
Statement
An enumeration is a type with a discrete set of values. Define
an enum describing pies:
enum PieType { 
    case apple 
    case cherry 
    case pecan
} 
 
let favoritePie = PieType.apple                              apple 
Swift has a powerful switch statement that, among other
things, is great for matching on enum values:
let name: String
switch favoritePie {
case .apple: 
    name = "Apple"                                           "Apple" 
case .cherry: 
    name = "Cherry"
case .pecan: 
    name = "Pecan"
}
The cases for a switch statement must be exhaustive: Each
possible value of the switch expression must be accounted for,
whether explicitly or via a default case. Unlike in C, Swift
switch cases do not fall through – only the code for the case
that is matched is executed. (If you need the fall-through
behavior of C, you can explicitly request it using the
fallthrough keyword.)
Switch statements can match on many types, including ranges:
    let macOSVersion: Int = ... 
    switch macOSVersion { 
    case 0...8: 
        print("A big cat") 
    case 9...15: 
        print("California locations") 
    default: 
        print("Greetings, people of the future! What's new in 10.\
(macOSVersion)?") 
    } 

--- Page 105 ---
For more on the switch statement and its pattern matching
capabilities, see the Control Flow section in Apple’s The Swift
Programming Language guide. (More on that in just a
moment.)
ENUMERATIONS AND RAW VALUES
Swift enums can have raw values associated with their cases.
Add this to your PieType enum:
enum PieType: Int { 
    case apple = 0 
    case cherry 
    case pecan 
} 
With the type specified, you can ask an instance of PieType
for its rawValue and then initialize the enum type with that
value. This returns an optional, since the raw value may not
correspond with an actual case of the enum, so it is a great
candidate for optional binding.
let pieRawValue = PieType.pecan.rawValue                2 
 
if let pieType = PieType(rawValue: pieRawValue) { 
    // Got a valid 'pieType'! 
    print(pieType)                                      "pecan\n" 
}
The raw value for an enum is often an Int, but it can be any
integer or floating-point number type as well as the String
and Character types.
When the raw value is an integer type, the values
automatically increment if no explicit value is given. For
PieType, only the apple case is given an explicit value.
The values for cherry and pecan are automatically
assigned a rawValue of 1 and 2, respectively.
There is more to enumerations. Each case of an enumeration
can have associated values. You will learn more about
associated values in Chapter 20.

--- Page 107 ---
Closures
A closure is a self-contained block of functionality.
Functions, which you have been using already, are a special
case of closures. You can think of a function as a named
closure. Closures differ from functions in that they have a
more compact and lightweight syntax. They allow you to write
a “function-like” construct without having to give it a name
and a full function declaration.
Define a closure to compare two Ints and check whether they
are passed in in ascending order:
let compareAscending = { (i: Int, j: Int) -> Bool in 
    return i < j
}
If you squint, closure syntax is similar to function syntax. You
declare your parameters in parentheses, you declare your
return type using the -> syntax, and you surround the
functionality in curly braces.
There are a couple differences. The parameters and return type
are declared within the curly braces, and there is an in
keyword used to separate the closure signature from the
closure implementation.
The closure you declared is assigned to the
compareAscending constant. Use this variable to compare
a few numbers:
let compareAscending = { (i: Int, j: Int) -> Bool in 
    return i < j 
} 
compareAscending(42, 2)                                      false 
compareAscending(-2, 12)                                     true 
The closure is called just like a function, passing in the
parameters in a list.

--- Page 108 ---
Closures’ concise syntax allows them to be easily passed
around in function arguments and returns. For example, arrays
have a sort(by:) method used to sort their contents. But
the array does not know how you want to sort the contents:
ascending order, descending order, or some other order. So
sort(by:) takes in a closure that compares two of its
elements. You determine whether those two elements are in
the correct order, and then the array uses that knowledge to
sort the entire array.
The compareAscending closure you defined fulfills
exactly that responsibility; it compares two Ints and
determines whether they were passed into the closure in
ascending order. Define an array of numbers and use your
compareAscending closure to sort it:
var numbers = [42, 9, 12, -17]                               [42, 9, 12, 
-17] 
 
numbers.sort(by: compareAscending)                           [-17, 9, 
12, 42] 
Their lightweight syntax also allows closures to be passed
inline to function calls. Sort the numbers array in descending
order using an inline closure:
var numbers = [42, 9, 12, -17]                               [42, 9, 12, 
-17] 
 
numbers.sort(by: compareAscending)                           [-17, 9, 
12, 42] 
numbers.sort(by: { (i, j) -> Bool in                         [-17, 9, 
12, 42] 
    return i < j                                             (6 times) 
})
Since the numbers array contains Int elements, the types of
i and j can be inferred. There are additional simplifications
and shorthands to the closure syntax, and you will learn about
many of those as you progress through this book.

--- Page 109 ---
Exploring Apple’s Swift Documentation
To explore Apple’s documentation on Swift, start at
developer.apple.com/ swift/ resources. Here are
two particular resources to look for. We suggest bookmarking
them and visiting them when you want to review a particular
concept or dig a little deeper.
The Swift Programming Language
This guide describes many features of Swift. It starts
with the basics and includes example code and lots of
detail. It also contains the language reference and
formal grammar of Swift.
Swift Standard Library
The standard library documentation lays out the
details of Swift types, protocols, and global (or free)
functions.
Your homework is to browse through the Values and
Collections section of the Swift Standard Library and the
sections of The Swift Programming Language’s Language
Guide on The Basics, Strings and Characters, and Collection
Types. Solidify what you learned in this chapter and become
familiar with the information these resources offer. If you
know where to find the details when you need them, then you
will feel less pressure to memorize them – letting you focus on
iOS development instead.

--- Page 110 ---
3 
Views and the View
Hierarchy
Over the next five chapters, you are going to build an
application named WorldTrotter. When it is complete, this app
will convert values between degrees Fahrenheit and degrees
Celsius. In this chapter, you will learn about views and the
view hierarchy through creating WorldTrotter’s UI. At the end of
this chapter, your app will look like Figure 3.1.

--- Page 111 ---
Figure 3.1  WorldTrotter


--- Page 112 ---
Let’s start with a little of the theory behind views and the view
hierarchy.

--- Page 113 ---
View Basics
Recall from Chapter 1 that views are objects that are visible to
the user, like buttons, text fields, and sliders. View objects
make up an application’s UI. A view:
is an instance of UIView or one of its subclasses
knows how to draw itself
can handle events, like touches
exists within a hierarchy of views whose root is the application’s
window
Let’s look at the view hierarchy in greater detail.

--- Page 114 ---
The View Hierarchy
Every application has a single instance of UIWindow that
serves as the container for all the views in the application.
UIWindow is a subclass of UIView, so the window is itself a
view. The window is created when the application launches.
Once the window is created, other views can be added to it.
When a view is added to the window, it is said to be a subview
of the window. Views that are subviews of the window can
also have subviews, and the result is a hierarchy of view
objects with the window at its root (Figure 3.2).

--- Page 115 ---
Figure 3.2  An example view hierarchy and the
interface that it creates
Once the view hierarchy is created, it will be drawn to the
screen. This process can be broken into two steps:
Each view in the hierarchy, including the window, draws itself. It renders
itself to its layer, which you can think of as a bitmap image. (The layer
is an instance of CALayer.)
The layers of all the views are composited together on the screen.
Figure 3.3 depicts another example view hierarchy and the two
drawing steps.

--- Page 116 ---
Figure 3.3  Views render themselves and then are
composited together
For WorldTrotter, you are going to create an interface composed
of different views. There will be four instances of UILabel

--- Page 117 ---
and one instance of UITextField that will allow the user to
enter a temperature in degrees Fahrenheit. Let’s get started.

--- Page 118 ---
Creating a New Project
In Xcode, select File → New → Project... (or use the keyboard
shortcut Command-Shift-N). Under the iOS section at the top
of the new project dialog, choose the Single View App template
under Application and click Next.
Enter WorldTrotter for the product name, make sure that Swift is
selected from the Language menu and Storyboard is selected from
the User Interface menu. Also make sure the Use Core Data
checkbox is unchecked (Figure 3.4).

--- Page 119 ---
Figure 3.4  Configuring WorldTrotter
Click Next and then Create on the following screen.

--- Page 120 ---
Views and Frames
When you initialize a view programmatically, you use its
init(frame:) designated initializer. This method takes
one argument, a CGRect, that will become the view’s frame,
a property on UIView.
    var frame: CGRect 
A view’s frame specifies the view’s size and its position
relative to its superview. Because a view’s size is always
specified by its frame, a view is always a rectangle.
A CGRect contains the members origin and size. The
origin is a structure of type CGPoint and contains two
CGFloat properties: x and y. The size is a structure of type
CGSize and has two CGFloat properties: width and
height (Figure 3.5).

--- Page 121 ---
Figure 3.5  CGRect
When the application is launched, the view for the initial view
controller is added to the root-level window. This view
controller is represented by the ViewController class
defined in ViewController.swift. We will discuss what
a view controller is in Chapter 4, but for now it is sufficient to
know that a view controller has a view and that the view
associated with the main view controller for the application is
added as a subview of the window.

--- Page 122 ---
Before you create the views for WorldTrotter, you are going to
add some practice views programmatically to explore views
and their properties and see how the interfaces for applications
are created.
Open ViewController.swift and delete any methods
that the template created. Your file should look like this:
    import UIKit 
 
    class ViewController: UIViewController { 
 
    } 
(UIKit, which you also saw in Chapter 1, is a framework. A
framework is a collection of related classes and resources. The
UIKit framework defines many of the UI elements that your
users see, as well as other iOS-specific classes. You will be
using a few different frameworks as you go through this
book.)
Right after the view controller’s view is loaded into memory,
its viewDidLoad() method is called. This method gives
you an opportunity to customize the view hierarchy, so it is a
great place to add your practice views.
In ViewController.swift, override viewDidLoad().
Create a CGRect that will be the frame of a UIView. Next,
create an instance of UIView and set its
backgroundColor property to UIColor.blue. Finally,
add the UIView as a subview of the view controller’s view to
make it part of the view hierarchy. (Much of this will not look
familiar. That is fine. We will explain more after you enter the
code.)
Listing 3.1  Overriding viewDidLoad()
(ViewController.swift)
class ViewController: UIViewController { 
 
    override func viewDidLoad() { 
        super.viewDidLoad() 

--- Page 123 ---
 
        let firstFrame = CGRect(x: 160, y: 240, width: 100, height: 150) 
        let firstView = UIView(frame: firstFrame) 
        firstView.backgroundColor = UIColor.blue 
        view.addSubview(firstView) 
    } 
 
} 
To create a CGRect, you use its initializer and pass in the
values for origin.x, origin.y, size.width, and
size.height. The initializer will create the underlying
origin and size and return the associated CGRect.
To set the backgroundColor, you use the UIColor class
property blue. This is a computed property that initializes an
instance of UIColor that is configured to be blue. There are a
number of UIColor class properties for common colors, such
as green, black, and clear.
Finally, to add your new view as a subview of the view
controller’s view, you use UIView’s addSubview(_:)
instance method.
Build and run the application (Command-R) on the iPhone 11
Pro simulator. You will see a blue rectangle that is the instance
of UIView. Because the origin of the UIView’s frame is
(160, 240), the rectangle’s top-left corner is 160 points to
the right of and 240 points down from the top-left corner of its
superview. The view stretches 100 points to the right and 150
points down from its origin, in accordance with its frame’s
size (Figure 3.6).

--- Page 124 ---
Figure 3.6  WorldTrotter with one UIView
Note that these values are in points, not pixels. If the values
were in pixels, then they would not be consistent across
displays of different resolutions (i.e., Retina versus non-

--- Page 125 ---
Retina). A point is a relative unit of a measure; it will be a
different number of pixels depending on how many pixels are
in the display. Sizes, positions, lines, and curves are always
described in points to allow for differences in display
resolution. 
Figure 3.7 represents the view hierarchy that you have created.
Figure 3.7  Current view hierarchy
Every instance of UIView has a superview property. When
you add a view as a subview of another view, the inverse
relationship is automatically established. In this case, the
UIView’s superview is the UIWindow.

--- Page 126 ---
Let’s experiment with the view hierarchy. First, in
ViewController.swift, create another instance of
UIView with a different frame and background color.
Listing 3.2  Updating viewDidLoad()
(ViewController.swift)
override func viewDidLoad() { 
    super.viewDidLoad() 
 
    let firstFrame = CGRect(x: 160, y: 240, width: 100, height: 150) 
    let firstView = UIView(frame: firstFrame) 
    firstView.backgroundColor = UIColor.blue 
    view.addSubview(firstView) 
 
    let secondFrame = CGRect(x: 20, y: 30, width: 50, height: 50) 
    let secondView = UIView(frame: secondFrame) 
    secondView.backgroundColor = UIColor.green 
    view.addSubview(secondView) 
} 
Build and run again. In addition to the blue rectangle, you will
see a green square near the top-left corner of the window.
Figure 3.8 shows the updated view hierarchy.

--- Page 127 ---
Figure 3.8  Updated view hierarchy with two
subviews as siblings
Now you are going to adjust the view hierarchy so that one
instance of UIView is a subview of the other UIView instead
of the view controller’s view. In
ViewController.swift, add secondView as a
subview of firstView.
Listing 3.3  Modifying the view hierarchy
(ViewController.swift)
let secondView = UIView(frame: secondFrame) 
secondView.backgroundColor = UIColor.green 

--- Page 128 ---
view.addSubview(secondView)
firstView.addSubview(secondView)
Your view hierarchy is now four levels deep, as shown in
Figure 3.9.

--- Page 129 ---
Figure 3.9  One UIView as a subview of the other
Build and run the application. Notice that secondView’s
position on the screen has changed (Figure 3.10). A view’s
frame is relative to its superview, so the top-left corner of

--- Page 130 ---
secondView is now inset (20, 30) points from the top-
left corner of firstView.
Figure 3.10  WorldTrotter with new hierarchy
(If the green instance of UIView looks smaller than it did
previously, that is just an optical illusion. Its size has not
changed.) 

--- Page 131 ---
Now that you have seen the basics of views and the view
hierarchy, you can start working on the interface for
WorldTrotter. Instead of building up the interface
programmatically, you will use Interface Builder to visually lay
out the interface, as you did in Chapter 1.
Start by removing your practice code from
ViewController.swift.
Listing 3.4  Deleting viewDidLoad()
(ViewController.swift)
override func viewDidLoad() { 
    super.viewDidLoad() 
 
    let firstFrame = CGRect(x: 160, y: 240, width: 100, height: 150) 
    let firstView = UIView(frame: firstFrame) 
    firstView.backgroundColor = UIColor.blue 
    view.addSubview(firstView) 
 
    let secondFrame = CGRect(x: 20, y: 30, width: 50, height: 50) 
    let secondView = UIView(frame: secondFrame) 
    secondView.backgroundColor = UIColor.green 
    firstView.addSubview(secondView)
}
Now let’s add some views to the interface and set their frames.
Open Main.storyboard. At the bottom of the canvas,
make sure the View as button is configured to display an iPhone
11 Pro device.
Open the library (with the 
  button or Command-Shift-L) and
drag five labels onto the canvas. (Remember that if you
Option-drag the first label, the library will stay open until you
close it.) Set their text to match Figure 3.11. As shown, space
them out vertically on the top half of the interface and center
them horizontally. (Do not use constraints; just position the
labels manually.)
Figure 3.11  Adding labels to the interface


--- Page 132 ---
Select the top label so you can see its frame in Interface Builder.
Open its size inspector – the sixth tab in the inspector area
to the right of the editor. (The keyboard shortcuts for the

--- Page 133 ---
inspectors are Command-Option plus the tab number. The size
inspector is the sixth tab, so its keyboard shortcut is
Command-Option-6.)
In the View section, find Frame Rectangle. (If you do not see it,
you might need to select it from the Show pop-up menu.) The
values shown are the view’s frame, and they dictate the
position of the view onscreen (Figure 3.12).
Figure 3.12  View frame values
Build and run the application on the iPhone 11 Pro simulator.
The interface on the simulator will look identical to the
interface that you laid out in Interface Builder.
CUSTOMIZING THE LABELS
Let’s make the interface look a little bit better by customizing
the view properties.
In Main.storyboard, select the background view. Open
the attributes inspector (the fifth inspector tab) and give
the app a new background color: Find and click the Background
pop-button and choose Custom.... In the Colors pop-up, select the
second tab (the Color Sliders tab) and choose RGB Sliders from the
menu. In the box near the bottom, enter a Hex Color # of F5F4F1

--- Page 134 ---
(Figure 3.13). This will give the background a warm gray
color. 
Figure 3.13  Changing the background color
Next you will give some of the labels a larger font size as well
as a burnt orange text color. You can customize attributes
common to selected views simultaneously.
Select the top two and bottom two labels by Command-
clicking them in the document outline. Make sure the

--- Page 135 ---
attributes inspector is open and update the text color: In the
Label section, find Color and open the pop-up menu. Click
Custom and select the Color Sliders tab again. Enter a Hex Color #
of E15829.
Now let’s update the font size. Select the 212 and 100 labels. In
the Label section in the attributes inspector, find Font and click
the text icon next to the current font. In the popover that
appears, change the Size to 70 (Figure 3.14). Select the
remaining three labels and change their Size to 36.
Figure 3.14  Customizing the labels’ font
Now that the font size is larger, the labels are no longer
positioned correctly. Move the labels so that they are again
nicely aligned vertically and centered horizontally. Also,

--- Page 136 ---
confirm that the labels do not overlap one another. One way to
help with this is to turn on bounds rectangles, shown in
Figure 3.15, which will give each view in Interface Builder a blue
outline. To see the bounds rectangles, select Editor → Canvas →
Bounds Rectangles.
Figure 3.15  Viewing the bounds rectangles


--- Page 137 ---
Note that these outlines do not show when the app is running.
We will not show the bounds rectangles going forward. You
can leave them on or, if you prefer, turn them off with Editor →
Canvas → Bounds Rectangles.
Build and run the application on the iPhone 11 Pro simulator.
Now build and run the application on the iPhone 11 Pro Max
simulator. Notice that the labels are no longer centered –
instead, they appear shifted slightly to the left.
You have just seen a major problem with absolute frames:
The view does not look equally good on different sizes of
screens.
In general, you should not use absolute frames – whose
position and size are fixed – for your views. Instead, as you
saw in Chapter 1, you should use Auto Layout to flexibly
compute the frames for you based on constraints that you
specify for each view.
What you really want for WorldTrotter is for the labels to remain
the same distance from the top of the screen and to remain
horizontally centered within their superview. They should also
update if the font or text of the labels change. You will
accomplish these goals in the next section.

--- Page 138 ---
The Auto Layout System
Before you can fix the labels to be flexible in their layout, you
need to learn a little of the theory behind the Auto Layout
system.
Absolute coordinates make your layout fragile because they
assume that you know the size of the screen ahead of time.
Using Auto Layout, you can describe the layout of your views
in a relative way that enables their frames to be determined at
runtime so that the frames’ definitions can take into account
the screen size of the device that the application is running on.
THE ALIGNMENT RECTANGLE AND
LAYOUT ATTRIBUTES
The Auto Layout system is based on the alignment
rectangle. This rectangle is defined by several layout
attributes (Figure 3.16).
Figure 3.16  Layout attributes defining a view’s
alignment rectangle


--- Page 139 ---
Width, Height
These values determine the alignment rectangle’s
size.
Top, Bottom,
Left, Right
These values determine the spacing between the
given edge of the alignment rectangle and the
alignment rectangle of another view.
CenterX,
CenterY
These values determine the center point of the
alignment rectangle.
FirstBaseline,
LastBaseline
These values are the same as the bottom attribute for
most, but not all, views. For example,
UITextField defines its baselines as the bottom
of the text it displays rather than the bottom of the
alignment rectangle. This keeps “descenders” (the
parts of letters like “g” and “p” that descend below
the baseline) from being obscured by a view right
below the text field. For multiline text labels and text
views, the first and last baseline refer to the first and
last line of text. In all other situations, the first and
last baseline are the same.
Leading,
Trailing
These values are language-specific attributes. If the
device is set to a language that reads left to right
(such as English), then the leading attribute is the
same as the left attribute and the trailing attribute is
the same as the right attribute. If the language reads
right to left (such as Arabic), then the leading
attribute is on the right and the trailing attribute is on
the left. Interface Builder automatically prefers leading

--- Page 140 ---
and trailing over left and right, and, in general, you
should as well.
By default, every view has an alignment rectangle, and every
view hierarchy uses Auto Layout.
The alignment rectangle is very similar to the frame. In fact,
these two rectangles are often the same. Whereas the frame
encompasses the entire view, the alignment rectangle only
encompasses the content that you wish to use for alignment
purposes. Figure 3.17 shows an example where the frame and
the alignment rectangle are different.
Figure 3.17  Frame vs alignment rectangle
You define a view’s alignment rectangle by providing a set of
constraints. Taken together, these constraints enable the system
to determine the layout attributes, and thus the alignment
rectangle, for each view in the view hierarchy. 
CONSTRAINTS
A constraint defines a specific relationship in a view
hierarchy that can be used to determine a layout attribute for
one or more views. For example, you might add a constraint
like, “The vertical space between these two views should
always be 8 points,” or, “These views should always have the
same width.” A constraint can also be used to give a view a

--- Page 141 ---
fixed size, like, “This view’s height should always be 44
points.”
You do not need a constraint for every layout attribute. Some
values may come directly from a constraint; others will be
computed by the values of related layout attributes. For
example, if a view’s constraints set its left edge and its width,
then the right edge is already determined (left edge + width =
right edge, always). As a general rule of thumb, you need at
least two constraints per dimension (horizontal and vertical).
If, after all the constraints have been considered, there is still
an ambiguous or missing value for a layout attribute, then
there will be errors and warnings from Auto Layout and your
interface will not look as you expect on all devices. Debugging
these problems is important, and you will get some practice
later in this chapter.
How do you come up with constraints? Let’s see how, using
the labels that you have laid out on the canvas.
First, describe what you want the view to look like
independent of screen size. For example, you might say that
you want the top label to be:
8 points from the top of the screen
centered horizontally in its superview
as wide and as tall as its text
To turn this description into constraints in Interface Builder, it will
help to understand how to find a view’s nearest neighbor.
The nearest neighbor is the closest sibling view in the
specified direction (Figure 3.18).

--- Page 142 ---
Figure 3.18  Nearest neighbor
If a view does not have any siblings in the specified direction,
then the nearest neighbor is its superview, also known as its
container.
Now you can spell out the constraints for the label:
1. The label’s top edge should be 8 points away from its nearest neighbor.

--- Page 143 ---
2. The label’s center should be the same as its superview’s center.
3. The label’s width should be equal to the width of its text rendered at its
font size.
4. The label’s height should be equal to the height of its text rendered at its
font size.
If you consider the first and fourth constraints, you can see that
there is no need to explicitly constrain the label’s bottom edge.
It will be determined from the constraints on the label’s top
edge and the label’s height. Similarly, the second and third
constraints together determine the label’s right and left edges.
Now that you have a plan for the top label, you can add these
constraints. Constraints can be added using Interface Builder or in
code. Apple recommends that you add constraints using
Interface Builder whenever possible, and that is what you will do
here. However, if your views are created and configured
programmatically, then you can add constraints in code. In
Chapter 5, you will practice that approach.
ADDING CONSTRAINTS IN INTERFACE
BUILDER
Let’s get started constraining that top label.
Select the top label on the canvas. In the bottom-right corner
of the canvas, find the Auto Layout constraint menus
(Figure 3.19).

--- Page 144 ---
Figure 3.19  Auto Layout constraint menus


--- Page 145 ---
Click the 
  icon to reveal the Add New Constraints menu. This
menu allows you to set the size and position of the label.
At the top of the Add New Constraints menu are four values that
describe the label’s current spacing from its nearest neighbor
on the canvas. For this label, you are only interested in the top
value.
To turn this value into a constraint, click the top red strut
separating the value from the square in the middle. The strut
will become a solid red line. Also, replace whatever value you
have in the top text field with 8.
In the middle of the menu, find the label’s Width and Height. The
values next to Width and Height indicate the current canvas
values. To constrain the label’s width and height to the current
canvas values, check the Width and Height checkboxes. The
button at the bottom of the menu reads Add 3 Constraints. Click
this button. The constraints will be added and the label will be
automatically repositioned to match them.
You might have noticed that your top label is not actually 8
points below the top of the screen, but instead 8 points below
the sensor housing. By default, constraints made to a
superview are made to its safe area. The safe area is an
alignment rectangle that represents the visible portion of your
interface.
At this point, you have not specified enough constraints to
fully determine the alignment rectangle. The red left and right
edges around the label indicate that its alignment rectangle is
incompletely defined – specifically that there is some problem
along the horizontal axis. (The top and bottom edges would be
red if there were a vertical constraint problem.) Interface Builder
will help you determine what the problem is.
Open the document outline and notice the red arrow in the top-
right corner (Figure 3.20). A red or yellow arrow here
indicates a potential issue with your interface.

--- Page 146 ---
Figure 3.20  Auto Layout issue indicator
Click this icon to reveal the Auto Layout issues outline
(Figure 3.21). Most of the issues listed here are classified as
Localization Issues. These are associated with the labels that do
not yet have constraints and therefore might have layout issues
similar to what you experienced before.

--- Page 147 ---
Figure 3.21  Auto Layout issues outline
The issue you are concerned with relates to the 212 label. For
that label, there is a Missing Constraints issue described as Need
constraints for: X position.
You have added two vertical constraints (a top edge constraint
and a height constraint), but you have only added one
horizontal constraint (a width constraint). Having only one
constraint makes the horizontal position of the label
ambiguous. You will fix this issue by adding a center
alignment constraint between the label and its superview.
With the top label still selected, click the 
  icon to reveal the
Align menu. If you have multiple views selected, this menu will
allow you to align attributes among the views. Because you

--- Page 148 ---
have only selected one label, the only options you are given
are to align the view within its container.
In the Align menu, check Horizontally in Container and then click
Add 1 Constraint to add the centering constraint and reposition
the label if needed. After adding this constraint, there will be
enough constraints to fully determine the alignment rectangle.
The label’s constraints are all blue now that the alignment
rectangle for the label is fully specified.
Build and run the application on the iPhone 11 Pro simulator
and the iPhone 11 Pro Max simulator. The top label will
remain centered in both simulators.
There is still one issue associated with the top label: Fixed width
constraints may cause clipping. Let’s discuss and address this
warning.
INTRINSIC CONTENT SIZE
Although the top label’s position is flexible, its size is not.
This is because you have added explicit width and height
constraints to the label. If the text or font were to change, the
frame would not hug to the content, which could then be cut
off (“clipped”) or left swimming in extra space. We will
discuss two causes of this, localization and Dynamic Type, in
Chapter 7 and Chapter 10, respectively.
This is where the intrinsic content size of a view comes
into play. You can think of the intrinsic content size as the
natural size for a view based on its contents. For labels, this
size is the size of the text rendered at the given font. For
images, this is the size of the image itself.
We said earlier that you generally need at least two constraints
per dimension (horizontal and vertical). A view’s intrinsic
content size acts as implicit width and height constraints. If
you do not specify constraints that explicitly determine the

--- Page 149 ---
width, the view will be its intrinsic width. The same goes for
the height.
With this knowledge, let the top label have a flexible size by
removing the explicit width and height constraints.
In Main.storyboard, select the width constraint on the
label. You can do this by clicking on the constraint on the
canvas. Alternatively, in the document outline, you can click
the disclosure triangle next to the 212 label, then disclose the
list of constraints for the label (Figure 3.22).
Figure 3.22  Selecting the width constraint
Once you have selected the width constraint, press the Delete
key. Do the same for the height constraint.

--- Page 150 ---
Notice that the remaining constraints for the label are still
blue. Because the width and height are being inferred from the
label’s intrinsic content size, there are still enough constraints
to determine the label’s alignment rectangle. (Wondering
where the constraints that position the label relative to its
superview are? They are in the constraints for the top-level
View.)
MISPLACED VIEWS
As you have seen, blue constraints indicate that the alignment
rectangle for a view is fully specified. Orange constraints often
indicate a misplaced view. This means that the frame for the
view in Interface Builder is different than the frame that Auto
Layout has computed.
A misplaced view is very easy to fix. That is good, because it
is also a very common issue that you will encounter when
working with Auto Layout.
Give your top label a misplaced view so that you can see how
to resolve this issue. Resize the top label on the canvas using
the resize controls and look for the yellow warning in the top-
right corner of the canvas. Click on this warning icon to reveal
the problem: Frame for "212" will be different at run time
(Figure 3.23).

--- Page 151 ---
Figure 3.23  Misplaced view warning
As the warning says, the frame at runtime will not be the same
as the frame specified on the canvas. If you look closely, you
will see an orange dotted line that indicates what the runtime
frame will be.
Build and run the application. Notice that the label is still
centered despite the new frame that you gave it in Interface
Builder. This might seem great – you get the result that you
want, after all. But the disconnect between what you have
specified in Interface Builder and the constraints computed by

--- Page 152 ---
Auto Layout will cause problems down the line as you
continue to build your views. Let’s fix the misplaced view.
Back in the storyboard, select the top label on the canvas.
Click the 
  icon (the left-most icon in the lower-right corner
of the canvas) to update the frame of the label to match the
frame that the constraints will compute.
You will get very used to updating the frames of views as you
work with Auto Layout. One word of caution: If you try to
update the frames for a view that does not have enough
constraints, you will almost certainly get unexpected results. If
that happens, undo the change and inspect the constraints to
see what is missing.
At this point, the top label is in good shape. It has enough
constraints to determine its alignment rectangle, and the view
is laying out the way you want.
Becoming proficient with Auto Layout takes a lot of
experience, so in the next section you are going to remove the
constraints from the top label and then add constraints to all
the labels.
ADDING MORE CONSTRAINTS
Let’s flesh out the constraints for the rest of the views. Before
you do that, you will remove the existing constraints from the
top label.
Select the top label on the canvas. Open the Resolve Auto Layout
Issues menu (the icon second from right) and select Clear
Constraints from the Selected Views section (Figure 3.24).

--- Page 153 ---
Figure 3.24  Clearing constraints
You are going to add the constraints to all the views in three
steps. First you will center the top label horizontally within the
superview. Then you will add constraints that pin the top of
each label to its nearest neighbor. Finally you will align the
centers of all the labels.
Select the top label. Open the Align menu and choose Horizontally
in Container with a constant of 0. Click Add 1 Constraint.
Now select all five labels. Open the Add New Constraints menu.
Select the top strut and make sure it has a constant of 8.
Your menu should match Figure 3.25. Once it does, click Add 5
Constraints.

--- Page 154 ---
Figure 3.25  Setting the spacing between neighbors
Finally, with all five labels still selected, open the Align menu
and select Horizontal Centers (Figure 3.26). Go ahead and Add 4
Constraints.

--- Page 155 ---
Figure 3.26  Aligning views’ horizontal centers
At this point, the labels are no longer horizontally or vertically
ambiguous. If you had any doubts, the fact that their
constraints have all turned blue verifies this.
Build and run the application on the iPhone 11 Pro simulator.
The views will be centered within the interface. Now build and
run the application on the iPhone 11 Pro Max simulator.
Unlike earlier in the chapter, all the labels remain centered on
the larger interface.
Auto Layout is a crucial technology for every iOS developer.
It helps you create flexible layouts that work across a range of
devices and interface sizes. It also takes a lot of practice to
master. You will get a lot of experience using Auto Layout as
you work through this book.

--- Page 156 ---
Challenges
Most chapters in this book will finish with at least one
challenge that encourages you to take your work in the chapter
one step further and prove to yourself what you have learned.
We suggest that you tackle as many of these challenges as you
can to cement your knowledge and move from learning iOS
development from us to doing iOS development on your own.
Challenges come in three levels of difficulty:
Bronze challenges typically ask you to do something very similar to
what you did in the chapter. These challenges reinforce what you learned
in the chapter and force you to type in similar code without having it laid
out in front of you. Practice makes perfect.
Silver challenges require you to do more digging and more thinking.
You will need to use methods, classes, and properties that you have not
seen before, but the tasks are still similar to what you did in the chapter.
Gold challenges are difficult and can take hours to complete. They
require you to understand the concepts from the chapter and then do
some quality thinking and problem-solving on your own. Tackling these
challenges will prepare you for the real-world work of iOS development.
Before beginning any challenge, always make a copy of
your project directory in Finder and attack the
challenge in that copy. Many chapters build on previous
chapters, and working on challenges in a copy of the project
ensures that you will be able to progress through the book.

--- Page 157 ---
Bronze Challenge: More Auto Layout
Practice
Remove all the constraints from the ViewController
interface and then add them back in. Try to do this without
consulting the book.

--- Page 158 ---
Silver Challenge: Adding a Gradient
Layer
You learned in this chapter that all UIView instances are
backed by a CALayer. Every view hierarchy is backed by a
corresponding layer hierarchy, and you can create and add
sublayers just as you can create and add subviews.
Use a CAGradientLayer to add a gradient to the
background of the view controller (Figure 3.27). You will want
this layer to be positioned behind the labels. For this challenge,
you will want to consult the documentation for both CALayer
and its subtype CAGradientLayer.

--- Page 159 ---
Figure 3.27  Gradient layer
Hint: To position the layer, you will want to set the layer’s
frame to be the same as the bounds of the view controller’s
view. Layers do not participate in Auto Layout in the same
way that views do, so you will also need to update the layer’s
frame in the view controller’s
viewWillLayoutSubviews() method.

--- Page 160 ---
Gold Challenge: Spacing Out the
Labels
Space out the labels evenly from the top of the safe area to the
bottom of the safe area (Figure 3.28). This should work on
different screen sizes, so you will not be able to hardcode the
values.
Figure 3.28  Flexible spacing between labels
Hint: You will likely want to use hidden “spacer views” and
equal height constraints to achieve this (Figure 3.29). You will
see an easier way to accomplish this task in Chapter 11, but

--- Page 161 ---
solving the problem using Auto Layout and the knowledge
you gained in this chapter is invaluable practice.
Figure 3.29  Spacer views


--- Page 162 ---
For the More Curious: Retina Display
Apple introduced the high-resolution Retina display with
iPhone 4. Today, iOS devices have 2x or 3x Retina displays.
Let’s look at what you should do to make graphics look their
best on all displays.
For vector graphics, you do not need to do anything; your code
will render as crisply as the device allows. However, if you
draw using Core Graphics functions, these graphics will
appear differently on different devices. In Core Graphics (also
called Quartz), lines, curves, text, etc. are described in terms of
points. On a non-Retina display, a point was a 1x1 pixel. On
Retina displays, a point is either 2x2 pixels or 3x3 pixels,
depending on the device (Figure 3.30).
Figure 3.30  Rendering to different resolutions
Given these differences, bitmap images (like JPEG or PNG
files) will be unattractive if the image is not tailored to the
device’s screen type. Say your application includes a small
image of 50x50 pixels, rendered at 25x25 points on a 2x
Retina display. If this image is displayed on a 3x Retina

--- Page 163 ---
display, then the image must be stretched to cover an area of
75x75 pixels. At this point, the system does a type of
averaging called anti-aliasing to keep the image from
looking jagged. The result is an image that is not jagged – but
it is fuzzy (Figure 3.31). You could use a larger file instead,
but the averaging would then cause problems in the other
direction if the image needed to be shrunk for a 2x Retina or
non-Retina display.
Figure 3.31  Fuzziness from stretching an image
All iOS devices sold today include a Retina display. In fact,
iOS 9 was the last major release of iOS to support devices with
a non-Retina screen. So if your application targets at least iOS
10, you do not need to include 1x non-Retina assets – you only
need to include 2x and 3x versions.
By the way, Xcode also supports vector PDF images. For these,
Xcode will generate an image from the PDF for each display
scale when the app is being compiled.
Fortunately, you do not have to write any extra code to handle
which image gets loaded on which device. All you have to do
is associate the different resolution images in the Asset
Catalog with a single asset. Then, when you use UIImage’s

--- Page 164 ---
init(named:) initializer to load the image, this method
looks in the bundle and gets the appropriate file for the
particular device. 

--- Page 165 ---
4 
View Controllers
View controllers are instances of a subclass of
UIViewController. A view controller manages a view
hierarchy. It is responsible for creating the view objects that
make up the hierarchy and for handling events associated with
the view objects in its hierarchy.
So far, WorldTrotter has a single view controller that displays
some labels. In this chapter, you will update the app to use
multiple view controllers. The user will be able to switch
between two view hierarchies – one for the existing
temperature conversion screen and another for a map
(Figure 4.1).

--- Page 166 ---
Figure 4.1  The two faces of WorldTrotter


--- Page 167 ---
The View of a View Controller
As subclasses of UIViewController, all view controllers
inherit an important property:
    var view: UIView! 
This property points to a UIView instance that is the root of
the view controller’s view hierarchy. When the view of a
view controller is added as a subview of the window, the view
controller’s entire view hierarchy is added, as shown in
Figure 4.2.

--- Page 168 ---
Figure 4.2  Object diagram for WorldTrotter
A view controller’s view is not created until it needs to
appear on the screen. This optimization is called lazy
loading, and it can conserve memory and improve
performance.
There are two ways to create a view controller’s view:
in Interface Builder, by using an interface file such as a storyboard
programmatically, by overriding the UIViewController method
loadView()

--- Page 169 ---
While the view controller’s view will be created using one of
those two approaches, that view’s hierarchy may be created
entirely in Interface Builder, entirely in code, or a mixture of both.
WorldTrotter’s view hierarchy is currently created in Interface
Builder using a storyboard. You will continue to use Interface
Builder in this chapter as you further explore view controllers.
In Chapter 5, you will get experience creating programmatic
views using loadView().

--- Page 170 ---
Setting the Initial View Controller
Although a storyboard can have many view controllers, each
storyboard file has exactly one initial view controller.
The initial view controller acts as an entry point into the
storyboard. You are going to add and configure another view
controller to the canvas and set it to be the initial view
controller for the storyboard.
Open Main.storyboard. From the library, drag a View
Controller onto the canvas (Figure 4.3). (To make space on the
canvas, you can zoom out by Control-clicking on the
background, using the zoom controls at the bottom of the
canvas, or using pinch gestures on your trackpad.)
Figure 4.3  Adding a view controller to the canvas


--- Page 171 ---
You want this view controller to display an MKMapView – a
class designed to display a map – instead of the existing white
UIView.
Select the view of the new View Controller – not the View Controller
itself! – and press Delete to remove this view from the canvas.
This might be easier to do using the document outline. Then
drag a Map Kit View from the library onto the view controller to
set it as the view for this view controller (Figure 4.4).
Figure 4.4  Adding a map view to the canvas


--- Page 172 ---
Now select the new View Controller and open its attributes
inspector. In the View Controller section, check the Is Initial View
Controller checkbox (Figure 4.5).

--- Page 173 ---
Figure 4.5  Setting the initial view controller
Did you notice that the gray arrow on the canvas that was
pointing at the conversion view controller is now pointing to
the new view controller? The arrow, as you have probably
surmised, indicates the initial view controller. Another way to
assign the initial view controller is to drag that arrow from one
view controller to another on the canvas.
Build and run the application. Because you have changed the
initial view controller, the map shows up instead of the view of
the temperature conversion screen.
As mentioned above, there can only be one initial view
controller associated with a given storyboard. When you set
the new map view controller to be the initial view controller,
the conversion view controller was no longer the initial view
controller for this storyboard. Let’s take a look at how this
requirement works with the root-level UIWindow to add the
initial view controller’s view to the window hierarchy.
UIWindow has a rootViewController property. When
a view controller is set as the window’s
rootViewController, that view controller’s view is
added to the window’s view hierarchy. When this property is
set, any existing subviews on the window are removed and the
view controller’s view is added to the window with the
appropriate Auto Layout constraints.
Each application has one main interface, a reference to a
storyboard. When the application launches, the initial view

--- Page 174 ---
controller for the main interface is set as the
rootViewController of the window.
The main interface for an application is set in the project
settings. With the project navigator open, click the WorldTrotter
project at the top of the list to open the project settings. In the
General settings tab, find the Deployment Info section. Here you
will see the Main Interface setting (Figure 4.6). It is set to Main,
which corresponds to Main.storyboard.
Figure 4.6  An application’s main interface


--- Page 175 ---
Tab Bar Controllers
View controllers become more interesting when the user has a
way to switch between them. Throughout this book, you will
learn a number of ways to present view controllers. In this
chapter, you will create a UITabBarController that will
allow the user to swap between the UIViewController
displaying the conversion labels and the
UIViewController displaying the map.
UITabBarController keeps an array of view controllers.
It also maintains a tab bar at the bottom of the screen with a
tab for each view controller in its array. Tapping on a tab
presents the view of the view controller associated with that
tab.
Open Main.storyboard and select the map view
controller. From Xcode’s Editor menu, choose Embed In → Tab Bar
Controller. This will add the map view controller to the view
controllers array of a new tab bar controller. You can see this
represented by the relationship arrow pointing from the Tab Bar
Controller on the canvas to the View Controller (Figure 4.7).
Additionally, Interface Builder knows to make the tab bar
controller the initial view controller for the storyboard.

--- Page 176 ---
Figure 4.7  Tab bar controller with one view
controller
A tab bar controller is not very useful with just one view
controller. Add the temperature conversion View Controller to the
Tab Bar Controller’s view controllers array: Control-drag from the

--- Page 177 ---
Tab Bar Controller to the View Controller with the temperature
conversion labels. From the Relationship Segue section in the
panel that appears, choose view controllers (Figure 4.8).
Figure 4.8  Adding a view controller to the tab bar
controller
Build and run the application. Tap on the two tabs at the
bottom to switch between the two view controllers. At the
moment, the tabs just say Item, which is not very helpful. In the
next section, you will update the tab bar items to make the tabs
more descriptive.
UITabBarController is itself a subclass of
UIViewController. A UITabBarController’s view
is a UIView with two primary subviews: the tab bar and the
view of the selected view controller (Figure 4.9).
Figure 4.9  UITabBarController diagram


--- Page 179 ---
TAB BAR ITEMS
Each tab on the tab bar can display a title and an image, and
each view controller maintains a tabBarItem property for
this purpose. When a view controller is contained by a
UITabBarController, its tab bar item appears in the tab
bar. Figure 4.10 shows an example of this relationship in
iPhone’s Health application.

--- Page 180 ---
Figure 4.10  UITabBarItem example
To make WorldTrotter’s tab bar more useful, you need to add a
few image files to your project for the tab bar items. In the
project navigator, open the Asset Catalog by opening
Assets.xcassets.
An asset is a set of files from which a single file will be
selected at runtime based on the user’s device configuration

--- Page 181 ---
(more on that at the end of this chapter). You are going to add
a ConvertIcon asset and a MapIcon asset, each with
images at two different resolutions.
In Finder, locate the 0 - Resources directory of the file
that you downloaded earlier. (www.bignerdranch.com/ 
solutions/ iOSProgramming7ed.zip). Find
ConvertIcon@2x.png, ConvertIcon@3x.png,
MapIcon@2x.png, and MapIcon@3x.png. Drag these
files into the images set list on the left side of the Asset
Catalog (Figure 4.11).

--- Page 182 ---
Figure 4.11  Adding images to the Asset Catalog
The tab bar item properties can be set either programmatically
or in a storyboard. Because you are configuring the WorldTrotter
application flow using a storyboard, that will be the easiest
place to set the tab bar item properties.
In Main.storyboard, locate the map view controller (it is
now labeled Item). Notice that a tab bar with the tab bar item in
it has been added to the interface, because the view controller
will be presented within a tab bar controller. This is very
useful when laying out your interface.

--- Page 183 ---
Select this tab bar item and open its attributes inspector. In the
Bar Item section, change the Title to Map and choose MapIcon from
the Image menu. You can also change the text of the tab bar
item by double-clicking on the text on the canvas. The tab bar
will be updated to reflect these values (Figure 4.12).
Figure 4.12  Map view controller’s tab bar item
Now find the temperature conversion view controller and
select its tab bar item. Set the Title to be Convert and the Image to
be ConvertIcon.
Let’s also change the first tab to be the temperature conversion
View Controller. The order of the tabs is determined by the order
of the view controllers within the tab bar controller’s
viewControllers array. You can change the order in a
storyboard by dragging the tabs at the bottom of the Tab Bar
Controller.
Find the Tab Bar Controller on the canvas. Drag the Convert tab to
be in the first position.
Build and run the application. The temperature conversion
view controller is now the first view controller that is
displayed, and the tab bar items at the bottom are more
descriptive (Figure 4.13). 

--- Page 184 ---
Figure 4.13  Tab bar items with labels and icons


--- Page 185 ---
Loaded and Appearing Views
Now that you have two view controllers, the lazy loading of
views mentioned earlier becomes more important. When the
application launches, the tab bar controller defaults to loading
the view of the first view controller in its array, which is the
temperature conversion view controller. The map view
controller’s view is not needed and will only be needed when
(or if) the user taps the tab to see it.
You can test this behavior for yourself. When a view controller
finishes loading its view, viewDidLoad() is called, and you
can override this method to make it print a message to the
console, allowing you to see that it was called.
You are going to add code to both view controllers. However,
there is no code currently associated with either view
controller, because everything has been configured using the
storyboard. Now that you want to add code to the view
controllers, you are going to create two view controller
subclasses and associate them with their respective interface.
Create a new Swift file (Command-N) and name it
MapViewController. In
MapViewController.swift, define a
UIViewController subclass named
MapViewController.
Listing 4.1  Creating a new view controller subclass
(MapViewController.swift)
import Foundation
import UIKit 
 
class MapViewController: UIViewController { 
 
}

--- Page 186 ---
Notice that you are importing the UIKit framework instead
of the Foundation framework. You briefly learned about
frameworks in Chapter 3. Frameworks allow code and
resources to be packaged up and shared across multiple
applications. You can write frameworks to share across your
own applications, or you can write frameworks to share with
other developers.
Also, Apple packages many frameworks with iOS. In the code
above, you need access to UIViewController, a class
defined in the UIKit framework. By importing the
framework in the source file, you allow this file to use
anything publicly declared within the framework.
With the MapViewController class declared, you can
now associate the interface you created in
Main.storyboard with this view controller class.
Open Main.storyboard and select the map view
controller, either in the document outline or by clicking the
yellow circle above the interface (Figure 4.14).
Figure 4.14  Selecting the map view controller


--- Page 187 ---
Open the identity inspector, which is the fourth tab in the
inspector area (Command-Option-4). At the top, find the
Custom Class section and change the Class to MapViewController
(Figure 4.15).

--- Page 188 ---
Figure 4.15  Changing the custom class
REFACTORING IN XCODE
The conversion view controller already has a Swift file that
was created for you when you created the project. Currently,
that corresponds with the ViewController class defined in
ViewController.swift. However, ViewController
is not a very descriptive name for a view controller that
manages the conversion between Fahrenheit and Celsius.
Having descriptive type names allows you to more easily
maintain your projects as they grow larger. You are going to
give this class a more descriptive name.
Open ViewController.swift and Control-click on
ViewController. From the menu that appears, select
Refactor → Rename.... Xcode will enter an editing mode where
you can see all the places in the project where this type is
being used. Change the type’s name to ConversionViewController
and notice how the name is updated in three places: the type
name, the filename, and the reference to the view controller in
the storyboard file (Figure 4.16).

--- Page 189 ---
Figure 4.16  Renaming in Xcode
When you are done renaming, click Rename to commit the
changes. That is it; Xcode makes renaming types seamless, and
the same tool can be used for variables and methods.
Now that the ConversionViewController and
MapViewController classes are associated with the
appropriate view controller on the canvas, you can add code to
both ConversionViewController and
MapViewController to print to the console when their
viewDidLoad() method is called.
In ConversionViewController.swift, update
viewDidLoad() to print a statement to the console.

--- Page 190 ---
Listing 4.2  Logging ConversionViewController’s
view loading (ConversionViewController.swift)
override func viewDidLoad() { 
    super.viewDidLoad() 
 
    print("ConversionViewController loaded its view.") 
} 
In MapViewController.swift, override the same
method.
Listing 4.3  Logging MapViewController’s view
loading (MapViewController.swift)
override func viewDidLoad() { 
    super.viewDidLoad() 
 
    print("MapViewController loaded its view.")
}
Build and run the application and check out the console
(Figure 4.17). If the console is not visible, open the Debug area
from the button in the top-right corner of Xcode or by using the
keyboard shortcut, Command-Shift-Y.

--- Page 191 ---
Figure 4.17  Displaying the console
The console reports that ConversionViewController
loaded its view right away. Tap MapViewController’s
tab, and the console will report that its view is now loaded.
At this point, both views have been loaded, so switching
between the tabs now will no longer trigger
viewDidLoad(). (Try it and see.)
ACCESSING SUBVIEWS
Often, you will want to do some extra initialization or
configuration of subviews defined in Interface Builder before they
appear to the user. So where can you access a subview? There
are two main options, depending on what you need to do. The
first option is the viewDidLoad() method that you
overrode to spot lazy loading. This method is called after the

--- Page 192 ---
view controller’s interface file is loaded, at which point all the
view controller’s outlets will reference the appropriate objects.
The second option is another UIViewController method,
viewWillAppear(_:). This method is called just before a
view controller’s view is added to the window.
Which should you choose? Override viewDidLoad() if the
configuration only needs to be done once during the run of the
app. Override viewWillAppear(_:) if you need the
configuration to be done each time the view controller’s view
appears onscreen.

--- Page 193 ---
Interacting with View Controllers and
Their Views
Let’s look at some methods that are called during the lifecycle
of a view controller and its view. Some of these methods you
have already seen, and some are new.
init(coder:) is the initializer for UIViewController instances
created from a storyboard.
When a view controller instance is created from a storyboard, its
init(coder:) is called once. You will learn more about this method
in Chapter 13.
init(nibName:bundle:) is the designated initializer for
UIViewController.
When a view controller instance is created without the use of a
storyboard, its init(nibName:bundle:) is called once. Note that
in some apps, you may end up creating several instances of the same
view controller class. This method is called once on each view controller
as it is created.
loadView() is overridden to create a view controller’s view
programmatically.
viewDidLoad() is overridden to configure views created by loading
an interface file. This method is called after the view of a view controller
is created.
viewWillAppear(_:) is overridden to configure the view
controller’s view each time it appears on screen.
This method and viewDidAppear(_:) are called every time your
view controller is moved onscreen. viewWillDisappear(_:) and
viewDidDisappear(_:) are called every time your view controller
is moved offscreen.
To preserve the benefits of lazy loading, you should never
access the view property of a view controller in
init(nibName:bundle:) or init(coder:). Asking
for the view in the initializer will cause the view controller to
load its view prematurely.

--- Page 194 ---
Bronze Challenge: Another Tab
Add a third tab to the WorldTrotter application. This tab should
show the Quiz interface that you created in Chapter 1. A few
notes to help you along:
In Chapter 1, the view controller’s name is ViewController.
Consider renaming it to QuizViewController.
You can drag the QuizViewController.swift file (or
ViewController.swift, if you did not rename it) from Finder into
the WorldTrotter application in Xcode. When you do, make sure you check
the Copy items if needed checkbox to make a copy of the file, rather than
moving it.
You can copy the view controller scene from the storyboard in the Quiz
project to the storyboard in the WorldTrotter project.

--- Page 195 ---
Silver Challenge: Different Background
Colors
Whenever the ConversionViewController is viewed,
update its background color to be a randomly generated color.
Hint: You will need to override viewWillAppear(_:) to
accomplish this.

--- Page 196 ---
5 
Programmatic Views
In this chapter, you will update WorldTrotter to create the view
for MapViewController programmatically (Figure 5.1).
In doing so, you will learn more about view controllers and
how to set up constraints and controls (such as UIButton
instances) programmatically.

--- Page 197 ---
Figure 5.1  MapViewController with programmatic
views
Currently, the view for MapViewController is defined in
the storyboard. The first step, then, is to remove this view from
the storyboard so you can instead create it programmatically.
In Main.storyboard, select the map view associated with
the map view controller and press Delete (Figure 5.2). As in

--- Page 198 ---
Chapter 4, this might be easier to do from the document
outline.

--- Page 199 ---
Figure 5.2  After deleting the view


--- Page 200 ---
Creating a View Programmatically
You learned in Chapter 4 that you create a view controller’s
view programmatically by overriding the
UIViewController method loadView().
Open MapViewController.swift and override
loadView() to create an instance of MKMapView and set it
as the view of the view controller. You will need a reference
to the map view later on, so create a property for it as well.
Listing 5.1  Creating a map view programmatically
(MapViewController.swift)
import UIKit 
import MapKit 
 
class MapViewController: UIViewController { 
 
    var mapView: MKMapView! 
 
    override func loadView() { 
        // Create a map view 
        mapView = MKMapView() 
 
        // Set it as *the* view of this view controller 
        view = mapView 
    } 
 
    override func viewDidLoad() { 
        super.viewDidLoad() 
 
        print("MapViewController loaded its view.") 
    } 
 
} 
When a view controller is created, its view property is nil.
If a view controller is asked for its view and its view is nil,
then the loadView() method is called.
Build and run the application and click the Map tab bar item to
switch views. Although the application looks the same, the
map view is being created programmatically instead of
through Interface Builder.

--- Page 202 ---
Programmatic Constraints
In Chapter 3, you learned about Auto Layout constraints and
how to add them using Interface Builder. In this section, you will
learn how to add constraints to an interface programmatically.
Apple recommends that you create and constrain your views in
Interface Builder whenever possible. However, if your views are
created in code, then you will need to constrain them
programmatically.
To learn about programmatic constraints, you are going to add
a UISegmentedControl to MapViewController’s
interface. A segmented control allows the user to choose
among a discrete set of options; you will allow the user to
switch between standard, hybrid, and satellite map types.
In MapViewController.swift, update loadView()
to add a segmented control to the interface. (Note that due to
page size restrictions we are showing the first declaration split
across two lines. You should enter each declaration on a single
line.)
Listing 5.2  Adding a segmented control
(MapViewController.swift)
override func loadView() { 
    // Create a map view 
    mapView = MKMapView() 
 
    // Set it as *the* view of this view controller 
    view = mapView 
 
    let segmentedControl 
            = UISegmentedControl(items: ["Standard", "Hybrid", 
"Satellite"]) 
    segmentedControl.backgroundColor = UIColor.systemBackground 
    segmentedControl.selectedSegmentIndex = 0 
 
    segmentedControl.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false 
    view.addSubview(segmentedControl) 
} 

--- Page 203 ---
The line of code regarding translating constraints has to do
with an older system for scaling interfaces – autoresizing
masks. Before Auto Layout was introduced, iOS applications
used autoresizing masks to allow views to scale for different-
sized screens at runtime.
Every view still has an autoresizing mask. By default, iOS
creates constraints that match the autoresizing mask and adds
them to the view. These translated constraints will often
conflict with explicit constraints in the layout and cause an
unsatisfiable constraints problem. The fix is to turn off this
default translation by setting the property
translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints
to false. (There is more about Auto Layout and autoresizing
masks at the end of this chapter.)
ANCHORS
When you work with Auto Layout programmatically, you use
anchors to create your constraints. Anchors are properties on a
view that correspond to attributes that you might want to
constrain to an anchor on another view. For example, you
might constrain the leading anchor of one view to the leading
anchor of another view. This would have the effect of the two
views’ leading edges being aligned.
Let’s create some constraints to do the following.
The top anchor of the segmented control should be equal to the top
anchor of its superview.
The leading anchor of the segmented control should be equal to the
leading anchor of its superview.
The trailing anchor of the segmented control should be equal to the
trailing anchor of its superview.
In MapViewController.swift, create these constraints
in loadView().

--- Page 204 ---
Listing 5.3  Adding layout constraints for the
segmented control (MapViewController.swift)
let segmentedControl 
        = UISegmentedControl(items: ["Standard", "Hybrid", "Satellite"]) 
segmentedControl.backgroundColor = UIColor.systemBackground 
segmentedControl.selectedSegmentIndex = 0 
 
segmentedControl.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false 
view.addSubview(segmentedControl) 
 
let topConstraint = 
        segmentedControl.topAnchor.constraint(equalTo: view.topAnchor)
let leadingConstraint = 
        segmentedControl.leadingAnchor.constraint(equalTo: 
view.leadingAnchor)
let trailingConstraint = 
        segmentedControl.trailingAnchor.constraint(equalTo: 
view.trailingAnchor)
Xcode will display an alert on each new line, indicating that
you have not used the variable you defined yet. You will
address this in a moment.
Anchors have a constraint(equalTo:) method that
creates a constraint between two anchors. There are a few
other constraint creation methods on NSLayoutAnchor,
including one that accepts a constant as an argument:
    func constraint(equalTo anchor: NSLayoutAnchor<AnchorType>, 
                    constant c: CGFloat) -> NSLayoutConstraint 
ACTIVATING CONSTRAINTS
You now have three NSLayoutConstraint instances.
However, these constraints will have no effect on the layout
until you explicitly activate them by setting their isActive
properties to true. This will resolve Xcode’s complaints.
In MapViewController.swift, activate the constraints
at the end of loadView().
Listing 5.4  Activating the programmatic layout
constraints (MapViewController.swift)

--- Page 205 ---
let topConstraint = 
    segmentedControl.topAnchor.constraint(equalTo: view.topAnchor) 
let leadingConstraint = 
    segmentedControl.leadingAnchor.constraint(equalTo: 
view.leadingAnchor) 
let trailingConstraint = 
    segmentedControl.trailingAnchor.constraint(equalTo: 
view.trailingAnchor) 
 
topConstraint.isActive = true
leadingConstraint.isActive = true
trailingConstraint.isActive = true
Constraints need to be added to the nearest common ancestor
of the views associated with the constraint. Figure 5.3 shows a
view hierarchy with the common ancestor for two views
highlighted.
Figure 5.3  Common ancestor


--- Page 206 ---
If a constraint is related to just one view (such as a width or
height constraint), then that view is considered the common
ancestor.
When the isActive property on a constraint is true, the
constraint will work its way up the hierarchy for the items to
find the common ancestor to add the constraint to. It will then
call the method addConstraint(_:) on the appropriate
view. Setting the isActive property is preferable to calling
addConstraint(_:) or removeConstraint(_:)
yourself.
Build and run the application and switch to the
MapViewController. The segmented control is now
pinned to the top, leading, and trailing edges of its superview
(Figure 5.4).
Figure 5.4  Segmented control added to the screen
Although the constraints are doing the right thing, the interface
does not look good. The segmented control is underlapping the
status bar and the sensor housing, and it would look better if
the segmented control was inset from the leading and trailing
edges of the screen. Let’s tackle the status bar and sensor
housing issue first.
LAYOUT GUIDES

--- Page 207 ---
In Chapter 3, we mentioned the safe area – an alignment
rectangle that represents the visible portion of your interface.
Programmatically, you access the safe area through a property
on view instances: safeAreaLayoutGuide. Using
safeAreaLayoutGuide will allow your content to not
underlap the status bar at the top of the screen or the tab bar at
the bottom of the screen.
Layout guides like safeAreaLayoutGuide expose
anchors that you can use to add constraints, such as:
topAnchor, bottomAnchor, heightAnchor, and
widthAnchor. Because you want the segmented control to
be under the status bar and sensor housing, you will constrain
the top anchor of the safe area layout guide to the top anchor
of the segmented control.
In MapViewController.swift, update the segmented
control’s constraints in loadView(). Make the segmented
control be 8 points below the top of the safe area layout guide.
Listing 5.5  Using the safe area layout guide of the
map view (MapViewController.swift)
let topConstraint = 
    segmentedControl.topAnchor.constraint(equalTo: view.topAnchor)
let topConstraint = 
    segmentedControl.topAnchor.constraint(equalTo: 
view.safeAreaLayoutGuide.topAnchor, 
                                          constant: 8) 
let leadingConstraint = 
    segmentedControl.leadingAnchor.constraint(equalTo: 
view.leadingAnchor) 
let trailingConstraint = 
    segmentedControl.trailingAnchor.constraint(equalTo: 
view.trailingAnchor) 
Build and run the application and switch to the
MapViewController. The segmented control now appears
below the status bar and sensor housing. And because you
used the safe area layout guide instead of a hardcoded
constant, the views will adapt based on the context they appear
in.

--- Page 208 ---
Now let’s update the segmented control so that it is inset from
the leading and trailing edges of its superview.
MARGINS
Although you could inset the segmented control using a
constant on the constraint, it is much better to use the margins
of the view controller’s view.
Every view has a layoutMargins property that denotes the
default spacing to use when laying out content. This property
is an instance of UIEdgeInsets, which you can think of as
a type of frame. When adding constraints, you will use the
layoutMarginsGuide, which exposes anchors that are
tied to the edges of the layoutMargins.
The primary advantage of using the margins is that the
margins can change depending on the device type (iPad or
iPhone) as well as the size of the device. Using the margins
will help your layout look good on any device.
Update the segmented control’s leading and trailing constraints
in loadView() to use the margins.
Listing 5.6  Using the layout margins of the map view
(MapViewController.swift)
let topConstraint = 
    segmentedControl.topAnchor.constraint(equalTo: 
view.safeAreaLayoutGuide.topAnchor, 
                                          constant: 8) 
let leadingConstraint = 
    segmentedControl.leadingAnchor.constraint(equalTo: 
view.leadingAnchor)
let trailingConstraint = 
    segmentedControl.trailingAnchor.constraint(equalTo: 
view.trailingAnchor) 
 
let margins = view.layoutMarginsGuide
let leadingConstraint = 
    segmentedControl.leadingAnchor.constraint(equalTo: 
margins.leadingAnchor)
let trailingConstraint = 
    segmentedControl.trailingAnchor.constraint(equalTo: 
margins.trailingAnchor) 
 
topConstraint.isActive = true 

--- Page 209 ---
leadingConstraint.isActive = true 
trailingConstraint.isActive = true 
Build and run the application again, switching to the map
view. The segmented control is now inset from the view’s
edges (Figure 5.5).
Figure 5.5  Segmented control with updated
constraints
EXPLICIT CONSTRAINTS
It is helpful to understand how the methods you have used
create constraints. NSLayoutConstraint has the
following initializer:
    convenience init(item view1: Any, 
                     attribute attr1: NSLayoutAttribute, 
                     relatedBy relation: NSLayoutRelation, 
                     toItem view2: Any?, 
                     attribute attr2: NSLayoutAttribute, 
                     multiplier: CGFloat, 
                     constant c: CGFloat) 
This initializer creates a single constraint using two layout
attributes of two view objects. The multiplier is the key to
creating a constraint based on a ratio. The constant is a fixed
number of points, similar to what you used in your spacing
constraints.
The layout attributes are defined as constants in the
NSLayoutConstraint class:

--- Page 210 ---
NSLayoutAttribute.left
NSLayoutAttribute.right
NSLayoutAttribute.leading
NSLayoutAttribute.trailing
NSLayoutAttribute.top
NSLayoutAttribute.bottom
NSLayoutAttribute.width
NSLayoutAttribute.height
NSLayoutAttribute.centerX
NSLayoutAttribute.centerY
NSLayoutAttribute.firstBaseline
NSLayoutAttribute.lastBaseline
There are additional attributes that handle the margins
associated with a view, such as
NSLayoutAttribute.leadingMargin.
Let’s consider a hypothetical constraint. Say you wanted the
width of the image view to be 1.5 times its height. You could
make that happen with the following code. (Do not type this
hypothetical constraint in your code! It will conflict with
others you already have.)
    let aspectConstraint = NSLayoutConstraint(item: imageView, 
                                              attribute: .width, 
                                              relatedBy: .equal, 
                                              toItem: imageView, 
                                              attribute: .height, 
                                              multiplier: 1.5, 
                                              constant: 0.0) 
To understand how this initializer works, think of this
constraint as the equation shown in Figure 5.6.

--- Page 211 ---
Figure 5.6  NSLayoutConstraint equation
You relate a layout attribute of one view to the layout attribute
of another view using a multiplier and a constant to define a
single constraint. 

--- Page 212 ---
Programmatic Controls
Now let’s update the segmented control to change the map
type when the user taps on a segment.
A UISegmentedControl is a subclass of UIControl.
You worked with another UIControl subclass in Chapter 1:
the UIButton class. Controls are responsible for calling
methods on their target in response to some event.
Control events are of type UIControl.Event. Here are a
few of the common control events that you will use:
UIControl.Event.touchDown
A touch down on the control.
UIControl.Event.touchUpInside
A touch down followed by a touch up while still
within the bounds of the control.
UIControl.Event.valueChanged
A touch that causes the value of the control to
change.
UIControl.Event.editingChanged
A touch that causes an editing change for a
UITextField.
The .touchDown type is rarely used; you used
.touchUpInside for the UIButton in Chapter 1 (it is the
default event when you Control-drag to connect actions in
Interface Builder), and you will see the .editingChanged
event in Chapter 6. For the segmented control, you will use the
.valueChanged event.

--- Page 213 ---
In MapViewController.swift, update loadView()
to add a target-action pair to the segmented control and
associate it with the .valueChanged event.
Listing 5.7  Attaching a target-action pair to the
segmented control (MapViewController.swift)
let segmentedControl 
        = UISegmentedControl(items: ["Standard", "Satellite", "Hybrid"]) 
segmentedControl.backgroundColor = UIColor.systemBackground 
segmentedControl.selectedSegmentIndex = 0 
 
segmentedControl.addTarget(self, 
                           action: #selector(mapTypeChanged(_:)), 
                           for: .valueChanged)
Next, implement the action method in
MapViewController that the event will trigger. This
method will check which segment was selected and update the
map accordingly.
(In the code above – and previously throughout this book – we
included existing code so that you could position new code
correctly. In the code below, we do not provide that context
because the position of the new code is not important so long
as it is within the curly braces for the type being implemented
– in this case, the MapViewController class. When a
code block includes all new code, like this one, we suggest
that you put it at the end of the type’s implementation, just
inside the final closing brace. In Chapter 15, you will see how
to easily navigate within an implementation file when your
files get longer and more complex.)
Listing 5.8  Implementing the mapTypeChanged(_:)
action (MapViewController.swift)
@objc func mapTypeChanged(_ segControl: UISegmentedControl) { 
    switch segControl.selectedSegmentIndex { 
    case 0: 
        mapView.mapType = .standard 
    case 1: 
        mapView.mapType = .hybrid 
    case 2: 
        mapView.mapType = .satellite 
    default: 
        break 

--- Page 214 ---
    }
}
The @objc annotation is needed to expose this method to the
Objective-C runtime. Recall that many iOS frameworks are
still written in Objective-C even though we interact with them
through Swift. Without this annotation, the segmented control
cannot see this action method.
Build and run the application. Change the selected segment
and the map will update.

--- Page 215 ---
Bronze Challenge: Points of Interest
Add a UILabel and UISwitch to the
MapViewController interface. The label should say Points
of Interest and the switch should toggle the display of points of
interest on the map (Figure 5.7). You will want to add a target-
action pair to the switch that updates the map’s
pointOfInterestFilter property.
Figure 5.7  Toggling points of interest
You may need to zoom in a bit before points of interest are
visible. To zoom in on the simulator, hold down the Option
key. Two small circles will appear on the simulator screen,
representing fingers. Click and drag the virtual fingers apart to
zoom in.

--- Page 216 ---
Silver Challenge: Rebuild the
Conversion Interface
Currently, the ConversionViewController interface is
being built in Interface Builder. Delete the interface in the
storyboard and re-create it programmatically in
ConversionViewController.swift. You will want to
override loadView() just as you did for
MapViewController.

--- Page 217 ---
For the More Curious:
NSAutoresizingMaskLayoutConstraint
As we mentioned earlier, before Auto Layout iOS applications
used another system for managing layout: autoresizing masks.
Each view had an autoresizing mask that constrained its
relationship with its superview, but this mask could not affect
relationships between sibling views.
By default, views create and add constraints based on their
autoresizing masks. However, these translated constraints
often conflict with the explicit constraints in your layout,
which results in an unsatisfiable constraints problem.
To see this happen, comment out the line in loadView()
that turns off the translation of autoresizing masks.
segmentedControl.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
// segmentedControl.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false 
view.addSubview(segmentedControl) 
Now the segmented control has a resizing mask that will be
translated into a constraint. Build and run the application and
navigate to the map interface. You will not like what you see.
The console will report the problem and its solution.
Unable to simultaneously satisfy constraints. 
Probably at least one of the constraints in the following list is one 
you don't 
want. Try this: (1) look at each constraint and try to figure out which 
you don't 
expect; (2) find the code that added the unwanted constraint or 
constraints and 
fix it. (Note: If you're seeing NSAutoresizingMaskLayoutConstraints that 
you don't 
understand, refer to the documentation for the UIView property 
translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints) 
( 
    "<NSAutoresizingMaskLayoutConstraint:0x7fb6b8e0ad00 
      h=--& v=--& H:[UISegmentedControl:0x7fb6b9897390(212)]>", 
    "<NSLayoutConstraint:0x7fb6b9975350 
UISegmentedControl:0x7fb6b9897390.leading 
      == 
UILayoutGuide:0x7fb6b9972640'UIViewLayoutMarginsGuide'.leading>", 
    "<NSLayoutConstraint:0x7fb6b9975460 
UISegmentedControl:0x7fb6b9897390.trailing 
      == 

--- Page 218 ---
UILayoutGuide:0x7fb6b9972640'UIViewLayoutMarginsGuide'.trailing>", 
    "<NSLayoutConstraint:0x7fb6b8e0b370 'UIView-Encapsulated-Layout-
Width' 
      H:[MKMapView:0x7fb6b8d237c0(0)]>", 
    "<NSLayoutConstraint:0x7fb6b9972020 'UIView-leftMargin-guide-
constraint' 
      H:|-(0)-[UILayoutGuide:0x7fb6b9972640'UIViewLayoutMarginsGuide']
(LTR) 
      (Names: '|':MKMapView:0x7fb6b8d237c0 )>", 
    "<NSLayoutConstraint:0x7fb6b9974f50 'UIView-rightMargin-guide-
constraint' 
      H:[UILayoutGuide:0x7fb6b9972640'UIViewLayoutMarginsGuide']-(0)-|
(LTR) 
      (Names: '|':MKMapView:0x7fb6b8d237c0 )>" 
) 
 
Will attempt to recover by breaking constraint 
<NSLayoutConstraint:0x7fb6b9975460 
UISegmentedControl:0x7fb6b9897390.trailing 
  == UILayoutGuide:0x7fb6b9972640'UIViewLayoutMarginsGuide'.trailing> 
 
Make a symbolic breakpoint at UIViewAlertForUnsatisfiableConstraints to 
catch 
this in the debugger. 
The methods in the UIConstraintBasedLayoutDebugging category on UIView 
listed 
in <UIKit/UIView.h> may also be helpful. 
Let’s go over this output. Auto Layout is reporting that it is
Unable to simultaneously satisfy
constraints. This happens when a view hierarchy has
constraints that conflict.
Then, the console spits out some handy tips and a list of all
constraints that are involved, with their descriptions. Let’s look
at the format of one of these constraints more closely.
<NSLayoutConstraint:0x7fb6b9975350 
UISegmentedControl:0x7fb6b9897390.leading 
  == UILayoutGuide:0x7fb6b9972640'UIViewLayoutMarginsGuide'.leading> 
This description indicates that the constraint located at
memory address 0x7fb6b9975350 is setting the leading
edge of the UISegmentedControl (at
0x7fb6b9897390) equal to the leading edge of the margin
of the UILayoutGuide (at 0x7fb6b9972640).
Five of the affected constraints are instances of
NSLayoutConstraint. One, however, is an instance of
NSAutoresizingMaskLayoutConstraint. This
constraint is the product of the translation of the image view’s
autoresizing mask.

--- Page 219 ---
Finally, Auto Layout tells you how it is going to solve the
problem by listing the conflicting constraint that it will ignore.
Unfortunately, it chooses poorly and ignores one of your
explicit instances of NSLayoutConstraint instead of the
NSAutoresizingMaskLayoutConstraint. This is
why your interface looks the way it does.
The note before the constraints are listed is very helpful: The
NSAutoresizingMaskLayoutConstraint needs to be
removed. Better yet, you can prevent this constraint from
being added in the first place by explicitly disabling translation
in loadView(): 
// segmentedControl.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false
segmentedControl.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false 
view.addSubview(segmentedControl) 

--- Page 220 ---
6 
Text Input and Delegation
WorldTrotter looks good, and its map is useful, but so far the
temperature conversion view only converts a single, hardcoded
value. In this chapter, you are going to add an instance of
UITextField to ConversionViewController. The
text field will allow the user to type in a temperature in
degrees Fahrenheit that will then be converted to degrees
Celsius and displayed on the interface (Figure 6.1).
Figure 6.1  WorldTrotter with a UITextField


--- Page 222 ---
Text Editing
The first thing you are going to do is add a UITextField to
the interface and set up the constraints for that text field. This
text field will replace the top label in the interface that
currently has the text 212.
Open Main.storyboard. Select the top label and press the
Delete key to remove this subview. Select the other four labels
in this view. The constraints for all these labels will turn red
because they were all directly or indirectly anchored to that top
label (Figure 6.2). That is OK; you will fix them shortly.

--- Page 223 ---
Figure 6.2  Ambiguous frames for the labels
Open the library and drag a Text Field to the top of the canvas
where the label you deleted was previously placed.
Now set up the constraints for this text field. With the text
field selected, open the Align menu and align the view

--- Page 224 ---
Horizontally in Container with a constant of 0 (Figure 6.3). Click
Add 1 Constraint.
Figure 6.3  Centering the text field in the container
Now open the Add New Constraints menu. Give the text field a
top edge constraint of 8 points and a bottom edge constraint of
8 points (Figure 6.4). Add these two constraints.

--- Page 225 ---
Figure 6.4  Constraining the top and bottom of the
text field
Finally, select the text field and the four labels below it. Open
the Align menu, select Horizontal Centers with a constant of 0 and
click Add 4 Constraints (Figure 6.5).

--- Page 226 ---
Figure 6.5  Aligning the text field
Next, customize some of the text field properties. Open the
attributes inspector for the text field and make the following
changes:
Set the text color (from the Color menu) to burnt orange (hex color
E15829).
Set the font size to System 70.
Set the Alignment to centered.
Set the placeholder text to be value. This is what will be displayed when
the user has not entered any text.
Set the Border Style to be none, which is the first element of the
segmented control (with the dotted lines).
Uncheck Adjust to Fit under Min Font Size.
The attributes inspector for your text field should look like
Figure 6.6.

--- Page 227 ---
Figure 6.6  Text field attributes inspector
Because the text field’s size changed to accommodate the font
size, the other views on the canvas were automatically
repositioned, based on their constraints (Figure 6.7).

--- Page 228 ---
Figure 6.7  The automatically updated frames
Build and run the application. Tap the text field and enter some
text. If you do not see the keyboard, click the simulator’s
Hardware menu and select Keyboard → Toggle Software Keyboard or
use the keyboard shortcut Command-K. By default, the
simulator treats your computer’s keyboard as a Bluetooth
keyboard connected to the simulator. This is not usually what
you want. Instead, you want the simulator to mimic an iOS
device running without any accessories attached by using the
onscreen keyboard.

--- Page 229 ---
KEYBOARD ATTRIBUTES
When a text field is tapped, the keyboard automatically slides
up onto the screen. (You will see why this happens later in this
chapter.) The keyboard’s appearance is determined by a set of
the UITextField’s properties called the
UITextInputTraits. One of these properties is the type
of keyboard that is displayed. For this application, you want to
use the decimal pad.
In the attributes inspector for the text field, find the attribute
named Keyboard Type and choose Decimal Pad. In the same
section, you can see some of the other text input traits that you
can customize for the keyboard. Change both Correction and
Spell Checking to No (Figure 6.8).
Figure 6.8  Keyboard text input traits


--- Page 230 ---
Build and run the application. Tapping the text field will now
reveal the decimal pad.
The next step of the project will be to update the Celsius label
when text is typed into the text field. You will write some code
in the next section to accomplish this.
RESPONDING TO TEXT FIELD CHANGES
You have worked with UIControl subclasses already. In
Chapter 1, you used a button to increment the current question
and show the associated answer. In Chapter 5, you used a
segmented control to change the map type. Text fields are
another control and can send an event when the text changes.
To get this all working, you will need to create an outlet to the
Celsius text label and create an action for the text field to call
when the text changes.
Open ConversionViewController.swift and define
this outlet and action. For now, the label will be updated with
whatever text the user types into the text field.
Listing 6.1  Adding an outlet and action
(ConversionViewController.swift)
class ConversionViewController: UIViewController { 
 
    @IBOutlet var celsiusLabel: UILabel! 
 
    override func viewDidLoad() { 
        super.viewDidLoad() 
 
        print("ConversionViewController loaded its view.") 
    } 
 
    @IBAction func fahrenheitFieldEditingChanged(_ textField: 
UITextField) { 
        celsiusLabel.text = textField.text 
    } 
} 
Open Main.storyboard to make these connections. The
outlet will be connected just as you did in Chapter 1. Control-
drag from the conversion view controller to the Celsius label

--- Page 231 ---
(the one that currently says 100) and connect it to the
celsiusLabel.
Connecting the action will be a little different than what you
have seen so far. In both Chapter 1 and Chapter 5, you
Control-dragged from the control to the view controller to
connect the action. This associates the control’s default event
to the target. The default event for buttons is
.touchUpInside, and the default event for segmented
controls is .valueChanged. In both cases, this was the
event that you wanted.
The default event for text fields is .editingDidBegin,
which is triggered when the field is tapped. This is not the
event you are interested in. Instead, you are interested in the
.editingChanged event, which is triggered when a
change is made to the field. Because you do not want the
default event, you will not be able to use the Control-drag
approach.
Instead, select the text field on the canvas and open its
connections inspector in the inspector area (the right-most tab,
or Command-Option-7). The connections inspector allows you
to make connections and see what connections have already
been made.
You are going to have changes to the text field trigger the
action you defined in ConversionViewController. In
the connections inspector, locate the Sent Events section and the
Editing Changed event. Click and drag from the circle to the right
of Editing Changed to the conversion view controller and click
the fahrenheitFieldEditingChanged: action in the pop-up menu
(Figure 6.9).

--- Page 232 ---
Figure 6.9  Connecting the editing changed event
Build and run the application. Tap the text field and type some
numbers. The Celsius label will mimic the text that is typed in.
Now delete the text in the text field and notice that the label
seems to go away. A label with no text has an intrinsic content
width and height of 0. Since the label has no explicit height
constraint, its intrinsic height of 0 is used, and the labels below
it move up. Let’s fix this issue.
In ConversionViewController.swift, update
fahrenheitFieldEditingChanged(_:) to display
??? if the text field is empty.
Listing 6.2  Updating the action
(ConversionViewController.swift)

--- Page 233 ---
@IBAction func fahrenheitFieldEditingChanged(_ textField: UITextField) { 
    celsiusLabel.text = textField.text 
 
    if let text = textField.text, !text.isEmpty { 
        celsiusLabel.text = text 
    } else { 
        celsiusLabel.text = "???" 
    } 
} 
You can validate multiple conditions within an if statement
using a comma to separate the conditions; this acts as an
“and.” If the text field has text and that text is not empty, it
will be set on the celsiusLabel. If either of those
conditions are not true, then the celsiusLabel will be
given the string ???.
Build and run the application. Add some text, delete it, and
confirm that the celsiusLabel is populated with ??? when
the text field is empty. 
DISMISSING THE KEYBOARD
Currently, there is no way to dismiss the keyboard. Let’s add
that functionality. One common way of doing this is by
detecting when the user taps the Return key and using that
action to dismiss the keyboard; you will use this approach in
Chapter 12. Because the decimal pad does not have a Return
key, in this case you will have a tap on the background view
trigger the dismissal.
When the text field is tapped, the method
becomeFirstResponder() is called on it. This is the
method that, among other things, causes the keyboard to
appear. To dismiss the keyboard, you call the method
resignFirstResponder() on the text field. You will
learn more about these methods in Chapter 12.
For WorldTrotter, you will need an outlet to the text field and a
method that is triggered when the background view is tapped.
This method will call resignFirstResponder() on the
text field outlet. Let’s take care of the code first.

--- Page 234 ---
Open ConversionViewController.swift and declare
an outlet near the top to reference the text field.
Listing 6.3  Adding a new outlet
(ConversionViewController.swift)
@IBOutlet var celsiusLabel: UILabel! 
@IBOutlet var textField: UITextField!
Now implement an action method that will dismiss the
keyboard when called.
Listing 6.4  Adding an action to dismiss the
keyboard (ConversionViewController.swift)
@IBAction func dismissKeyboard(_ sender: UITapGestureRecognizer) { 
    textField.resignFirstResponder()
}
Two things are still needed: The textField outlet needs to
be connected in the storyboard file, and you need a way of
triggering the dismissKeyboard(_:) method you added.
To take care of the first item, open Main.storyboard and
select the conversion view controller. Control-drag from the
conversion view controller to the text field on the canvas and
connect it to the textField outlet.
Now you need a way of triggering the method you
implemented. You will use a gesture recognizer to
accomplish this.
A gesture recognizer is a subclass of
UIGestureRecognizer that detects a specific touch
sequence and calls an action on its target when that sequence is
detected. There are gesture recognizers that detect taps,
swipes, long presses, and more. In this chapter, you will use a
UITapGestureRecognizer to detect when the user taps
the background view.

--- Page 235 ---
In Main.storyboard, find Tap Gesture Recognizer in the
library. Drag this object onto the background view for the
conversion view controller (Figure 6.10). You will see a
reference to this gesture recognizer in the scene dock, the row
of icons above the scene in the canvas.
Figure 6.10  Adding the tap gesture recognizer to the
background view
Control-drag from the gesture recognizer in the scene dock to
the conversion view controller and connect it to the
dismissKeyboard: method (Figure 6.11).

--- Page 236 ---
Figure 6.11  Connecting the gesture recognizer
action
Build and run the application. Tap the text field to present the
keyboard, then tap the background view to dismiss it.

--- Page 237 ---
Implementing the Temperature
Conversion
With the basics of the interface wired up, let’s implement the
conversion from Fahrenheit to Celsius. You are going to store
the current Fahrenheit value and compute the Celsius value
whenever the text field changes.
In ConversionViewController.swift, add a
property for the Fahrenheit value. This will be an optional
measurement for temperature, a
Measurement<UnitTemperature>?. (Do not worry
about the strange syntax of the measurement type; it is a
generic type, and you will be learning more about them
later.)
Listing 6.5  Adding a variable to store the
temperature (ConversionViewController.swift)
@IBOutlet var celsiusLabel: UILabel! 
@IBOutlet var textField: UITextField! 
 
var fahrenheitValue: Measurement<UnitTemperature>?
This property is optional because the user might not have
typed in a number. (Earlier, you used optional binding to
manage the same issue for the Celsius label.)
Now, add a computed property for the Celsius value.
Listing 6.6  Adding a computed property for Celsius
temperature (ConversionViewController.swift)
var fahrenheitValue: Measurement<UnitTemperature>? 
var celsiusValue: Measurement<UnitTemperature>? { 
    if let fahrenheitValue = fahrenheitValue { 
        return fahrenheitValue.converted(to: .celsius) 
    } else { 
        return nil 
    }
}

--- Page 238 ---
If there is a Fahrenheit value, it will be converted to the
equivalent value in Celsius. Otherwise, nil is returned.
Any time the Fahrenheit value changes, the Celsius label needs
to be updated. Take care of that next.
Add a method to ConversionViewController that
updates the celsiusLabel.
Listing 6.7  Updating the Celsius label
(ConversionViewController.swift)
func updateCelsiusLabel() { 
    if let celsiusValue = celsiusValue { 
        celsiusLabel.text = "\(celsiusValue.value)" 
    } else { 
        celsiusLabel.text = "???" 
    }
}
This method should be called whenever the Fahrenheit value
changes. To do this, you will use a property observer, which
is a chunk of code that is called whenever a property’s value
changes.
A property observer is declared using curly braces
immediately after the property declaration. Inside the braces,
you declare your observer using either willSet or didSet,
depending on whether you want it to run immediately before
or immediately after the property value changes, respectively.
(Note that property observers are not triggered when the
property value is changed from within an initializer.)
Add a property observer to fahrenheitValue that will be
called after the property value changes.
Listing 6.8  Adding a property observer to
fahrenheitValue
(ConversionViewController.swift)

--- Page 239 ---
var fahrenheitValue: Measurement<UnitTemperature>? { 
    didSet { 
        updateCelsiusLabel() 
    }
}
With that logic in place, you can now update the Fahrenheit
value when the text field changes (which, in turn, will trigger
an update of the Celsius label).
In fahrenheitFieldEditingChanged(_:), delete
your earlier non-converting implementation and instead update
the Fahrenheit value.
Listing 6.9  Updating
fahrenheitFieldEditingChanged(_:)
(ConversionViewController.swift)
@IBAction func fahrenheitFieldEditingChanged(_ textField: UITextField) { 
 
    if let text = textField.text, !text.isEmpty { 
        celsiusLabel.text = text 
    } else { 
        celsiusLabel.text = "???" 
    } 
 
    if let text = textField.text, let value = Double(text) { 
        fahrenheitValue = Measurement(value: value, unit: .fahrenheit) 
    } else { 
        fahrenheitValue = nil 
    } 
} 
If there is text in the text field and that text can be represented
by a Double, then the Fahrenheit value is set to a
Measurement initialized with that Double value. For
example, if the text field contains 3.14, then
fahrenheitValue is set to a value of 3.14. But if the text
field contains something like three or 1.2.3, then the initial
checks fail. In this case, the Fahrenheit value is set to nil.
Build and run the application. The conversion between
Fahrenheit and Celsius works great – so long as you enter a
valid number. (It also shows more digits than you probably
want it to, which you will address in a moment.)

--- Page 240 ---
It would be nice if the celsiusLabel updated when the
application first launches, instead of showing the value 100.
Override viewDidLoad() to set the initial value, similar to
what you did in Chapter 1.
Listing 6.10  Overriding viewDidLoad()
(ConversionViewController.swift)
override func viewDidLoad() { 
    super.viewDidLoad() 
 
    print("ConversionViewController loaded its view.") 
 
    updateCelsiusLabel() 
} 
Build and run again to see the effect of this change.
In the remainder of this chapter, you will update WorldTrotter to
address two issues: You will format the Celsius value to show
a precision up to one fractional digit, and you will not allow
the user to type in more than one decimal separator. There are
a couple of other issues with your app, but you will focus on
these two for now. One of the other issues will be presented as
a challenge at the end of this chapter.
Let’s start with updating the precision of the Celsius value.
NUMBER FORMATTERS
Although the temperature conversion currently works, it is not
very readable. This is because you are not truncating or
rounding the fractional part of the Celsius value. For example,
converting 78 degrees Fahrenheit might display the Celsius
value as 25.555555555557987. To address this, you will use a
number formatter to limit the number of fractional digits.
Number formatters are instances of NumberFormatter that
customize the display of a number. There are formatters for
dates, energy, mass, length, measurements, and so on.

--- Page 241 ---
Create a constant number formatter in
ConversionViewController.swift.
Listing 6.11  Adding a number formatter as a
property (ConversionViewController.swift)
let numberFormatter: NumberFormatter = { 
    let nf = NumberFormatter() 
    nf.numberStyle = .decimal 
    nf.minimumFractionDigits = 0 
    nf.maximumFractionDigits = 1 
    return nf
}()
You are using a closure to instantiate the number formatter. A
NumberFormatter is created with the .decimal style,
configured to display no more than one fractional digit. You
will learn more about this syntax for declaring properties in
Chapter 13.
Now modify updateCelsiusLabel() to use the
formatter.
Listing 6.12  Updating updateCelsiusLabel()
(ConversionViewController.swift)
func updateCelsiusLabel() { 
    if let celsiusValue = celsiusValue { 
        celsiusLabel.text = "\(celsiusValue.value)" 
        celsiusLabel.text = 
            numberFormatter.string(from: NSNumber(value: 
celsiusValue.value)) 
    } else { 
        celsiusLabel.text = "???" 
    } 
} 
Build and run the application. Play around with Fahrenheit
values to see the formatter at work. You should never see more
than one fractional digit in the Celsius label.
In the next section, you will update the application to accept a
maximum of one decimal separator in the text field. To do this,
you will use a common iOS design pattern called delegation.

--- Page 242 ---
Delegation
Control events – such as .touchUpInside and
.valueChanged – provide controls with a convenient,
predefined list of triggers to call their action methods on their
targets. But sometimes you want a control to report something
that is not one of its predefined events. To have a control send
a custom message to a listening object, you can use the
delegation pattern.
Delegation is an object-oriented approach to callbacks. A
callback is a function that is supplied in advance of an event
and is called every time the event occurs. Some objects need to
make a callback for more than one event. For instance, the text
field needs to “call back” when the user enters text as well as
when the user hits the Return key (depending on the keyboard
type).
However, there is no built-in way for two (or more) callback
functions to coordinate and share information. This is the
problem addressed by delegation – you supply a single
delegate to receive all the event-related callbacks for a
particular object. This delegate object can then store,
manipulate, act on, and relay the information from the
callbacks as needed.
When the user types into a text field, that text field will ask its
delegate if it wants to accept the changes that the user has
made. For WorldTrotter, you want to deny that change if the user
attempts to enter a second decimal separator. The delegate for
the text field will be the instance of
ConversionViewController.
CONFORMING TO A PROTOCOL

--- Page 243 ---
The first step is enabling instances of the
ConversionViewController class to perform the role
of UITextField delegate by declaring that
ConversionViewController conforms to the
UITextFieldDelegate protocol.
For every delegate role, there is a corresponding protocol that
declares the methods that an object can call on its delegate.
You cannot create instances of a protocol; it is simply a list of
method and property requirements. Implementation of the
requirements is left to each type that conforms to the protocol.
Also, not all protocols are for delegate roles; you will see an
example of a different kind of protocol in Chapter 13. In fact,
while the protocols we use in this book are part of the iOS
SDK, you can also write your own protocols.
Protocols used for delegation are called delegate protocols,
and the naming convention for a delegate protocol is the name
of the delegating class plus the word Delegate.
The UITextFieldDelegate protocol looks like this:
    protocol UITextFieldDelegate: NSObjectProtocol { 
        optional func textFieldShouldBeginEditing(_ textField: 
UITextField) -> Bool 
        optional func textFieldDidBeginEditing(_ textField: UITextField) 
        optional func textFieldShouldEndEditing(_ textField: 
UITextField) -> Bool 
        optional func textFieldDidEndEditing(_ textField: UITextField) 
        optional func textField(_ textField: UITextField, 
                                shouldChangeCharactersIn range: NSRange, 
                                replacementString string: String) -> 
Bool 
        optional func textFieldShouldClear(_ textField: UITextField) -> 
Bool 
        optional func textFieldShouldReturn(_ textField: UITextField) -> 
Bool 
    } 
Like all protocols, UITextFieldDelegate is declared
with protocol followed by its name,
UITextFieldDelegate. The NSObjectProtocol
after the colon indicates that UITextFieldDelegate
inherits all the methods in the NSObject protocol. The

--- Page 244 ---
methods specific to UITextFieldDelegate are declared
next.
By default, methods declared in a protocol must be
implemented; however, the protocol’s author may provide a
default implementation for a method, effectively making it
optional. For the UITextFieldDelegate protocol, all its
methods are optional, so you can conform to the protocol
without implementing any of its methods. This is typically true
of delegate protocols. In Chapter 9, you will see a protocol that
requires implementing methods.
In a class’s declaration, the protocols that the class conforms to
are in a comma-delimited list following the superclass (if there
is one). In ConversionViewController.swift,
declare that ConversionViewController conforms to
the UITextFieldDelegate protocol.
Listing 6.13  Making ConversionViewController
conform to UITextFieldDelegate
(ConversionViewController.swift)
class ConversionViewController: UIViewController, UITextFieldDelegate { 
USING A DELEGATE
Now that you have declared
ConversionViewController as conforming to the
UITextFieldDelegate protocol, you can set the
delegate property of the text field.
Open Main.storyboard and Control-drag from the text
field to the conversion view controller. Choose delegate from
the panel to connect the delegate property of the text field
to the ConversionViewController.
Next, you are going to implement the
UITextFieldDelegate method that you are interested in

--- Page 245 ---
–
textField(_:shouldChangeCharactersIn:repla
cementString:). Because the text field calls this method
on its delegate, you must implement it in
ConversionViewController.swift.
In ConversionViewController.swift, implement
textField(_:shouldChangeCharactersIn:repla
cementString:) to print the text field’s current text as
well as the replacement string. For now, just return true from
this method.
Listing 6.14  Adding a delegate method
(ConversionViewController.swift)
func textField(_ textField: UITextField, 
               shouldChangeCharactersIn range: NSRange, 
               replacementString string: String) -> Bool { 
 
    print("Current text: \(String(describing: textField.text))") 
    print("Replacement text: \(string)") 
 
    return true
}
Notice that Xcode was able to autocomplete this method
because ConversionViewController conforms to
UITextFieldDelegate. It is a good idea to declare a
protocol before implementing methods from the protocol so
that Xcode can offer this support.
Build and run the application. Enter several digits in the text
field and watch Xcode’s console (Figure 6.12). It prints out the
current text of the text field as well as the replacement string.

--- Page 246 ---
Figure 6.12  Printing to the console
Consider this “current text” and “replacement text”
information in light of your goal of preventing multiple
decimal separators. If the existing string has a decimal
separator and the replacement string has a decimal separator,
the change should be rejected.
In ConversionViewController.swift, update
textField(_:shouldChangeCharactersIn:repla
cementString:) to use this logic. 
Listing 6.15  Updating
textField(_:shouldChangeCharactersIn:repla

--- Page 247 ---
cementString:)
(ConversionViewController.swift)
func textField(_ textField: UITextField, 
               shouldChangeCharactersIn range: NSRange, 
               replacementString string: String) -> Bool { 
 
    print("Current text: \(textField.text)") 
    print("Replacement text: \(string)") 
 
    return true 
 
    let existingTextHasDecimalSeparator = textField.text?.range(of: ".") 
    let replacementTextHasDecimalSeparator = string.range(of: ".") 
 
    if existingTextHasDecimalSeparator != nil, 
        replacementTextHasDecimalSeparator != nil { 
        return false 
    } else { 
        return true 
    } 
} 
Build and run the application. Attempt to enter multiple
decimal separators; the application will reject the second
decimal separator that you enter.
MORE ON PROTOCOLS
In the UITextFieldDelegate protocol, there are two
kinds of methods: methods that handle information updates
and methods that handle requests for input. For example, the
text field’s delegate implements the
textFieldDidBeginEditing(_:) method if it wants
to know when the user taps on the text field.
On the other hand,
textField(_:shouldChangeCharactersIn:repla
cementString:) is a request for input. A text field calls
this method on its delegate to ask whether the replacement
string should be accepted or rejected. The method returns a
Bool, which is the delegate’s answer.

--- Page 248 ---
Bronze Challenge: Disallow Alphabetic
Characters
Currently, the user can enter alphabetic characters either by
using a Bluetooth keyboard or by pasting copied text into the
text field. Fix this issue. Hint: You will want to use the
CharacterSet type.

--- Page 249 ---
Silver Challenge: Displaying the User’s
Region
Display and zoom in on the user’s location on the map.
MKMapView has a mechanism for displaying a blue dot
annotation on the map, but there is no built-in way to zoom in
on that location. To get this to work, you will need to do a few
things:
Add a “Privacy – Location When In Use Usage Description” key to your
application’s Info.plist. This key is associated with a description
that tells your users why you will be accessing their location
information. See Chapter 15 for another example of adding a privacy
description to your applications.
Ask the user for permission to find their location. You will need to add a
property to MapViewController for a CLLocationManager
instance and call requestWhenInUseAuthorization() when
the MapViewController’s view appears. This will present an alert
to the user with the usage description requesting their permission to get
their location.
Use the user’s location to zoom in on their map region. To do this, assign
the map’s delegate property. Look through the documentation for
MKMapViewDelegate and find the appropriate callback to get
informed when the user’s location has been updated. Implement this
method to set the region on the map, either directly or using
setRegion(_:animated:).

--- Page 250 ---
7 
Internationalization and
Localization
The appeal of iOS is global – iOS users live in many countries
and speak many languages. You can ensure that your
application is ready for a global audience through the
processes of internationalization and localization.
Internationalization is making sure your native cultural
information (like language, currency, date format, number
format, etc.) is not hardcoded into your application.
Localization is the process of providing the appropriate data in
your application based on the user’s Language and Region
settings.
You can find these settings in the iOS Settings application
(Figure 7.1). Select the General row and then the Language &
Region row.

--- Page 251 ---
Figure 7.1  Language and region settings
Here, users can set their region, like United States or United
Kingdom. (Why does Apple use “region” instead of “country”?

--- Page 252 ---
Some countries have more than one region with different
settings. Scroll through the options in Region to see for
yourself.)
Apple makes internationalization and localization relatively
simple. An application that takes advantage of the localization
APIs does not even need to be recompiled to be distributed in
other languages or regions. (By the way, because
“internationalization” and “localization” are long words, in the
world of software development they are sometimes
abbreviated as i18n and L10n, respectively.)
In this chapter, you will first internationalize WorldTrotter and
then localize it into Spanish (Figure 7.2).

--- Page 253 ---
Figure 7.2  Localized WorldTrotter


--- Page 254 ---
Internationalization
First, you will use the NumberFormatter and NSNumber
classes to internationalize the
ConversionViewController.
FORMATTERS
In Chapter 6, you used an instance of NumberFormatter to
set the text of the Celsius label in
ConversionViewController. NumberFormatter
has a locale property, which is set to the device’s current
locale. Whenever you use a NumberFormatter to create a
number, it checks its locale property and sets the format
accordingly. So the text of the Celsius label has already been
internationalized.
The Locale type knows how different regions display
symbols, dates, and decimals and whether they use the metric
system. An instance of Locale represents one region’s
settings for these variables. When you access the current
property on Locale, the instance of Locale that represents
the user’s region setting is returned. Once you have that
instance of Locale, you can ask it questions, like, “Does this
region use the metric system?” or, “What is the currency
symbol for this region?”
    let currentLocale = Locale.current 
    let isMetric = currentLocale.usesMetricSystem 
    let currencySymbol = currentLocale.currencySymbol 
Even though the Celsius label is already internationalized,
there is still a problem with it. Change the system region to
Spain to see. Select the active scheme pop-up and select Edit
Scheme... (Figure 7.3).

--- Page 255 ---
Figure 7.3  Edit scheme
Make sure that Run is selected on the lefthand side and then
select the Options tab at the top. In the Application Region pop-up,
select Europe and then Spain (Figure 7.4). Finally, Close the
active scheme window.

--- Page 256 ---
Figure 7.4  Selecting a different region
Build and run the application. On the
ConversionViewController, tap the text field and
make sure the software keyboard is visible. You may already
notice one difference in the keyboard: In Spain, the decimal
separator is a comma instead of a period (and the thousands
separator is a period instead of a comma), so the number
written 123,456.789 in the United States would be written
123.456,789 in Spain.

--- Page 257 ---
Attempt to type in multiple decimal separators (the comma)
and notice that the application happily allows it. Whoops!
Your code for disallowing multiple decimal separators checks
for a period instead of using a locale-specific decimal
separator. Let’s fix that.
Open ConversionViewController.swift and update
textField(_:shouldChangeCharactersIn:repla
cementString:) to use the locale-specific decimal
separator.
Listing 7.1  Internationalizing the decimal separator
(ConversionViewController.swift)
func textField(_ textField: UITextField, 
               shouldChangeCharactersIn range: NSRange, 
               replacementString string: String) -> Bool { 
 
    let existingTextHasDecimalSeparator = textField.text?.range(of: ".") 
    let replacementTextHasDecimalSeparator = string.range(of: ".") 
 
    let currentLocale = Locale.current 
    let decimalSeparator = currentLocale.decimalSeparator ?? "." 
 
    let existingTextHasDecimalSeparator 
            = textField.text?.range(of: decimalSeparator) 
    let replacementTextHasDecimalSeparator = string.range(of: 
decimalSeparator) 
 
    if existingTextHasDecimalSeparator != nil, 
        replacementTextHasDecimalSeparator != nil { 
        return false 
    } else { 
        return true 
    } 
} 
Build and run the application. The application no longer
allows you to type in multiple decimal separators, and it does
this in a way that is independent of the user’s region choice.
But there is still a problem. If you type in a number with a
comma decimal separator, the conversion to Celsius is not
happening – the Celsius label displays “???”. What is going on
here? In fahrenheitFieldEditingChanged(_:),
you are using an initializer for the Double type that takes in a
string as its argument. This initializer does not know how to

--- Page 258 ---
handle a string that uses something other than a period for its
decimal separator.
Let’s fix this code using the NumberFormatter class. In
ConversionViewController.swift, update
fahrenheitFieldEditingChanged(_:) to convert
the text field’s string into a number in a locale-independent
way.
Listing 7.2  Internationalizing the temperature entry
(ConversionViewController.swift)
@IBAction func fahrenheitFieldEditingChanged(_ textField: UITextField) { 
 
    if let text = textField.text, let value = Double(text) { 
        fahrenheitValue = Measurement(value: value, unit: .fahrenheit) 
    if let text = textField.text, let number = 
numberFormatter.number(from: text) { 
        fahrenheitValue = Measurement(value: number.doubleValue, unit: 
.fahrenheit) 
    } else { 
        fahrenheitValue = nil 
    } 
} 
Here you are using the number formatter’s instance method
number(from:) to convert the string into a number.
Because the number formatter is aware of the locale, it is able
to convert the string into a number. If the string contains a
valid number, the method returns an instance of NSNumber.
NSNumber is a class that can represent a variety of number
types, including Int, Float, Double, and more. You can
ask an instance of NSNumber for its value represented as one
of those values. You are doing that here to get the
doubleValue of the number.
Build and run the application. Now that you are converting the
string in a locale-independent way, the text field’s value is
properly converted to its Celsius value (Figure 7.5). 
Figure 7.5  Conversion with a comma separator


--- Page 259 ---
BASE INTERNATIONALIZATION

--- Page 260 ---
When internationalizing, you ask the instance of Locale
questions. But the Locale only has a few region-specific
variables. This is where localization – creating application-
specific substitutions for different region and language settings
– comes into play. Localization usually involves either
generating multiple copies of resources (like images, sounds,
and interface files) for different regions and languages or
creating and accessing strings tables (which you will see
later in the chapter) to translate text into different languages.
Before you go through the process of localizing resources, you
must understand how an iOS application handles localized
resources.
When you build a target in Xcode, an application bundle is
created. All of the resources that you added to the target in
Xcode are copied into this bundle along with the executable
itself. This bundle is represented at runtime by an instance of
Bundle known as the main bundle. Many classes work with
the Bundle to load resources.
Localizing a resource puts another copy of the resource in the
application bundle. These resources are organized into
language-specific directories, known as lproj directories.
Each one of these directories is the name of the localization
suffixed with lproj. For example, the American English
localization is en_US, where en is the English language code
and US is the United States of America region code, so the
directory for American English resources is en_US.lproj.
(The region can be omitted if you do not need to make
regional distinctions in your resource files.) These language
and region codes are standard on all platforms, not just iOS.
When a bundle is asked for the path of a resource file, it first
looks at the root level of the bundle for a file of that name. If it
does not find one, it looks at the locale and language settings
of the device, finds the appropriate lproj directory, and

--- Page 261 ---
looks for the file there. Thus, just by localizing resource files,
your application will automatically load the correct file.
One option for localizing resource files is to create separate
storyboard files and manually edit each string in each file.
However, this approach does not scale well if you are planning
multiple localizations. What happens when you add a new
label or button to your localized storyboard? You have to add
this view to the storyboard for every language. Not fun.
To simplify the process of localizing interface files, Xcode has a
feature called base internationalization. Base
internationalization creates the Base.lproj directory, which
contains the main interface files. Localizing individual
interface files can then be done by creating just the
Localizable.strings files. It is still possible to create
the full interface files, in case localization cannot be done by
changing strings alone. However, with the help of Auto
Layout, string replacement is sufficient for most localization
needs. In the next section, you will use Auto Layout to prepare
your layout for localization.
PREPARING FOR LOCALIZATION
Open Main.storyboard and show the preview either by
clicking Editor → Preview or with the keyboard shortcut Option-
Command-Return. The preview allows you to easily see how
your interface will look across screen sizes and orientations as
well as between different localized languages.
In the storyboard, select the conversion view controller to see
its preview (Figure 7.6).

--- Page 262 ---
Figure 7.6  Preview
Notice the controls in the lower corners of the preview. The 
button on the left side allows you to add additional screen
sizes to the preview canvas. This allows you to easily see how
changes to your interface propagate across screen sizes and
orientations simultaneously. The button on the right side
allows you to select a language to preview this interface in.

--- Page 263 ---
(If your preview is for a configuration other than iPhone 11
Pro, use the 
  button to add this configuration. Then click on
whatever preview opened by default and press the Delete key
to remove it.)
You have not localized the application into another language
yet, but Xcode supplies a few pseudolanguages for you to use.
Pseudolanguages help you internationalize your applications
before receiving translations for all your strings and assets.
One of the built-in pseudolanguages, Double-Length
Pseudolanguage, mimics languages that are more verbose by
repeating whatever text string is in the text element. So, for
example, “is really” becomes “is really is really.”
Select the Language pop-up that says English and choose Double-
Length Pseudolanguage. The labels all have their text doubled
(Figure 7.7).

--- Page 264 ---
Figure 7.7  Doubled text strings
The double-length pseudolanguage reveals a problem
immediately: The labels go off both the left and right edges of
the screen, and you are unable to read the entire strings. The
fix is to constrain all the labels so that their leading and trailing
edges stay within the margins of their superview. Then you
will need to change the line count for the labels to 0, which
tells the labels that their text should wrap to multiple lines if

--- Page 265 ---
needed. You are going to start by fixing one label, then repeat
the steps for the rest of the labels.
In the canvas, select the degrees Fahrenheit label. You are going
to add constraints to this label in a new way. Control-drag
from the label to the left side of the superview. When you do, a
context-sensitive pop-up will appear giving you the constraints
that make sense for this direction (Figure 7.8). Select Leading
Space to Safe Area from the list.
Figure 7.8  Creating constraints by Control-dragging


--- Page 266 ---
The direction that you drag influences which possible
constraints are displayed. A horizontal drag will show
horizontal constraints, and a vertical drag will show vertical
constraints. A diagonal drag will show both horizontal and
vertical constraints, which is useful for setting up many
constraints simultaneously.
This constraint is configured to the safe area’s leading edge,
but you want it configured to the superview’s leading margin.
Select the constraint you just added, either by clicking on it on
the canvas or by selecting it in the document outline. Open its
attributes inspector and find the Safe Area.Leading option, likely
associated with the Second Item. Click Safe Area.Leading and
select Superview. Finally, click Superview.Leading to open the
menu again and check Relative to Margin (Figure 7.9).

--- Page 267 ---
Figure 7.9  Constraining to the margin
A note about the constraint attributes inspector: Which
element is the First Item and which the Second Item is only
important when the constraint involves either a multiplier
(such as when one item should be half the width of the other,
which you will see an example of in Chapter 17) or a constant
(such as when one item should be exactly 20 points wider than
the other). Here, it is not important whether SafeArea.Leading is
the First Item or the Second Item; make the changes wherever it
appears.

--- Page 268 ---
On its own, this constraint is not very good. It maintains the
existing fixed distance between the leading and trailing edges
of the label, as you can see in the preview (Figure 7.10).
Figure 7.10  Preview with new constraints
What you really want is for the distance between the label and
the margins to be greater than or equal to 0. You can do this
with inequality constraints.

--- Page 269 ---
Select the leading constraint again. In its attributes inspector,
change the Relation to Greater Than or Equal and the Constant to 0
(Figure 7.11).
Figure 7.11  Inequality constraint
Take a look at the preview; the interface is looking better, but
the label is still being truncated since the label is currently
limited to a single line of text.
Select the label and open its attributes inspector. Change the
Lines count to 0. Now take a look at the preview; the label is no
longer being truncated, and instead the text flows to multiple
lines. And, because the other labels are each constrained to the
label above them, they have automatically moved down.
Finally, change the label’s Alignment to Center in the attributes
inspector.

--- Page 270 ---
Repeat the steps above for the other labels. You will need to:
Add a leading constraint to each label.
Configure the constraint to be related to the superview’s leading margin.
Set the constraints’ relation to Greater Than or Equal and the constant to 0.
(A shortcut for editing a constraint is to double-click it.)
Change the label’s line count to 0.
Change the label’s alignment to Center.
Add the same constraint to the text field as well. You will not
change the line count, but that is OK since the text in the text
field should rarely span more than one line.
When you are done, the preview with the double-length
pseudolanguage will look like Figure 7.12.

--- Page 271 ---
Figure 7.12  Preview with final constraints
At this point, you are done with the preview. You can close it
the same way you opened it, or you can toggle it off from the
Adjust editor options menu in the top-right corner of the preview
(Figure 7.13).

--- Page 272 ---
Figure 7.13  Adjusting the editor options


--- Page 273 ---
Localization
WorldTrotter is now internationalized – its interface is able to
adapt to various languages and regions. Now it is time to
localize the app – that is, to update the strings and resources in
the application for a new language. In this section, you are
going to localize the interface of WorldTrotter: the
Main.storyboard file. You will create English and
Spanish localizations, which will create two lproj
directories in addition to the base one.
Start by localizing your storyboard file. Select
Main.storyboard in the project navigator.
Open the File inspector by clicking the 
  tab in the
inspector selector or by using the keyboard shortcut Option-
Command-1. Find the section in this inspector named
Localization. Check the English checkbox and make sure the pop-
up button next to it says Localizable Strings (Figure 7.14). This
will create a strings table that you will use later to localize the
application.
Figure 7.14  Localizing into English
Next, in the project navigator, select the WorldTrotter project at
the top. Then select WorldTrotter under the Project section in the
side list, and make sure the Info tab is open. (If you cannot see

--- Page 274 ---
the side list, you can open it using the Show projects and targets list
button in the upper-left corner, shown in Figure 7.15.)
Figure 7.15  Showing the project settings
Click the 
  button under Localizations and select Spanish (es). In
the dialog, uncheck the LaunchScreen.storyboard file;
keep the Main.storyboard file checked. Make sure that
the reference language is Base and the file type is Localizable
Strings. Click Finish. This creates an es.lproj folder and
generates the Main.strings file in it that contains all the
strings from the base interface file. The Localizations
configuration should look like Figure 7.16.

--- Page 275 ---
Figure 7.16  Localizations
Look in the project navigator. Click the disclosure button next
to Main.storyboard (Figure 7.17). Xcode moved the

--- Page 276 ---
Main.storyboard file to the Base.lproj directory and
created the Main.strings file in the es.lproj directory.
Figure 7.17  Localized storyboard in the project
navigator
Click on the Spanish version of Main.strings. You will
notice that it includes references to all the text elements in
Main.storyboard. You will also notice that the text is not
in Spanish. You have to translate localized files yourself; Xcode
is not that smart.
Edit this file according to the following text. The numbers and
order may be different in your file, but you can use the text
and title fields in the comments to match up the
translations.
Listing 7.3  Translating the user interface strings
(Main.strings (Spanish))
/* Class = "UITabBarItem"; title = "Map"; ObjectID = "6xh-o5-yRt"; */ 
"6xh-o5-yRt.title" = "Map" "Mapa"; 
 
/* Class = "UILabel"; text = "degrees Celsius"; ObjectID = "7la-u7-mx6"; 
*/ 
"7la-u7-mx6.text" = "degrees Celsius" "grados Celsius"; 
 
/* Class = "UILabel"; text = "degrees Fahrenheit"; ObjectID = "Dic-rs-
P0S"; */ 
"Dic-rs-P0S.text" = "degrees Fahrenheit" "grados Fahrenheit"; 
 
/* Class = "UILabel"; text = "100"; ObjectID = "Eso-Wf-EyH"; */ 
"Eso-Wf-EyH.text" = "100"; 
 
/* Class = "UITextField"; placeholder = "value"; ObjectID = "On4-jV-

--- Page 277 ---
YlY"; */ 
"On4-jV-YlY.placeholder" = "value" "valor"; 
 
/* Class = "UILabel"; text = "is really"; ObjectID = "wtF-xR-gbZ"; */ 
"wtF-xR-gbZ.text" = "is really" "es realmente"; 
 
/* Class = "UITabBarItem"; title = "Convert"; ObjectID = "zLY-50-CeX"; 
*/ 
"zLY-50-CeX.title" = "Convert" "Convertir"; 
Now that you have finished localizing this storyboard file, let’s
test it out. Open the active scheme pop-up and select Edit
Scheme. Make sure Run is selected on the lefthand side and
open the Options tab. Open the Application Language pop-up and
select Spanish (Figure 7.18). Finally, confirm that Spain is still
selected in the Application Region pop-up. Close the window.
Figure 7.18  Switching to Spanish
Build and run the application. Make sure you are viewing the
ConversionViewController, and you will see the
interface in Spanish. Because you set the constraints on the
labels to accommodate different lengths of text, they resize
themselves appropriately (Figure 7.19).

--- Page 278 ---
Figure 7.19  Spanish ConversionViewController
(If your keyboard has a period for the decimal separator
instead of a comma, you did not do anything wrong. This
seems to be a bug in Xcode. Use your hardware keyboard to
enter a comma.)
NSLOCALIZEDSTRING AND STRINGS
TABLES
In many places in your applications’ code, you will create
String instances dynamically or display string literals to the
user. To display translated versions of these strings, you create
a strings table. A strings table is a file containing key-value
pairs for all the strings that your application uses and their

--- Page 279 ---
associated translations. It is a resource file that you add to your
application, but you do not need to do a lot of work to get data
from it.
You might use a string in your code like this:
    let greeting = "Hello!" 
To internationalize the string in your code, you replace literal
strings with the function
NSLocalizedString(_:comment:).
    let greeting = NSLocalizedString("Hello!", comment: "The greeting 
for the user") 
This function takes two arguments: a key and a comment that
describes the string’s use. The key is the lookup value in a
strings table. At runtime,
NSLocalizedString(_:comment:) will look through
the strings tables bundled with your application for a table that
matches the user’s language settings. Then, in that table, the
function gets the translated string that matches the key.
Now you are going to internationalize the strings that the
MapViewController displays in its segmented control. In
MapViewController.swift, locate the loadView()
method and update the initializer for the segmented control to
use localized strings.
Listing 7.4  Internationalizing the labels for the
segmented control (MapViewController.swift)
override func loadView() { 
    // Create a map view 
    mapView = MKMapView() 
 
    // Set it as *the* view of this view controller 
    view = mapView 
 
    let segmentedControl 
            = UISegmentedControl(items: ["Standard", "Hybrid", 
"Satellite"]) 
 
    let standardString = NSLocalizedString("Standard", comment: 
"Standard map view") 

--- Page 280 ---
    let hybridString = NSLocalizedString("Hybrid", comment: "Hybrid map 
view") 
    let satelliteString 
            = NSLocalizedString("Satellite", comment: "Satellite map 
view") 
 
    let segmentedControl 
          = UISegmentedControl(items: [standardString, hybridString, 
satelliteString])
Once you have files that have been internationalized with the
NSLocalizedString(_:comment:) function, you can
generate strings tables with a command-line application.
Open the Terminal app. This is a Unix terminal; it is used to run
command-line tools. You want to navigate to the location of
MapViewController.swift. If you have never used the
Terminal app before, here is a handy trick. In Terminal, type the
following:
cd
followed by a space. (Do not press Return yet.)
Next, open Finder and locate MapViewController.swift
and the folder that contains it. Drag the icon of that folder onto
the Terminal window. Terminal will fill out the path for you. It
will look something like this:
    cd /Users/cbkeur/iOSDevelopment/WorldTrotter/WorldTrotter/ 
Press Return. The current working directory of Terminal is now
this directory.
Use the terminal command ls to print out the contents of the
working directory and confirm that
MapViewController.swift is in that list.
To generate the strings table, enter the following into Terminal
and press Return:
genstrings MapViewController.swift

--- Page 281 ---
The resulting file, Localizable.strings, contains the
strings from MapViewController. Drag this new file from
Finder into the project navigator (or use Xcode’s File → Add Files
to "WorldTrotter"... menu item). When the application is compiled,
this resource will be copied into the main bundle.
Open Localizable.strings. The file should look
something like this:
    /* Hybrid map view */ 
    "Hybrid" = "Hybrid"; 
 
    /* Satellite map view */ 
    "Satellite" = "Satellite"; 
 
    /* Standard map view */ 
    "Standard" = "Standard"; 
Notice that the comment above each string is the second
argument you supplied to the NSLocalizedString
function. Even though the function does not require the
comment argument, including it will make your localizing life
easier.
Now that you have created Localizable.strings, you
need to localize it in Xcode. Open its file inspector and click the
Localize... button. Make sure Spanish is selected from the pop-up
and click Localize. Select Localizable.strings in the
project navigator again and add the English localization by
checking the checkbox next to that language in the file
inspector.
In the project navigator, click the disclosure triangle that now
appears next to Localizable.strings. Open the Spanish
version. The string on the lefthand side is the key that is
passed to the NSLocalizedString(_:comment:)
function, and the string on the righthand side is what is
returned. Change the text on the righthand sides of the pairs to
the Spanish translations shown below. (To type an accented
character, such as “é,” press and hold the appropriate character
on your keyboard and then press the appropriate number from
the pop-up.)

--- Page 282 ---
Listing 7.5  Translating the labels for the segmented
control (Localizable.strings (Spanish))
/* Hybrid map view */ 
"Hybrid" = "Hybrid" "Híbrido"; 
 
/* Satellite map view */ 
"Satellite" = "Satellite" "Satélite"; 
 
/* Standard map view */ 
"Standard" = "Standard" "Estándar"; 
Build and run the application again. Now all the strings,
including the titles in the segmented control, will appear in
Spanish (Figure 7.20). If they do not, you might need to delete
the application, clean your project, and rebuild. (Or check your
active scheme language setting.) 
To clean your project, select Product → Clean Build Folder or hit
Command-Shift-K. This deletes all build artifacts from your
computer. The next time you build and run, Xcode will re-
create them from your source code.
Figure 7.20  Spanish MapViewController


--- Page 283 ---
You might be wondering why the map itself is still rendering
in the development language (English in the figure above)
instead of Spanish. This only happens on the simulator. While
the application interface is rendered in Spanish, due to the
changes you made to the active scheme, text provided by the
system is still using the simulator’s language. If you would
like to change the entire simulator to Spanish, you can do so
by opening the Settings application, selecting the General row,
and then making the change in Language & Region.
Internationalization and localization are very important for
your app to reach the largest audience. Additionally, as you
saw early in this chapter, your app might not work for some
users if you have not properly internationalized it. You will
internationalize (but not localize) your projects in the rest of
this book.
Over the past five chapters, you have built a rather impressive
application that allows the user to convert between Celsius and
Fahrenheit as well as display a map in a few different ways.
Not only does this application scale well on all iPhone screen
sizes, but it is also localized into another language.
Congratulations!

--- Page 284 ---
Bronze Challenge: Another Localization
Practice makes perfect. Localize WorldTrotter for another
language. Use a translation website if you need help with the
language.

--- Page 285 ---
For the More Curious: Bundle’s Role in
Internationalization
The real work of taking advantage of localizations is done for
you by the class Bundle. A bundle represents a location on
the filesystem that groups the compiled code and resources
together. The “main bundle” is another name for the
application bundle, which contains all the resources and the
executable for the application. You will learn more about the
application bundle in Chapter 13.
When an application is built, all the lproj directories are
copied into the main bundle. Figure 7.21 shows the main
bundle for WorldTrotter (with some additional images added to
the project).

--- Page 286 ---
Figure 7.21  Application bundle
Bundle knows how to search through localization directories
for every type of resource using the instance method
url(forResource:withExtension:). When you
want a path to a resource bundled with your application, you
call this method on the main bundle. Here is an example using
the resource file Boo.png:
    let path = Bundle.main.url(forResource:"Boo", withExtension: "png") 
When attempting to locate the resource, the bundle first checks
to see whether the resource exists at the top level of the

--- Page 287 ---
application bundle. If so, it returns the full URL to that file. If
not, the bundle gets the device’s language and region settings
and looks in the appropriate lproj directories to construct
the URL. If it still does not find it, it looks within the
Base.lproj directory. Finally, if no file is found, it returns
nil.
In the application bundle shown in Figure 7.21, if the user’s
language is set to Spanish, Bundle will find Boo.png at the
top level, Tom.png in es.lproj, and Hat.png in
Base.lproj.
When you add a new localization to your project, Xcode does
not automatically remove the resources from the top-level
directory. This is why you must delete and clean an application
when you localize a file – otherwise, the previous unlocalized
file will still be in the root level of the application bundle.
Even though there are lproj folders in the application
bundle, the bundle finds the top-level file first and returns its
URL.

--- Page 288 ---
For the More Curious: Importing and
Exporting as XLIFF
The industry-standard format for localization data is the
XLIFF data type, which stands for XML Localization
Interchange File Format (and XML stands for Extensible
Markup Language). When working with translators, you will
often send them an XLIFF file containing the data in the
application to localize, and they will give you back a localized
XLIFF file for you to import.
Xcode natively supports importing and exporting localization
data in XLIFF. The exporting process will take care of finding
and exporting the localized strings within the project, which
you did manually using the genstrings tool.
To export the localizable strings in XLIFF, select the project
(WorldTrotter) in the project navigator. Then select the Editor
menu, and then Export For Localization.... On the next screen, you
can choose whether to export existing translations (which is
probably a good idea so the translator does not do redundant
work) and which languages you would like exported
(Figure 7.22).

--- Page 289 ---
Figure 7.22  Exporting localization data as XLIFF
To import localizations, select the project (WorldTrotter) in the
project navigator. Then select Editor → Import Localizations....
After choosing a file, you will be able to confirm the updates
before you import.

--- Page 290 ---
8 
Debugging
As you write an application, you will inevitably make
mistakes. Even worse, from time to time you will have errors
in your application’s design. Xcode’s debugger (called LLDB)
is the fundamental tool that will help you find these bugs and
fix them. This chapter gives you an overview of Xcode’s
debugger and its basic functions.

--- Page 291 ---
A Buggy Project
You will use a simple project to guide you through your
exploration of the Xcode debugger. Open Xcode and create a
new project for an iOS single view application. Name the
project Buggy and confirm the other options match Figure 8.1.
Click Next.
Figure 8.1  Configuring Buggy


--- Page 292 ---
As you write this application’s code, keep in mind that it is a
buggy project. You may be asked to type code you know is
incorrect. Do not fix it as you type it in; those errors will help
you learn about debugging techniques.
To get started, open Main.storyboard and drag a
UIButton onto the View Controller Scene. Double-click the new
button and change its title to Tap me!. With the button still
selected, open the Auto Layout Align menu. Check Horizontally in
Container and click Add 1 Constraint. Next, open the Add New
Constraints menu. Pin the distance to the top of the container,
check the Width and Height checkboxes, and click Add 3
Constraints.
Your results should look something like Figure 8.2, but do not
worry if your actual dimensions and spacing are a bit different.

--- Page 293 ---
Figure 8.2  Auto Layout constraints for the Tap me!
button
Now you need to implement a method for this button to trigger
and then connect it to the button in the storyboard.
Open ViewController.swift and implement an action
method for the button to trigger.
@IBAction func buttonTapped(_ sender: UIButton) { 
    print("Called buttonTapped(_:)")
}
Now go back to Main.storyboard. Control-drag from the
button to the View Controller and connect it to the buttonTapped:

--- Page 294 ---
option.
Build and run the application. Make sure the button is
correctly displayed on the screen. Tap the button and confirm
that the print statement shows up in the console.

--- Page 295 ---
Debugging Basics
The simplest debugging uses the console. Interpreting the
information provided in the console when an application
crashes or intentionally logging information to the console
allows you to observe and zero in on your code’s failures.
Let’s look at some examples of how the console can support
your quest for bug-free code.
INTERPRETING CONSOLE MESSAGES
Time to add some mayhem to the Buggy project. Suppose that
after considering the UI for a while, you decide that a switch
would be a better control than a button. Open
ViewController.swift and make the following changes
to the buttonTapped(_:) method.
@IBAction func buttonTapped(_ sender: UIButton) {
@IBAction func switchToggled(_ sender: UISwitch) { 
    print("Called buttonTapped(_:)") 
} 
You renamed the action to reflect the change of control and
you changed the type of sender to UISwitch.
Unfortunately, you forgot to update the interface in
Main.storyboard. Build and run the application, then tap
the button. The application will crash and you will see a
message logged to the console similar to the one on the next
page. (We have truncated some of the information to fit on the
page.)

--- Page 296 ---
    2016-08-24 12:52:38.463 Buggy[1961:47078] -[Buggy.ViewController 
buttonTapped:]: 
    unrecognized selector sent to instance 0x7ff6db708870 
    2016-08-24 12:52:38.470 Buggy[1961:47078] *** Terminating app due to 
uncaught 
    exception 'NSInvalidArgumentException', 
    reason: '-[Buggy.ViewController buttonTapped:]: unrecognized 
selector sent to 
    instance 0x7ff6db708870' 
    *** First throw call stack: 
    ( 
      0   CoreFoundation   [...] __exceptionPreprocess + 171 
      1   libobjc.A.dylib  [...] objc_exception_throw + 48 
      2   CoreFoundation   [...] -[NSObject(NSObject) 
doesNotRecognizeSelector:] + 132 
      3   UIKitCore        [...] -[UIResponder 
doesNotRecognizeSelector:] + 302 
      4   CoreFoundation   [...] ___forwarding___ + 1013 
      5   CoreFoundation   [...] _CF_forwarding_prep_0 + 120 
      6   UIKitCore        [...] -[UIApplication 
sendAction:to:from:forEvent:] + 83 
      7   UIKitCore        [...] -[UIControl sendAction:to:forEvent:] + 
67 
      8   UIKitCore        [...] -[UIControl 
_sendActionsForEvents:withEvent:] + 444 
      9   UIKitCore        [...] -[UIControl touchesEnded:withEvent:] + 
668 
      10  UIKitCore        [...] -[UIWindow _sendTouchesForEvent:] + 
2747 
      11  UIKitCore        [...] -[UIWindow sendEvent:] + 4011 
      12  UIKitCore        [...] -[UIApplication sendEvent:] + 356 
      13  UIKitCore        [...] -[UIApplication sendEvent:] + 371 
      14  UIKitCore        [...] 
__dispatchPreprocessedEventFromEventQueue + 3248 
      15  UIKit            [...] __handleEventQueue + 4879 
      16  CoreFoundation   [...] 
__CFRUNLOOP_IS_CALLING_OUT_TO_A_SOURCE0_PERFORM[...] 
      17  CoreFoundation   [...] __CFRunLoopDoSource0 + 76 
      18  CoreFoundation   [...] __CFRunLoopDoSources0 + 556 
      19  CoreFoundation   [...] __CFRunLoopRun + 918 
      20  CoreFoundation   [...] CFRunLoopRunSpecific + 420 
      21  GraphicsServices [...] GSEventRunModal + 161 
      22  UIKit            [...] UIApplicationMain + 159 
      23  Buggy            [...] main + 111 
      24  libdyld.dylib    [...] start + 1 
    ) 
    libc++abi.dylib: terminating with uncaught exception of type 
NSException 
The message in the console looks pretty scary and hard to
understand, but it is not as bad as it first seems. The really
useful information is at the very top. Let’s start with the very
first line.
    2016-08-24 12:52:38.463 Buggy[1961:47078] -[Buggy.ViewController 
buttonTapped:]: 
    unrecognized selector sent to instance 0x7ff6db708870
There is a time stamp, the name of the application, and the
statement unrecognized selector sent to
instance 0x7ff6db708870. To make sense of this

--- Page 297 ---
information, remember that an iOS application may be written
in Swift, but it is still built on top of Cocoa Touch, which is a
collection of frameworks written in Objective-C. Objective-C
is a dynamic language, and when a message is sent to an
instance, the Objective-C runtime finds the actual method to
be called at that precise time based on its selector, a kind of
ID.
Thus, the statement that an unrecognized selector
[was] sent to instance 0x7ff6db708870 means
that the application tried to call a method on an instance that
did not have it.
Which instance was it? You have two pieces of information
about it. First, it is a Buggy.ViewController. (Why not
just ViewController? Swift namespaces include the name
of the module, which in this case is the application’s name.)
Second, it is located at memory address 0x7ff6db708870 (your
actual address will likely be different).
The expression -[Buggy.ViewController
buttonTapped:] is a representation of Objective-C code.
A message in Objective-C is always enclosed in square
brackets in the form [receiver selector]. The
receiver is the class or instance to which the message is sent.
The dash (-) before the opening square bracket indicates that
the receiver is an instance of ViewController. (A plus
sign (+) would indicate that the receiver was the class itself.)
In short, this line from the console tells you that the selector
buttonTapped: was sent to an instance of
Buggy.ViewController but it was not recognized.
The next line of the message adds the information that the app
was terminated due to an “uncaught exception” and specifies
the type of the exception as
NSInvalidArgumentException.

--- Page 298 ---
The bulk of the console message is the stack trace, a list of
all the functions or methods that were called up to the point of
the application crash. Knowing which logical path the
application took before crashing can help you reproduce and
fix a bug. None of the calls in the stack trace had a chance to
return, and they are listed with the most recent call on top.
Here is the stack trace again:
    *** First throw call stack: 
    ( 
      0   CoreFoundation   [...] __exceptionPreprocess + 171 
      1   libobjc.A.dylib  [...] objc_exception_throw + 48 
      2   CoreFoundation   [...] -[NSObject(NSObject) 
doesNotRecognizeSelector:] + 132 
      3   UIKitCore        [...] -[UIResponder 
doesNotRecognizeSelector:] + 302 
      4   CoreFoundation   [...] ___forwarding___ + 1013 
      5   CoreFoundation   [...] _CF_forwarding_prep_0 + 120 
      6   UIKitCore        [...] -[UIApplication 
sendAction:to:from:forEvent:] + 83 
      7   UIKitCore        [...] -[UIControl sendAction:to:forEvent:] + 
67 
      8   UIKitCore        [...] -[UIControl 
_sendActionsForEvents:withEvent:] + 444 
      9   UIKitCore        [...] -[UIControl touchesEnded:withEvent:] + 
668 
      10   UIKitCore       [...] -[UIWindow _sendTouchesForEvent:] + 
2747 
      11  UIKitCore        [...] -[UIWindow sendEvent:] + 4011 
      12  UIKitCore        [...] -[UIApplication sendEvent:] + 356 
      13  UIKitCore        [...] -[UIApplication sendEvent:] + 371 
      14  UIKitCore        [...] 
__dispatchPreprocessedEventFromEventQueue + 3248 
      15  UIKit            [...] __handleEventQueue + 4879 
      16  CoreFoundation   [...] 
__CFRUNLOOP_IS_CALLING_OUT_TO_A_SOURCE0_PERFORM[...] 
      17  CoreFoundation   [...] __CFRunLoopDoSource0 + 76 
      18  CoreFoundation   [...] __CFRunLoopDoSources0 + 556 
      19  CoreFoundation   [...] __CFRunLoopRun + 918 
      20  CoreFoundation   [...] CFRunLoopRunSpecific + 420 
      21  GraphicsServices [...] GSEventRunModal + 161 
      22  UIKit            [...] UIApplicationMain + 159 
      23  Buggy            [...] main + 111 
      24  libdyld.dylib    [...] start + 1 
    ) 
Each row in the list includes a call number, the module name,
a memory address (which we have removed to fit the rest on
the page), and a symbol representing the function or method. If
you scan the stack trace from the bottom up, you can get a
sense that the application starts in the main function of Buggy
at the line identified with call number 23 (note that your call
numbers may be slightly different), receives an event
recognized as a touch at call number 10, and then tries to send
the corresponding action to the button’s target at call number

--- Page 299 ---
8. The selector for the action is not found (call number 3: -
[UIResponder doesNotRecognizeSelector:]),
resulting in an exception being raised (call number 1:
objc_exception_throw).
Although this breakdown of the console message is specific to
one error type out of many possibilities, understanding the
basic structure of these messages will help you make sense of
the error messages you will encounter in the future. As you
gain more experience, you will start associating error
messages with types of problems and you will become better
at debugging code.
FIXING THE FIRST BUG
Reviewing ViewController.swift, you discover that
you changed your action method from buttonTapped(_:)
to switchToggled(_:), which is why the selector
buttonTapped: is not being recognized.
You can explicitly see the connection to the missing action in
Interface Builder. Open Main.storyboard and Control-click
the View Controller on the document outline. The black panel will
show a warning icon beside the buttonTapped: action in the
Received Actions section, as shown in Figure 8.3.

--- Page 300 ---
Figure 8.3  Nonexistent button action flagged in
Interface Builder
To fix the bug, you have two choices. You could update the
action connected to the button on Main.storyboard to
match your new action method. Or you could revert the name
change on the switchToggled(_:) method. You decide
that you do not want a switch after all, so open
ViewController.swift and change your method back to
its earlier implementation. (Remember: Make the changes
exactly as shown, even if you see a problem.)
@IBAction func switchToggled(_ sender: UISwitch) {
@IBAction func buttonTapped(_ sender: UISwitch) { 
    print("Called buttonTapped(_:)") 
} 

--- Page 301 ---
Build and run the application and tap the button. It works fine
… or does it? Actually, there is a problem, which you will
resolve in the next section.
CAVEMAN DEBUGGING
The current implementation of ViewController’s
buttonTapped(_:) method just logs a statement to the
console. This is an example of a technique that is fondly called
caveman debugging: strategically placing print() calls in
your code to verify that functions and methods are being called
(and called in the proper sequence) and to log variable values
to the console to keep an eye on important data.
Like the cavemen in those old insurance commercials,
caveman debugging is not as outmoded as the name might
suggest, and modern developers continue to rely on messages
logged to the console.
In the @IBAction methods you have written throughout this
book, you have been passing in an argument – usually called
sender - that is a reference to the control sending the
message. A control is a subclass of UIControl; you have
worked with a few UIControl subclasses so far, including
UIButton, UITextField, and UISegmentedControl.
To explore what caveman debugging can do for you, log the
state of the sender control when buttonTapped(_:) is
called in ViewController.swift.
@IBAction func buttonTapped(_ sender: UISwitch) { 
    print("Called buttonTapped(_:)") 
    // Log the control state: 
    print("Is control on? \(sender.isOn)") 
} 
As you can see in buttonTapped(_:)’s signature, the
sender in this case is an instance of a UISwitch. The
isOn property is a boolean indicating whether the switch
instance is in the on state. For many controls, you want to

--- Page 302 ---
check some state on the sender like this, as you did with the
UISegmentedControl in Chapter 5.
Build and run the application. Try tapping the button. Oops!
You have an unrecognized selector error again.
    Called buttonTapped(_:) 
    2016-08-30 09:30:57.730 Buggy[9738:1177400] -[UIButton isOn]: 
    unrecognized selector sent to instance 0x7fcc5d104cd0 
    2016-08-30 09:30:57.734 Buggy[9738:1177400] *** Terminating app due 
to uncaught 
    exception 'NSInvalidArgumentException', reason: '-[UIButton isOn]: 
unrecognized 
    selector sent to instance 0x7fcc5d104cd0' 
The console message begins with the Called
buttonTapped(_:) line, indicating that the action was
indeed called. But then the application crashes because the
isOn selector is sent to an instance of a UIButton.
You can probably see the problem: sender is typed as a
UISwitch in buttonTapped(_:), but the action is
actually attached to a UIButton instance in
Main.storyboard.
To confirm this hypothesis, log the address of sender in
ViewController.swift, just before you call the isOn
property.
 @IBAction func buttonTapped(_ sender: UISwitch) { 
    print("Called buttonTapped(_:)") 
    // Log sender: 
    print("sender: \(sender)") 
    // Log the control state: 
    print("Is control on? \(sender.isOn)") 
} 
Build and run the application one more time. After tapping the
button and crashing the application, check the first few lines of
the console log, which will look something like this:
   Called buttonTapped(_:) 
   sender: <UIButton: 0x7fcf8c508bb0; frame = (160 84; 55 30); opaque = 
NO; 
   autoresize = RM+BM; layer = <CALayer: 0x618000220ea0>> 
   2016-08-30 09:45:00.562 Buggy[9946:1187061] -[UIButton isOn]: 
unrecognized selector 
   sent to instance 0x7fcf8c508bb0 

--- Page 303 ---
   2016-08-30 09:45:00.567 Buggy[9946:1187061] *** Terminating app due 
to uncaught 
   exception 'NSInvalidArgumentException', reason: '-[UIButton isOn]: 
unrecognized 
   selector sent to instance 0x7fcf8c508bb0' 
In the line after Called buttonTapped(_:), you get
information about the sender. As expected, it is an instance of
a UIButton and it exists in memory at address
0x7fcf8c508bb0. Further down the log, you can confirm that
this is the same instance to which you are sending the isOn
message. A button cannot respond to a UISwitch property,
so the app crashes.
To fix this problem, correct the buttonTapped(_:)
definition in ViewController.swift. While you are
there, delete the extra calls to print(), which you will not
need again.
 @IBAction func buttonTapped(_ sender: UISwitch) { 
 @IBAction func buttonTapped(_ sender: UIButton) { 
    print("Called buttonTapped(_:)") 
    // Log sender: 
    print("sender: \(sender)") 
    // Log the control state: 
    print("Is control on? \(sender.isOn)") 
} 
Caveman debugging gets a little more sophisticated when you
use literal expressions to make the console messages more
explicit. Swift has four literal expressions that can assist you in
logging information to the console (Table 8.1):
Table 8.1  Literal expressions useful for debugging
                              
Literal Type Value
               
                     #file 
                  
                     String 
                  
                     
The name of the file where the 
expression appears.

--- Page 304 ---
                   
                     #line 
                  
                     Int 
                  
                     
The line number the expression 
appears on.
                   
                     #column 
                  
                     Int 
                  
                     
The column number the expression 
begins in.
                   
                     #function 
                  
                     String 
                  
                     
The name of the declaration the 
expression appears in.
                   
             
To see these literal expressions in action, update your call to
print() in the buttonTapped(_:) method in
ViewController.swift.
@IBAction func buttonTapped(_ sender: UIButton) { 
    print("Called buttonTapped(_:)") 
    print("Method: \(#function) in file: \(#file) line: \(#line) 
called.") 
} 
Build and run the application. As you tap the button, you will
see a message logged to the console like the one below.
    Method: buttonTapped(_:) in file: 
/Users/cbkeur/iOSDevelopment/Buggy/Buggy/ 
        ViewController.swift at line: 13 was called. 
While caveman debugging is useful, be aware that print
statements are not stripped from your code as you build your
project for release. These print statements can be viewed if a
device is connected to a Mac, so be careful about printing
sensitive information.

--- Page 305 ---
The Xcode Debugger: LLDB
To continue your debugging experiments, you are going to add
another bug to your application. Add the code below to
ViewController.swift. Notice that you will be using an
NSMutableArray, the Objective-C counterpart of Swift’s
Array, to make the bug a little harder to find.
@IBAction func buttonTapped(_ sender: UIButton) { 
    print("Method: \(#function) in file: \(#file) line: \(#line) 
called.") 
 
    badMethod() 
} 
 
func badMethod() { 
    let array = NSMutableArray() 
 
    for i in 0..<10 { 
        array.insert(i, at: i) 
    } 
 
    // Go one step too far emptying the array (notice the range change): 
    for _ in 0...10 { 
        array.removeObject(at: 0) 
    }
}
Build and run the application to confirm that a tap on the
button results in the application crashing with an uncaught
NSRangeException exception. Use your freshly acquired
knowledge to study and interpret the error message as much as
possible.
If you had used a Swift Array type, Xcode would have been
able to highlight the line of code that caused the exception.
Because you used an NSMutableArray, the code that raised
the exception is deep within the Cocoa Touch framework.
Frequently this is the case when debugging: Problems are not
so obvious and you need to do some investigative work.
SETTING BREAKPOINTS
Assume that you do not know the direct cause of the crash.
You just know it happens after you tap the application’s

--- Page 306 ---
button. A reasonable way to proceed would be to stop the
application after the button is tapped and step through the code
until you get a clue as to the problem.
Open ViewController.swift. To stop an application at
a specified location in the code, you set a breakpoint. The
simplest way to set a breakpoint is to click on the gutter to the
left of the editor pane next to the line where you want
execution to stop. Try it: Click to the left of the line
@IBAction func buttonTapped(_ sender:
UIButton). A blue marker indicating the new breakpoint
will appear (Figure 8.4).
Figure 8.4  Setting a breakpoint
After a breakpoint is set, you can toggle it by clicking the blue
marker directly. If you click the marker once, it will become
disabled, indicated by a paler shade of blue (Figure 8.5).
Figure 8.5  Disabling a breakpoint


--- Page 307 ---
Another click re-enables the breakpoint. You can also enable,
disable, delete, or edit a breakpoint by Control-clicking the
marker. A contextual menu will appear, as shown in
Figure 8.6.
Figure 8.6  Modifying a breakpoint
Selecting Reveal in Breakpoint Navigator opens the breakpoint
navigator in Xcode’s navigator area with a list of all the
breakpoints in your application (Figure 8.7). You can also
open the breakpoint navigator by clicking its icon in the
navigator selector.
Figure 8.7  The breakpoint navigator


--- Page 308 ---
STEPPING THROUGH CODE
Make sure your breakpoint on the buttonTapped(_:)
method is set and active after all the clicking you did in the
previous section. Run the application and tap the button.
Your application hits the breakpoint and stops executing, and
Xcode takes you to the line of code that would be executed
next, which is highlighted in green. It also opens some new
information areas (Figure 8.8).

--- Page 309 ---
Figure 8.8  Xcode stopped at a breakpoint
You are familiar with the console and have already seen the
debug navigator. The new areas here are the variables view
and the debug bar, which together with the console make up
the debug area. (If you cannot see the variables view, click the
 icon in the bottom-right corner of the debug area.)

--- Page 310 ---
The variables view can help you discover the values of
variables and constants within the scope of the breakpoint.
However, trying to find a particular value can require a fair
amount of digging.
Initially, all you will see listed in the variables view are the
sender and self arguments passed to the
buttonTapped(_:) method. Click the disclosure triangle
for sender, and you will see that it contains a
baseUIControl@0 property. Within it there is a
_targetActions array that contains the button’s attached
target-action pairs.
Open the _targetActions array, open the first item
([0]), and then select the _target property. Press the space
bar while _target is selected, and a Quick Look window
will open, showing a preview of the variable (which is an
instance of ViewController). The Quick Look is shown in
Figure 8.9.

--- Page 311 ---
Figure 8.9  Inspecting variables in the variables view
In the same section as the _target, find the _action. Next
to it, you will see (SEL) "buttonTapped:". The (SEL) indicates that
this is a selector, and "buttonTapped:" is the name of the selector.
In this contrived example, it does not help you much to dig to
find the _target and the _action; however, once you start

--- Page 312 ---
working with larger, more complex applications, it can be
especially useful to use the variables view. You do need to
know what you are looking for, such as the _target and the
_action – but finding the value that you are interested in can
be very helpful in tracking down bugs.
Now it is time to start advancing through the code. You can do
this using the buttons on the debug bar, shown in Figure 8.10.
Figure 8.10  The debug bar
The important buttons in the debug bar are:
Continue program execution (
 ) – resumes normal execution of the
program
Step over (
 ) – executes a single line of code without entering any
function or method call
Step into (
 ) – executes the next line of code, including entering a
function or method call
Step out (
 ) – continues execution until the current function or method
is exited
Click the 
  button until you highlight the badMethod()
line (do not execute this line). Note that you do not step into

--- Page 313 ---
the print() method – because it is an Apple-written
method, you know there will be no problems there.
With badMethod() highlighted, click the 
  button to step
into the badMethod() method, and continue stepping
through the code with 
  until the application crashes. It will
take you quite a few clicks, and it will look like you are going
through the same lines of code over and over – in fact, you are,
as the code loops over the ranges.
As you step through the code, you can pause to mouseover i
and array to see their values update (Figure 8.11).
Figure 8.11  Examining the value of a variable
Once the application crashes, you have confirmation that the
crash occurs within the badMethod() method. With this
knowledge you can now delete or disable the breakpoint at the
func buttonTapped(_ sender: UIButton) line.
To delete a breakpoint, Control-click it and select Delete
Breakpoint. You can also delete a breakpoint by dragging the
blue marker out of the gutter, as shown in Figure 8.12.

--- Page 314 ---
Figure 8.12  Dragging a marker to delete the
breakpoint
Occasionally, you want to be notified when a line of code is
triggered, but you do not need any additional information or
for the application to pause when it hits that line. To
accomplish this, you can add a sound to a breakpoint and have
it automatically continue execution after being triggered.
To check whether the problem is in the addition of objects in
the array, add a new breakpoint at the array.insert(i,
at: i) line of the badMethod() method. Then Control-
click the marker and select Edit Breakpoint.... Click the Add Action
button and select Sound from the pop-up menu. Finally, check
the Automatically continue after evaluating actions checkbox
(Figure 8.13).

--- Page 315 ---
Figure 8.13  Enabling breakpoint actions
You have configured the breakpoint to make an alert sound
instead of stopping execution every time it is encountered. Run
the application again and tap the button. You should hear a
sequence of sounds, and the application will crash.
It seems the application is safely completing the for loop, but
you need to be sure. Find and Control-click your breakpoint
marker again, selecting Edit Breakpoint... as before. In the editor
pop-up, click the 
  to the right of the sound action to add a
new action.
From the pop-up, select Log Message. In the Text field, enter
Pass number %H (%H is the breakpoint hit count, a
reference to the number of times the breakpoint has been
encountered). Finally, make sure the Log message to console radio
button is selected (Figure 8.14).

--- Page 316 ---
Figure 8.14  Assigning multiple actions to a
breakpoint
Run the application again and tap the button. You will hear the
sequence of sounds again, and the application will crash as
before. But this time, if you watch the console (or scroll up
after the application crashes), you will see that the breakpoint
was encountered 10 times. This confirms that your code is
completing the loop safely.
So perhaps the problem is in removing items from the array.
Delete your current breakpoint and add a new one on the line
array.removeObject(at: 0). Edit the breakpoint to
log the pass number and continue automatically, as before
(Figure 8.15).

--- Page 317 ---
Figure 8.15  Adding a logging breakpoint
Run the application and tap the button. When it crashes, scroll
up in the console and you will see that the second breakpoint
was encountered 11 times. That is one time too many, and you
have your smoking gun. It also explains the
NSRangeException logged on the console as the
application crashes. Carefully read the crash log on the console
again and make as much sense of it as possible.
Before fixing the problem, take the time to explore a couple
more debugging strategies. First, disable or delete any
remaining breakpoints in the application.
In these simple examples, you have known just where to look
to find the bug in your code, but in real-world development

--- Page 318 ---
you will often have no idea where in your application a bug is
hiding. It would be nice if you could tell which line of code is
causing an uncaught exception resulting in a crash.
It would be nice – and with an exception breakpoint, you
can do just that. Open the breakpoint navigator and click the 
in the lower-left corner of the window. From the contextual
menu, select Exception Breakpoint.... A new exception breakpoint
is created and a pop-up appears. Make sure it catches all
exceptions on throw, as shown in Figure 8.16.
Figure 8.16  Adding an exception breakpoint
Run the application and tap the button once again. The
application stops and Xcode takes you to the line that directly
causes the exception to be raised. Note, however, that there is
no console log. That is because the application has not crashed
yet. To see the crash and read the cause, click the 
  button
on the debug bar until you see the crash.
This strategy is the one to begin with as you tackle a new bug.
In fact, many programmers always keep an exception
breakpoint active while developing. Why did we make you

--- Page 319 ---
wait so long to use it? Because if you had started with an
exception breakpoint, you would not have needed to learn
about the other debugging strategies, and they have their uses,
too. Feel free to remove this breakpoint if you would like; you
will not need it again.
You are going to try one final technique: the symbolic
breakpoint. These are breakpoints specified not by line
number, but by the name of a function or method (referred to
as a symbol). Symbolic breakpoints are triggered when the
symbol is called – whether the symbol is in your code or in a
framework for which you have no code.
Add a new symbolic breakpoint in the breakpoint navigator by
clicking the 
  button in the lower-left corner and, from the
contextual menu, selecting Symbolic Breakpoint.... In the pop-up,
specify badMethod as the symbol, as shown in Figure 8.17. This
means that every time badMethod() is called, the
application will stop.

--- Page 320 ---
Figure 8.17  Adding a symbolic breakpoint
Run the application to test the breakpoint. The application
should stop at badMethod() after you tap the Tap me! button.
In a real-world app, it is rare that you would use a symbolic
breakpoint on a method that you created; you would likely add
a normal breakpoint like the ones you saw earlier in this
chapter. Symbolic breakpoints are most useful to stop on a
method that you did not write, such as a method in one of
Apple’s frameworks. For example, you might want to know
whenever the method loadView() is triggered for any view
controller within the application.
Finally, fix the bug.
func badMethod() { 
    let array = NSMutableArray() 
 
    for i in 0..<10 { 
        array.insert(i, at: i) 
    } 
 

--- Page 321 ---
    // Go one step too far emptying the array (notice the range change): 
    for _ in 0...10 { 
    for _ in 0..<10 { 
        array.removeObject(at: 0) 
    } 
} 
THE LLDB CONSOLE
A great feature of Xcode’s LLDB debugger is that it has a
command-line interface. The console area can be used not only
to read messages but also to type LLDB commands. The
debugger command-line interface is active whenever you see
the blue (lldb) prompt on the console.
Make sure your symbolic breakpoint on badMethod() is
still active, run the application, and tap the button to break at
that point. Look at the console and you will see the (lldb)
prompt (Figure 8.18). Click beside the prompt, and you can
type commands.
Figure 8.18  The (lldb) prompt on the console
One of the most useful LLDB commands is print-object,
abbreviated po. This command prints a nice description of any
instance. Try it out by typing on the console.
(lldb) po self 
<Buggy.ViewController: 0x7fae9852bf20> 

--- Page 322 ---
The response to the command is that self is an instance of
ViewController. Now advance one line of code with the
command step; this will initialize the array constant
reference. Print the reference’s value with po.
(lldb) step 
(lldb) po array 
0 elements 
The response 0 elements is not very useful, as it does not
give you a lot of information. The print command,
abbreviated p, can be more verbose. Try it.
(lldb) p array 
(NSMutableArray) $R3 = 0x00007fae98517c00 0 elements {} 
Frequently, using the console with print or print-
object to examine variables is much more convenient than
Xcode’s variables view pane.
Another useful LLDB command is expression,
abbreviated expr. This command allows you to enter Swift
code to modify variables. For example, add some data to the
array, look at the contents, and continue execution.
(lldb) expr array.insert(1, at: 0) 
(lldb) p array 
(NSMutableArray) $R5 = 0x00007fae98517c00 1 element { 
  [0] = 0xb000000000000013 Int64(1) 
} 
(lldb) po array 
▿  1 element 
  - 0 : 1 
  (lldb) continue 
Process 8822 resuming 
Perhaps more surprisingly, you can also change the UI with
LLDB expressions. Tap the button to stop the application
again and try changing the view’s backgroundColor to
red.
(lldb) expr self.view.backgroundColor = UIColor.red 
(lldb) continue 
Process 8822 resuming 

--- Page 323 ---
There are many LLDB commands. To learn more, enter the
help command at the (lldb) prompt.

--- Page 324 ---
9 
UITableView and
UITableViewController
Many iOS applications show the user a list of items and allow
the user to select, delete, or reorder items on the list. Whether
an application displays a list of people in the user’s address
book or a list of best-selling items on the App Store, it is a
UITableView doing the work.
A UITableView displays a single column of data with a
variable number of rows. Figure 9.1 shows some examples of
UITableView.

--- Page 325 ---
Figure 9.1  Examples of UITableView


--- Page 326 ---
Beginning the LootLogger Application
In this chapter, you are going to start an application called
LootLogger that keeps an inventory of all your possessions. In
the case of a fire or other catastrophe, you will have a record
for your insurance company.
So far, your iOS projects have been small, but LootLogger will
grow into a realistically complex application over the course
of eight chapters. By the end of this chapter, LootLogger will
present a list of Item instances in a UITableView, as
shown in Figure 9.2.

--- Page 327 ---
Figure 9.2  LootLogger: phase 1
To get started, open Xcode and create a new iOS Single View App
project. Configure it as shown in Figure 9.3.

--- Page 328 ---
Figure 9.3  Configuring LootLogger


--- Page 329 ---
UITableViewController
A UITableView is a view object. Recall that in the MVC
design pattern, which iOS developers do their best to follow,
each class falls into exactly one of the following categories:
model: holds data and knows nothing about the UI
view: is visible to the user and knows nothing about the model objects
controller: keeps the UI and the model objects in sync and controls the
flow of the application
As a view object, a UITableView does not handle
application logic or data. When using a UITableView, you
must consider what else is necessary to get the table working
in your application:
A UITableView typically needs a view controller to handle its
appearance on the screen.
A UITableView needs a data source. A UITableView asks its
data source for the number of rows to display, the data to be shown in
those rows, and other tidbits that make a UITableView a useful UI.
Without a data source, a table view is just an empty container. The
dataSource for a UITableView can be any type of object as long
as it conforms to the UITableViewDataSource protocol.
A UITableView typically needs a delegate that can inform other
objects of events involving the UITableView. The delegate can be
any object as long as it conforms to the UITableViewDelegate
protocol.
An instance of the class UITableViewController can
fill all three roles: view controller, data source, and delegate.
In the MVC pattern, all these roles are fulfilled by controller
objects.
UITableViewController is a subclass of
UIViewController and therefore has a view. A
UITableViewController’s view is always an instance
of UITableView, and the UITableViewController

--- Page 330 ---
handles the preparation and presentation of the
UITableView.
When a UITableViewController creates its view, the
dataSource and delegate properties of the
UITableView are automatically set to point at the
UITableViewController (Figure 9.4).
Figure 9.4  UITableViewController-UITableView
relationship
SUBCLASSING
UITABLEVIEWCONTROLLER
You are going to implement a subclass of
UITableViewController for LootLogger. Create a new
Swift file named ItemsViewController. In
ItemsViewController.swift, define a
UITableViewController subclass named
ItemsViewController.
Listing 9.1  Creating the ItemsViewController
class (ItemsViewController.swift)
import Foundation
import UIKit 

--- Page 331 ---
 
class ItemsViewController: UITableViewController { 
 
}
Now open Main.storyboard. You want the initial view
controller to be a table view controller. Select the existing View
Controller and press Delete. Then drag a Table View Controller from
the library onto the canvas. With the Table View Controller
selected, open its identity inspector and change the class to
ItemsViewController. Finally, open the attributes inspector for Items
View Controller and check the Is Initial View Controller checkbox.
Build and run your application. You should see an empty table
view, as shown in Figure 9.5. As a subclass of
UIViewController, a UITableViewController
inherits the view property. When this property is accessed for
the first time, the loadView() method is called, which
creates and loads a view object. A
UITableViewController’s view is always an instance
of UITableView, so asking for the view of a
UITableViewController gets you a bright, shiny, and
empty table view.

--- Page 332 ---
Figure 9.5  Empty UITableView
You no longer need the ViewController.swift file that
the template created for you. Select this file in the project

--- Page 333 ---
navigator and press Delete.

--- Page 334 ---
Creating the Item Class
Your table view needs some rows to display. Each row in the
table view will display an item with information such as a
name, serial number, and value in dollars.
Create a new Swift file named Item. In Item.swift,
define the Item class and give it four properties.
Listing 9.2  Creating the Item class (Item.swift)
import Foundation
import UIKit 
 
class Item { 
    var name: String 
    var valueInDollars: Int 
    var serialNumber: String? 
    let dateCreated: Date
}
Notice that serialNumber is an optional String,
necessary because an item may not have a serial number. Also,
notice that none of the properties has a default value. Without
these default values, Xcode will report an error that Item has
no initializers. You will need to give these properties their
values in a designated initializer.
CUSTOM INITIALIZERS
You learned about struct initializers in Chapter 2. Initializers
on structs are fairly straightforward because structs do not
support inheritance. Classes, on the other hand, have some
rules for initializers to support inheritance.
Classes can have two kinds of initializers: designated
initializers and convenience initializers.
A designated initializer is a primary initializer for the class.
Every class has at least one designated initializer. A designated

--- Page 335 ---
initializer ensures that all properties in the class have a value.
Once it ensures that, a designated initializer calls a designated
initializer on its superclass (if it has one).
Implement a new designated initializer on the Item class that
sets the initial values for all the properties.
Listing 9.3  Adding a designated initializer
(Item.swift)
import UIKit 
 
class Item { 
    var name: String 
    var valueInDollars: Int 
    var serialNumber: String? 
    let dateCreated: Date 
 
    init(name: String, serialNumber: String?, valueInDollars: Int) { 
        self.name = name 
        self.valueInDollars = valueInDollars 
        self.serialNumber = serialNumber 
        self.dateCreated = Date() 
    } 
} 
This initializer takes in arguments for the name,
serialNumber, and valueInDollars. Because the
argument names and the property names are the same, you
must use self to distinguish the property from the argument.
Now that you have implemented your own custom initializer,
you can never use the “free” init() initializer that classes
have. The free initializer is useful when all your class’s
properties have default values and you do not need to do
additional work to create the new instance. The Item class
does not satisfy these criteria, so you have declared a custom
initializer for the class. Now that you have a custom initializer,
if you were to go back and add default values to each of
Item’s properties, you still would not be able to use the free
initializer.
Every class must have at least one designated initializer, but
convenience initializers are optional. You can think of
convenience initializers as helpers. A convenience initializer

--- Page 336 ---
always calls another initializer on the same class. Convenience
initializers are indicated by the convenience keyword
before the initializer name.
Add a convenience initializer to Item that creates a randomly
generated item.
Listing 9.4  Adding a convenience initializer
(Item.swift)
convenience init(random: Bool = false) { 
    if random { 
        let adjectives = ["Fluffy", "Rusty", "Shiny"] 
        let nouns = ["Bear", "Spork", "Mac"] 
 
        let randomAdjective = adjectives.randomElement()! 
        let randomNoun = nouns.randomElement()! 
 
        let randomName = "\(randomAdjective) \(randomNoun)" 
        let randomValue = Int.random(in: 0..<100) 
        let randomSerialNumber = 
            UUID().uuidString.components(separatedBy: "-").first! 
 
        self.init(name: randomName, 
                  serialNumber: randomSerialNumber, 
                  valueInDollars: randomValue) 
    } else { 
        self.init(name: "", serialNumber: nil, valueInDollars: 0) 
    }
}
If random is true, the instance is configured with a random
name, serial number, and value. Notice that you are force
unwrapping the call to randomElement(). Why does this
method return an optional element? If the array is empty, there
are no elements to return. But you know the adjectives
and nouns arrays are not empty, because you declared them a
few lines above, and so it is safe to force unwrap this optional.
Finally, at the end of both branches of the conditional, you call
through to the designated initializer for Item. Convenience
initializers must call another initializer on the same type,
whereas designated initializers must call a designated
initializer on the superclass.
The Item class is ready for work. In the next section you will
display an array of Item instances in a table view.

--- Page 338 ---
UITableView’s Data Source
The process of providing rows to a UITableView in Cocoa
Touch (the collection of frameworks used to build iOS apps) is
different from the typical procedural programming task. In a
procedural design, you tell the table view what it should
display. In Cocoa Touch, the table view asks another object –
its dataSource – what it should display. In this case, the
ItemsViewController is the data source, so it needs a
way to store item data.
You are going to use an array to store the Item instances, but
with a twist. The array that holds the Item instances will be
abstracted into another object – an ItemStore (Figure 9.6).

--- Page 339 ---
Figure 9.6  LootLogger object diagram
If an object wants to see all the items, it will ask the
ItemStore for the array that contains them. In future
chapters, the store will be responsible for performing
operations on the array, like reordering, adding, and removing
items. It will also be responsible for saving and loading the
items from disk.
Create a new Swift file named ItemStore. In
ItemStore.swift, define the ItemStore class and

--- Page 340 ---
declare a property to store the list of Items.
Listing 9.5  Creating the ItemStore class
(ItemStore.swift)
import Foundation
import UIKit 
 
class ItemStore { 
 
    var allItems = [Item]() 
 
}
The ItemsViewController will call a method on
ItemStore when it wants a new Item to be created. The
ItemStore will oblige, creating the object and adding it to
an array of instances of Item.
In ItemStore.swift, implement createItem() to
create and return a new Item.
Listing 9.6  Adding an item creation method
(ItemStore.swift)
@discardableResult func createItem() -> Item { 
    let newItem = Item(random: true) 
 
    allItems.append(newItem) 
 
    return newItem
}
The @discardableResult annotation means that a caller
of this function is free to ignore the result of calling this
function. Take a look at the following code, which illustrates
this effect.
    // This is OK 
    let newItem = itemStore.createItem() 
 
    // This is also OK; the result is not assigned to a variable 
    itemStore.createItem() 
You will see why this annotation is needed shortly.

--- Page 341 ---
GIVING THE CONTROLLER ACCESS TO
THE STORE
In ItemsViewController.swift, add a property for an
ItemStore.
Listing 9.7  Adding an ItemStore property
(ItemsViewController.swift)
class ItemsViewController: UITableViewController { 
 
    var itemStore: ItemStore! 
} 
Now, where should you set this property on the
ItemsViewController instance? When the application
first launches, the SceneDelegate’s
scene(_:willConnectTo:options:) method is
called. The SceneDelegate is declared in
SceneDelegate.swift and serves as the delegate for the
application’s scenes.
You have encountered the “scene” terminology in Interface
Builder. Users tend to call instances of an application’s UI
“windows,” but they are not actually analogous to instances of
UIWindow. To avoid confusion, Interface Builder and the iOS
SDK refer to instances of an application’s UI as “scenes.” A
scene is an instance of UIScene (commonly
UIWindowScene, a subclass of UIScene) and is
responsible for managing one instance of an application’s UI.
Open SceneDelegate.swift and locate its
scene(_:willConnectTo:options:) method. Access
the ItemsViewController (which will be the
rootViewController of the window) and set its
itemStore property to be a new instance of ItemStore.
Listing 9.8  Injecting the ItemStore
(SceneDelegate.swift)

--- Page 342 ---
func scene(_ scene: UIScene, 
           willConnectTo session: UISceneSession, 
           options connectionOptions: UIScene.ConnectionOptions) { 
    guard let _ = (scene as? UIWindowScene) else { return } 
 
    // Create an ItemStore 
    let itemStore = ItemStore() 
 
    // Access the ItemsViewController and set its item store 
    let itemsController = window!.rootViewController as! 
ItemsViewController 
    itemsController.itemStore = itemStore 
} 
Finally, in ItemStore.swift, implement the designated
initializer to add five random items.
Listing 9.9  Populating the ItemStore with Item
instances (ItemStore.swift)
init() { 
    for _ in 0..<5 { 
        createItem() 
    }
}
This is why you annotated createItem() with
@discardableResult. If you had not, then the call to that
function would have needed to look like:
    // Call the function, but ignore the result 
    let _ = createItem() 
At this point you may be wondering why itemStore was set
externally on the ItemsViewController. Why didn’t the
ItemsViewController instance itself just create an
instance of the store? The reason for this approach is based on
a fairly complex topic called the dependency inversion
principle. The essential goal of this principle is to decouple
objects in an application by inverting certain dependencies
between them. This results in more robust and maintainable
code.
The dependency inversion principle states that:
1. High-level objects should not depend on low-level objects. Both should
depend on abstractions.

--- Page 343 ---
2. Abstractions should not depend on details. Details should depend on
abstractions.
The abstraction required by the dependency inversion
principle in LootLogger is the concept of a “store.” A store is a
lower-level object that retrieves and saves Item instances
through details that are only known to that class.
ItemsViewController is a higher-level object that only
knows that it will be provided with a utility object (the store)
from which it can obtain a list of Item instances and to which
it can pass new or updated Item instances to be stored
persistently. This results in a decoupling, because
ItemsViewController is not dependent on
ItemStore.
In fact, as long as the store abstraction is respected,
ItemStore could be replaced by another object that fetches
Item instances differently (such as by using a web service)
without any changes to ItemsViewController.
A common pattern used when implementing the dependency
inversion principle is dependency injection. In its simplest
form, dependency injection means that higher-level objects do
not assume which lower-level objects they need to use.
Instead, those are passed to them through an initializer or
property. In your implementation of
ItemsViewController, you used injection through a
property to give it a store.
IMPLEMENTING DATA SOURCE METHODS
Now that there are some items in the store, you need to teach
ItemsViewController how to turn those items into rows
that its UITableView can display. When a UITableView
wants to know what to display, it calls methods from the set of
methods declared in the UITableViewDataSource
protocol.

--- Page 344 ---
Open the documentation and search for the
UITableViewDataSource protocol reference. Scroll
down to the Topics section (Figure 9.7).
Figure 9.7  UITableViewDataSource protocol
documentation
In the Providing the Number of Rows and Sections and Providing Cells,
Headers, and Footers sections, notice that two of the methods are
marked Required. For ItemsViewController to conform
to UITableViewDataSource, it must implement
tableView(_:numberOfRowsInSection:) and
tableView(_:cellForRowAt:). These methods tell the
table view how many rows it should display and what content
to display in each row.

--- Page 345 ---
Whenever a UITableView needs to display itself, it calls a
series of methods (the required methods plus any optional ones
that have been implemented) on its dataSource. The
required method
tableView(_:numberOfRowsInSection:) returns an
integer value for the number of rows that the UITableView
should display. In the table view for LootLogger, there should be
a row for each entry in the store.
In ItemsViewController.swift, implement
tableView(_:numberOfRowsInSection:).
Listing 9.10  Implementing the first data source
method (ItemsViewController.swift)
override func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, 
        numberOfRowsInSection section: Int) -> Int { 
    return itemStore.allItems.count
}
Wondering about the section that this method refers to?
Table views can be broken up into sections, with each section
having its own set of rows. For example, in the address book,
all names beginning with “C” are grouped together in a
section. By default, a table view has one section, and in this
chapter you will work with only one. Once you understand
how a table view works, it is not hard to use multiple sections.
In fact, using sections is the first challenge at the end of this
chapter.
The second required method in the
UITableViewDataSource protocol is
tableView(_:cellForRowAt:). To implement this
method, you need to learn about another class –
UITableViewCell. 

--- Page 346 ---
UITableViewCells
Each row of a table view is a view. These views are instances
of UITableViewCell. In this section, you will create the
instances of UITableViewCell to fill the table view.
A cell itself has one subview – its contentView
(Figure 9.8). The contentView is the superview for the
content of the cell. The cell may also have an accessory view.
Figure 9.8  UITableViewCell layout
The accessory view shows an action-oriented icon, such as a
checkmark, a disclosure icon, or an information button. These
icons are accessed through predefined constants for the
appearance of the accessory view. The default is
UITableViewCellAccessoryType.none, and that is
what you are going to use in this chapter. You will see the
accessory view again in Chapter 23. (Curious now? See the
documentation for UITableViewCell for more details.)
The real meat of a UITableViewCell is the
contentView, which has three subviews of its own
(Figure 9.9). Two of those subviews are UILabel instances
that are properties of UITableViewCell named
textLabel and detailTextLabel. The third subview is
a UIImageView called imageView. In this chapter, you
will use textLabel and detailTextLabel.

--- Page 347 ---
Figure 9.9  UITableViewCell hierarchy
Each cell also has a UITableViewCellStyle that
determines which subviews are used and their position within
the contentView. Examples of these styles and their
constants are shown in Figure 9.10. 

--- Page 348 ---
Figure 9.10  UITableViewCellStyle: styles and
constants
CREATING AND RETRIEVING
UITABLEVIEWCELLS
For now, each cell will display the name of an Item as its
textLabel and the valueInDollars of the Item as its
detailTextLabel. To make this happen, you need to
implement the second required method from the
UITableViewDataSource protocol,
tableView(_:cellForRowAt:). This method will
create a cell, set its textLabel to the name of the Item, set
its detailTextLabel to the valueInDollars of the
Item, and return it to the UITableView (Figure 9.11).

--- Page 349 ---
Figure 9.11  UITableViewCell retrieval
How do you decide which cell an Item corresponds to? One
of the parameters sent to
tableView(_:cellForRowAt:) is an IndexPath,
which has two properties: section and row. When this
method is called on a data source, the table view is asking,
“Can I have a cell to display in section X, row Y?” Because
there is only one section in this exercise, your implementation
will only be concerned with the index path’s row.
In ItemsViewController.swift, implement
tableView(_:cellForRowAt:) so that the nth row

--- Page 350 ---
displays the nth entry in the allItems array.
Listing 9.11  Returning a table view cell for each row
(ItemsViewController.swift)
override func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, 
        cellForRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) -> UITableViewCell { 
    // Create an instance of UITableViewCell with default appearance 
    let cell = UITableViewCell(style: .value1, reuseIdentifier: 
"UITableViewCell") 
 
    // Set the text on the cell with the description of the item 
    // that is at the nth index of items, where n = row this cell 
    // will appear in on the table view 
    let item = itemStore.allItems[indexPath.row] 
 
    cell.textLabel?.text = item.name 
    cell.detailTextLabel?.text = "$\(item.valueInDollars)" 
 
    return cell
}
Build and run the application now, and you will see a
UITableView populated with a list of random items. 
REUSING UITABLEVIEWCELLS
iOS devices have a limited amount of memory. If you were
displaying a list with thousands of entries in a
UITableView, you would have thousands of instances of
UITableViewCell. Most of these cells would take up
memory needlessly. After all, if the user cannot see a cell
onscreen, then there is no reason for that cell to have a claim
on memory.
To conserve memory and improve performance, you can reuse
table view cells. When the user scrolls the table, some cells
move offscreen and are put into a pool of cells available for
reuse. Then, instead of creating a brand new cell for every
request, the data source first checks the pool. If there is an
unused cell, the data source configures it with new data and
returns it to the table view (Figure 9.12).

--- Page 351 ---
Figure 9.12  Reusable instances of
UITableViewCell
Be aware of one problem: If you subclass
UITableViewCell to create a special look or behavior,
then your UITableView will have different types of cells.
Different subclasses floating around in the pool of reusable
cells create the possibility of getting back a cell of the wrong
type. You must be sure of the type of the cell returned so that
you can be sure of what properties and methods it has.
Note that you do not care about getting any specific cell out of
the pool, because you are going to change the cell content
anyway. What you need is a cell of a specific type. The good
news is that every cell has a reuseIdentifier property of
type String. When a data source asks the table view for a

--- Page 352 ---
reusable cell, it passes a string and says, “I need a cell with
this reuse identifier.” By convention, the reuse identifier is
typically the name of the cell class.
To reuse cells, you need to register either a prototype cell or a
class with the table view for a specific reuse identifier. You are
going to register the default UITableViewCell class. You
tell the table view, “Hey, any time I ask for a cell with this
reuse identifier, give me back a cell that is this specific
class.” The table view will either give you a cell from the
reuse pool or instantiate a new cell if there are no cells of that
type in the reuse pool.
Open Main.storyboard. Notice in the table view that
there is a section for Prototype Cells (Figure 9.13).
Figure 9.13  Prototype cells
In this area, you can configure the different kinds of cells that
you need for the associated table view. If you are creating
custom cells, this is where you will set up the interface for the
cells. ItemsViewController only needs one kind of cell,
and using one of the built-in styles will work great for now, so

--- Page 353 ---
you will only need to configure some attributes on the cell that
is already on the canvas.
Select the prototype cell and open its attributes inspector.
Change the Style to Right Detail (which corresponds to
UITableViewCellStyle.value1) and give it an
Identifier of UITableViewCell (Figure 9.14).
Figure 9.14  Table view cell attributes
Next, in ItemsViewController.swift, update
tableView(_:cellForRowAt:) to reuse cells. 
Listing 9.12  Dequeuing a reused cell
(ItemsViewController.swift)
override func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, 
        cellForRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) -> UITableViewCell { 
    // Create an instance of UITableViewCell, with default appearance 
    let cell = UITableViewCell(style: .value1, reuseIdentifier: 
"UITableViewCell") 
 
    // Get a new or recycled cell 
    let cell = tableView.dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier: 
"UITableViewCell", 
        for: indexPath) 
    ... 
The method
dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier:for:)
will check the pool, or “queue,” of cells to see whether a cell
with the correct reuse identifier already exists. If so, it will

--- Page 354 ---
“dequeue” that cell. If there is not an existing cell, a new cell
will be created and returned.
Build and run the application. The behavior of the application
should remain the same. Behind the scenes, reusing cells
means that only a handful of cells have to be created, which
puts fewer demands on memory. Your application’s users (and
their devices) will thank you. 

--- Page 355 ---
Editing Table Views
One of the great features of table views is their built-in support
for editing. This includes inserting new rows, deleting existing
rows, and rearranging rows. In this section, you will add
support for all three of those features to LootLogger.
EDITING MODE
UITableView has an editing property, and when this
property is set to true, the UITableView enters editing
mode. Once the table view is in editing mode, the rows of the
table can be manipulated by the user. Depending on how the
table view is configured, the user can change the order of the
rows, add rows, or remove rows. (Editing mode does not allow
the user to edit the content of a row.)
But first, the user needs a way to put the UITableView in
editing mode. For now, you are going to include a button in the
header view of the table. A header view appears at the top of
a table and is useful for adding section-wide or table-wide
titles and controls. It can be any UIView instance.
Note that the table view uses the word “header” in two
different ways: There can be a table header and section
headers. Likewise, there can be a table footer and section
footers (Figure 9.15).

--- Page 356 ---
Figure 9.15  Headers and footers
You are creating a table view header. It will have two
subviews that are instances of UIButton: one to toggle

--- Page 357 ---
editing mode and the other to add a new Item to the table.
You could create this view programmatically, but in this case
you will create the view and its subviews in the storyboard
file.
First, let’s set up the necessary code. In
ItemsViewController.swift, stub out two methods in
the implementation.
Listing 9.13  Adding two button action methods
(ItemsViewController.swift)
class ItemsViewController: UITableViewController { 
 
    var itemStore: ItemStore! 
 
    @IBAction func addNewItem(_ sender: UIButton) { 
 
    } 
 
    @IBAction func toggleEditingMode(_ sender: UIButton) { 
 
    }
Now open Main.storyboard. From the library, drag a View
to the very top of the table view, above the prototype cell. This
will add the view as a header view for the table view. Resize
the height of this view to be about 60 points. (You can use the
size inspector if you want to make it exact.)
Now drag two Buttons from the library to the header view.
Change their text and position them as shown in Figure 9.16.
You do not need to be exact – you will add constraints next to
position the buttons.

--- Page 358 ---
Figure 9.16  Adding buttons to the header view
Select both of the buttons and open the Auto Layout Align
menu. Select Vertically in Container with a constant of 0, and then
click Add 2 Constraints (Figure 9.17).

--- Page 359 ---
Figure 9.17  Align menu constraints
Now open the Add New Constraints menu and configure it as
shown in Figure 9.18. Make sure the values for the leading and
trailing constraints save after you have typed them; sometimes
the values do not save, so it can be a bit tricky. When you have
done that, click Add 4 Constraints.

--- Page 360 ---
Figure 9.18  Adding new constraints
Finally, connect the actions for the two buttons as shown in
Figure 9.19.

--- Page 361 ---
Figure 9.19  Connecting the two actions
Build and run the application to see the interface. 
Now let’s implement the toggleEditingMode(_:)
method. You could toggle the editing property of
UITableView directly. However, UIViewController
also has an editing property. A
UITableViewController instance automatically sets the
editing property of its table view to match its own
editing property. By setting the editing property on the
view controller itself, you can ensure that other aspects of the
interface also enter and leave editing mode. You will see an

--- Page 362 ---
example of this in Chapter 12 with UIViewController’s
editButtonItem.
To set the isEditing property for a view controller, you call
the method setEditing(_:animated:). In
ItemsViewController.swift, implement
toggleEditingMode(_:).
Listing 9.14  Updating the interface for editing mode
(ItemsViewController.swift)
@IBAction func toggleEditingMode(_ sender: UIButton) { 
    // If you are currently in editing mode... 
    if isEditing { 
        // Change text of button to inform user of state 
        sender.setTitle("Edit", for: .normal) 
 
        // Turn off editing mode 
        setEditing(false, animated: true) 
    } else { 
        // Change text of button to inform user of state 
        sender.setTitle("Done", for: .normal) 
 
        // Enter editing mode 
        setEditing(true, animated: true) 
    } 
} 
Build and run your application again. Tap the Edit button and
the UITableView will enter editing mode (Figure 9.20). 

--- Page 363 ---
Figure 9.20  UITableView in editing mode
(You might notice you can’t delete or move these rows yet.
You will get to that shortly.)
ADDING ROWS
There are two common interfaces for adding rows to a table
view at runtime.
A button above the cells of the table view: usually for adding a
record for which there is a detail view. For example, in the Contacts app,
you tap a button when you meet a new person and want to take down
their information.
A cell with a green 
 : usually for adding a new field to a record,
such as when you want to add a birthday to a person’s record in the
Contacts app. In editing mode, you tap the green 
 next to add birthday.
In this exercise, you will use the first option and create a New
button in the header view. When this button is tapped, a new
row will be added to the UITableView.
In ItemsViewController.swift, implement
addNewItem(_:).

--- Page 364 ---
Listing 9.15  Adding a new item to the table view
(ItemsViewController.swift)
@IBAction func addNewItem(_ sender: UIButton) { 
    // Make a new index path for the 0th section, last row 
    let lastRow = tableView.numberOfRows(inSection: 0) 
    let indexPath = IndexPath(row: lastRow, section: 0) 
 
    // Insert this new row into the table 
    tableView.insertRows(at: [indexPath], with: .automatic) 
} 
Build and run the application. Tap the Add button and … the
application crashes. The console tells you that the table view
has an internal inconsistency exception.
Remember that, ultimately, it is the dataSource of the
UITableView that determines the number of rows the table
view should display. After inserting a new row, the table view
has six rows (the original five plus the new one). When the
UITableView asks its dataSource for the number of
rows, the ItemsViewController consults the store and
returns that there should be five rows. The UITableView
cannot resolve this inconsistency and throws an exception.
You must make sure that the UITableView and its
dataSource agree on the number of rows by adding a new
Item to the ItemStore before inserting the new row.
In ItemsViewController.swift, update
addNewItem(_:).
Listing 9.16  Fixing the crash when adding a new
item (ItemsViewController.swift)
@IBAction func addNewItem(_ sender: UIButton) { 
    // Make a new index path for the 0th section, last row 
    let lastRow = tableView.numberOfRows(inSection: 0) 
    let indexPath = IndexPath(row: lastRow, section: 0) 
 
    // Insert this new row into the table 
    tableView.insertRows(at: [indexPath], with: .automatic) 
 
    // Create a new item and add it to the store 
    let newItem = itemStore.createItem() 
 

--- Page 365 ---
    // Figure out where that item is in the array 
    if let index = itemStore.allItems.firstIndex(of: newItem) { 
        let indexPath = IndexPath(row: index, section: 0) 
 
        // Insert this new row into the table 
        tableView.insertRows(at: [indexPath], with: .automatic) 
    } 
} 
Let’s fix the error you are seeing where you find the index of
newItem in the allItems array. The
firstIndex(of:) method works by comparing the item
that you are looking for to each of the items in the collection.
It does this using the == operator. Types that conform to the
Equatable protocol must implement this operator, and
Item does not yet conform to Equatable.
In Item.swift, declare that Item conforms to the
Equatable protocol and implement the required
overloading of the == operator.
Listing 9.17  Defining Item equality (Item.swift)
class Item: Equatable { 
    ... 
    static func ==(lhs: Item, rhs: Item) -> Bool { 
        return lhs.name == rhs.name 
            && lhs.serialNumber == rhs.serialNumber 
            && lhs.valueInDollars == rhs.valueInDollars 
            && lhs.dateCreated == rhs.dateCreated 
    } 
} 
You compare each of the properties between the two items. If
all the properties match then the items are the same.
Build and run the application. Tap the Add button, and the new
row will slide into the bottom position of the table. Remember
that the role of a view object is to present model objects to the
user; updating views without updating the model objects is not
very useful. 
Now that you have the ability to add rows and items, you no
longer need the code that puts five random items into the store.
Open ItemStore.swift and remove the initializer code.

--- Page 366 ---
Listing 9.18  Removing the unneeded initializer
(ItemStore.swift)
init() { 
    for _ in 0..<5 { 
        createItem() 
    }
}
Build and run the application. There will no longer be any
rows when you first launch the application, but you can add
some by tapping the Add button.
DELETING ROWS
In editing mode, the red circles with the minus sign (shown in
Figure 9.20) are deletion controls, and tapping one should
delete that row. However, at this point, you cannot actually
delete the row. (Try it and see.) Before the table view will
delete a row, it calls a method on its data source about the
proposed deletion and waits for confirmation.
When deleting a cell, you must do two things: remove the row
from the UITableView and remove the Item associated
with it from the ItemStore. To pull this off, the
ItemStore must know how to remove objects from itself.
In ItemStore.swift, implement a new method to remove
a specific item.
Listing 9.19  Removing an item from the store
(ItemStore.swift)
func removeItem(_ item: Item) { 
    if let index = allItems.firstIndex(of: item) { 
        allItems.remove(at: index) 
    }
}
Now you will implement
tableView(_:commit:forRowAt:), a method from the
UITableViewDataSource protocol. (This method is

--- Page 367 ---
called on the ItemsViewController. Keep in mind that
while the ItemStore is where the data is kept, the
ItemsViewController is the table view’s
dataSource.)
When tableView(_:commit:forRowAt:) is called on
the data source, two extra arguments are passed along with it.
The first is the UITableViewCell.EditingStyle,
which, in this case, is .delete. The other argument is the
IndexPath of the row in the table.
In ItemsViewController.swift, implement this
method to have the ItemStore remove the right object and
confirm the row deletion by calling the method
deleteRows(at:with:) on the table view.
Listing 9.20  Implementing table view row deletion
(ItemsViewController.swift)
override func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, 
                        commit editingStyle: 
UITableViewCell.EditingStyle, 
                        forRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) { 
    // If the table view is asking to commit a delete command... 
    if editingStyle == .delete { 
        let item = itemStore.allItems[indexPath.row] 
 
        // Remove the item from the store 
        itemStore.removeItem(item) 
 
        // Also remove that row from the table view with an animation 
        tableView.deleteRows(at: [indexPath], with: .automatic) 
    }
}
Build and run your application, create some rows, and then
delete a row. It will disappear. Notice that swipe-to-delete
works also. 
MOVING ROWS
To change the order of rows in a UITableView, you will use
another method from the UITableViewDataSource
protocol – tableView(_:moveRowAt:to:).

--- Page 368 ---
To delete a row, you had to call the method
deleteRows(at:with:) on the UITableView to
confirm the deletion. Moving a row, however, does not require
confirmation: The table view moves the row on its own
authority and reports the move to its data source by calling the
method tableView(_:moveRowAt:to:). You
implement this method to update your data source to match the
new order.
But before you can implement this method, you need to give
the ItemStore a method to change the order of items in its
allItems array.
In ItemStore.swift, implement this new method.
Listing 9.21  Reordering items within the store
(ItemStore.swift)
func moveItem(from fromIndex: Int, to toIndex: Int) { 
    if fromIndex == toIndex { 
        return 
    } 
 
    // Get reference to object being moved so you can reinsert it 
    let movedItem = allItems[fromIndex] 
 
    // Remove item from array 
    allItems.remove(at: fromIndex) 
 
    // Insert item in array at new location 
    allItems.insert(movedItem, at: toIndex)
}
In ItemsViewController.swift, implement
tableView(_:moveRowAt:to:) to update the store.
Listing 9.22  Implementing table view row reordering
(ItemsViewController.swift)
override func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, 
                        moveRowAt sourceIndexPath: IndexPath, 
                        to destinationIndexPath: IndexPath) { 
    // Update the model 
    itemStore.moveItem(from: sourceIndexPath.row, to: 
destinationIndexPath.row)
}

--- Page 369 ---
Build and run your application. Add a few items, then tap Edit
and check out the new reordering controls (the three horizontal
lines) on the side of each row. Touch and hold a reordering
control and move the row to a new position (Figure 9.21).
Figure 9.21  Moving a row
Note that simply implementing
tableView(_:moveRowAt:to:) caused the reordering
controls to appear. The UITableView asks its data source at
runtime whether it implements
tableView(_:moveRowAt:to:). If it does, then the
table view adds the reordering controls whenever the table
view enters editing mode. 

--- Page 370 ---
Design Patterns
A design pattern solves a common software engineering
problem. Design patterns are not actual snippets of code, but
instead are abstract ideas or approaches that you can use in
your applications. Good design patterns are valuable and
powerful tools for any developer.
The consistent use of design patterns throughout the
development process reduces the mental overhead in solving a
problem so you can create complex applications more easily
and rapidly. Here are some of the design patterns that you have
already used:
Delegation: One object delegates certain responsibilities to another
object. You used delegation with the UITextField to be informed
when the contents of the text field change.
Data source: A data source is similar to a delegate, but instead of
reacting to another object, a data source is responsible for providing data
to another object when requested. You used the data source pattern with
table views: Each table view has a data source that is responsible for, at a
minimum, telling the table view how many rows to display and which
cell it should display at each index path.
Model-View-Controller: Each object in your applications fulfills one of
three roles. Model objects are the data. Views display the UI. Controllers
provide the glue that ties the models and views together.
Target-action pairs: One object calls a method on another object
when a specific event occurs. The target is the object that has a method
called on it, and the action is the method being called. For example, you
used target-action pairs with buttons: When a touch event occurs, a
method will be called on another object (often a view controller).
Apple is very consistent in its use of these design patterns, and
so it is important to understand and recognize them. Keep an
eye out for these patterns as you continue through this book;
recognizing them will help you learn new classes and
frameworks much more easily.

--- Page 371 ---
Bronze Challenge: Sections
Have the UITableView display two sections – one for items
worth more than $50 and one for the rest. Before you start this
challenge, make sure you copy the folder containing the
project and all its source files in Finder. Then tackle the
challenge in the copied project; you will need the original to
build on in the following chapters.

--- Page 372 ---
Silver Challenge: Constant Rows
Make it so that if there are no items, the UITableView
displays a cell that has the text No items!. This row should not
appear if there are items to display, and it should not be able to
be deleted or reordered.

--- Page 373 ---
Gold Challenge: Favorite Items
Allow the user to select favorite items by swiping right on
them. You will want to use the table view edit actions to
accomplish this. This is a bit involved; you will need to:
1. Add an isFavorite property to the Item class.
2. Investigate the UITableViewDataSource for a way to add edit
actions to a row, then implement this to toggle the isFavorite
property on the item.
3. Display whether an item is favorited. This could be done by appending
(Favorite) to the item’s name on the textLabel property.
Bonus: Implement a way to show only favorited items. This
could be done with an additional button in the table view
header view that toggles which items are displayed.

--- Page 374 ---
10 
Subclassing
UITableViewCell
A UITableView displays a list of UITableViewCell
objects. For many applications, the basic cell with its
textLabel, detailTextLabel, and imageView is
sufficient. However, when you need a cell with more detail or
a different layout, you subclass UITableViewCell.
In this chapter, you will create a subclass of
UITableViewCell named ItemCell that will display
Item instances more effectively. Each of these cells will show
an Item’s name, its value in dollars, and its serial number
(Figure 10.1).

--- Page 375 ---
Figure 10.1  LootLogger with subclassed table view
cells
You customize the appearance of UITableViewCell
subclasses by adding subviews to its contentView. Adding
subviews to the contentView instead of directly to the cell
itself is important because the cell will resize its
contentView at certain times. For example, when a table
view enters editing mode, the contentView resizes itself to
make room for the editing controls (Figure 10.2).

--- Page 376 ---
Figure 10.2  Table view cell layout in standard and
editing mode
If you added subviews directly to the UITableViewCell,
the editing controls would obscure the subviews. The cell
cannot adjust its size when entering edit mode (it must remain
the width of the table view), but the contentView can and
does.

--- Page 377 ---
Creating ItemCell
Create a new Swift file named ItemCell. In
ItemCell.swift, define ItemCell as a
UITableViewCell subclass.
Listing 10.1  Adding the ItemCell class
(ItemCell.swift)
import Foundation
import UIKit 
 
class ItemCell: UITableViewCell { 
 
}
The easiest way to configure a UITableViewCell subclass
is through a storyboard. In Chapter 9, you saw that storyboards
for table view controllers have a Prototype Cells section. This is
where you will lay out the content for the ItemCell.
Open Main.storyboard and select the UITableViewCell in
the document outline. Open its attributes inspector, change the
Style to Custom, and change the Identifier to ItemCell.
Now open its identity inspector (the 
  tab). In the Class field,
enter ItemCell (Figure 10.3).

--- Page 378 ---
Figure 10.3  Changing the cell class
Change the height of the prototype cell to be about 65 points
tall. You can change it either on the canvas or by selecting the
table view cell and changing the Row Height in its size inspector.
An ItemCell will display three text elements, so drag three
UILabel objects onto the cell. Configure them as shown in
Figure 10.4. Make the text of the bottom label a slightly
smaller font, and set the text color to Secondary Label Color.
Make sure that the labels do not overlap at all.
Figure 10.4  ItemCell’s layout
Add constraints to these three labels as follows.
1. Select the top-left label and open the Auto Layout Add New Constraints
menu. Select the top and left struts and then click Add 2 Constraints.
2. You want the bottom-left label to always be aligned with the top-left
label. Control-drag from the bottom-left label to the top-left label and
select Leading.

--- Page 379 ---
3. With the bottom-left label still selected, open the Add New Constraints
menu, select the bottom strut, and then click Add 1 Constraint.
4. Select the right label and Control-drag from this label to its superview
on its right side. Select both Trailing Space to Container and Center Vertically in
Container.
5. Select the bottom-left label and open its size inspector. Find the Vertical
Content Hugging Priority and lower it to 250. Lower the Vertical Content
Compression Resistance Priority to 749. You will learn what these Auto
Layout properties do in Chapter 11.
6. Your frames might be misplaced, so select the three labels and click the
Update Frames button.

--- Page 380 ---
Exposing the Properties of ItemCell
For ItemsViewController to configure the content of an
ItemCell in tableView(_:cellForRowAt:), the cell
must have properties that expose the three labels. These
properties will be set through outlet connections in
Main.storyboard.
The next step, then, is to create and connect outlets on
ItemCell for each of its subviews.
Open ItemCell.swift and add three properties for the
outlets.
Listing 10.2  Adding outlets to ItemCell
(ItemCell.swift)
import UIKit 
 
class ItemCell: UITableViewCell { 
 
    @IBOutlet var nameLabel: UILabel! 
    @IBOutlet var serialNumberLabel: UILabel! 
    @IBOutlet var valueLabel: UILabel! 
 
} 
You are going to connect the outlets for the three views to the
ItemCell. When connecting outlets earlier in the book, you
Control-dragged from the view controller in the storyboard to
the appropriate view. But the outlets for ItemCell are not
outlets on a controller. They are outlets on a view: the custom
UITableViewCell subclass.
Therefore, to connect the outlets for ItemCell, you will
connect them to the ItemCell view itself.
Open Main.storyboard. Control-click the ItemCell in the
document outline and make the three outlet connections shown
in Figure 10.5.

--- Page 381 ---
Figure 10.5  Connecting the outlets


--- Page 382 ---
Using ItemCell
Let’s get your custom cells onscreen. In
ItemsViewController’s
tableView(_:cellForRowAt:) method, you will
dequeue an instance of ItemCell for every row in the table.
Now that you are using a custom UITableViewCell
subclass, the table view needs to know how tall each row is.
There are a few ways to accomplish this, but the simplest way
is to set the rowHeight property of the table view to a
constant value. You will see another way shortly.
Open ItemsViewController.swift and implement
viewDidLoad() to set the height of the table view cells.
Listing 10.3  Setting a fixed row height
(ItemsViewController.swift)
override func viewDidLoad() { 
    super.viewDidLoad() 
 
    tableView.rowHeight = 65
}
Now that you have registered the ItemCell with the table
view (using the prototype cells in the storyboard), you can ask
the table view to dequeue a cell with the identifier
"ItemCell".
In ItemsViewController.swift, modify
tableView(_:cellForRowAt:).
Listing 10.4  Dequeuing ItemCell instances
(ItemsViewController.swift)
override func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, 
                        cellForRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) -> 
UITableViewCell { 

--- Page 383 ---
    // Get a new or recycled cell 
    let cell = tableView.dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier: 
"UITableViewCell", 
                                             for: indexPath) 
 
    let cell = tableView.dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier: "ItemCell", 
                                             for: indexPath) as! 
ItemCell 
 
    // Set the text on the cell with the description of the item 
    // that is at the nth index of items, where n = row this cell 
    // will appear in on the tableview 
    let item = itemStore.allItems[indexPath.row] 
 
    cell.textLabel?.text = item.name 
    cell.detailTextLabel?.text = "$\(item.valueInDollars)" 
 
    // Configure the cell with the Item 
    cell.nameLabel.text = item.name 
    cell.serialNumberLabel.text = item.serialNumber 
    cell.valueLabel.text = "$\(item.valueInDollars)" 
 
    return cell 
} 
First, the reuse identifier is updated to reflect your new
subclass. Then, for each label on the cell, you set its text to
some property from the appropriate Item.
Build and run the application. The new cells now load with
their labels populated with the values from each Item.

--- Page 384 ---
Dynamic Cell Heights
Currently, the cells have a fixed height of 65 points. It is much
better to allow the content of the cell to drive its height. That
way, if the content ever changes, the table view cell’s height
can change automatically.
You can achieve this goal, as you have probably guessed, with
Auto Layout. The UITableViewCell needs to have
vertical constraints that will exactly determine the height of
the cell. Currently, ItemCell does not have sufficient
constraints for this. You need to add a constraint between the
two left labels that fixes the vertical spacing between them.
First, open Main.storyboard. Control-drag from the
nameLabel to the serialNumberLabel and select
Vertical Spacing.
Next, open ItemsViewController.swift and update
viewDidLoad() to tell the table view that it should
compute the cell heights based on the constraints.
Listing 10.5  Using dynamic cell heights
(ItemsViewController.swift)
override func viewDidLoad() { 
    super.viewDidLoad() 
 
    tableView.rowHeight = 65 
    tableView.rowHeight = UITableView.automaticDimension 
    tableView.estimatedRowHeight = 65 
} 
UITableView.automaticDimension is the default
value for rowHeight, so while it is not necessary to add, it is
useful for understanding what is going on. Setting the
estimatedRowHeight property on the table view can
improve performance. Instead of asking each cell for its height
when the table view loads, setting this property allows some of

--- Page 385 ---
that performance cost to be deferred until the user starts
scrolling. Ultimately, though, setting an estimated row height
value is what triggers the dynamic row height system.
Build and run the application. It will look the same as it did
before. In the next section, you will learn about a technology
called Dynamic Type that will take advantage of the
automatically resizing table view cells.

--- Page 386 ---
Dynamic Type
Creating an interface that appeals to everyone can be daunting.
Some people prefer more compact interfaces so they can see
more information at once. Others might want to be able to
easily see information at a glance, or perhaps they have poor
eyesight. In short: People have different needs. Good
developers strive to make apps that meet those needs.
Dynamic Type is a technology that helps realize this goal by
providing specifically designed text styles that are
optimized for legibility. Users can select one of seven
preferred text sizes from within Apple’s Settings application
(plus a few additional larger sizes from within the Accessibility
section), and apps that support Dynamic Type will have their
fonts scaled appropriately. In this section, you will update
ItemCell to support Dynamic Type. Figure 10.6 shows
LootLogger rendered at the smallest and largest user-selectable
Dynamic Type sizes.

--- Page 387 ---
Figure 10.6  ItemCell with Dynamic Type supported
The Dynamic Type system is centered around text styles.
When a font is requested for a given text style, the system will
consider the user’s preferred text size in association with the
text style to return an appropriately configured font.
Figure 10.7 shows the different text styles.

--- Page 388 ---
Figure 10.7  Text styles
Open Main.storyboard. Let’s update the labels to use text
styles instead of fixed fonts. Select the nameLabel and valueLabel
and open the attributes inspector. For Font, choose Text Styles -
Body (Figure 10.8). Repeat the same steps for the
serialNumberLabel, choosing the Caption 1 text style.

--- Page 389 ---
Figure 10.8  Changing the text style
Now let’s change the simulator’s preferred font size. You do
this through the Settings application.
Build and run the application. From the simulator’s Hardware
menu, select Home. Next, on the simulator’s Home screen,
open the Settings application. Choose Accessibility, then Display &
Text Size, and then Larger Text. (On an actual device, this menu
can also be accessed in Settings via Display & Brightness → Text
Size.) Drag the slider all the way to the left to set the font size
to the smallest value (Figure 10.9).
Figure 10.9  Text size settings


--- Page 390 ---
Build and run the application again from Xcode. (If you switch
back to the application, you will not see the changes. You will
fix that in the next section.) Add some items to the table view
and you will see the new smaller font sizes in action.
RESPONDING TO USER CHANGES

--- Page 391 ---
When the user changes the preferred text size and returns to
the application, the table view will get reloaded.
Unfortunately, the labels will not know about the new
preferred text size. To fix this, you need to have the labels
automatically adjust to content size changes.
Open Main.storyboard and select all three ItemCell
labels. Open the attributes inspector, and check the Automatically
Adjusts Font checkbox (Figure 10.10). This will set the
corresponding
adjustsFontForContentSizeCategory property on
each label to true.
Figure 10.10  Automatically adjusts label font
Build and run the application and add a few rows. Go into
Settings and change the preferred reading size to the largest
size. Unlike before, when you now switch back to LootLogger,
the table view cells will update to reflect the new preferred
text size. 

--- Page 393 ---
Bronze Challenge: Cell Colors
Update the ItemCell to display the valueInDollars in
green if the value is less than 50 and in red if the value is
greater than or equal to 50.

--- Page 394 ---
Silver Challenge: Long Item Names
Currently, if the item’s name is long it will overlap with the
value label (Figure 10.11). This will be more important in
Chapter 11 and Chapter 12 when you will add the ability for
the user to edit an item. To see this for now, update Item’s
initializer in Item.swift to have an extra-long name.
Figure 10.11  Labels overlapping on the cell
Fix this problem by allowing the nameLabel to wrap to
multiple lines if the name gets too long (Figure 10.12). You
will need to add at least one new constraint and allow the label
to wrap multiple lines as you did in Chapter 7.
Figure 10.12  Cell with wrapping item name


--- Page 395 ---
11 
Stack Views
You have been using Auto Layout throughout this book to
create flexible interfaces that scale across device types and
sizes. Auto Layout is a very powerful technology, but with that
power comes complexity. Laying out an interface well often
needs a lot of constraints, and it can be difficult to create
dynamic interfaces due to the need to constantly add and
remove constraints.
Often, an interface (or a subsection of the interface) can be laid
out in a linear fashion. Think about the other applications you
wrote: The Quiz application from Chapter 1 consisted of four
subviews that were laid out vertically. And in the WorldTrotter
application, the ConversionViewController had a
vertical interface consisting of a text field and a few labels.
Interfaces that have a linear layout are great candidates for
using a stack view. A stack view is an instance of
UIStackView that allows you to create a vertical or
horizontal layout that is easy to lay out and manages most of
the constraints that you would typically have to manage
yourself. Perhaps best of all, you are able to nest stack views
within other stack views, which allows you to create truly
amazing interfaces in a fraction of the time.
In this chapter, you are going to update LootLogger to display
the details of a specific Item. The interface that you create
will consist of multiple nested stack views, both vertical and
horizontal (Figure 11.1). In Chapter 12, you will implement
editing and finish the interface.

--- Page 396 ---
Figure 11.1  LootLogger with stack views


--- Page 397 ---
Using UIStackView
At the top level, your new interface will have a vertical stack
view with four elements displaying the item’s name, serial
number, value, and date created (Figure 11.2).
Figure 11.2  Vertical stack view layout
Open your LootLogger project and then open
Main.storyboard. Drag a new View Controller from the
library onto the canvas. Drag a Vertical Stack View from the

--- Page 398 ---
library onto the view for the View Controller. Add four
constraints to the stack view: Pin it to the leading and trailing
margins, then pin the top and bottom edges 8 points from the
top and bottom of the safe area.
Now drag four instances of UILabel from the library onto
the stack view. From top to bottom, give these labels the text
Name, Serial, Value, and Date Created (Figure 11.3).
Figure 11.3  Labels added to the stack view


--- Page 399 ---
You might notice a warning that some views are vertically
ambiguous. And if you select any of the labels, you will see
that they all have a red top and bottom border (indicating a
vertical Auto Layout problem). There are two ways you can
fix this issue: by using Auto Layout or by using a property on
the stack view. Let’s work through the Auto Layout solution
first, because it highlights an important aspect of Auto Layout.
IMPLICIT CONSTRAINTS
You learned in Chapter 3 that every view has an intrinsic
content size. You also learned that if you do not specify
constraints that explicitly determine the width or height, the
view will derive its width or height from its intrinsic content
size. How does this work?
It does this using implicit constraints derived from its
content hugging priorities and its content compression
resistance priorities. A view has one of each of these
priorities for each axis:
horizontal content hugging priority
vertical content hugging priority
horizontal content compression resistance priority
vertical content compression resistance priority

--- Page 400 ---
Content hugging priorities
The content hugging priority is like a rubber band that is
placed around a view. The rubber band makes the view not
want to be bigger than its intrinsic content size in that
dimension. Each priority is associated with a value from 0 to
1000. A value of 1000 means that a view cannot get bigger
than its intrinsic content size on that dimension.
Let’s look at an example with just the horizontal dimension.
Say you have two labels next to one another with constraints
both between the two views and between each view and its
superview, as shown in Figure 11.4.
Figure 11.4  Two labels side by side
This works great until the superview becomes wider. At that
point, which label should become wider? The first label, the
second label, or both? As Figure 11.5 shows, the interface is
currently ambiguous.

--- Page 401 ---
Figure 11.5  Ambiguous layout
This is where the content hugging priority becomes relevant.
The view with the higher content hugging priority is the one
that does not stretch. You can think about the priority value as
the “strength” of the rubber band. The higher the priority
value, the stronger the rubber band and the more it wants to
hug to its intrinsic content size.
Content compression resistance priorities
The content compression resistance priorities determine how
much a view resists getting smaller than its intrinsic content
size. Consider the same two labels from Figure 11.4. What
would happen if the superview’s width decreased? One of the
labels would need to truncate its text (Figure 11.6). But which
one?

--- Page 402 ---
Figure 11.6  Compressed ambiguous layout
The view with the greater content compression resistance
priority is the one that will resist compression and, therefore,
not truncate its text.
With this knowledge, you can now fix the problem with the
stack view.
Select the Date Created label and open its size inspector. Find
the Vertical Content Hugging Priority and lower it to 249. Now the
other three labels have a higher content hugging priority, so
they will all hug to their intrinsic content height. The Date
Created label will stretch to fill in the remaining space.
STACK VIEW DISTRIBUTION
Let’s take a look at another way of solving the problem. Stack
views have a number of properties that determine how their
content is laid out.
Select the stack view, either on the canvas or using the
document outline. Open its attributes inspector and find the
section at the top labeled Stack View. One of the properties that

--- Page 403 ---
determines how the content is laid out is the Distribution
property. Currently it is set to Fill, which lets the views lay out
their content based on their intrinsic content size. Change the
value to Fill Equally. This will resize the labels so that they all
have the same height, ignoring the intrinsic content size
(Figure 11.7). 
Figure 11.7  Stack view set to fill equally


--- Page 404 ---
We recommend that you read the documentation to learn about
the other distribution values that a stack view can have. For
now, change the Distribution of the stack view back to Fill; this is
the value you will want going forward in this chapter.
NESTED STACK VIEWS
One of the most powerful features of stack views is that they
can be nested within one another. You will use this to nest
horizontal stack views within the larger vertical stack view.
The top three labels will have a text field next to them that
displays the corresponding value for the Item and will also
allow the user to edit that value.
Select the Name label in the item detail view hierarchy on the
canvas. Click the rightmost icon in the Auto Layout
constraints menu (
 ) and then select Stack View from the
Embed In View section. This will embed the selected view in a
stack view.
Select the new stack view and open its attributes inspector.
The stack view is currently a vertical stack view, but you want
it to be a horizontal stack view. Change the Axis to Horizontal.
Now drag a Text Field from the library to the right of the Name
label. Because labels, by default, have a greater content
hugging priority than text fields, the label hugs to its intrinsic
content width and the text field stretches. The label and the
text field currently have the same content compression

--- Page 405 ---
resistance priorities, which would result in an ambiguous
layout if the text field’s text was too long. Open the size
inspector for the text field and set its Horizontal Content
Compression Resistance Priority to 749. This will ensure that the
text field’s text will be truncated if necessary, rather than the
label.
STACK VIEW SPACING
The label and text field look a little squished because there is
no spacing between them. This is easy to fix, because stack
views allow you to customize the spacing between items.
Select the horizontal stack view and open its attributes
inspector. Change the Spacing to be 8 points. Notice that the
text field shrinks to accommodate the spacing, because it is
less resistant to compression than the label.
Repeat these steps for the Serial and Value labels:
1. Select the label, click the 
 icon, and select Stack View.
2. Change the stack view to be a horizontal stack view.
3. Drag a text field onto the horizontal stack view and change its horizontal
content compression resistance priority to be 749.
4. Update the stack view to have a spacing of 8 points.
There are a couple of other tweaks you will want to make to
the interface: The vertical stack view needs some spacing. The
Date Created label should have a center text alignment. And the
Name, Serial, and Value labels should be the same width.
Select the vertical stack view, open its attributes inspector, and
update the Spacing to be 8 points. Then select the Date Created
label, open its attributes inspector, and change the Alignment to
be centered. That solves the first two issues.
Although stack views substantially reduce the number of
constraints that you need to add to your interface, some
constraints are still important. With the interface as is, the text

--- Page 406 ---
fields do not align on their leading edge due to the difference
in the widths of the labels. (The difference is not very
noticeable in English, but it becomes more pronounced when
localized into other languages.) To solve this, you will add
leading edge constraints between the three text fields.
Control-drag from the Name text field to the Serial text field and
select Leading. Then do the same for the Serial text field and the
Value text field. The completed interface will look like
Figure 11.8.
Figure 11.8  Final stack view interface


--- Page 407 ---
Stack views allow you to create very rich interfaces in a
fraction of the time it would take to configure them manually
using constraints. Constraints are still added, but they are
being managed by the stack view itself instead of by you.
Stack views allow you to have very dynamic interfaces at
runtime. You can add and remove views from stack views by
using addArrangedSubview(_:),
insertArrangedSubview(_:at:), and
removeArrangedSubview(_:). You can also toggle the
hidden property on a view in a stack view. The stack view
will automatically lay out its content to reflect that value. 

--- Page 408 ---
Segues
Most iOS applications have a number of view controllers that
users navigate between. Storyboards allow you to set up these
interactions as segues without having to write code.
A segue moves another view controller’s view onto the screen
and is represented by an instance of UIStoryboardSegue.
Each segue has a style, an action item, and an identifier.
The style of a segue determines how the view controller will
be presented. The action item is the view object in the
storyboard file that triggers the segue, like a button, a table
view cell, or some other UIControl. The identifier is used
to programmatically access the segue. This is useful when you
want to trigger a segue that does not come from an action item,
like a shake or some other interface element that cannot be set
up in the storyboard file.
Let’s start with a show segue. A show segue displays a view
controller in whatever manner works best for the circumstance
(usually by presenting it modally). The segue will be between
the table view controller and the new view controller. The
action items will be the table view’s cells; tapping a cell will
show the view controller modally. (We will explain “modal”
presentation in Chapter 14.)
In Main.storyboard, select the ItemCell prototype cell
on the Items View Controller. Control-drag from the cell to the new
view controller that you set up in the previous section. (Make
sure you are Control-dragging from the cell and not the table
view!) A black panel will appear that lists the possible styles
for this segue. Select Show from the Selection Segue section
(Figure 11.9).

--- Page 409 ---
Figure 11.9  Setting up a show segue
Notice the arrow that goes from the table view controller to the
new view controller. This is a segue. The icon in the circle tells
you that this segue is a show segue – each segue has a unique
icon.
Build and run the application. Tap a cell and the new view
controller will slide up from the bottom of the screen. (Sliding
up from the bottom is the default behavior when presenting a
view controller modally.)
So far, so good! But there are two problems at the moment:
The view controller is not displaying the information for the
Item that was selected, and there is no way to dismiss the
view controller to return to the ItemsViewController.
You will fix the first issue in the next section, and you will fix
the second issue in Chapter 12.

--- Page 411 ---
Hooking Up the Content
To display the information for the selected Item, you will
need to create a new UIViewController subclass.
Create a new Swift file and name it
DetailViewController. Open
DetailViewController.swift and declare a new
UIViewController subclass named
DetailViewController.
Listing 11.1  Creating the DetailViewController
class (DetailViewController.swift)
import Foundation
import UIKit 
 
class DetailViewController: UIViewController { 
 
}
Because you need to be able to access the subviews you
created during runtime, DetailViewController needs
outlets for them. The plan is to add four new outlets to
DetailViewController and then make the connections.
In previous exercises, you did this in two distinct steps: First,
you added the outlets in the Swift file, then you made
connections in the storyboard file. You can do both at once by
opening a second editor pane.
With DetailViewController.swift open, Option-
click Main.storyboard in the project navigator. This will
open the file in another editor next to
DetailViewController.swift.
Before you connect the outlets, you need to tell the detail
interface that it should be associated with the
DetailViewController. Select the View Controller on the

--- Page 412 ---
canvas and open its identity inspector. Change the Class to be
DetailViewController (Figure 11.10).
Figure 11.10  Setting the view controller class
Your window has become a little cluttered. Let’s make some
temporary space. Hide the navigator area and inspector area by
clicking the left and right button, respectively, in the View
control at the top of the workspace. Then, hide the document
outline in Interface Builder by clicking the toggle button in the
lower-left corner of its editor. Your workspace should now
look like Figure 11.11.

--- Page 413 ---
Figure 11.11  Laying out the workspace
The three instances of UITextField and the bottom
instance of UILabel will be outlets in
DetailViewController. Control-drag from the

--- Page 414 ---
UITextField next to the Name label to the top of
DetailViewController.swift, as shown in
Figure 11.12.

--- Page 415 ---
Figure 11.12  Dragging from storyboard to source file
Let go and a pop-up window will appear. Enter nameField into
the Name field, make sure the Storage is set to Strong, and click
Connect (Figure 11.13).

--- Page 416 ---
Figure 11.13  Autogenerating an outlet and making a
connection
This will create an @IBOutlet property of type
UITextField named nameField in
DetailViewController.
In addition, this UITextField is already connected to the
nameField outlet of the DetailViewController. You
can verify this by Control-clicking the Detail View Controller to
see the connections. Also notice that hovering your mouse
above the nameField connection in the panel that appears will
reveal the UITextField that you connected. Two birds, one
stone.
Create the other three outlets the same way and name them as
shown in Figure 11.14.
Figure 11.14  Connection diagram


--- Page 417 ---
After you make the connections,
DetailViewController.swift should look like this:

--- Page 418 ---
    import UIKit 
 
    class DetailViewController: UIViewController { 
 
        @IBOutlet var nameField: UITextField! 
        @IBOutlet var serialNumberField: UITextField! 
        @IBOutlet var valueField: UITextField! 
        @IBOutlet var dateLabel: UILabel! 
 
    } 
If your file looks different, then your outlets are not connected
correctly. Fix any disparities between your file and the code
shown above in three steps: 
First, go through the Control-drag process and make connections again
until you have the four lines shown above in your
DetailViewController.swift.
Second, remove any wrong code (like non-property method declarations
or properties) that got created.
Finally, check for any bad connections in the storyboard file – in
Main.storyboard, Control-click on the Detail View Controller. If there
are yellow warning signs next to any connection, click the 
 icon next
to those connections to disconnect them.
It is important to ensure that there are no bad connections in an
interface file. A bad connection typically happens when you
change the name of a property but do not update the
connection in the interface file or when you completely
remove a property but do not remove it from the interface file.
Either way, a bad connection will cause your application to
crash when the interface file is loaded.
With the connections made, you can close the additional editor
by clicking the 
  in the top-left corner and return to viewing
just DetailViewController.swift.
DetailViewController will hold on to a reference to the
Item that is being displayed. When its view is loaded, you
will set the text on each text field to the appropriate value from
the Item instance.
In DetailViewController.swift, add a property for
an Item instance and override viewWillAppear(_:) to

--- Page 419 ---
set up the interface.
Listing 11.2  Populating the interface with the Item
values (DetailViewController.swift)
class DetailViewController: UIViewController { 
 
    @IBOutlet var nameField: UITextField! 
    @IBOutlet var serialNumberField: UITextField! 
    @IBOutlet var valueField: UITextField! 
    @IBOutlet var dateLabel: UILabel! 
 
    var item: Item! 
 
    override func viewWillAppear(_ animated: Bool) { 
        super.viewWillAppear(animated) 
 
        nameField.text = item.name 
        serialNumberField.text = item.serialNumber 
        valueField.text = "\(item.valueInDollars)" 
        dateLabel.text = "\(item.dateCreated)" 
    } 
} 
This works, but instead of using string interpolation to print
out the valueInDollars and dateCreated, it would be
better to use a formatter. You used an instance of
NumberFormatter in Chapter 6. You will use another one
here, as well as an instance of DateFormatter to format
the dateCreated.
Add an instance of NumberFormatter and an instance of
DateFormatter to the DetailViewController. Use
these formatters in viewWillAppear(_:) to format the
valueInDollars and dateCreated.
Listing 11.3  Adding and using data formatters
(DetailViewController.swift)
var item: Item! 
 
let numberFormatter: NumberFormatter = { 
    let formatter = NumberFormatter() 
    formatter.numberStyle = .decimal 
    formatter.minimumFractionDigits = 2 
    formatter.maximumFractionDigits = 2 
    return formatter
}() 
 
let dateFormatter: DateFormatter = { 
    let formatter = DateFormatter() 

--- Page 420 ---
    formatter.dateStyle = .medium 
    formatter.timeStyle = .none 
    return formatter
}() 
 
override func viewWillAppear(_ animated: Bool) { 
    super.viewWillAppear(animated) 
 
    nameField.text = item.name 
    serialNumberField.text = item.serialNumber 
    valueField.text = "\(item.valueInDollars)" 
    dateLabel.text = "\(item.dateCreated)" 
    valueField.text = 
        numberFormatter.string(from: NSNumber(value: 
item.valueInDollars)) 
    dateLabel.text = dateFormatter.string(from: item.dateCreated) 
} 

--- Page 421 ---
Passing Data Around
When a row in the table view is tapped, you need a way of
telling the DetailViewController which item was
selected. Whenever a segue is triggered, the
prepare(for:sender:) method is called on the view
controller initiating the segue. This method has two
arguments: the UIStoryboardSegue, which gives you
information about which segue is happening, and the sender,
which is the object that triggered the segue (a
UITableViewCell or a UIButton, for example).
The UIStoryboardSegue gives you three pieces of
information: the source view controller (where the segue
originates), the destination view controller (where the segue
ends), and the identifier of the segue. The identifier lets you
differentiate segues. Let’s give the segue a useful identifier.
Open Main.storyboard again. Select the show segue by
clicking the arrow between the two view controllers and open
the attributes inspector. For the identifier, enter showItem
(Figure 11.15).

--- Page 422 ---
Figure 11.15  Segue identifier
With your segue identified, you can now pass your Item
instances around. Open ItemsViewController.swift
and implement prepare(for:sender:).
Listing 11.4  Injecting the selected Item
(ItemsViewController.swift)
override func prepare(for segue: UIStoryboardSegue, sender: Any?) { 
    // If the triggered segue is the "showItem" segue 
    switch segue.identifier { 
    case "showItem": 
        // Figure out which row was just tapped 
        if let row = tableView.indexPathForSelectedRow?.row { 
 
            // Get the item associated with this row and pass it along 
            let item = itemStore.allItems[row] 
            let detailViewController 
                    = segue.destination as! DetailViewController 
            detailViewController.item = item 
        } 
    default: 
        preconditionFailure("Unexpected segue identifier.") 
    }
}

--- Page 423 ---
You learned about switch statements in Chapter 2. Here, you
are using one to switch over the possible segue identifiers. The
default block uses the preconditionFailure(_:)
function to catch any unexpected segue identifiers and crash
the application. This would be the case if the programmer
either forgot to give a segue an identifier or if there was a typo
somewhere with the segue identifiers. In either case, it is the
programmer’s mistake, and using
preconditionFailure(_:) can help you identify these
problems sooner.
Build and run the application. Tap a row and the
DetailViewController will slide onscreen, displaying
the details for that item. And you can dismiss the detail screen
by swiping down on the interface – that makes two points in
the plus column.
But there is still work to be done. One issue is that any
changes that you make to the item’s details will not persist.
And, in terms of style, there is a more conventional way to
present and dismiss detail screens. You will address both of
these issues in Chapter 12. 
Many programmers new to iOS struggle with how data is
passed between view controllers. Having all the data in the
root view controller and passing subsets of that data to the next
UIViewController (as you did in this chapter) is a clean
and efficient way to perform this task.

--- Page 424 ---
Bronze Challenge: More Stack Views
Quiz and WorldTrotter are good candidates for using stack views.
Update both of these applications to use UIStackView.

--- Page 425 ---
12 
Navigation Controllers
In Chapter 4, you learned about UITabBarController
and how it allows a user to access different screens. A tab bar
controller is great for screens that are independent of each
other, but what if you have screens that provide related
information?
For example, the Settings application has multiple related
screens of information: a list of settings (including some for
apps, like Safari), a detail page for each setting, and a selection
page for each detail (Figure 12.1). This type of interface is
called a drill-down interface.

--- Page 426 ---
Figure 12.1  Drill-down interface in Settings


--- Page 427 ---
In this chapter, you will use a UINavigationController
to add a drill-down interface to LootLogger that lets the user see
and edit the details of an Item. These details will be
presented by the DetailViewController that you
created in Chapter 11 (Figure 12.2).
Figure 12.2  LootLogger with
UINavigationController


--- Page 429 ---
UINavigationController
A UINavigationController maintains an array of view
controllers presenting related information in a stack. When a
UIViewController is on top of the stack, its view is
visible.
When you initialize an instance of
UINavigationController, you give it a
UIViewController. This UIViewController is
added to the navigation controller’s viewControllers
array and becomes the navigation controller’s root view
controller. The root view controller is always on the bottom of
the stack. (Note that while this view controller is referred to as
the navigation controller’s “root view controller,”
UINavigationController does not have a
rootViewController property.)
More view controllers can be pushed on top of the
UINavigationController’s stack while the application
is running. These view controllers are added to the end of the
viewControllers array that corresponds to the top of the
stack. UINavigationController’s
topViewController property keeps a reference to the
view controller at the top of the stack.
When a view controller is pushed onto the stack, its view
slides onscreen from the right. When the stack is popped (i.e.,
the last item is removed), the top view controller is removed
from the stack and its view slides off to the right, exposing the
view of the next view controller on the stack, which becomes
the top view controller. Figure 12.3 shows a navigation
controller with two view controllers. The view of the
topViewController is what the user sees.

--- Page 430 ---
Figure 12.3  UINavigationController’s stack
UINavigationController is a subclass of
UIViewController, so it has a view of its own. Its view
always has two subviews: a UINavigationBar and the
view of topViewController (Figure 12.4).
Figure 12.4  A UINavigationController’s view


--- Page 431 ---
In this chapter, you will add a
UINavigationController to the LootLogger application

--- Page 432 ---
and make the ItemsViewController the
UINavigationController’s root view controller. The
DetailViewController will be pushed onto the
UINavigationController’s stack when an Item is
selected. This view controller will allow the user to view and
edit the properties of an Item selected from the table view of
ItemsViewController. The object diagram for the
updated LootLogger application is shown in Figure 12.5.

--- Page 433 ---
Figure 12.5  LootLogger object diagram
This application is getting fairly large, as you can see.
Fortunately, view controllers and

--- Page 434 ---
UINavigationController know how to deal with the
complex relationships in this object diagram. When writing
iOS applications, it is important to treat each
UIViewController as its own little world. The stuff that
has already been implemented in Cocoa Touch will do the
heavy lifting.
Reopen the LootLogger project. You are going to begin by giving
LootLogger a navigation controller. The only requirements for
using a UINavigationController are that you give it a
root view controller and add its view to the window.
Open Main.storyboard and select the Items View Controller.
Then, from the Editor menu, choose Embed In → Navigation
Controller (this can also be done from the 
  button in the
bottom right). This will set the ItemsViewController to
be the root view controller of a
UINavigationController. It will also update the
storyboard to set the Navigation Controller as the initial view
controller.
Your Detail View Controller interface may have misplaced views
now that it is contained within a navigation controller. If it
does, select the stack view and click the Update Frames button in
the Auto Layout constraint menu.
Build and run the application and … the application crashes.
What is happening? You previously created a contract with the
SceneDelegate that an instance of
ItemsViewController would be the
rootViewController of the window:
    let itemsController = window!.rootViewController as! 
ItemsViewController 
You have now broken this contract by embedding the
ItemsViewController in a
UINavigationController. You need to update the
contract.

--- Page 435 ---
Open SceneDelegate.swift (if Xcode has not opened it
for you) and update
scene(_:willConnectTo:options:) to reflect the
new view controller hierarchy.
Listing 12.1  Updating the SceneDelegate
(SceneDelegate.swift)
func scene(_ scene: UIScene, 
           willConnectTo session: UISceneSession, 
           options connectionOptions: UIScene.ConnectionOptions) { 
    guard let _ = (scene as? UIWindowScene) else { return } 
 
    // Create an ItemStore 
    let itemStore = ItemStore() 
 
    // Access the ItemsViewController and set its item store 
    let itemsController = window!.rootViewController as! 
ItemsViewController 
    let navController = window!.rootViewController as! 
UINavigationController 
    let itemsController = navController.topViewController as! 
ItemsViewController 
    itemsController.itemStore = itemStore 
} 
Build and run the application again. LootLogger works again and
has a very nice, if totally empty, UINavigationBar at the
top of the screen (Figure 12.6).

--- Page 436 ---
Figure 12.6  LootLogger with an empty navigation
bar
Notice how the screen adjusted to fit
ItemsViewController’s view as well as the new
navigation bar. UINavigationController did this for
you: While the view of the ItemsViewController
actually underlaps the navigation bar,
UINavigationController added padding to the top so
that everything fits nicely. This is because the safe area insets
for the view controller’s view are adjusted.

--- Page 437 ---
Navigating with UINavigationController
With the application still running, create a new item and select
that row from the UITableView. Not only are you taken to
DetailViewController’s view, but you also get a free
animation and a Back button in the UINavigationBar. Tap
this button to get back to ItemsViewController.
Notice that you did not have to change the show segue that
you created in Chapter 11 to get this behavior. As mentioned
in that chapter, the show segue presents the destination view
controller in a way that makes sense given the surrounding
context. When a show segue is triggered from a view
controller embedded within a navigation controller, the
destination view controller is pushed onto the navigation
controller’s view controller stack.
Because the UINavigationController’s stack is an
array, it will take ownership of any view controller added to it.
Thus, the DetailViewController is owned only by the
UINavigationController after the segue finishes.
When the stack is popped, the DetailViewController is
destroyed. The next time a row is tapped, a new instance of
DetailViewController is created.
Having a view controller push the next view controller is a
common pattern. The root view controller typically creates the
next view controller, and the next view controller creates the
one after that, and so on. Some applications may have view
controllers that can push different view controllers depending
on user input. For example, the Photos app pushes a video view
controller or an image view controller onto the navigation
stack depending on what type of media is selected.
Notice that the detail view for an item contains the information
for the selected Item. However, while you can edit this data,

--- Page 438 ---
the UITableView will not reflect those changes when you
return to it. To fix this problem, you need to implement code to
update the properties of the Item being edited. In the next
section, you will see when to do this.

--- Page 439 ---
Appearing and Disappearing Views
Whenever a UINavigationController is about to swap
views, it calls two methods: viewWillDisappear(_:)
and viewWillAppear(_:). The UIViewController
that is about to be popped off the stack has
viewWillDisappear(_:) called on it. The
UIViewController that will then be on top of the stack
has viewWillAppear(_:) called on it.
To hold on to changes in the data, when a
DetailViewController is popped off the stack you will
set the properties of its item to the contents of the text fields.
When implementing these methods for views appearing and
disappearing, it is important to call the superclass’s
implementation – it might have some work to do and needs to
be given the chance to do it.
In DetailViewController.swift, implement
viewWillDisappear(_:).
Listing 12.2  Updating the Item values
(DetailViewController.swift)
override func viewWillDisappear(_ animated: Bool) { 
    super.viewWillDisappear(animated) 
 
    // "Save" changes to item 
    item.name = nameField.text ?? "" 
    item.serialNumber = serialNumberField.text 
 
    if let valueText = valueField.text, 
        let value = numberFormatter.number(from: valueText) { 
        item.valueInDollars = value.intValue 
    } else { 
        item.valueInDollars = 0 
    }
}
Now the values of the Item will be updated when the user
taps the Back button on the UINavigationBar. When

--- Page 440 ---
ItemsViewController appears back on the screen, the
method viewWillAppear(_:) is called. Take this
opportunity to reload the UITableView so the user can
immediately see the changes.
In ItemsViewController.swift, override
viewWillAppear(_:) to reload the table view.
Listing 12.3  Reloading the table view when coming
onscreen (ItemsViewController.swift)
override func viewWillAppear(_ animated: Bool) { 
    super.viewWillAppear(animated) 
 
    tableView.reloadData()
}
Build and run your application once again. Now you can add
items, move back and forth between the view controllers that
you created, and change the data with ease.

--- Page 441 ---
Dismissing the Keyboard
Run the application, add and select an item, and touch the text
field with the item’s name. When you touch the text field, a
keyboard appears onscreen (Figure 12.7), as you saw in your
WorldTrotter app in Chapter 6. (If you are using the simulator
and the keyboard does not appear, remember that you can
press Command-K to toggle the device keyboard.)

--- Page 442 ---
Figure 12.7  Keyboard appears when a text field is
touched


--- Page 443 ---
The appearance of the keyboard in response to a touch is built
into the UITextField class as well as UITextView, so
you do not have to do anything extra for the keyboard to
appear. However, at times you will want to make sure the
keyboard behaves as you want it to.
For example, notice that the keyboard covers more than a third
of the screen. Right now, it does not obscure anything, but
soon you will add more details that extend to the bottom of the
screen, and users will want a way to hide the keyboard when it
is not needed. In this section, you are going to give the user
two ways to dismiss the keyboard: pressing the keyboard’s
Return key and tapping anywhere else on the detail view
controller’s view. But first, let’s look at the combination of
events that make text editing possible.
EVENT HANDLING BASICS
When you touch a view, an event is created. This event
(known as a “touch event”) is tied to a specific location in the
view controller’s view. That location determines which view in
the hierarchy the touch event is delivered to.
For example, when you tap a UIButton within its bounds, it
will receive the touch event and respond in button-like fashion
– by calling the action method on its target. It is perfectly
reasonable to expect that when a view in your application is
touched, that view receives a touch event, and it may choose to
react to that event or ignore it. However, views in your
application can also respond to events without being touched.
A good example of this is a shake. If you shake the device
with your application running, one of your views on the screen
can respond. But which one? Another interesting case is
responding to the keyboard. DetailViewController’s
view contains three UITextFields. Which one will receive
the text when the user types?
For both the shake and keyboard events, there is no event
location within your view hierarchy to determine which view

--- Page 444 ---
will receive the event, so another mechanism must be used.
This mechanism is the first responder status. Many views
and controls can be a first responder within your view
hierarchy – but only one at a time. Think of it as a flag that can
be passed among views. Whichever view holds the flag will
receive the shake or keyboard event.
Instances of UITextField and UITextView have an
uncommon response to touch events. When touched, a text
field or a text view becomes the first responder, which in turn
triggers the system to put the keyboard onscreen and send the
keyboard events to that text field or view. The keyboard and
the text field or view have no direct connection, but they work
together through the first responder status.
This is a neat way to ensure that the keyboard input is
delivered to the correct text field. The concept of a first
responder is part of the broader topic of event handling in
Cocoa Touch programming that includes the UIResponder
class and the responder chain. You can visit Apple’s Using
Responders and the Responder Chain to Handle Events for
more information.
DISMISSING BY PRESSING THE RETURN
KEY
Now let’s get back to allowing users to dismiss the keyboard.
If you touch another text field in the application, that text field
will become the first responder, and the keyboard will stay
onscreen. The keyboard will only give up and go away when
no text field (or text view) is the first responder. To dismiss the
keyboard, then, you call resignFirstResponder() on
the text field that is the first responder.
To have the text field resign in response to the Return key
being pressed, you are going to implement the
UITextFieldDelegate method
textFieldShouldReturn(_:). This method is called
whenever the Return key is pressed.

--- Page 445 ---
First, in DetailViewController.swift, have
DetailViewController conform to the
UITextFieldDelegate protocol.
Listing 12.4  Conforming to the
UITextFieldDelegate protocol
(DetailViewController.swift)
class DetailViewController: UIViewController, UITextFieldDelegate { 
Next, implement textFieldShouldReturn(_:) to call
resignFirstResponder() on the text field that is
passed in.
Listing 12.5  Dismissing the keyboard upon tapping
Return (DetailViewController.swift)
func textFieldShouldReturn(_ textField: UITextField) -> Bool { 
    textField.resignFirstResponder() 
    return true
}
Finally, open Main.storyboard and connect the
delegate property of each text field to the Detail View
Controller (Figure 12.8). (Control-drag from each
UITextField to the Detail View Controller and choose delegate.)

--- Page 446 ---
Figure 12.8  Connecting the delegate property of a
text field
Build and run the application. Add an item and drill down to
its detail view. Tap a text field and then press the Return key
on the keyboard. The keyboard will disappear. To get the
keyboard back, tap any text field.
DISMISSING BY TAPPING ELSEWHERE
It would be stylish to also dismiss the keyboard if the user taps
anywhere else on DetailViewController’s view. To
do this, you are going to use a gesture recognizer when the
view is tapped, just as you did in the WorldTrotter app. In the
action method, you will call resignFirstResponder()
on the text field.
Open Main.storyboard and find Tap Gesture Recognizer in
the object library. Drag this object onto the background view

--- Page 447 ---
for the Detail View Controller. You will see a reference to this
gesture recognizer in the scene dock.
In the project navigator, Option-click
DetailViewController.swift to open it in an
additional editor. Control-drag from the tap gesture recognizer
in the storyboard to the implementation of
DetailViewController.
In the panel that appears, select Action from the Connection
menu. Name the action backgroundTapped. For the Type, choose
UITapGestureRecognizer (Figure 12.9).
Figure 12.9  Configuring a
UITapGestureRecognizer action
Click Connect and the stub for the action method will appear in
DetailViewController.swift. Update the method to
call endEditing(_:) on the view of
DetailViewController.
Listing 12.6  Dismissing the keyboard upon tapping
the background view
(DetailViewController.swift)
@IBAction func backgroundTapped(_ sender: UITapGestureRecognizer) { 
    view.endEditing(true) 
} 

--- Page 448 ---
Calling endEditing(_:) is a convenient way to dismiss
the keyboard without having to know (or care) which text field
is the first responder. When the view gets this call, it checks
whether any text field in its hierarchy is the first responder. If
so, then resignFirstResponder() is called on that
particular view.
Build and run your application, add an item, and tap it. Tap a
text field to show the keyboard. Tap the view outside of a text
field, and the keyboard will disappear.
There is one final case where you need to dismiss the
keyboard. When the user taps the Back button,
viewWillDisappear(_:) is called on the
DetailViewController before it is popped off the stack,
and the keyboard disappears instantly, with no animation. To
dismiss the keyboard more smoothly, update the
implementation of viewWillDisappear(_:) in
DetailViewController.swift to call
endEditing(_:). 
Listing 12.7  Dismissing the keyboard when the view
controller is going offscreen
(DetailViewController.swift)
override func viewWillDisappear(_ animated: Bool) { 
    super.viewWillDisappear(animated) 
 
    // Clear first responder 
    view.endEditing(true) 
 
    // "Save" changes to item 
    item.name = nameField.text ?? "" 
    item.serialNumber = serialNumberField.text 
 
    if let valueText = valueField.text, 
        let value = numberFormatter.number(from: valueText) { 
        item.valueInDollars = value.intValue 
    } else { 
        item.valueInDollars = 0 
    } 
} 

--- Page 449 ---
UINavigationBar
In this section, you are going to give the
UINavigationBar a descriptive title for the
UIViewController that is currently on top of the
UINavigationController’s stack.
Every UIViewController has a navigationItem
property of type UINavigationItem. However, unlike
UINavigationBar, UINavigationItem is not a
subclass of UIView, so it cannot appear on the screen.
Instead, the navigation item supplies the navigation bar with
the content it needs to draw. When a UIViewController
comes to the top of a UINavigationController’s stack,
the UINavigationBar uses the UIViewController’s
navigationItem to configure itself, as shown in
Figure 12.10.
Figure 12.10  UINavigationItem
By default, a UINavigationItem is empty. At the most
basic level, a UINavigationItem has a simple title
string. When a UIViewController is moved to the top of

--- Page 450 ---
the navigation stack and its navigationItem has a valid
string for its title property, the navigation bar will display
that string (Figure 12.11).
Figure 12.11  UINavigationItem with a title
The title for the ItemsViewController will always
remain the same, so you can set the title of its navigation item
within the storyboard itself.
Open Main.storyboard. Drag a Navigation Item from the
library on top of the Items View Controller. Double-click the center
of the navigation bar above the Items View Controller to edit its
title. Give it a title of LootLogger (Figure 12.12).

--- Page 451 ---
Figure 12.12  Setting the title in a storyboard
Build and run the application. Notice the string LootLogger on
the navigation bar. Create and tap a row and notice that the
navigation bar no longer has a title. It would be nice to have
the DetailViewController’s navigation item title be the
name of the Item it is displaying. Because the title will
depend on the Item that is being displayed, you need to set
the title of the navigationItem dynamically in code.
In DetailViewController.swift, add a property
observer to the item property that updates the title of the
navigationItem.
Listing 12.8  Setting the navigation item’s title
(DetailViewController.swift)
var item: Item! { 
    didSet { 
        navigationItem.title = item.name 
    }
}
Build and run the application once again. Create and tap a row
and you will see that the title of the navigation bar is the name
of the Item you selected.

--- Page 452 ---
A navigation item can hold more than just a title string, as
shown in Figure 12.13. There are three customizable areas for
each UINavigationItem: a leftBarButtonItem, a
rightBarButtonItem, and a titleView. The left and
right bar button items are references to instances of
UIBarButtonItem, which contain the information for a
button that can only be displayed on a UINavigationBar
or a UIToolbar.
Figure 12.13  UINavigationItem with everything
Recall that UINavigationItem is not a subclass of
UIView. Instead, UINavigationItem encapsulates
information that UINavigationBar uses to configure
itself. Similarly, UIBarButtonItem is not a view, but holds
the information about how a single button on the
UINavigationBar should be displayed. (A UIToolbar
also uses instances of UIBarButtonItem to configure
itself.)
The third customizable area of a UINavigationItem is its
titleView. You can either use a basic string as the title or

--- Page 453 ---
have a subclass of UIView sit in the center of the navigation
item. You cannot have both. If it suits the context of a specific
view controller to have a custom view (like a segmented
control or a text field, for example), you would set the
titleView of the navigation item to that custom view.
Figure 12.13 shows an example from the built-in Maps
application of a UINavigationItem with a custom view as
its titleView. Typically, however, a title string is sufficient.
ADDING BUTTONS TO THE NAVIGATION
BAR
In this section, you are going to replace the two buttons that
are in the table’s header view with two bar button items that
will appear in the UINavigationBar when the
ItemsViewController is on top of the stack. A bar
button item has a target-action pair that works like
UIControl’s target-action mechanism: When tapped, it
sends the action message to the target.
First, let’s work on a bar button item for adding new items.
This button will sit on the right side of the navigation bar when
the ItemsViewController is on top of the stack. When
tapped, it will add a new Item.
Before you update the storyboard, you need to change the
method signature for addNewItem(_:). Currently this
method is triggered by a UIButton. Now that you are
changing the sender to a UIBarButtonItem, you need to
update the signature.
In ItemsViewController.swift, update the method
signature for addNewItem(_:).
Listing 12.9  Updating the action method signatures
(ItemsViewController.swift)
@IBAction func addNewItem(_ sender: UIButton) {
@IBAction func addNewItem(_ sender: UIBarButtonItem) { 

--- Page 454 ---
    ... 
} 
Now open Main.storyboard. Open the object library and
drag a Bar Button Item to the right side of the items view
controller’s navigation bar. Select this bar button item and
open its attributes inspector. Change the System Item to Add
(Figure 12.14).
Figure 12.14  System bar button item
Control-drag from this bar button item to the Items View Controller
and select addNewItem: (Figure 12.15).

--- Page 455 ---
Figure 12.15  Connecting the addNewItem: action
Build and run the application. Tap the 
  button and a new row
will appear in the table.
Now let’s replace the Edit button. View controllers expose a bar
button item that will automatically toggle their editing mode.
There is no way to access this through Interface Builder, so you
will need to add this bar button item programmatically.
In ItemsViewController.swift, override the
init(coder:) method to set the left bar button item.
Listing 12.10  Displaying the editButtonItem
(ItemsViewController.swift)
required init?(coder aDecoder: NSCoder) { 
    super.init(coder: aDecoder) 
 

--- Page 456 ---
    navigationItem.leftBarButtonItem = editButtonItem
}
Build and run the application, add some items, and tap the Edit
button. The UITableView enters editing mode. The
editButtonItem property creates a UIBarButtonItem
with the title Edit. Even better, this button comes with a target-
action pair: It calls the method
setEditing(_:animated:) on its
UIViewController when tapped. 
Open Main.storyboard. Now that LootLogger has a fully
functional navigation bar, you can get rid of the header view
and the associated code. Select the header view on the table
view and press Delete.
Finally, in ItemsViewController.swift, remove the
toggleEditingMode(_:) method.
Listing 12.11  Removing the unneeded method
(ItemsViewController.swift)
@IBAction func toggleEditingMode(_ sender: UIButton) { 
    // If you are currently in editing mode... 
    if isEditing { 
        // Change text of button to inform user of state 
        sender.setTitle("Edit", for: .normal) 
 
        // Turn off editing mode 
        setEditing(false, animated: true) 
    } else { 
        // Change text of button to inform user of state 
        sender.setTitle("Done", for: .normal) 
 
        // Enter editing mode 
        setEditing(true, animated: true) 
    }
}
Build and run again. The old Edit and Add buttons are gone,
leaving you with a lovely UINavigationBar
(Figure 12.16). 

--- Page 457 ---
Figure 12.16  LootLogger with navigation bar


--- Page 458 ---
Bronze Challenge: Displaying a Number
Pad
The keyboard for the UITextField that displays an Item’s
valueInDollars is the default alphabetic keyboard. It
would be better if it were a number pad. Change the Keyboard
Type of that UITextField to the Number Pad.

--- Page 459 ---
Silver Challenge: A Different Back
Button Title
Sometimes the title of a back bar button item is too long or
does not provide any value. In LootLogger, when you drill down
to the DetailViewController, the back bar button item
title is LootLogger, which does not provide any value to the user.
Change the back title displayed when the user is viewing the
DetailViewController. Some possible title candidates
are an empty string, Back, and Log (Figure 12.17). Feel free to
choose a different title as well. You can accomplish this both
programmatically and through the storyboard.
Figure 12.17  Different back bar button item titles
(Hint: You will need to make the change on
ItemsViewController.)

--- Page 460 ---
Gold Challenge: Pushing More View
Controllers
Currently, instances of Item cannot have their
dateCreated property changed. Change Item so that they
can, then add a button underneath the dateLabel in
DetailViewController with the title Change Date. When
this button is tapped, push another view controller instance
onto the navigation stack. This view controller should have a
UIDatePicker instance that modifies the dateCreated
property of the selected Item.

--- Page 461 ---
13 
Saving, Loading, and Scene
States
There are many ways to save and load data in an iOS
application. This chapter will take you through some of the
most common mechanisms as well as the concepts you need
for writing to or reading from the filesystem in iOS. Along the
way, you will be updating LootLogger so that its data persists
between runs (Figure 13.1).

--- Page 462 ---
Figure 13.1  LootLogger in the task switcher


--- Page 463 ---
Codable
Most iOS applications are, at base, doing the same thing:
providing an interface for the user to manipulate data. Every
object in an application has a role in this process: Model
objects are responsible for holding on to the data that the user
manipulates. View objects reflect that data, and controllers are
responsible for keeping the views and the model objects in
sync.
So saving and loading “data” almost always means saving and
loading model objects.
In LootLogger, the model objects that a user manipulates are
instances of Item. For LootLogger to be a useful application,
instances of Item must persist between runs of the
application. In this chapter, you will make the Item type
codable so that instances can be saved to and loaded from
disk.
Codable types conform to the Encodable and Decodable
protocols and implement their required methods, which are
encode(to:) and init(from:), respectively.
    protocol Encodable { 
        func encode(to encoder: Encoder) throws 
    } 
 
    protocol Decodable { 
        init(from decoder: Decoder) throws 
    } 
(Do not worry about the new throws syntax; we will discuss
it later in this chapter.)
Although your types can conform to either one of these
protocols, it is common for types to conform to both. Apple
has a protocol composition type for types that conform to both
protocols called Codable.

--- Page 464 ---
    typealias Codable = Decodable & Encodable 
Your Item class does not currently conform to Codable.
Open LootLogger and add this conformance in Item.swift.
Listing 13.1  Declaring conformance to Codable
(Item.swift)
class Item: Equatable, Codable { 
The Codable protocol requires the two methods required by
Encodable and Decodable. You have not implemented
either of these methods in Item. However, build the project
and you will notice there are no errors. What is going on here?
Any codable type whose properties are all Codable
automatically conforms to the protocol itself. Item satisfies
this requirement, as the types of its properties (String, Int,
String?, and Date) all conform to Codable. (You will
see how to conform to Codable manually in the section
called For the More Curious: Manually Conforming to
Codable near the end of this chapter.)
Now that Item can be encoded and decoded, you will need a
coder. A coder is responsible for encoding a type into some
external representation. There are two built-in coders:
PropertyListEncoder, which saves data out in a
property list format, and JSONEncoder, which saves data
out in a JSON format. You are going to serialize the Item
data using a property list. (You will see JSONEncoder in
action in Chapter 20.)

--- Page 465 ---
Property Lists
A property list is a representation of data that can be saved
to disk and read back in at a later point. Property lists can
represent hierarchies of data and so are a great tool for saving
and loading lightweight object graphs.
Under the hood, property list data can be represented by a
number of formats, but you will frequently see them
represented using an XML or binary format. Here is an
example XML property list describing two items:
    <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
    <!DOCTYPE plist PUBLIC "-//Apple//DTD PLIST 1.0//EN" 
            "http://www.apple.com/DTDs/PropertyList-1.0.dtd"> 
    <plist version="1.0"> 
    <array> 
        <dict> 
            <key>dateCreated</key> 
            <date>2018-10-14T13:24:01Z</date> 
            <key>name</key> 
            <string>Fluffy Mac</string> 
            <key>serialNumber</key> 
            <string>96854567</string> 
            <key>valueInDollars</key> 
            <integer>62</integer> 
        </dict> 
        <dict> 
            <key>dateCreated</key> 
            <date>2018-10-15T19:47:01Z</date> 
            <key>name</key> 
            <string>Shiny Bear</string> 
            <key>serialNumber</key> 
            <string>36DDDB2B</string> 
            <key>valueInDollars</key> 
            <integer>91</integer> 
        </dict> 
    </array> 
    </plist> 
Property lists can hold the following types: Array, Bool,
Data, Date, Dictionary, Float, Int, and String. As
long as a given type is composed of those types, or a hierarchy
of those types, then it can be represented as a property list.
Time to encode your items into a property list. In
ItemStore.swift, implement a new method that will be
responsible for saving the items.

--- Page 466 ---
Listing 13.2  Implementing saveChanges() to
persist items (ItemStore.swift)
func saveChanges() -> Bool { 
 
    let encoder = PropertyListEncoder() 
    let data = encoder.encode(allItems) 
 
    return false
}
(You will have an error, which we will discuss shortly.)
First, you create an instance of PropertyListEncoder.
Then you call the encode(_:) method on that encoder,
passing in whatever Codable type you would like to encode.
Here, you pass in the allItems array, which will encode
each of the Item instances. The encode(_:) method
returns an instance of Data, which is a type that holds some
number of bytes of binary data.
Encoding is a recursive process. When an instance is encoded
(that is, when it is the first argument in encode(_:)), that
instance is sent encode(to:). During the execution of its
encode(to:) method, it encodes its properties using
encode(_:forKey:). Thus, each instance encodes any
properties that it references, which encode any properties that
they reference, and so on (Figure 13.2).

--- Page 467 ---
Figure 13.2  Encoding an object
So what about that error you saw? The error on the line that
calls encode(_:) says: Call can throw, but it is not marked with 'try'
and the error is not handled. This compiler error indicates that you
are not handling the possibility of the encoding process failing.
Let’s discuss how Swift approaches error handling and then
use that knowledge to fix the compiler error that was just
introduced.

--- Page 468 ---
Error Handling
It is often useful to have a way of representing the possibility
of failure when creating methods. You have seen one way of
representing failure throughout this book with the use of
optionals. Optionals provide a simple way to represent failure
when you do not care about the reason for failure. Consider the
creation of an Int from a String.
    let theMeaningOfLife = "42" 
    let numberFromString = Int(theMeaningOfLife) 
This initializer on Int takes a String parameter and returns
an optional Int (an Int?). This is because the string may not
be able to be represented as an Int. The code above will
successfully create an Int, but the following code will not:
    let pi = "Apple Pie" 
    let numberFromString = Int(pi) 
The string "Apple Pie" cannot be represented as an Int,
so numberFromString will contain nil. An optional
works well for representing failure here because you do not
care why it failed. You just want to know whether it was
successful.
When you need to know why something failed, an optional
will not provide enough information.
Swift provides a rich error handling system with compiler
support to ensure that you recognize when something bad
could happen. You are seeing an example of that now: The
Swift compiler is telling you that you are not handling a
possible error when attempting to encode allItems.
If a method can generate an error, its method signature needs
to indicate this using the throws keyword. Here is the

--- Page 469 ---
method definition for encode(_:):
    func encode(_ value: Encodable) throws -> Data 
The throws keyword indicates that this method could throw
an error. (If you are familiar with throwing exceptions in other
languages, Swift’s error handling is not the same as throwing
exceptions.) By using this keyword, the compiler ensures that
anyone who uses this method knows that it can throw an error
– and, more importantly, that the caller handles any potential
errors.
To call a method that can throw, you use a do-catch
statement. Within the do block, you annotate any methods that
might throw an error using the try keyword to reinforce the
idea that the call might fail.
In ItemStore.swift, update saveChanges() to call
encode(_:) using a do-catch statement.
Listing 13.3  Using a do-catch block to handle
errors (ItemStore.swift)
func saveChanges() -> Bool { 
    do { 
        let encoder = PropertyListEncoder() 
        let data = encoder.encode(allItems) 
        let data = try encoder.encode(allItems) 
    } catch { 
 
    } 
 
    return false 
} 
If a method does throw an error, then the program immediately
exits the do block; no further code in the do block is
executed. At that point, the error is passed to the catch block
for it to be handled in some way.
Next, update saveChanges() to print out the error to the
console.

--- Page 470 ---
Listing 13.4  Printing the error (ItemStore.swift)
func saveChanges() -> Bool { 
    do { 
        let encoder = PropertyListEncoder() 
        let data = try encoder.encode(allItems) 
    } catch { 
        print("Error encoding allItems: \(error)") 
    } 
 
    return false 
} 
Within the catch block, there is an implicit error constant
that contains information describing the error. You can
optionally give this constant an explicit name. Finally, update
saveChanges() to use an explicit name for the error being
caught.
Listing 13.5  Using an explicit error name
(ItemStore.swift)
func saveChanges() -> Bool { 
 
    do { 
        let encoder = PropertyListEncoder() 
        let data = try encoder.encode(allItems) 
    } catch let encodingError { 
        print("Error encoding allItems: \(error encodingError)") 
    } 
 
    return false 
} 
There is a lot more that you can do with error handling, but
this is the basic knowledge that you need for now. We will
cover more details as you progress through this book.
You now have encoded the items array into Data using a
property list format. Now you need to persist this data to disk.
You can build the application now to make sure there are no
syntax errors, but you do not yet have a way to kick off the
saving and loading. You also need a place on the filesystem to
store the saved items.

--- Page 471 ---
Application Sandbox
Every iOS application has its own application sandbox. An
application sandbox is a directory on the filesystem that is
barricaded from the rest of the filesystem. Your application
must stay in its sandbox, and no other application can access
its sandbox. Figure 13.3 shows an example application
sandbox.
Figure 13.3  Application sandbox
The application sandbox contains a number of directories: 
Documents/
This directory is where you write data that the
application generates during runtime and that you
want to persist between runs of the application. It is
backed up when the device is synchronized with
iCloud or Finder. If something goes wrong with the
device, files in this directory can be restored from
iCloud or Finder. In LootLogger, the file that holds the
data for all your items will be stored here.
Library/Caches/
This directory is where you write data that the
application generates during runtime and that you

--- Page 472 ---
want to persist between runs of the application.
However, unlike the Documents directory, it does
not get backed up when the device is synchronized
with iCloud or Finder. A major reason for not backing
up cached data is that the data can be very large and
extend the time it takes to synchronize your device.
Data stored somewhere else – like a web server – can
be placed in this directory. If the user needs to restore
the device, this data can be downloaded from the web
server again. If the device is very low on disk space,
the system may delete the contents of this directory.
Library/Preferences/
This directory is where any preferences are stored
and where the Settings application looks for
application preferences. Library/Preferences
is handled automatically by the class
UserDefaults and is backed up when the device
is synchronized with iCloud or Finder.
tmp/
This directory is where you write data that you will
use temporarily during an application’s runtime. The
OS may purge files in this directory when your
application is not running. However, to be tidy you
should explicitly remove files from this directory
when you no longer need them. This directory does
not get backed up when the device is synchronized
with iCloud or Finder.
CONSTRUCTING A FILE URL
The instances of Item from LootLogger will be saved to a
single file in the Documents/ directory. The ItemStore
will handle writing to and reading from that file. To do this,
the ItemStore needs to construct a URL to this file. 
Implement a new property in ItemStore.swift to store
this URL.

--- Page 473 ---
Listing 13.6  Adding the URL that items will be saved
to (ItemStore.swift)
var allItems = [Item]() 
let itemArchiveURL: URL = { 
    let documentsDirectories = 
        FileManager.default.urls(for: .documentDirectory, in: 
.userDomainMask) 
    let documentDirectory = documentsDirectories.first! 
    return documentDirectory.appendingPathComponent("items.plist")
}()
Instead of assigning a value to the property directly, the value
is being set using a closure. You may recall that you did this
with the numberFormatter property in Chapter 6. Notice
that the closure here has a signature of () -> URL, meaning
it does not take in any arguments and it returns an instance of
URL.
When the ItemStore class is instantiated, this closure will
be run and the return value will be assigned to the
itemArchiveURL property. Using a closure like this allows
you to set the value for a variable or constant that requires
multiple lines of code, which can be very useful when
configuring objects. This makes your code more maintainable
because it keeps the property and the code needed to generate
the property together.
The method urls(for:in:) searches the filesystem for a
URL that meets the criteria given by the arguments.
In iOS, the last argument is always the same. (This method is
borrowed from macOS, where there are significantly more
options.) The first argument is a SearchPathDirectory
enumeration that specifies the directory in the sandbox you
want the URL for. For example, searching for
.cachesDirectory will return the Caches directory in
the application’s sandbox. Double-check that your first
argument is .documentDirectory and not
.documentationDirectory. It is easy to introduce this
error and end up with the wrong URL.

--- Page 474 ---
You can search the documentation for
SearchPathDirectory to locate the other options.
Remember that these enumeration values are shared by iOS
and macOS, so not all of them will work on iOS.
The return value of urls(for:in:) is an array of URLs. It
is an array because in macOS there may be multiple URLs that
meet the search criteria. In iOS, however, there will only be
one (if the directory you searched for is an appropriate
sandbox directory). Therefore, the name of the archive file is
appended to the first and only URL in the array. This will be
where the archive of Item instances will live. 
You now have a place to save data on the filesystem and a
model object that can be saved to the filesystem. The final two
questions are: When do you write the data to disk, and how?
To answer the first of these questions, you need to understand
the lifecycle of iOS scenes.

--- Page 475 ---
Scene States and Transitions
On iPhone, there is only ever one scene – one instance of your
application’s UI. But on iPad, users may have multiple scenes,
and they might be visible simultaneously. Figure 13.4 shows
three instances of Safari visible onscreen.
Figure 13.4  Three instances of Safari


--- Page 476 ---
Scenes can be created and destroyed as a user opens and closes
windows, so you should think about the lifecycle of a scene in
addition to the lifecycle of the application as a whole. For
example, one scene can go into the background while another
scene remains in the foreground.
In LootLogger, the items will be archived when the scene enters
the background state. It is useful to understand the states a
scene can be in (summarized in Figure 13.5) as well as what
causes a scene to transition between states and how your code
can be notified of these transitions.
Figure 13.5  States of a typical scene


--- Page 477 ---
When a scene is not running, it is in the unattached state,
and it does not execute any code or have any memory reserved
in RAM.
After a scene is launched, it briefly enters the foreground
inactive state before entering the foreground active
state. When in the foreground active state, a scene’s interface
is on the screen, it is accepting events, and its code is handling
those events.
While in the active state, a scene can be temporarily
interrupted by a system event, like a phone call, or interrupted
by a user event, like triggering Siri or opening the task
switcher. At this point, the scene reenters the foreground
inactive state. In the inactive state, a scene is usually visible
and is executing code, but it is not receiving events. Scenes
typically spend very little time in the inactive state.
When the user returns to the Home screen or switches to
another application, the scene enters the background state.
(Actually, it spends a brief moment in the foreground inactive
state before transitioning to the background state.) In the
background state, a scene’s interface is not visible or receiving
events, but it can still execute code.
By default, a scene that enters the background state has about
10 seconds before it enters the suspended state. But your
scenes should not rely on having this much time; instead, they
should save user data and release any shared resources as
quickly as possible.
A scene in the suspended state cannot execute code. You
cannot see its interface, and any resources it does not need
while suspended are destroyed. A suspended scene is
essentially flash-frozen and can be quickly thawed when the
user relaunches it.
Table 13.1 summarizes the characteristics of the different
scene states.

--- Page 478 ---
Table 13.1  Scene states
                          
State Visible Receives EventsExecutes Code
             
Unattached no no no
Foreground Activeyes yes yes
Foreground Inactivemostly no yes
Background no no yes
Suspended no no no
           
You can see what scenes are in the background or suspended
in the task switcher (Figure 13.6), reached on the simulator by
pressing Command-Shift-H twice. (Recently run applications
that have been terminated may also appear in this display.)

--- Page 479 ---
Figure 13.6  Background and suspended scenes in
the task switcher


--- Page 480 ---
A scene in the suspended state will remain in that state as long
as there is adequate system memory. When the OS decides
memory is getting low, it will terminate suspended scenes as
needed, moving them to the unattached state. A suspended
scene gets no indication that it is about to be terminated. It is
simply removed from memory. (A scene may remain in the
task switcher after it has been terminated, but it will have to
relaunch when tapped.)
Transitioning to the background state is a good place to save
any outstanding changes, because it is the last time your scene
can execute code before it enters the suspended state. Once in
the suspended state, a scene can be terminated at the whim of
the OS. 

--- Page 481 ---
Persisting the Items
Now for the “how.” To write data to the filesystem, you call
the method write(to:options:) on an instance of
Data. The first parameter indicates a location on the
filesystem to write the data into, and the second parameter
allows you to specify options that customize the writing
behavior.
In ItemStore.swift, update saveChanges() to write
out the data to the itemArchiveURL.
Listing 13.7  Writing data to disk (ItemStore.swift)
func saveChanges() -> Bool { 
    print("Saving items to: \(itemArchiveURL)") 
 
    do { 
        let encoder = PropertyListEncoder() 
        let data = try encoder.encode(allItems) 
        try data.write(to: itemArchiveURL, options: [.atomic]) 
        print("Saved all of the items") 
        return true 
    } catch let encodingError { 
        print("Error encoding allItems: \(encodingError)") 
        return false 
    } 
 
    return false 
} 
The .atomic writing option ensures that there is no data
corruption. This works by first writing the data to a temporary
auxiliary file and then, if that succeeds, renaming that
auxiliary file to the final filename. You do this because there
will usually be an existing items.plist file that will be
replaced during a save. If there is a problem during the write
operation, the original file will not be affected.
The item data will now be persisted to disk when the
saveChanges() method is called. The final step, then, is to
call the saveChanges() method when you are ready to
save, and to do that, you will use the notification center.

--- Page 482 ---
NOTIFICATION CENTER
An object can post notifications about what it is doing to a
centralized notification center. Interested objects register to
receive a callback when a particular notification is posted or
when a particular object posts.
Every application has an instance of
NotificationCenter, which works like a smart bulletin
board. An object can register as an observer (“Send me ‘lost
dog’ notifications”). When another object posts a notification
(“I lost my dog”), the notification center forwards the
notification to the registered observers (Figure 13.7).
Figure 13.7  NotificationCenter
Notifications are instances of Notification. Every
Notification instance has a name and a reference back to
the object that posted it. When you register as an observer, you

--- Page 483 ---
can specify a notification name, a posting object, and the
method that should be called when a qualifying notification is
posted.
Here is an example of registering an observer for notifications
named LostDog that have been posted by any object:
    let notificationCenter = NotificationCenter.default 
    notificationCenter.addObserver(self, 
 
                                   selector: #selector(retrieveDog(_:)), 
 
                                   name: Notification.Name(rawValue: 
"LostDog"), 
 
                                   object: nil) 
             
                 
 
               
                 
the observer that should be notified
               
             
                 
 
               
                 
the method that should be called on the observer
               
             
                 
 
               
                 
the name of the notification that the observer is interested in
               
             
                 
 
               
                 
which posting object the observer is interested in
               
           
Note that nil works as a wildcard in the notification center
world. You can pass nil as the name argument, which will

--- Page 484 ---
give you every notification regardless of its name. If you pass
nil for the notification name and the posting object, you will
get every notification. While passing nil for the name is
uncommon, it is fairly common to pass in nil for the
object.
The method that is triggered when the notification arrives,
retrieveDog(_:) in this example, takes a
Notification object as the argument:
    @objc func retrieveDog(_ notification: Notification) { 
        let poster = notification.object 
        let name = notification.name 
        let extraInformation = notification.userInfo 
    } 
The notification object may have a userInfo dictionary
attached to it. This dictionary is used to pass additional
information, like a description of the dog that was found. Here
is an example of an object posting a notification with a
userInfo dictionary attached:
    let extraInfo = ["Name": "Fido"] 
    let notification = Notification(name: Notification.Name(rawValue: 
"LostDog"), 
                                    object: self, 
                                    userInfo: extraInfo) 
    NotificationCenter.default.post(notification) 
For a more concrete example, think about a keyboard coming
onto the screen. In that case, a notification named
UIResponder.keyboardWillShowNotification is
posted that has a userInfo dictionary. This dictionary
contains, among other information, the onscreen region that
the newly visible keyboard occupies.
It is important to understand that Notifications and the
NotificationCenter are not associated with visual
“notifications,” like push and local notifications that the user
sees when an alarm goes off or a text message is received.
Notifications and the NotificationCenter

--- Page 485 ---
comprise a design pattern, like target-action pairs or
delegation.
SAVING THE ITEMS
Many of the scene states described earlier in this chapter have
associated notifications that are sent as a scene transitions
either in or out of them. Here are some of the notifications that
announce scene state transitions:
    UIScene.willConnectNotification 
    UIScene.didDisconnectNotification 
    UIScene.willEnterForegroundNotification 
    UIScene.didActivateNotification 
    UIScene.willDeactivateNotification 
    UIScene.didEnterBackgroundNotification 
(There are also corresponding delegate callbacks for most of
those notifications in the SceneDelegate class.)
For LootLogger, you will save the encoded data for instances of
Item when the application “exits.” When the user leaves the
application (such as by going to the Home screen), the
notification
UIScene.didEnterBackgroundNotification is
posted to the NotificationCenter. You will listen for
that notification and save the items when it is posted.
In ItemStore.swift, override init() to add an
observer for the
UIScene.didEnterBackgroundNotification
notification.
Listing 13.8  Adding a notification observer to the
ItemStore (ItemStore.swift)
init() { 
    let notificationCenter = NotificationCenter.default 
    notificationCenter.addObserver(self, 
                                   selector: #selector(saveChanges), 
                                   name: 
UIScene.didEnterBackgroundNotification, 
                                   object: nil)
}

--- Page 486 ---
NotificationCenter is written in Objective-C, so the
method that a notification triggers must be visible to the
Objective-C runtime. Currently, saveChanges() is not
exposed to Objective-C, so you see an error: Argument of
'#selector' refers to instance method 'saveChanges()' that is not exposed to
Objective-C.
To expose the method to the Objective-C runtime and fix this
error, add the @objc annotation to the saveChanges()
method.
Listing 13.9  Adding @objc annotation to
saveChanges() (ItemStore.swift)
@objc func saveChanges() -> Bool { 
Build and run the application. Create a few instances of Item,
then go to the simulator’s Home screen, either by selecting
Hardware → Home or with the keyboard shortcut Command-
Shift-H. Check the Xcode console, and you should see a log
statement indicating that the items were saved. (You may see
additional log statements generated by iOS, which you can
ignore.)
While you cannot yet load these instances of Item back into
the application, you can still verify that something was saved.
In the console’s log statements, find one that logs out the
itemArchiveURL location and another that indicates
whether saving was successful. If saving was not successful,
confirm that your itemArchiveURL is being created
correctly. If the items were saved successfully, copy the path
that is printed to the console.
Open Finder and press Command-Shift-G. Paste the file path
that you copied from the console, replacing the file:/// with just
/, and press Return. You will be taken to the directory that
contains the items.plist file. Press Command-Up to

--- Page 487 ---
navigate to the parent directory of items.plist. This is the
application’s sandbox directory. Here, you can see the
Documents/, Library/, and tmp/ directories alongside
the application itself (Figure 13.8).
Figure 13.8  LootLogger’s sandbox
While the contents of the sandbox will remain unchanged
between runs of the application, the location of the sandbox
directory can change. You may need to copy and paste the
directory into Finder frequently if you need to see or interact
with the files in the sandbox while working on an application.
LOADING THE ITEMS
Now let’s turn to loading the items. To load instances of Item
when the application launches, you will use the
PropertyListDecoder type when the ItemStore is
created.
In ItemStore.swift, update init() to load in the items.
Listing 13.10  Deserializing archived items when
ItemStore is initialized (ItemStore.swift)
init() { 
    do { 
        let data = try Data(contentsOf: itemArchiveURL) 
        let unarchiver = PropertyListDecoder() 
        let items = try unarchiver.decode([Item].self, from: data) 
        allItems = items 
    } catch { 
        print("Error reading in saved items: \(error)") 
    } 

--- Page 488 ---
 
    let notificationCenter = NotificationCenter.default 
    notificationCenter.addObserver(self, 
                                   selector: #selector(saveChanges), 
                                   name: 
UIScene.didEnterBackgroundNotification, 
                                   object: nil) 
} 
Build and run the application. Your items will be available
until you explicitly delete them. One thing to note about
testing your saving and loading code: If you kill LootLogger
from Xcode, the notification
UIScene.didEnterBackgroundNotification will
not get posted and the item array will not be saved. You must
leave the app to trigger the save operation.

--- Page 489 ---
Bronze Challenge: Throwing Errors
Currently, the saveChanges() method returns a Bool to
indicate success or failure. It would be better if this method
threw an error instead.
Update saveChanges() to be a throwing method. It should
have the following method signature:
    func saveChanges() throws 

--- Page 490 ---
Gold Challenge: Support Multiple
Windows
You can enable multiple window support within an application
by opening the project settings and, under Deployment Info,
checking the Supports multiple windows checkbox. While this
small change will allow you to have multiple instances of the
LootLogger interface open, each of those instances will have its
own instance of ItemStore and therefore its own items.
This is not what you would like.
For this challenge, update LootLogger to support multiple
windows and share its ItemStore across scenes. You will
want a way for one scene to be updated in response to an event
in another scene. For example, if a user adds a new Item in
one scene, it should also appear in the items list for any other
scene.

--- Page 491 ---
For the More Curious: Manually
Conforming to Codable
In this chapter, you took advantage of automatic conformance
to the Codable protocol and did not need to implement
encode(to:) or init(from:) yourself. What if you had
some property that was not codable? Let’s take a look at how
to implement those two methods.
The code you add in this section will conflict with later
chapters, so create a copy of your LootLogger project to work in,
as you do for challenges. Open Item.swift. Create a new
enumeration to describe the category of an item and add a
property to reference the category.
Listing 13.11  Adding a Category enumeration
(Item.swift)
enum Category { 
    case electronics 
    case clothing 
    case book 
    case other
} 
 
var category = Category.other
(For brevity, the category property is given a default value.
In practice, you would probably want to add an additional
parameter to the initializer to allow the category to be
customized.)
With the introduction of the category property, Codable
conformance is no longer automatic. The first thing you need
to do to regain codable functionality is to define the keys that
will be used during encoding. You can think of these as being
like the keys to a dictionary.

--- Page 492 ---
In Item.swift, define another enumeration named
CodingKeys that conforms to the CodingKey protocol.
Listing 13.12  Adding a CodingKeys enumeration
(Item.swift)
enum CodingKeys: String, CodingKey { 
    case name 
    case valueInDollars 
    case serialNumber 
    case dateCreated 
    case category
}
The CodingKeys enumeration has a raw value of type
String, as indicated in its declaration. This means that every
case is associated with a string of the same name as the case.
(You will learn about enumerations with raw values in
Chapter 20.)
It also conforms to the CodingKey protocol. The
CodingKey protocol effectively has one requirement: a
stringValue for each of the keys. Since the CodingKeys
enum is backed by a String raw value, this requirement is
automatically satisfied.
With the CodingKeys enumeration created, you can now
implement encode(to:).
Listing 13.13  Implementing encode(to:)
(Item.swift)
func encode(to encoder: Encoder) throws { 
    var container = encoder.container(keyedBy: CodingKeys.self) 
 
    try container.encode(name, forKey: .name) 
    try container.encode(valueInDollars, forKey: .valueInDollars) 
    try container.encode(serialNumber, forKey: .serialNumber) 
    try container.encode(dateCreated, forKey: .dateCreated) 
 
    switch category { 
    case .electronics: 
        try container.encode("electronics", forKey: .category) 
    case .clothing: 
        try container.encode("clothing", forKey: .category) 
    case .book: 
        try container.encode("book", forKey: .category) 

--- Page 493 ---
    case .other: 
        try container.encode("other", forKey: .category) 
    }
}
First, you create a container. Generally, you will want a keyed
container that acts like a dictionary. You specify which keys
the container supports by passing it the CodingKeys
enumeration.
After the container is created, you encode each piece of data
that you want to persist. The encode(_:forKey:) method
can fail if the value passed in is invalid for the current context,
so it must be annotated with try.
Encoding the original Item properties is pretty
straightforward. For the new category property, you cannot
just encode the property itself. After all, that is the issue you
are addressing here: Category is not Codable itself, so
you must “convert” it to a type that is. To do this, you switch
over the category and encode a string for each case.
With the encode(to:) method implemented, let’s
implement init(from:).
Listing 13.14  Implementing init(from:)
(Item.swift)
required init(from decoder: Decoder) throws { 
    let container = try decoder.container(keyedBy: CodingKeys.self) 
 
    name = try container.decode(String.self, forKey: .name) 
    valueInDollars = try container.decode(Int.self, forKey: 
.valueInDollars) 
    serialNumber = try container.decode(String?.self, forKey: 
.serialNumber) 
    dateCreated = try container.decode(Date.self, forKey: .dateCreated) 
 
    let categoryString = try container.decode(String.self, forKey: 
.category) 
    switch categoryString { 
    case "electronics": 
        category = .electronics 
    case "clothing": 
        category = .clothing 
    case "book": 
        category = .book 
    case "other": 
        category = .other 
    default: 

--- Page 494 ---
        category = .other 
    }
}
This initializer’s role is to pull out the data you need from a
container. Once again, you specify which keys are associated
with the container. Then you decode the properties, specifying
the type and key for each. For the category property, you
need to decode the string that was encoded earlier, check the
contents of that string, and then assign the corresponding
enumeration case.
Build the application and notice that the errors are addressed.
You have now restored codable functionality to Item.

--- Page 495 ---
For the More Curious: Scene State
Transitions
Logging the scene state transition delegate methods is a good
way to get a better understanding of the various scene state
transitions. You can make these changes in the same copy of
the project that you used for the last section or in your main
LootLogger project; they do not conflict with code in later
chapters.
In SceneDelegate.swift, implement four of these
methods so that they print out their names. If the template
created these methods for you, update them as shown in
Listing 13.15. If not, you will need to add them.
Rather than hardcoding the name of the method in the call to
print(), use the #function expression. At compile time,
the #function expression will evaluate to a String
representing the name of the method.
Listing 13.15  Implementing scene state transition
delegate methods (SceneDelegate.swift)
func sceneWillResignActive(_ scene: UIScene) { 
    print(#function)
} 
 
func sceneDidEnterBackground(_ scene: UIScene) { 
    print(#function)
} 
 
func sceneWillEnterForeground(_ scene: UIScene) { 
    print(#function)
} 
 
func sceneDidBecomeActive(_ scene: UIScene) { 
    print(#function)
}
Add the same print() statement to the top of
scene(_:willConnectTo:options:).

--- Page 496 ---
Listing 13.16  Printing
scene(_:willConnectTo:options:)
(SceneDelegate.swift)
func scene(_ scene: UIScene, 
           willConnectTo session: UISceneSession, 
           options connectionOptions: UIScene.ConnectionOptions) { 
 
    print(#function) 
    guard let _ = (scene as? UIWindowScene) else { return } 
    ... 
} 
Build and run the application. You will see that the scene gets
sent scene(_:willConnectTo:options:) and then
sceneDidBecomeActive(_:). Play around to see what
actions cause what transitions.
Switch to the Home screen, and the console will report that the
scene briefly inactivated and then went into the background
state. Relaunch the application by tapping its icon on the
Home screen. The console will report that the scene entered
the foreground and then became active.
Press Command-Shift-H twice to open the task switcher.
Swipe the LootLogger application up and off this display to quit
the application. Note that no method is called on your scene
delegate at this point – it is simply terminated. 

--- Page 497 ---
For the More Curious: The Application
Bundle
When you build an iOS application project in Xcode, you create
an application bundle. The application bundle contains the
application executable and any resources you have bundled
with your application. Resources are things like storyboard
files, images, and audio files – any files that will be used at
runtime. When you add a resource file to a project, Xcode is
smart enough to realize that it should be bundled with your
application.
How can you tell which files are being bundled with your
application? Select the LootLogger project from the project
navigator. Check out the Build Phases pane in the LootLogger
target. Everything under Copy Bundle Resources will be added to
the application bundle when it is built.
Each item in the LootLogger target group is one of the phases
that occurs when you build a project. The Copy Bundle Resources
phase is where all the resources in your project get copied into
the application bundle.
You can check out what an application bundle looks like on
the filesystem after you install an application on the simulator.
Start by printing the application bundle path to the console.
    print(Bundle.main.bundlePath) 
Then, navigate to the application bundle directory using the
steps you followed in the section called Saving the Items. Then
Control-click the application bundle and choose Show Package
Contents (Figure 13.9).

--- Page 498 ---
Figure 13.9  Viewing an application bundle
A Finder window will appear showing you the contents of the
application bundle (Figure 13.10). When users download your
application from the App Store, these files are copied to their
devices.

--- Page 499 ---
Figure 13.10  The application bundle
You can load files from the application’s bundle at runtime. To
get the full URL for files in the application bundle, you need
to get a reference to the application bundle and then ask it for
the URL of a resource.
    // Get a reference to the application bundle 
    let mainBundle = Bundle.main 
 
    // Ask for the URL to a resource named MyTextFile.txt in the bundle 
resources 
    if let url = mainBundle.url(forResource: "MyTextFile", ofType: 
"txt") { 
        // Do something with URL 
    } 

--- Page 500 ---
If you ask for the URL to a file that is not in the application’s
bundle, this method will return nil. If the file does exist, then
the full URL is returned, and you can use this URL to load the
file with the appropriate class.
Bear in mind that files within the application bundle are read-
only. You cannot modify them, nor can you dynamically add
files to the application bundle at runtime. Files in the
application bundle are typically things like button images,
interface sound effects, or the initial state of a database you
ship with your application. You will use this method in later
chapters to load these types of resources at runtime. 

--- Page 501 ---
14 
Presenting View Controllers
iOS applications often present users with a view controller
showing an action they must complete or dismiss. For
example, when adding a new contact on iPhone, users are
presented with a screen to fill out the contact’s details
(Figure 14.1). We call this kind of presentation modal, as the
application is being put into a different “mode” where a set of
actions become the focus.

--- Page 502 ---
Figure 14.1  Creating a new contact
Modally presented view controllers often occupy the entire
screen, but they do not have to. Sometimes – especially on
iPad, where there is more space to work with – they take up
only a portion of the screen (Figure 14.2). Either way, though,
the user must interact with the modally presented view
controller before proceeding.

--- Page 503 ---
Figure 14.2  Creating a new contact on iPad
Over the course of the next two chapters, you will extend the
LootLogger application to add the ability for users to associate a
photo with each of their items. In this chapter, you will present
the user with the option to select a photo from either the
camera or the device’s photo library (Figure 14.3). In
Chapter 15, you will respond to the user’s selection by
presenting either the camera interface or the photo library
interface.

--- Page 504 ---
Figure 14.3  Choosing a photo source in LootLogger


--- Page 505 ---
Adding a Camera Button
In this section, you will add a way for the user to initiate the
photo selection process. You will create an instance of
UIToolbar, add a camera button to the toolbar, and place
the toolbar at the bottom of DetailViewController’s
view.
Open LootLogger.xcodeproj and navigate to
Main.storyboard. In the detail view controller, select the
bottom constraint for the outer stack view and press Delete to
remove it. The stack view will resize itself, which will make
some room for the toolbar at the bottom of the screen.
Now, drag a toolbar from the library and place it near the
bottom of the view. Make sure it is above the Home indicator
(the black bar along the bottom of the screen, shown in
Figure 14.4).
Figure 14.4  Adding a toolbar to the detail view
controller


--- Page 506 ---
You want the toolbar to extend from the superview’s leading
edge to its trailing edge, independent of the safe area. To do
this, select both the toolbar and the superview and open the
Auto Layout Align menu. Configure the constraints as shown in
Figure 14.5 and then click Add 2 Constraints.

--- Page 507 ---
Figure 14.5  Toolbar horizontal constraints
For the vertical constraints, you want the toolbar to be aligned
to the bottom safe area and be 8 points away from the stack
view. Select only the toolbar this time and open the Auto
Layout Add New Constraints menu. Configure the top and bottom
constraints as shown in Figure 14.6 and then click Add 2
Constraints.

--- Page 508 ---
Figure 14.6  Toolbar vertical constraints
A UIToolbar works a lot like a UINavigationBar – you
can add instances of UIBarButtonItem to it. However,
where a navigation bar has two slots for bar button items, a
toolbar has an array of bar button items. You can place as
many bar button items in a toolbar as can fit on the screen.
By default, a new instance of UIToolbar that is created in
an interface file comes with one UIBarButtonItem. Select
this bar button item and open the attributes inspector. Change

--- Page 509 ---
the System Item to Camera, and the item will show a camera icon
(Figure 14.7).
Figure 14.7  UIToolbar with camera bar button item


--- Page 510 ---
Build and run the application and navigate to an item’s details
to see the toolbar with its camera bar button item.
You have not connected the camera button yet, so tapping it
will not do anything. The camera button needs a target and an
action. With Main.storyboard still open, Option-click
DetailViewController.swift in the project navigator
to open it in another editor.
In Main.storyboard, select the camera button in the
document outline and Control-drag from the selected button to
the DetailViewController.swift editor.
In the panel, select Action as the Connection, name it
choosePhotoSource, select UIBarButtonItem as the Type, and click
Connect (Figure 14.8).
Figure 14.8  Creating an action
If you made any mistakes while making this connection, you
will need to open Main.storyboard and disconnect the
bad connection before trying again. (Look for yellow warning
signs in the connections inspector.)
With the toolbar and camera button in place, you can now
implement the functionality to let the user choose a photo
source.

--- Page 512 ---
Alert Controllers
To allow the user to choose a photo source, you will present an
alert with the possible choices. Alerts are often used to
display information the user must act on. When you want to
display an alert, you create an instance of
UIAlertController with a preferred style. The two
available styles are
UIAlertControllerStyle.actionSheet and
UIAlertControllerStyle.alert (Figure 14.9).
Figure 14.9  UIAlertController styles


--- Page 513 ---
The .actionSheet style is used to present the user with a
list of actions to choose from. The .alert type is used to
display critical information and requires the user to decide
how to proceed. The distinction may seem subtle, but if the
user can back out of a decision or if the action is not critical,
then an .actionSheet is probably the best choice.
You are going to use a UIAlertController to allow the
user to choose whether they want to take a new photo from
their camera or choose an existing photo from their photo
library. You will use the .actionSheet style because the
purpose of the alert is to choose from a list of options and the
user is free to back out of the process.
Close the Main.storyboard editor. In
DetailViewController.swift, update
choosePhotoSource(_:) to create an alert controller
instance.
Listing 14.1  Creating an alert controller
(DetailViewController.swift)
@IBAction func choosePhotoSource(_ sender: UIBarButtonItem) { 
    let alertController = UIAlertController(title: nil, 
                                            message: nil, 

--- Page 514 ---
                                            preferredStyle: 
.actionSheet) 
} 
After determining that the user wants to associate a photo with
some item, you create an instance of
UIAlertController. No title or message are needed for
this action sheet since the purpose should be self-evident from
the action the user took. Finally, you specify the
.actionSheet style for the alert.
If the alert controller were presented with the current code,
there would not be any actions for the user to choose from.
You need to add actions to the alert controller, and these
actions are instances of UIAlertAction. You can add
multiple actions (regardless of the alert’s style). They are
added to the UIAlertController instance using the
addAction(_:) method.
Add actions to the action sheet in
choosePhotoSource(_:).
Listing 14.2  Adding actions to the action sheet
(DetailViewController.swift)
@IBAction func choosePhotoSource(_ sender: UIBarButtonItem) { 
    let alertController = UIAlertController(title: nil, 
                                            message: nil, 
                                            preferredStyle: 
.actionSheet) 
 
    let cameraAction = UIAlertAction(title: "Camera", style: .default) { 
_ in 
        print("Present camera") 
    } 
    alertController.addAction(cameraAction) 
 
    let photoLibraryAction 
            = UIAlertAction(title: "Photo Library", style: .default) { _ 
in 
        print("Present photo library") 
    } 
    alertController.addAction(photoLibraryAction) 
 
    let cancelAction = UIAlertAction(title: "Cancel", style: .cancel, 
handler: nil) 
    alertController.addAction(cancelAction) 
} 

--- Page 515 ---
Each action is given a title, a style, and a closure to execute if
that action is selected by the user. The different styles –
.default, .cancel, and .destructive – influence the
position and styling of the action within the action sheet. For
example, .cancel actions show up at the bottom of the list,
and .destructive actions use red font colors to emphasize
the destructive nature of the action.
(You will flesh out cameraAction and
photoLibraryAction in the next chapter.)
Now that the action sheet has been configured, you need a way
to present it to the user. To present a view controller modally,
you call present(_:animated:completion:) on the
initiating view controller, passing in the view controller to
present as the first argument.
Update choosePhotoSource(_:) to present the alert
controller modally.
Listing 14.3  Presenting the view controller modally
(DetailViewController.swift)
@IBAction func choosePhotoSource(_ sender: UIBarButtonItem) { 
    let alertController = UIAlertController(title: nil, 
                                            message: nil, 
                                            preferredStyle: 
.actionSheet) 
 
    let cameraAction = UIAlertAction(title: "Camera", style: .default) { 
_ in 
        print("Present camera") 
    } 
    alertController.addAction(cameraAction) 
 
    let photoLibraryAction 
            = UIAlertAction(title: "Photo Library", style: .default) { _ 
in 
        print("Present photo library") 
    } 
    alertController.addAction(photoLibraryAction) 
 
    let cancelAction = UIAlertAction(title: "Cancel", style: .cancel, 
handler: nil) 
    alertController.addAction(cancelAction) 
 
    present(alertController, animated: true, completion: nil) 
} 

--- Page 516 ---
The present(_:animated:completion) method
takes in a view controller to present, a Bool indicating
whether that presentation should be animated, and an optional
closure to call once the presentation is completed. Generally,
you will want the presentation to be animated, as this provides
context to the user about what is happening.
Build and run the application. Tap the camera button and
watch the action sheet slide up. Finally, tap one of the actions.
If you tap either the Camera or Photo Library action, you will see
a message logged to the console indicating which was tapped.
Regardless of which action you tap, you will notice that the
action sheet is automatically dismissed.

--- Page 517 ---
Presentation Styles
When you present a standard view controller, it slides up to
cover the window. This is the default presentation style.
The presentation style determines the appearance of the view
controller as well as how the user can interact with it. Here are
some of the more common presentation styles that you will
encounter:
                      
                 
 
                   
                    
.aut
omat
ic 
                   
                
               
                 
Presents the view controller using a style chosen by the 
system. Typically this results in a .formSheet 
presentation. This is the default presentation style.
               
                 
 
                   
                    
.for
mShe
et 
                   
                
               
                 
Presents the view controller centered on top of the existing 
content.
               
                 
 
                   
                    
.ful
lScr
een 
                 
Presents the view controller over the entire application.
               

--- Page 518 ---
                   
                
               
                 
 
                   
                    
.ove
rFul
lScr
een 
                   
                
               
                 
Similar to .fullScreen except the view underneath the 
presented view controller stays visible. Use this style if the 
presented view controller has transparency, so that the user 
can see the view controller underneath.
               
                 
 
                   
                    
.pop
over 
                   
                
               
                 
Presents the view controller in a popover view on iPad. 
(On iPhone, using this style falls back to a form sheet 
presentation style due to space constraints.)
               
         
Many of the presentation styles adapt their appearance based
on the size of the window. Specifically, they adapt based on
the horizontal and vertical size classes, which you will learn
about in Chapter 16. Figure 14.10 shows a view controller
presented using a popover presentation style on devices of
different sizes.

--- Page 519 ---
Figure 14.10  Popover adapting to different window
sizes
Action sheets should be presented using the popover style. As
you can see in Figure 14.10, on iPad this produces a popover
interface with a “pointer” connecting it to the element that
triggered it. On iPhone, because of the smaller window size,
.popover falls back to .automatic and allows the system
to choose the best style.
This is what you want for your alert controller. On iPad, you
want it to appear in a popover pointing at the camera bar
button. On iPhone, you want the system to select the best style
for the screen size (which will be the .formSheet style you
just saw in action). Update choosePhotoSource(_:) to
tell the alert controller to use the popover presentation style.

--- Page 520 ---
Listing 14.4  Setting the modal presentation style
(DetailViewController.swift)
@IBAction func choosePhotoSource(_ sender: UIBarButtonItem) { 
    let alertController = UIAlertController(title: nil, 
                                            message: nil, 
                                            preferredStyle: 
.actionSheet) 
 
    alertController.modalPresentationStyle = .popover
To indicate where the popover should point, you can specify a
frame or a bar button item for it to point to. Since you already
have a bar button item, that is the better choice here.
In choosePhotoSource(_:), specify the bar button item
that the popover should point at.
Listing 14.5  Indicating where the popover should
point (DetailViewController.swift)
@IBAction func choosePhotoSource(_ sender: UIBarButtonItem) { 
    let alertController = UIAlertController(title: nil, 
                                            message: nil, 
                                            preferredStyle: 
.actionSheet) 
 
    alertController.modalPresentationStyle = .popover 
    alertController.popoverPresentationController?.barButtonItem = 
sender
Every view controller has a
popoverPresentationController, which is an
instance of UIPopoverPresentationController. The
popover presentation controller is responsible for managing
the appearance of the popover. One of its properties is
barButtonItem, which tells the popover to point at the
provided bar button item. Alternatively, you can specify a
sourceView and a sourceRect if the popover is not
presented from a bar button item.
Open the active scheme pop-up and choose an iPad simulator.
Build and run the application, navigate to an item’s details, and
tap the camera button. The action sheet is presented in a
popover pointing at the camera button (Figure 14.11). Notice

--- Page 521 ---
that there is no “cancel” action; when an action sheet is
presented in a popover, the cancel action is triggered by
tapping outside of the popover.
Figure 14.11  iPad presenting the alert controller


--- Page 522 ---
15 
Camera
In this chapter, you are going to add photos to the LootLogger
application. You will present a
UIImagePickerController so that the user can take
and save a picture of each item. The image will then be
associated with an Item instance and viewable in the item’s
detail view (Figure 15.1).

--- Page 523 ---
Figure 15.1  LootLogger with camera addition


--- Page 524 ---
Images tend to be very large, so it is a good idea to store
images separately from other data. Thus, you are going to
create a second store for images. ImageStore will fetch and
cache images as they are needed.

--- Page 525 ---
Displaying Images and UIImageView
Your first step is to have the DetailViewController get
and display an image. An easy way to display an image is to
put an instance of UIImageView on the screen.
Open LootLogger.xcodeproj and
Main.storyboard. Drag an Image View from the library
onto the detail view controller’s view, positioning it as the
last view within the stack view.
Select the image view and open its size inspector. You want
the vertical content hugging and content compression
resistance priorities for the image view to be lower than those
of the other views. Change the Vertical Content Hugging Priority to
248 and the Vertical Content Compression Resistance Priority to 749.
Your layout will look like Figure 15.2.

--- Page 526 ---
Figure 15.2  UIImageView on
DetailViewController’s view


--- Page 527 ---
A UIImageView displays an image according to the image
view’s contentMode property. This property determines
where to position and how to resize the content within the
image view’s frame. For image views, you will usually want
either aspect fit (if you want to see the whole image) or aspect
fill (if you want the image to fill the image view). Figure 15.3
compares the result of these two content modes.
Figure 15.3  Comparing content modes
With the UIImageView still selected, open the attributes
inspector. Find the Content Mode attribute and confirm it is set to
Aspect Fit.
Next, Option-click DetailViewController.swift in
the project navigator to open it in another editor. Control-drag
from the UIImageView to the top of
DetailViewController.swift. Name the outlet
imageView and make sure the storage type is Strong
(Figure 15.4). Click Connect. 

--- Page 528 ---
Figure 15.4  Creating the imageView outlet
The top of DetailViewController.swift should now
look like this:
    class DetailViewController: UIViewController, UITextFieldDelegate { 
 
        @IBOutlet var nameField: UITextField! 
        @IBOutlet var serialNumberField: UITextField! 
        @IBOutlet var valueField: UITextField! 
        @IBOutlet var dateLabel: UILabel! 
        @IBOutlet var imageView: UIImageView! 

--- Page 529 ---
Taking Pictures and
UIImagePickerController
In the choosePhotoSource(_:) method, you will
instantiate a UIImagePickerController and present it
on the screen. When creating an instance of
UIImagePickerController, you must set its
sourceType property and assign it a delegate. Because there
is set-up work needed for the image picker controller, you
need to create and present it programmatically instead of
through the storyboard.
CREATING A
UIIMAGEPICKERCONTROLLER
Close the editor showing Main.storyboard. In
DetailViewController.swift, add a new method that
creates and configures a UIImagePickerController
instance. You will need to create the
UIImagePickerController instance from more than
one place, so abstracting it into a method will help avoid
repetition.
Listing 15.1  Adding an image picker controller
creation method (DetailViewController.swift)
func imagePicker(for sourceType: UIImagePickerController.SourceType) 
                                                        -> 
UIImagePickerController { 
    let imagePicker = UIImagePickerController() 
    imagePicker.sourceType = sourceType 
    return imagePicker
}
The sourceType is a
UIImagePickerController.SourceType
enumeration value and tells the image picker where to get
images. It has three possible values:

--- Page 530 ---
                          
                   
 
                     
                      
.camera 
                     
                  
                 
                   
Allows the user to take a new photo.
                 
                   
 
                     
                      
.photoLibrary 
                     
                  
                 
                   
Prompts the user to select an album and 
then a photo from that album.
                 
                   
 
                     
                      
.savedPhotosAlb
um 
                     
                  
                 
                   
Prompts the user to choose from the most 
recently taken photos.
                 
           
These three options are illustrated in Figure 15.5.

--- Page 531 ---
Figure 15.5  Examples of the three sourceTypes
In choosePhotoSource(_:), create an image picker
controller instance when the user chooses one of the action
sheet options.

--- Page 532 ---
Listing 15.2  Creating an image picker controller
(DetailViewController.swift)
@IBAction func choosePhotoSource(_ sender: UIBarButtonItem) { 
    let alertController = UIAlertController(title: nil, 
                                            message: nil, 
                                            preferredStyle: 
.actionSheet) 
 
    alertController.modalPresentationStyle = .popover 
    alertController.popoverPresentationController?.barButtonItem = 
sender 
 
    let cameraAction = UIAlertAction(title: "Camera", style: .default) { 
_ in 
        print("Present camera") 
        let imagePicker = self.imagePicker(for: .camera) 
    } 
    alertController.addAction(cameraAction) 
 
    let photoLibraryAction = 
            UIAlertAction(title: "Photo Library", style: .default) { _ 
in 
        print("Present photo library") 
        let imagePicker = self.imagePicker(for: .photoLibrary) 
    } 
    alertController.addAction(photoLibraryAction) 
 
    let cancelAction = UIAlertAction(title: "Cancel", style: .cancel, 
handler: nil) 
    alertController.addAction(cancelAction) 
 
    present(alertController, animated: true, completion: nil) 
} 
The first source type, .camera, will not work on a device
that does not have a camera. So before using this type, you
have to check for a camera by calling the method
isSourceTypeAvailable(_:) on the
UIImagePickerController class:
    class func isSourceTypeAvailable 
        (_ type: UIImagePickerController.SourceType) -> Bool 
Calling this method returns a Boolean value indicating
whether the device supports the passed-in source type.
Update choosePhotoSource(_:) to only show the
camera option if the device has a camera.
Listing 15.3  Checking whether the device has a
camera (DetailViewController.swift)

--- Page 533 ---
@IBAction func choosePhotoSource(_ sender: UIBarButtonItem) { 
    let alertController = UIAlertController(title: nil, 
                                            message: nil, 
                                            preferredStyle: 
.actionSheet) 
 
    alertController.modalPresentationStyle = .popover 
    alertController.popoverPresentationController?.barButtonItem = 
sender 
 
    if UIImagePickerController.isSourceTypeAvailable(.camera) { 
        let cameraAction = UIAlertAction(title: "Camera", style: 
.default) { _ in 
            let imagePicker = self.imagePicker(for: .camera) 
        } 
        alertController.addAction(cameraAction) 
    }
With that code added, your cameraAction code may not be
indented correctly. An easy way to correct indentation is to
highlight the code that you want to correct, open the Editor
menu, and select Structure → Re-Indent. Since this is a tool you
will likely want to use often, the keyboard shortcut Control-I is
a handy one to remember.
SETTING THE IMAGE PICKER’S
DELEGATE
In addition to a source type, the
UIImagePickerController instance needs a delegate.
When the user selects an image from the
UIImagePickerController’s interface, the delegate is
sent the message
imagePickerController(_:didFinishPickingMe
diaWithInfo:). (If the user taps the cancel button, then
the delegate receives the message
imagePickerControllerDidCancel(_:).) 
The image picker’s delegate will be the instance of
DetailViewController. At the top of
DetailViewController.swift, declare that
DetailViewController conforms to the
UINavigationControllerDelegate and the
UIImagePickerControllerDelegate protocols.

--- Page 534 ---
Listing 15.4  Conforming to the necessary delegate
protocols (DetailViewController.swift)
class DetailViewController: UIViewController, UITextFieldDelegate, 
        UINavigationControllerDelegate, UIImagePickerControllerDelegate 
{ 
Why UINavigationControllerDelegate?
UIImagePickerController’s delegate property is
actually inherited from its superclass,
UINavigationController, and while
UIImagePickerController has its own delegate
protocol, its inherited delegate property is declared to
reference an object that conforms to
UINavigationControllerDelegate.
Next, set the instance of DetailViewController to be
the image picker’s delegate in imagePicker(for:).
Listing 15.5  Assigning the image picker controller
delegate (DetailViewController.swift)
func imagePicker(for sourceType: UIImagePickerController.SourceType) -> 
        UIImagePickerController { 
    let imagePicker = UIImagePickerController() 
    imagePicker.sourceType = sourceType 
    imagePicker.delegate = self 
    return imagePicker 
} 
PRESENTING THE IMAGE PICKER
MODALLY
Once the UIImagePickerController has a source type
and a delegate, you can display it by presenting the view
controller modally.
In DetailViewController.swift, add code to the end
of choosePhotoSource(_:) to present the
UIImagePickerController.

--- Page 535 ---
Listing 15.6  Presenting the image picker controller
(DetailViewController.swift)
if UIImagePickerController.isSourceTypeAvailable(.camera) { 
    let cameraAction = UIAlertAction(title: "Camera", style: .default) { 
_ in 
        let imagePicker = self.imagePicker(for: .camera) 
        self.present(imagePicker, animated: true, completion: nil) 
    } 
    alertController.addAction(cameraAction) 
} 
 
let photoLibraryAction = UIAlertAction(title: "Photo Library", style: 
.default) { _ in 
    let imagePicker = self.imagePicker(for: .photoLibrary) 
    self.present(imagePicker, animated: true, completion: nil) 
} 
alertController.addAction(photoLibraryAction) 
Apple’s documentation for UIImagePickerController
mentions that the camera should be presented full screen, and
the photo library and saved photos album must be presented in
a popover. The only change you need to make to satisfy these
requirements is to present the photo library in a popover.
Update the image picker to do just that.
Listing 15.7  Presenting the photo library in a
popover (DetailViewController.swift)
let photoLibraryAction = UIAlertAction(title: "Photo Library", style: 
.default) { _ in 
    let imagePicker = self.imagePicker(for: .photoLibrary) 
    imagePicker.modalPresentationStyle = .popover 
    imagePicker.popoverPresentationController?.barButtonItem = sender 
    self.present(imagePicker, animated: true, completion: nil) 
} 
Build and run the application. Select an Item to see its details
and then tap the camera button on the UIToolbar. Choose
Photo Library and then select a photo.
If you are working on the simulator, you will notice that the
Camera option no longer appears, because the simulator has no
camera. However, there are some default images already in the
photo library that you can use.

--- Page 536 ---
If you have an actual iOS device to run on, you will notice a
problem if you try to use the camera. When you select an
Item, tap the camera button, and chose Camera, the
application crashes.
Take a look at the description of the crash in the console:
    LootLogger[3575:64615] [access] This app has crashed because it 
attempted to 
    access privacy-sensitive data without a usage description.  The 
app's Info.plist 
    must contain an NSCameraUsageDescription key with a string value 
explaining 
    to the user how the app uses this data. 
When attempting to access potentially private information,
such as the camera, iOS prompts the user to consent to that
access. Contained within this prompt is a description of why
the application wants to access the information. LootLogger is
missing this description, and therefore the application is
crashing.
PERMISSIONS
There are a number of capabilities on iOS that require user
approval before use. The camera is one. Some of the others
are:
                          
                                        
 
                      
 
                        
photos
 
                      
 
                    
                   
                                        
 
                      
 
                        
location
 
                      
 
                    
                   

--- Page 537 ---
                                  
                                        
 
                      
 
                        
microphone
 
                      
 
                    
                                    
                                        
 
                      
 
                        
HealthKit data
 
                      
 
                    
                                    
                                        
 
                      
 
                        
calendar
 
                      
 
                    
                                    
                                        
 
                      
 
                        
reminders
 
                      
 
                    
                                    
           
For each of these, your application must supply a usage
description that specifies the reason that your application
wants to access the capability or information. This description
will be presented to the user when the application attempts the
access.
In some cases, iOS manages user privacy without the alert.
When selecting a photo from the photo library using
UIImagePickerController, users confirm the photo

--- Page 538 ---
they want to use with the Choose button. No usage description
is required. On the other hand, the photo library usage
description is required when the application wants to use the
Photos framework to access the library silently.
In the project navigator, select the project at the top. In the
editor, make sure the LootLogger target is selected and open the
Info tab along the top (Figure 15.6).
Figure 15.6  Opening the project info
Hover over the last entry in this list of Custom iOS Target
Properties and click the 
  button. Set the Key of the new entry
that appears to NSCameraUsageDescription and the Type to String.
You will not find this key in the drop-down menu; you must
type in its name. And the key is case sensitive, so make sure to
type it in correctly.
When you press Return, the key name in Xcode will change
from “NSCameraUsageDescription” to “Privacy – Camera
Usage Description.” By default, Xcode displays human-
readable strings instead of the actual key names. When adding

--- Page 539 ---
or editing an entry, you can use either the human-readable
string or the actual key name. If you would like to view the
actual key names in Xcode, Control-click on the key-value table
and select Raw Keys & Values.
For the Value, enter This app uses the camera to associate photos with
items. This is the string that will be presented to the user. The
Custom iOS Target Properties section will look similar to
Figure 15.7.
Figure 15.7  Adding the new key
Build and run the application on a device and navigate to an
item. Tap the camera button, select the Camera option, and you
will see the permission dialog presented with the usage
description that you provided (Figure 15.8). After you tap OK,
the UIImagePickerController’s camera interface will
appear on the screen, and you can take a picture. 

--- Page 540 ---
Figure 15.8  Camera privacy alert
SAVING THE IMAGE
Selecting an image dismisses the
UIImagePickerController and returns you to the detail
view. However, you do not have a reference to the photo once
the image picker is dismissed. To fix this, you are going to
implement the delegate method
imagePickerController(_:didFinishPickingMe
diaWithInfo:). This method is called on the image
picker’s delegate when a photo has been selected.
In DetailViewController.swift, implement
imagePickerController(_:didFinishPickingMe
diaWithInfo:) to put the image into the UIImageView
and then call the method to dismiss the image picker.
Listing 15.8  Accessing the selected image
(DetailViewController.swift)
func imagePickerController(_ picker: UIImagePickerController, 
        didFinishPickingMediaWithInfo info: 
[UIImagePickerController.InfoKey: Any]) { 
 
    // Get picked image from info dictionary 
    let image = info[.originalImage] as! UIImage 
 
    // Put that image on the screen in the image view 
    imageView.image = image 

--- Page 541 ---
 
    // Take image picker off the screen - you must call this dismiss 
method 
    dismiss(animated: true, completion: nil)
}
The image that the user selects comes packaged within the
info dictionary. This dictionary contains data relevant to the
user’s selection, and its contents will vary depending on how
the image picker is configured. For example, if the image
picker is configured to allow image editing, the dictionary
might also contain the .editedImage and .cropRect
keys. There are other ways to configure an image picker and
other keys that can be returned in the info dictionary, so take
a look at the UIImagePickerController documentation
if you are interested in learning more.
Build and run the application again. Select a photo. The image
picker is dismissed, and you are returned to the
DetailViewController’s view, where you will see the
selected photo.
LootLogger’s users could have hundreds of items to catalog, and
each one could have a large image associated with it. Keeping
hundreds of instances of Item in memory is not a big deal.
But keeping hundreds of images in memory would be bad:
First, you will get a low-memory warning. Then, if your app’s
memory footprint continues to grow, the OS will terminate it.
The solution, which you are going to implement in the next
section, is to store images to disk and only fetch them into
RAM when they are needed. This fetching will be done by a
new class, ImageStore. When the application receives a
low-memory notification, the ImageStore’s cache will be
flushed to free the memory that the fetched images were
occupying. 

--- Page 542 ---
Creating ImageStore
In Chapter 13, you had Items write out their properties to a
file, and those properties are then read in when the application
starts. However, because images tend to be very large, it is a
good idea to keep them separate from other data.
You are going to store the pictures the user takes in an instance
of a class named ImageStore. The image store will fetch
and cache the images as they are needed. It will also be able to
flush the cache if the device runs low on memory.
Create a new Swift file named ImageStore. In
ImageStore.swift, define the ImageStore class and
add a property that is an instance of NSCache.
Listing 15.9  Adding the ImageStore class
(ImageStore.swift)
import Foundation
import UIKit 
 
class ImageStore { 
 
    let cache = NSCache<NSString,UIImage>() 
 
}
The cache works very much like a dictionary. You are able to
add, remove, and update values associated with a given key.
Unlike a dictionary, the cache will automatically remove
objects if the system gets low on memory.
Note that the cache is associating an instance of NSString
with UIImage. NSString is Objective-C’s version of
String. Due to the way NSCache is implemented (it is an
Objective-C class, like most of Apple’s classes that you have
been working with), it requires you to use NSString instead
of String.

--- Page 543 ---
Now, implement three methods for adding, retrieving, and
deleting an image from the dictionary.
Listing 15.10  Implementing ImageStore methods
(ImageStore.swift)
class ImageStore { 
 
    let cache = NSCache<NSString,UIImage>() 
 
    func setImage(_ image: UIImage, forKey key: String) { 
        cache.setObject(image, forKey: key as NSString) 
    } 
 
    func image(forKey key: String) -> UIImage? { 
        return cache.object(forKey: key as NSString) 
    } 
 
    func deleteImage(forKey key: String) { 
        cache.removeObject(forKey: key as NSString) 
    } 
 
} 
These three methods all take in a key of type String so that
the rest of your code base does not have to think about the
underlying implementation of NSCache. You then cast each
String to an NSString when passing it to the cache.

--- Page 544 ---
Giving View Controllers Access to the
Image Store
The DetailViewController needs an instance of
ImageStore to fetch and store images. You will inject this
dependency into the DetailViewController’s
designated initializer, just as you did for
ItemsViewController and ItemStore in Chapter 9.
In DetailViewController.swift, add a property for
an ImageStore.
Listing 15.11  Adding an ImageStore property to the
detail view controller
(DetailViewController.swift)
var item: Item! { 
    didSet { 
        navigationItem.title = item.name 
    } 
} 
var imageStore: ImageStore!
Now do the same in ItemsViewController.swift.
Listing 15.12  Adding an ImageStore property to the
items view controller
(ItemsViewController.swift)
var itemStore: ItemStore! 
var imageStore: ImageStore!
Next, still in ItemsViewController.swift, update
prepare(for:sender:) to set the imageStore
property on DetailViewController.
Listing 15.13  Injecting the ImageStore
(ItemsViewController.swift)

--- Page 545 ---
override func prepare(for segue: UIStoryboardSegue, sender: Any?) { 
    // If the triggered segue is the "showItem" segue 
    switch segue.identifier { 
    case "showItem": 
        // Figure out which row was just tapped 
        if let row = tableView.indexPathForSelectedRow?.row { 
 
            // Get the item associated with this row and pass it along 
            let item = itemStore.allItems[row] 
            let detailViewController 
                    = segue.destination as! DetailViewController 
            detailViewController.item = item 
            detailViewController.imageStore = imageStore 
        } 
    default: 
        preconditionFailure("Unexpected segue identifier.") 
    } 
} 
Finally, update SceneDelegate.swift to create and
inject the ImageStore.
Listing 15.14  Creating and injecting the ImageStore
(SceneDelegate.swift)
func scene(_ scene: UIScene, 
           willConnectTo session: UISceneSession, 
           options connectionOptions: UIScene.ConnectionOptions) { 
    guard let _ = (scene as? UIWindowScene) else { return } 
 
    // Create an ImageStore 
    let imageStore = ImageStore() 
 
    // Create an ItemStore 
    let itemStore = ItemStore() 
 
    // Access the ItemsViewController and set its item store 
    let navController = window!.rootViewController as! 
UINavigationController 
    let itemsController = navController.topViewController as! 
ItemsViewController 
    itemsController.itemStore = itemStore 
    itemsController.imageStore = imageStore 
} 

--- Page 546 ---
Creating and Using Keys
When an image is added to the store, it will be put into the
cache under a unique key, and the associated Item object will
be given that key. When the DetailViewController
wants an image from the store, it will ask its item for the key
and search the cache for the image.
Add a property to Item.swift to store the key.
Listing 15.15  Adding a new property for a unique
identifier (Item.swift)
let dateCreated: Date 
let itemKey: String
The image keys need to be unique for your cache to work.
While there are many ways to hack together a unique string,
you are going to use the Cocoa Touch mechanism for creating
universally unique identifiers (UUIDs), also known as globally
unique identifiers (GUIDs). Objects of type UUID represent a
UUID and are generated using the time, a counter, and a
hardware identifier, which is usually the MAC address of the
WiFi card. When represented as a string, UUIDs look
something like this:
    4A73B5D2-A6F4-4B40-9F82-EA1E34C1DC04 
In Item.swift, generate a UUID and set it as the
itemKey.
Listing 15.16  Generating a UUID (Item.swift)
init(name: String, serialNumber: String?, valueInDollars: Int) { 
    self.name = name 
    self.valueInDollars = valueInDollars 
    self.serialNumber = serialNumber 
    self.dateCreated = Date() 

--- Page 547 ---
    self.itemKey = UUID().uuidString 
} 
Then, in DetailViewController.swift, update
imagePickerController(_:didFinishPickingMe
diaWithInfo:) to store the image in the ImageStore.
Listing 15.17  Storing the image
(DetailViewController.swift)
func imagePickerController(_ picker: UIImagePickerController, 
        didFinishPickingMediaWithInfo info: 
[UIImagePickerController.InfoKey: Any]) { 
 
    // Get picked image from info dictionary 
    let image = info[UIImagePickerControllerOriginalImage] as! UIImage 
 
    // Store the image in the ImageStore for the item's key 
    imageStore.setImage(image, forKey: item.itemKey) 
 
    // Put that image on the screen in the image view 
    imageView.image = image 
 
    // Take image picker off the screen - you must call this dismiss 
method 
    dismiss(animated: true, completion: nil) 
} 
Each time an image is captured, it will be added to the store.
Notice that the images are saved immediately after being
taken, while the instances of Item are saved only when the
application enters the background. You save the images right
away because they are too big to keep in memory for long. 
Both the ImageStore and the Item will know the key for
the image, so both will be able to access it as needed
(Figure 15.9).

--- Page 548 ---
Figure 15.9  Accessing images from the cache
Similarly, when an item is deleted, you need to delete its
image from the image store. In
ItemsViewController.swift, update
tableView(_:commit:forRowAt:) to remove the
item’s image from the image store.
Listing 15.18  Deleting the image from the
ImageStore (ItemsViewController.swift)

--- Page 549 ---
override func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, 
                        commit editingStyle: 
UITableViewCellEditingStyle, 
                        forRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) { 
    // If the table view is asking to commit a delete command... 
    if editingStyle == .delete { 
        let item = itemStore.allItems[indexPath.row] 
 
        // Remove the item from the store 
        itemStore.removeItem(item) 
 
        // Remove the item's image from the image store 
        imageStore.deleteImage(forKey: item.itemKey) 
 
        // Also remove that row from the table view with an animation 
        tableView.deleteRows(at: [indexPath], with: .automatic) 
    } 
} 

--- Page 550 ---
Persisting Images to Disk
Each item’s itemKey is encoded and decoded, but what
about its image? At the moment, images are lost when the app
enters the background state. In this section, you will extend the
image store to save images as they are added and fetch them as
they are needed.
The images for Item instances should also be stored in the
Documents directory. You can use the image key generated
when the user takes a picture to name the image in the
filesystem.
Implement a new method in ImageStore.swift named
imageURL(forKey:) to create a URL in the documents
directory using a given key.
Listing 15.19  Adding a method to get a URL for a
given image (ImageStore.swift)
func imageURL(forKey key: String) -> URL { 
    let documentsDirectories = 
        FileManager.default.urls(for: .documentDirectory, in: 
.userDomainMask) 
    let documentDirectory = documentsDirectories.first! 
 
    return documentDirectory.appendingPathComponent(key)
}
To save and load an image, you are going to copy the JPEG
representation of the image into a Data buffer.
In ImageStore.swift, modify
setImage(_:forKey:) to get a URL and save the image.
Listing 15.20  Saving image data to disk
(ImageStore.swift)
func setImage(_ image: UIImage, forKey key: String) { 
    cache.setObject(image, forKey: key as NSString) 

--- Page 551 ---
 
    // Create full URL for image 
    let url = imageURL(forKey: key) 
 
    // Turn image into JPEG data 
    if let data = image.jpegData(compressionQuality: 0.5) { 
        // Write it to full URL 
        try? data.write(to: url) 
    } 
} 
Let’s examine this code more closely. The
jpegData(compressionQuality:) method takes a
single parameter that determines the compression quality when
converting the image to a JPEG data format. The compression
quality is a Float from 0 to 1, where 1 is the highest quality
(least compression). The function returns an instance of Data
if the compression succeeds and nil if it does not.
Finally, you call write(to:) to write the image data to the
filesystem, as you did in Chapter 13.
Now that the image is stored in the filesystem, the
ImageStore will need to load that image when it is
requested. The UIImage initializer
init(contentsOfFile:) will read in an image from a
file, given a URL.
In ImageStore.swift, update image(forKey:) so
that the ImageStore will load the image from the filesystem
if it does not already have it.
Listing 15.21  Fetching the image from the filesystem
if it is not in the cache (ImageStore.swift)
func image(forKey key: String) -> UIImage? { 
    return cache.object(forKey: key as NSString) 
 
    if let existingImage = cache.object(forKey: key as NSString) { 
        return existingImage 
    } 
 
    let url = imageURL(forKey: key) 
    guard let imageFromDisk = UIImage(contentsOfFile: url.path) else { 
        return nil 
    } 
 
    cache.setObject(imageFromDisk, forKey: key as NSString) 

--- Page 552 ---
    return imageFromDisk 
} 
What is that guard statement? guard is a conditional
statement, similar to an if statement but with some key
differences. Unlike an if statement, a guard statement must
have an else block that exits scope. A guard statement is
used when some condition must be met in order for the code
after it to be executed. If that condition is met, program
execution continues past the guard statement, and any
variables bound in the guard statement are available for use.
Here, the condition is whether the UIImage initialization is
successful. If the initialization succeeds, imageFromDisk is
available to use. If the initialization fails, the else block is
executed, returning nil.
The code above is functionally equivalent to:
    if let imageFromDisk = UIImage(contentsOfFile: url.path) { 
        cache.setObject(imageFromDisk, forKey: key) 
        return imageFromDisk 
    } 
 
    return nil 
While you could do this, guard provides both a cleaner and,
more importantly, a safer way to ensure that you exit if you
do not have what you need. Using guard also forces the
failure case to be directly tied to the condition being checked.
This makes the code more readable and easier to reason about.
You are able to save an image to disk and retrieve an image
from disk. Now you need the functionality to remove an image
from disk. In ImageStore.swift, make sure that when an
image is deleted from the store, it is also deleted from the
filesystem.
Listing 15.22  Removing the image from the
filesystem (ImageStore.swift)

--- Page 553 ---
func deleteImage(forKey key: String) { 
    cache.removeObject(forKey: key as NSString) 
 
    let url = imageURL(forKey: key) 
    do { 
        try FileManager.default.removeItem(at: url) 
    } catch { 
        print("Error removing the image from disk: \(error)") 
    } 
} 
Build and run the application now that the ImageStore is
complete. Select a photo for an item and exit the application to
the Home screen. Launch the application again. Selecting that
same item will show all its saved details – except the photo
you just took.
You are successfully taking, showing, and saving images. But
you are not yet loading images from the store when you need
them. You will do that next.

--- Page 554 ---
Loading Images from the ImageStore
Now that the ImageStore can store images, and instances of
Item have a key to get an image (Figure 15.9), you need to
teach DetailViewController how to grab the image for
the selected Item and place it in its imageView.
The DetailViewController’s view will appear when
the user taps a row in ItemsViewController and when
the UIImagePickerController is dismissed. In both of
these situations, the imageView should be populated with
the image of the Item being displayed. Currently, it is only
happening when the UIImagePickerController is
dismissed.
In DetailViewController.swift, look for and display
images in viewWillAppear(_:).
Listing 15.23  Retrieving the image from the
ImageStore (DetailViewController.swift)
override func viewWillAppear(_ animated: Bool) { 
    super.viewWillAppear(animated) 
 
    nameField.text = item.name 
    serialNumberField.text = item.serialNumber 
    valueField.text = 
        numberFormatter.string(from: NSNumber(value: 
item.valueInDollars)) 
    dateLabel.text = dateFormatter.string(from: item.dateCreated) 
 
    // Get the item key 
    let key = item.itemKey 
 
    // If there is an associated image with the item, display it on the 
image view 
    let imageToDisplay = imageStore.image(forKey: key) 
    imageView.image = imageToDisplay 
} 
Build and run the application. Create an item and select it from
the table view. Then tap the camera button and select a picture.
The image will appear as it should. Pop out from the item’s

--- Page 555 ---
details to the list of items. Unlike before, if you tap and drill
down to see the details of the item you added a picture to, you
will see the image.

--- Page 556 ---
Bronze Challenge: Editing an Image
UIImagePickerController has a built-in interface for
editing an image once it has been selected. Allow the user to
edit the image and use the edited image instead of the original
image in DetailViewController.

--- Page 557 ---
Silver Challenge: Removing an Image
Add a button that clears the image for an item.

--- Page 558 ---
For the More Curious: Navigating
Implementation Files
Both of your view controllers have quite a few methods in
their implementation files. To be an effective iOS developer,
you must be able to go to the code you are looking for quickly
and easily. The source editor jump bar in Xcode is one tool at
your disposal (Figure 15.10).
Figure 15.10  Source editor jump bar
The jump bar shows you exactly where you are within the
project (including where the cursor is within a given file).
Figure 15.11 breaks down the jump bar details.
Figure 15.11  Jump bar details
The breadcrumb trail navigation of the jump bar mirrors the
project navigation hierarchy. If you click on any of the

--- Page 559 ---
sections, you will be presented with a pop-up menu of that
section in the project hierarchy. From there, you can easily
navigate to other parts of the project.
Figure 15.12 shows the file pop-up menu for the LootLogger
folder.
Figure 15.12  File pop-up menu
Perhaps most useful is the ability to navigate easily within an
implementation file. If you click the last element in the
breadcrumb trail, you will get a pop-up menu with the contents
of the file, including all the methods implemented within that
file.
While the pop-up menu is visible, you can type to filter the
items in the list. At any point, you can use the up and down
arrow keys and then press the Return key to jump to that
method in the code. Figure 15.13 shows what you get when

--- Page 560 ---
you filter for “tableview” in
ItemsViewController.swift.
Figure 15.13  File pop-up menu with “tableview” filter
// MARK:
As your classes get longer, it can get more difficult to find a
method buried in a long list of methods. A good way to
organize your methods is to use // MARK: comments.
Two useful // MARK: comments are the divider and the
label:
    // This is a divider 
    // MARK: - 
 
    // This is a label 
    // MARK: My Awesome Methods 
The divider and label can be combined:
    // MARK: - View lifecycle 
    override func viewDidLoad() { ... } 
    override func viewWillAppear(_ animated: Bool) { ... } 
 
    // MARK: - Actions 
    func addNewItem(_ sender: UIBarButtonItem) {...} 
Adding // MARK: comments to your code does not change
the code itself; it just tells Xcode how to visually organize your
methods. You can see the results by opening the current file

--- Page 561 ---
item in the jump bar. Figure 15.14 presents a well-organized
ItemsViewController.swift.
Figure 15.14  File pop-up menu with // MARK:s
If you make a habit of using // MARK: comments, you will
force yourself to organize your code. If done thoughtfully, this
will make your code more readable and easier to work with.

--- Page 562 ---
16 
Adaptive Interfaces
It is important to build interfaces that adapt to users’
preferences as well as to the context they are presented in. In
the interfaces you have built so far, you have used Auto
Layout and the safe area to allow them to adapt to various
screen sizes and device types, and you have supported
Dynamic Type in order to respect a user’s preferred text size.
In this chapter, you will learn about two new ways to adapt
your interfaces. First, you will use size classes to modify
how the LootLogger interface appears when presented on a
screen with a relatively small height. Then, you will learn how
to effectively support Dark Mode in your applications to
respect your user’s visual preference.
Let’s get started by looking at size classes.

--- Page 563 ---
Size Classes
Often, you want an application’s interface to have a different
layout depending on the dimensions and orientation of the
screen. In this chapter, you will modify the interface for
DetailViewController so that when it appears on a
screen that has a relatively small height, the set of text fields
and the image view are side by side instead of stacked
(Figure 16.1).
Figure 16.1  Two layouts for
DetailViewController


--- Page 564 ---
The relative sizes of screens are defined in size classes. A
size class represents a relative amount of screen space in a
given dimension. Each dimension (width and height) is
classified as either compact or regular, so there are four
combinations of size classes:
Compact Width | Compact Height
iPhones with 4, 4.7, or 5.8-inch screens in landscape
orientation
Compact Width | Regular Height
iPhones of all sizes in portrait orientation
Regular Width | Compact Height
iPhones with 5.5, 6.1, or 6.5-inch screens in
landscape orientation
Regular Width | Regular Height
iPads of all sizes in all orientations
Now you can understand the View As notation at the bottom of
Interface Builder. View as: iPhone 11 Pro (wC hR), for example, means
that the selected device and orientation is classified as compact
width (wC) and regular height (hR).
Note that apps running on iPad in Split View or Slide Over do
not fill the entire iPad screen, so they will often have a
compact width.
Notice that the size classes cover both screen sizes and
orientations. Instead of thinking about interfaces in terms of
orientation or device, it is better to think in terms of size
classes.
MODIFYING TRAITS FOR A SPECIFIC SIZE
CLASS
When editing the interface for a specific size class
combination, you are able to change:

--- Page 565 ---
properties for many views
whether a specific subview is installed
whether a specific constraint is installed
the constant of a constraint
the font for subviews that display text
In LootLogger, you are going to focus on the first item in that list
– adjusting view properties depending on the size class
configuration. The goal is to have the image view be on the
right side of the labels and text fields in a compact height
environment. In a regular height environment, the image view
will be below the labels and text fields (as it currently is).
Stack views will allow you to make this change easily.
To begin, you are going to embed the existing vertical stack
view within another stack view. This will make it easy to add
an image view to the right side of the labels and text fields.
Open LootLogger.xcodeproj and
Main.storyboard. Select the vertical stack view, click the 
 icon, then click Stack View to embed this stack view within
another stack view.
You now have five stack views on your interface, and it can be
easy to get confused about which one you are editing. A
helpful trick is to rename views in Interface Builder’s document
outline to give them descriptive names.
In Main.storyboard, expand the document outline and
select the outermost stack view. Press Return to start editing
the name and enter Adaptive Stack View. Do the same for the
other four stack views, renaming them as shown in
Figure 16.2.

--- Page 566 ---
Figure 16.2  Renaming the stack views
These names are used only within Interface Builder to help you
identify which UI element you are working with. They have
no effect on the code or the running app’s appearance.
Select the new Adaptive Stack View and open the Auto Layout Add
New Constraints menu. Set the top and bottom constraint
constants to both be 8, but do not yet add the constraints.
By default, the menu wants to constrain the stack view to the
leading and trailing safe area, but you want to constrain it to
the margins instead. To do this, click the disclosure arrow for
the leading constraint, change the selection to View, and then
set the constant to 0 (Figure 16.3). Do the same for the trailing

--- Page 567 ---
constraint. Ensure the Constrains to Margin checkbox is checked,
and then Add 4 Constraints.
Figure 16.3  Stack view constraints
Next, open the Adaptive Stack View’s attributes inspector. Increase
the Spacing to be 8.
Now you are going to move the image view from the Form
Stack View to the Adaptive Stack View. This is how you will be able
to have the image view on the right side of the rest of the
interface: In a compact height environment, the Adaptive Stack
View will be set to be horizontal, and the image view will take
up the right side of the interface.

--- Page 568 ---
Moving the image view from one stack view to the other can
be a little tricky, so you are going to do it in a few steps.
In the document outline, expand the sections for the Detail View
Controller Scene and the outer two stack views, as shown in
Figure 16.4.
Figure 16.4  Expanding the document outline
Drag the Image View right above the Form Stack View, which it is
currently contained within (Figure 16.5). This will move it
from the Form Stack View to the Adaptive Stack View.

--- Page 569 ---
Figure 16.5  Moving the image view to the Adaptive
Stack View
Finally, collapse the Form Stack View and drag the Image View to
be below it in the stack (Figure 16.6). Make sure the Image View
is indented at the same level as the Form Stack View. You may
need to update frames at this point to get rid of any warnings.

--- Page 570 ---
Figure 16.6  Moving the image view below the Form
Stack View
Build and run the application. Confirm that the behavior of the
stack view is unchanged.
At this point, you have updated everything that is common to
all size classes. Next you will modify specific size classes to
change the layout of the content.
At the bottom of Interface Builder, click on View as: iPhone 11 Pro
(wC hR) to expand the view options. Then select the landscape
Orientation (Figure 16.7). Leave the Device as iPhone 11 Pro.

--- Page 571 ---
Figure 16.7  DetailViewController viewed as
iPhone 11 Pro landscape
Next, you will update the properties for the Adaptive Stack View
so that the image view is on the right side.
Select the Adaptive Stack View and open its attributes inspector.
Under the Stack View heading, find the Axis property and click
the 
  button on its left side. From the pop-up menu, choose
Any for the Width variation and Compact for the Height variation

--- Page 572 ---
(Figure 16.8). Click Add Variation. This will allow you to
customize the axis property for all iPhones in landscape.
Figure 16.8  Adding a size-class-specific option
For the new option (hC), choose Horizontal (Figure 16.9). Now,
whenever the interface has a compact height, the Adaptive Stack
View will have a horizontal configuration. When the interface
has a regular height, the Adaptive Stack View will have a vertical
configuration.
Figure 16.9  Customizing the axis
The last change you want to make is for the Form Stack View and
the image view to fill the Adaptive Stack View equally when in a

--- Page 573 ---
compact height environment. To do this, you will customize
the Adaptive Stack View’s distribution property.
With the attributes inspector still open for the Adaptive Stack
View, click the 
  next to Distribution and once again select Any
for the Width variation and Compact for the Height variation from
the pop-up menu. Change the distribution for this size class to
be Fill Equally (Figure 16.10).
Figure 16.10  Customizing the distribution
Build and run the application. Select an item and drill down to
its details to add a photo, if it does not already have one.
Rotate between portrait and landscape (on the simulator, you
can use Command plus the left or right arrow key to rotate)
and notice how the interface is laid out as you specified for
both regular and compact height. 

--- Page 574 ---
Adapting to Dark Mode
iOS supports a system-wide dark appearance called Dark
Mode, and good iOS applications should respect the user’s
preference. Let’s see how LootLogger looks currently in Dark
Mode.
With the application still running, change the environment to
Dark Mode by clicking the 
  button in Xcode’s debug toolbar
to open the Environment Overrides menu (Figure 16.11). Turn on
the Interface Style switch and select Dark.

--- Page 575 ---
Figure 16.11  Choosing the Dark Mode environment
override
Navigate through the app and notice that it responds pretty
well to Dark Mode (Figure 16.12).

--- Page 576 ---
Figure 16.12  LootLogger in Dark Mode
By default, the system-provided views – such as UILabel,
UITextField, and UIView – use dynamic colors when
drawing themselves. Dynamic colors provide different values
depending on whether they are in a light or dark appearance.
(They also change slightly based on a few accessibility options
such as Increase Contrast. You will learn more about
accessibility in Chapter 24.)

--- Page 577 ---
Most of the colors in Interface Builder’s color picker are dynamic
colors. In the color picker shown in Figure 16.13, notice the
Label Color and System Background Color. Label Color is the default
text color for labels; it is black in a light appearance and white
in a dark appearance. System Background Color is the inverse; it is
white when in a light appearance and black in a dark
appearance. Since you have not changed the default colors
used for the views in LootLogger, the application responds
appropriately to Dark Mode.
Figure 16.13  Dynamic colors in Interface Builder
You can use these colors in code as well. Label Color maps to
UIColor.label and System Background Color maps to

--- Page 578 ---
UIColor.systemBackground. See the UIColor
documentation for the full list of values.
Dynamic colors are dependent on the current trait
collection to provide adaptability. A trait collection is an
instance of UITraitCollection that helps determine the
appearance of views with properties such as:
                      
                 
 
                   
                    
userInter
faceIdiom 
                   
                
               
                 
the type of device the application is running on, 
such as iPhone, iPad, Apple TV, or CarPlay device
               
                 
 
                   
                    
userInter
faceStyle 
                   
                
               
                 
Light or Dark Mode
               
                 
 
                   
                    
userInter
faceLevel 
                   
                
               
                 
base level (for full-screen views) or elevated level 
(for non-full-screen views, such as modals, 
popovers, and apps in Split View)
               
         

--- Page 579 ---
Instances of UIView and UIViewController have a
traitCollection property that can be used to access
these properties. Another convenient way to access an instance
of trait collection is the current property of
UITraitCollection, which is set automatically by the
UIKit framework.
Dynamic colors use the current trait collection to determine
which color to return based on the interface style and level.
UIKit contains several system-level dynamic colors. There
are three variants of background colors: primary, secondary,
and tertiary.
These colors allow you to structure the view hierarchy of your
application (Figure 16.14). For example, when using the
systemBackgroundColor in a dark appearance, the
system will use a pure black color for full screen (base level)
views, and a dark gray color for non-full-screen (elevated)
views. You can use the trait collection properties to do the
same for your interfaces.

--- Page 580 ---
Figure 16.14  Background color variants
There are four levels of text colors that let you emphasize the
importance of elements relative to each other. Primary-level
colors are used for the title, secondary for the subtitle, tertiary
and quaternary for other text. You can use these colors for
other purposes, but it is important to know the hierarchy of the
colors when using them.

--- Page 581 ---
While LootLogger responds well to Dark Mode, let’s update its
interface to use some different colors to give the app a little
more flair. To do this, you will create a few custom colors and
then use these on various interface elements.
ADDING COLORS TO THE ASSET
CATALOG
You added images to the Asset Catalog in the Quiz and
WorldTrotter applications. You will now use the Asset Catalog to
add colors. Using the Asset Catalog for this will allow you to
give names to these colors that can be referenced in Interface
Builder as well as in code – and, more importantly, you will be
able to customize the colors for both light and dark
appearances.
Open Assets.xcassets. In the bottom-left corner, click
the 
  and select New Color Set (Figure 16.15).

--- Page 582 ---
Figure 16.15  Adding a new color
Double-click the color in the sidebar and name it Primary Brand
Fill Color. This is the color that will be used as the background
throughout the app. With the color still selected, open its
attributes inspector. From the Appearances drop-down menu,
select Any, Dark. Notice that an additional color option appears
in the catalog (Figure 16.16).

--- Page 583 ---
Figure 16.16  Adding another color appearance
You can now update the color values. If the interface is in a
dark appearance, the Dark Appearance color will be used.
Otherwise, the Any Appearance color will be used.
Select the Any Appearance box and open its attributes inspector.
In the Color section, set the Input Method to 8-bit (0-255). Then,
change the Red, Green, and Blue values to 248, 248, and 253,
respectively.
Now select the Dark Appearance box and set the Red, Green, and
Blue values to 25, 25, and 42, respectively.
With the primary fill color created, repeat the same steps to
create two more colors you will use in the app. See Table 16.1
for the values to use.
Table 16.1  Colors
               

--- Page 584 ---
               
Name Any AppearanceDark Appearance
               
Secondary Brand Fill Color                                  
R
ed
2
3
6
Gr
ee
n
2
3
5
Bl
ue
2
5
5
                             
                                 
R
ed
4
5
Gr
ee
n
4
2
Bl
ue
7
5
                             
Brand Accent Color                                 
R
ed
2
4
0
Gr
ee
n
7
9
Bl
ue
0
                             
                                 
R
ed
2
5
5
Gr
ee
n
8
4
Bl
ue
0
                             
             
You might notice that the brand accent colors are very similar
to one another, with the dark appearance color being just a
little lighter than the light appearance color. This is often the

--- Page 585 ---
case for non-fill colors. While any orange (in this case) would
contrast against a white, gray, or black background, setting the
dark appearance color a little lighter gives it extra “pop” on the
darker background fill colors (and vice versa for the light
appearance color).
USING CUSTOM DYNAMIC COLORS
With the three dynamic colors created, it is time to put them to
use. Start by updating the ItemsViewController.
Open Main.storyboard and find the LootLogger scene.
Select the table view and open its attributes inspector. Scroll
down to the View section and open the Background drop-down
menu. You should see a new section in this drop-down menu
labeled Named Colors (Figure 16.17). Select Primary Brand Fill Color
from this list. Now do the same for the table view cell: Select
it, open its attributes inspector, and change its Background color
to be Primary Brand Fill Color.
Figure 16.17  Named colors in the color picker
Let’s see how the interface looks so far. You can change
whether the canvas shows a light style or dark style
appearance using the View as menu. Expand the View as menu
and select the dark Interface Style.
Now, update the navigation bar. Find the navigation controller
on the canvas and select the navigation bar at the top of its
interface. Open its attributes inspector and find the Bar Tint
option within the Navigation Bar section. Open the color menu
and select Secondary Brand Fill Color (Figure 16.18).

--- Page 586 ---
Figure 16.18  Setting the bar tint color
The last color to update for the ItemsViewController to
look nice is the global tint color. Each app has a tint color that
is used to tint interactive interface elements such as bar button
items, alert and action sheet action titles, and tab bar items.
To change the global tint color, open the file inspector by
clicking the 
  tab in the inspector selector or by using the
keyboard shortcut Option-Command-1. Scroll down to the
Interface Builder Document section and find the Global Tint option.
Open its color menu and select Brand Accent Color
(Figure 16.19).

--- Page 587 ---
Figure 16.19  Setting the global tint color
Notice that many of the interface elements that were
previously the default blue tint color are now the brand accent
color (Figure 16.20).

--- Page 588 ---
Figure 16.20  Global tint color on the canvas
With the ItemsViewController colors taken care of,
let’s turn our attention to the DetailViewController.
Select the DetailViewController’s background view,
open its attributes inspector, and change its Background color to
Primary Brand Fill Color. Then select the toolbar, open its attributes
inspector, and change its Bar Tint to Secondary Brand Fill Color.
Your interface will look like Figure 16.21.
Figure 16.21  Updated DetailViewController
colors

--- Page 589 ---
The background color for the text fields could be improved a
bit to stand out against the background view. Let’s update

--- Page 590 ---
them to be a little more pleasing.
Select the name text field and open its attributes inspector.
Scroll down to the View section and change the Background to
Tertiary System Fill Color. The documentation says that the tertiary
system fill color is good for filling large shapes such as input
fields, search bars, and buttons. A text field is an input field, so
this color choice works well. Repeat the same steps for the
other two text fields. After you are done, the interface will
look like Figure 16.22.
Figure 16.22  Finished app colors
Build and run the project. Browse the app, using the
environment overrides to toggle between a light and dark

--- Page 591 ---
appearance. LootLogger responds well to both appearances with
the new colors.
With that, your LootLogger application is complete. You have
built an app with a flexible interface that can take photos and
store data, and we hope you are proud of your
accomplishment! Take some time to celebrate.

--- Page 592 ---
Bronze Challenge: Stacked Text Field
and Labels
In a compact height environment, make it so the text fields and
labels are stacked vertically instead of horizontally
(Figure 16.23).
Figure 16.23  Text fields and labels stacked


--- Page 593 ---
17 
Extensions and Container
View Controllers
Over the next three chapters, you are going to create Mandala,
an application that allows you to log how you are feeling and
see a historical log of the entries. The name is derived from the
Mood Mandala, a tool used for daily mood tracking to detect
patterns over time.
In this chapter, you will build up much of the structure of the
application, creating a container view controller to display the
content. Figure 17.1 shows what the application will look like
at the end of this chapter. In Chapter 18, you will create a
custom UIControl subclass to manage mood selection.

--- Page 594 ---
Figure 17.1  Mandala


--- Page 595 ---
Starting Mandala
Begin by creating a new project. In Xcode, create a new single
view app project and name it Mandala (Figure 17.2).
Figure 17.2  Starting Mandala
The application will support a variety of different moods, and
a table view will display a mood entry containing a specific
mood and a timestamp showing when the mood was logged.
You will start by creating the model objects to represent the
moods and the mood entries.
CREATING THE MODEL TYPES
So far, all the types that you have created have been classes. In
fact, most have been Cocoa Touch subclasses; for example,

--- Page 596 ---
you have created subclasses of UIViewController and
UITableViewCell.
The custom types you are about to create will be structs. You
were introduced to Swift’s structs in Chapter 2, and you have
used structs throughout this book. CGRect, CGSize, and
CGPoint, which you used in WorldTrotter, are all structs. So are
String, Int, Array, and Dictionary. Now you are
going to create some of your own.
Create a new Swift file named Mood.
In Mood.swift, import UIKit and declare the Mood struct.
A Mood will have a name, an image, and a color associated
with it.
Listing 17.1  Creating the Mood struct (Mood.swift)
import Foundation
import UIKit 
 
struct Mood { 
    var name: String 
    var image: UIImage 
    var color: UIColor
}
Now create another Swift file named MoodEntry. Declare a
new MoodEntry struct and give it a property for a mood and
a timestamp.
Listing 17.2  Creating the MoodEntry struct
(MoodEntry.swift)
import Foundation 
 
struct MoodEntry { 
    var mood: Mood 
    var timestamp: Date
}
ADDING RESOURCES TO THE ASSET
CATALOG

--- Page 597 ---
Each Mood is associated with an image and a color. Your next
step is to add some images and colors to the Asset Catalog, as
you have done for other apps you have built. This will provide
a single location to visualize and manage these resources.
Then, in code, you will be able to reference the images and
colors by names that you assign to each.
If you have not already done so, download the book resources
from www.bignerdranch.com/ solutions/ 
iOSProgramming7ed.zip. Make sure you have the
course resources downloaded. Your instructor can give you a
link if you do not have them. Find the directory for this
project, and you will see images for the various moods you
will include in this project.
Now, back in Xcode, open Assets.xcassets. Click the 
button in the bottom-left corner of the Asset Catalog sidebar
and select New Folder. Name this folder Images, then create
another folder and name it Colors.
Go back to the resources that you downloaded. Select all the
images and drag them into the Images folder in the Asset
Catalog (Figure 17.3). You will now be able to reference these
images in code by their names within the Asset Catalog.

--- Page 598 ---
Figure 17.3  Asset Catalog with images
Now you are going to add colors to the Asset Catalog that
correspond to each of the moods. By adding colors to the
Asset Catalog, you make it easy to visualize them – and you
can give each color a name that can be referenced in code. It
allows you to easily define each color in one place and use it
everywhere. If the color ever needs to change, all you need to
do is change it in the Asset Catalog, and the change will
propagate everywhere that named color is used.
Select the Colors folder, click the 
  button in the bottom-left
corner of the Asset Catalog sidebar, and select New Color Set.

--- Page 599 ---
Double-click the new color in the sidebar and give it the name
happyTurquoise. Select the color box in the editor and open its
attributes inspector (Figure 17.4). In the Color section, set the
Input Method to 8-bit (0-255) and set the Red, Green, and Blue values
to 19, 211, and 172, respectively.
Figure 17.4  Adding a color to the Asset Catalog
Repeat the steps above with the following names and values:
Table 17.1  Colors
                              
Name
                     
Red                   
                     
Green                   
                     
Blue                   

--- Page 600 ---
               
                     angryRed                   
                     
179                   
                     
25                   
                     
64                   
                     
confusedPurple                   
                     
195                   
                     
130                   
                     
230                   
                     
cryingLightBlue                   
                     
61                   
                     
182                   
                     
255                   
                     
goofyOrange                   
                     
249                   
                     
167                   
                     
0                   
                     mehGray                   
                     
41                   
                     
41                   
                     
41                   
                     sadBlue                   
                     
87                   
                     
96                   
                     
250                   
                     
sleepyLightRed                   
                     
255                   
                     
50                   
                     
102                   
             
Now that you have added the images and colors to the Asset
Catalog, it is time to put them to use. In the next section, you
will create Mood instances that represent each mood, along
with its associated images and colors.

--- Page 601 ---
Extensions
Up to now, you have accessed the assets you added to your
apps through Interface Builder, but assets can also be accessed
programmatically. Each image and color you added to the
Asset Catalog has a name, which is how you reference it in
code:
    let happyImage: UIImage? = UIImage(named: "happy") 
    let happyColor: UIColor? = UIColor(named: "happyTurquoise") 
Note that the resources here are looked up by their names,
which are strings. If you were to enter a resource name in your
code incorrectly, the resource would not be located at runtime.
Also, because there may not be a resource associated with a
given string (even if it is entered correctly), these initializers
are failable and therefore must return an optional.
In short, accessing assets programmatically is bug prone.
Wouldn’t it be nice to have some help from the compiler to
avoid these bugs? What if – just for example – you could
access your images like this?
    let happyImage: UIImage = UIImage(resource: .happy) 
    let happyColor: UIColor = UIColor.happy 
By using a static variable instead of a string to identify
resources, you allow the compiler to validate your code as you
enter it and generate an error if you make a mistake. This gives
you more confidence in your code, guarantees that you will
not look up a resource that is not there at runtime, and adds the
perk of code completion. Sounds great, right?
It is great, and you can achieve this wonder using an
extension. Extensions serve a couple of purposes: They allow
you to group chunks of functionality into a logical unit, and
they allow you to add functionality to your own classes,
structs, and enums as well as types provided by the system or

--- Page 602 ---
other frameworks. Being able to add functionality to a type
whose source code you do not have access to is a very
powerful and flexible tool.
Let’s take a look at an example. With extensions, you can add
methods and computed properties (but not stored properties) to
types. Say you wanted to add functionality to the Int type to
provide a doubled value, like this:
    let fourteen = 7.doubled // The value of fourteen is '14' 
You can add this functionality by extending the Int type:
    extension Int { 
        var doubled: Int { 
            return self * 2 
        } 
    } 
Extensions can also make your code more readable and help
with long-term maintainability of your code base by grouping
related pieces of functionality. One common chunk of
functionality that is often grouped into an extension is
conformance to a protocol along with implementations of the
protocol’s methods.
Enough talk. You are going to create an extension on
UIColor to make it easier to access your custom color assets.
Create a new Swift file and name it UIColor+Mandala.
Conventionally, extensions are named with the type you are
extending (UIColor here), followed by a + and some
description of the extension.
In UIColor+Mandala.swift, declare your UIColor
extension.
Listing 17.3  Declaring a UIColor extension
(UIColor+Mandala.swift)
import Foundation
import UIKit 
 

--- Page 603 ---
extension UIColor { 
 
}
You are going to follow the same pattern that UIKit provides
for your new colors by making them static properties on
UIColor. So just as you are able to use UIColor.green,
you will be able to use UIColor.happy.
Add the new color static properties within the UIColor
extension.
Listing 17.4  Adding new colors
(UIColor+Mandala.swift)
import UIKit 
 
extension UIColor { 
 
    static let angry = UIColor(named: "angryRed")! 
    static let confused = UIColor(named: "confusedPurple")! 
    static let crying = UIColor(named: "cryingLightBlue")! 
    static let goofy = UIColor(named: "goofyOrange")! 
    static let happy = UIColor(named: "happyTurquoise")! 
    static let meh = UIColor(named: "mehGray")! 
    static let sad = UIColor(named: "sadBlue")! 
    static let sleepy = UIColor(named: "sleepyLightRed")! 
 
} 
Here, you are using the initializer that takes in a name,
UIColor(named:), and then force unwrapping the value
that is returned. This is fine to do since it is a programmer
error if you misspell the resource name. You have to use the
string in exactly one place in the application, in this file, and
now elsewhere you can reference these colors via the static
properties on UIColor.
You are going to do something very similar for the UIImage
extension. Create a new Swift file and name it
UIImage+Mandala.swift. Open this file and declare a
UIImage extension.
Listing 17.5  Declaring a UIImage extension
(UIImage+Mandala.swift)

--- Page 604 ---
import Foundation
import UIKit 
 
extension UIImage { 
 
}
Instead of creating static properties on UIImage, you are
going to create a new initializer that takes in an enumeration
value that corresponds to each image resource. Create this
enumeration near the top of UIImage+Mandala.swift.
Listing 17.6  Implementing the ImageResource
enumeration (UIImage+Mandala.swift)
enum ImageResource: String { 
    case angry 
    case confused 
    case crying 
    case goofy 
    case happy 
    case meh 
    case sad 
    case sleepy
} 
 
extension UIImage { 
 
} 
Notice that this enumeration is backed by a String raw
value. You will use the strings associated with each case to
look up the corresponding image resource.
Now implement a new convenience initializer that accepts an
ImageResource instance.
Listing 17.7  Implementing a new UIImage initializer
(UIImage+Mandala.swift)
extension UIImage { 
 
    convenience init(resource: ImageResource) { 
        self.init(named: resource.rawValue)! 
    } 
 
} 

--- Page 605 ---
This is similar to the UIColor extension in some ways; you
are (indirectly) using a string value in exactly one place, and
then force unwrapping the result of the initializer that you are
chaining to. Now you can use this initializer elsewhere in your
application with confidence that you are not making a mistake.
It is time to put these pieces together and create your various
moods.
Open Mood.swift and declare an extension at the bottom.
This extension will be used to group all the static moods.
Listing 17.8  Adding an extension to the Mood type
(Mood.swift)
struct Mood { 
    var name: String 
    var image: UIImage 
    var color: UIColor 
} 
 
extension Mood { 
 
}
Now declare static properties for each of the moods. You will
use the two extensions that you declared earlier to create these
moods.
Listing 17.9  Adding static moods (Mood.swift)
extension Mood { 
    static let angry = Mood(name: "angry", 
                            image: UIImage(resource: .angry), 
                            color: UIColor.angry) 
 
    static let confused = Mood(name: "confused", 
                               image: UIImage(resource: .confused), 
                               color: UIColor.confused) 
 
    static let crying = Mood(name: "crying", 
                             image: UIImage(resource: .crying), 
                             color: UIColor.crying) 
 
    static let goofy = Mood(name: "goofy", 
                            image: UIImage(resource: .goofy), 
                            color: UIColor.goofy) 
 
    static let happy = Mood(name: "happy", 
                            image: UIImage(resource: .happy), 
                            color: UIColor.happy) 

--- Page 606 ---
 
    static let meh = Mood(name: "meh", 
                          image: UIImage(resource: .meh), 
                          color: UIColor.meh) 
 
    static let sad = Mood(name: "sad", 
                          image: UIImage(resource: .sad), 
                          color: UIColor.sad) 
 
    static let sleepy = Mood(name: "sleepy", 
                             image: UIImage(resource: .sleepy), 
                             color: UIColor.sleepy) 
} 
Build the project to confirm that you have not introduced any
errors.
You have used extensions to add capabilities to both the
UIColor and UIImage classes as well as to group the
various moods. Now that Mandala has its list of moods to use, it
is time to start setting up the interface. 

--- Page 607 ---
Creating a custom container view
controller
Container view controllers allow you to split up the
functionality of your application into smaller units, which can
be useful for the maintenance and flexibility of your code
base. You have used a couple of container view controllers in
other projects: UITabBarController and
UINavigationController. Now you will create a new
container view controller.
The container you will create will have an emoji selection
control along the bottom of the screen where the user can
select and add new mood entries. This container will contain
another view controller that will be responsible for adding and
displaying the list of mood entries.
CREATING THE
MOODSELECTIONVIEWCONTROLLER
Start by creating the user interface. Open
Main.storyboard and the library. Drag a Visual Effect View
with Blur onto the view controller’s view. Place it at the bottom,
underneath the emoji selection control, so that if content
underlaps the emoji buttons, the control will still be legible.
This is the same technique that standard navigation bars, tab
bars, and toolbars use.
You want the visual effect view to be pinned to the leading,
trailing, and bottom edges of the superview. To do this, select
the visual effect view and its superview and open the Align
menu. Select the leading, trailing, and bottom edges options,
and then Add 3 Constraints (Figure 17.5). The visual effect view
currently does not have a height, and that is OK; its height will
be determined by its subview content, which you will add
shortly.

--- Page 608 ---
Figure 17.5  Adding constraints to the visual effects
view
You are going to use a stack view to contain the various emoji
buttons. Drag a Horizontal Stack View from the library onto the
visual effects view. Open the Add New Constraints menu and
configure the constraints as shown in Figure 17.6. Click Add 5
Constraints and the frames for both the visual effect view and
the stack view will update.

--- Page 609 ---
Figure 17.6  Adding constraints to the stack view
There are a few changes you need to make to the interface, but
it is a little hard to see since everything looks white. To help
you see the issues (and the fixes), drag a View from the library
onto the stack view and give it a colorful background color in
the attributes inspector.
The issue that needs to be addressed is related to the safe area,
so you will want to see how the current interface looks on
devices with different safe areas. An easy way to do this is by
using the Interface Builder preview functionality that you used in
Chapter 7.
Still viewing the storyboard, show the preview either by
clicking Editor → Preview or with the keyboard shortcut Option-
Command-Return. Click the 
  button in the bottom-left
corner of the preview and select iPhone 8. Then hover over each

--- Page 610 ---
interface preview and click the rotate button in the bottom-left
corner to rotate each interface into landscape orientation
(Figure 17.7).
Figure 17.7  Preview with two interfaces
Notice that the colored view extends to the edges of the screen,
beyond the safe area. While this is good for the visual effects
view, the content of that visual effects view (the stack view
and its contents) should stay within the safe area. Let’s fix that.
Back on the canvas, select the stack view’s leading constraint.
Open its attributes inspector and find the Superview.Leading
entry. Click it and select Relative to margin from the drop-down
menu. Then update the Constant to be 0 (Figure 17.8). Do the
same for the stack view’s trailing and bottom constraints.

--- Page 611 ---
Figure 17.8  Constraining to the margin
The interface is looking better in the preview, but the colored
view is still extending past the safe area. The final change is to
update the margins to be relative to the safe area.
Select the visual effects view’s content view (which is the
stack view’s superview) and open its size inspector. In the
Layout Margins section, check the Safe Area Relative Margins
checkbox (Figure 17.9). This will inset the margins from the
safe area.

--- Page 612 ---
Figure 17.9  Safe area relative margins
Look at the preview and notice that the colored view is now
positioned within the safe area (Figure 17.10).

--- Page 613 ---
Figure 17.10  Preview with updated constraints
Feel free to build and run the project at this point; you should
see the same interface that you see in the preview.
With that taken care of, delete the colored view from the stack
view; it has served its purpose. You can also close the preview
(either with Editor → Preview or Option-Command-Return). You
will programmatically add buttons to the stack view in just a
bit. First, make a few more interface changes.
You want all the emoji buttons in the stack view to have an
equal width. Select the stack view, open its attributes inspector,
and give it a Fill Equally distribution. Set the Alignment to Center
and set the Spacing to 12.
Once the user has selected their current mood, they will tap a
button to store that mood entry.
Drag a new Button from the library and place it above the visual
effects view. Add constraints to pin the button 20 points above

--- Page 614 ---
the visual effects view, center it horizontally in its container,
and give it a fixed height of 48 points.
Now you want to constrain the button’s width to be half of the
safe area’s width. This is something that you have not yet
done. To create this constraint, select the Button and the Safe
Area in the document outline and open the Add New Constraints
menu. Choose Equal Widths and click Add 1 Constraint. To make
the button be half of the safe area’s width, instead of the full
width, select the newly created constraint and open its
attributes inspector. Confirm that the First Item is Button.Width. (If
it is Safe Area.Width, select that and choose Reverse First And
Second Item.) Finally, set the Multiplier to be 0.5 (Figure 17.11).
Figure 17.11  Configuring a half-width constraint
Select the button and open the attributes inspector. Set its Title
to be Add Mood and the Text Color to be white. Feel free to give
the button a colorful background color as well so you can see

--- Page 615 ---
the text in Interface Builder; the exact color choice does not
matter as you will be updating the background color in code.
The interface is just about done. But before you finish it, turn
your attention to the programmatic side of things for a bit.
Open ViewController.swift. To begin, rename this
class: Control-click the class name and select Refactor →
Rename…. Name it MoodSelectionViewController and click Rename.
Declare the outlets that the
MoodSelectionViewController class will need for its
basic UI as well as an array of available moods and the buttons
that will be used to represent them:
Listing 17.10  Adding mood properties
(MoodSelectionViewController.swift)
class MoodSelectionViewController: UIViewController { 
 
    @IBOutlet var stackView: UIStackView! 
    @IBOutlet var addMoodButton: UIButton! 
 
    var moods: [Mood] = [] 
    var moodButtons: [UIButton] = [] 
 
    override func viewDidLoad() { 
        super.viewDidLoad() 
        // Do any additional setup after loading the view. 
    } 
 
} 
When the moods are set, you will want to update the buttons
to display each mood. You can easily accomplish this using
property observers.
Add a property observer to update the mood buttons when the
moods array is updated.
Listing 17.11  Updating the mood buttons
(MoodSelectionViewController.swift)
var moods: [Mood] = [] { 
    didSet { 
        moodButtons = moods.map { mood in 

--- Page 616 ---
            let moodButton = UIButton() 
            moodButton.setImage(mood.image, for: .normal) 
            moodButton.imageView?.contentMode = .scaleAspectFit 
            moodButton.adjustsImageWhenHighlighted = false 
            return moodButton 
        } 
    }
}
Here you are using the map(_:) method on Array to
transform one array into another array. This code:
    let numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] 
    let strings = numbers.map { number in 
        return "\(number)" 
    } 
has the same result as this code:
    let numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] 
    var strings: [String] = [] 
    for number in numbers { 
        strings.append("\(number)") 
    } 
When the moodButtons array is set, the existing buttons
need to be removed from the stack view and the new buttons
need to be added. Add a property observer to moodButtons
to do this.
Listing 17.12  Updating the stack view’s buttons
(MoodSelectionViewController.swift)
var moodButtons: [UIButton] = [] { 
    didSet { 
        oldValue.forEach { $0.removeFromSuperview() } 
        moodButtons.forEach { stackView.addArrangedSubview($0)} 
    }
}
There are a couple of new concepts in the code above. The
forEach(_:) method acts on an array very similarly to a
normal for loop, except it has a closure parameter that is
called for each element in the array. This code:
    let numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] 
    numbers.forEach { number in 
        print(number) 
    } 

--- Page 617 ---
has the same result as this code:
    let numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] 
    for number in numbers { 
        print(number) 
    } 
The forEach(_:) method is most useful when you have a
single action that you need to perform on each element, as
seen in the moodButtons property observer above.
The $0 in the closure is a shorthand way of accessing the
arguments of the closure. If there are two parameters, for
example, their arguments can be accessed by $0 and $1. So
this code:
    let numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] 
    numbers.forEach { print($0) } 
also has the same result as this code:
    let numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] 
    numbers.forEach { number in 
        print(number) 
    } 
With the infrastructure now in place, setting the moods array
will now update the UI. Update viewDidLoad(), set the
available moods via the moods array, and apply some styling
to the add mood button.
Listing 17.13  Declaring the moods to display
(MoodSelectionViewController.swift)
override func viewDidLoad() { 
    super.viewDidLoad() 
    // Do any additional setup after loading the view. 
 
    moods = [.happy, .sad, .angry, .goofy, .crying, .confused, .sleepy, 
.meh] 
 
    addMoodButton.layer.cornerRadius = addMoodButton.bounds.height / 2 
} 
When the moods array is set, it will trigger the property
observers that you declared on both moods and

--- Page 618 ---
moodButtons, which will then add the appropriate buttons
to the stack view.
While you can tap the emoji buttons, they are not currently
wired up to do anything. Let’s address that.
When the user taps one of the images, you will update the
currently selected mood. This will then update the
addMoodButton to display the name of the selected mood,
and it will change the button’s background color to match the
selected mood.
Add the code to accomplish this in
MoodSelectionViewController.swift.
Start by adding a currentMood property and a method that
you will use to update the currentMood when the control’s
selection changes:
Listing 17.14  Updating the currently selected mood
(MoodSelectionViewController.swift)
var currentMood: Mood? { 
    didSet { 
        guard let currentMood = currentMood else { 
            addMoodButton?.setTitle(nil, for: .normal) 
            addMoodButton?.backgroundColor = nil 
            return 
        } 
 
        addMoodButton?.setTitle("I'm \(currentMood.name)", for: .normal) 
        addMoodButton?.backgroundColor = currentMood.color 
    }
} 
 
@objc func moodSelectionChanged(_ sender: UIButton) { 
    guard let selectedIndex = moodButtons.firstIndex(of: sender) else { 
        preconditionFailure( 
                "Unable to find the tapped button in the buttons 
array.") 
    } 
 
    currentMood = moods[selectedIndex]
}
Next, ensure that the currentMood is updated when the
control’s selection changes. You will also want to update the
currentMood whenever the moods array is set.

--- Page 619 ---
Listing 17.15  Connecting the current mood to the
selection (MoodSelectionViewController.swift)
var moods: [Mood] = [] { 
    didSet { 
        currentMood = moods.first 
        moodButtons = moods.map { mood in 
            let moodButton = UIButton() 
            moodButton.setImage(mood.image, for: .normal) 
            moodButton.imageView?.contentMode = .scaleAspectFit 
            moodButton.adjustsImageWhenHighlighted = false 
            moodButton.addTarget(self, 
                                 action: 
#selector(moodSelectionChanged(_:)), 
                                 for: .touchUpInside) 
            return moodButton 
        } 
    } 
} 
Now, open Main.storyboard and connect the
stackView and addMoodButton outlets.
Build and run the application. You will see the buttons along
the bottom, and as you tap them the add mood button will be
updated to reflect the current selection (Figure 17.12).

--- Page 620 ---
Figure 17.12  Interface with mood selection
The MoodSelectionViewController is just about
done. In the next section, you will create the table view
controller that will display the historical list of mood entries.
Then you will connect these two view controllers together.

--- Page 621 ---
CREATING THE
MOODLISTVIEWCONTROLLER
The table view controller will display a list of MoodEntry
instances. Create a new Swift file named
MoodListViewController and declare the
UITableViewController subclass. Implement the table
view data source methods.
Listing 17.16  Implementing the
MoodListViewController class
(MoodListViewController.swift)
import Foundation
import UIKit 
 
class MoodListViewController: UITableViewController { 
 
    var moodEntries: [MoodEntry] = [] 
 
    override func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, 
                            numberOfRowsInSection section: Int) -> Int { 
        return moodEntries.count 
    } 
 
    override func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, 
                            cellForRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) -> 
UITableViewCell { 
 
        let moodEntry = moodEntries[indexPath.row] 
 
        let cell = tableView.dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier: 
"UITableViewCell", 
                                                 for: indexPath) 
 
        cell.imageView?.image = moodEntry.mood.image 
        cell.textLabel?.text = "I was \(moodEntry.mood.name)" 
 
        let dateString = DateFormatter.localizedString(from: 
moodEntry.timestamp, 
                                                       dateStyle: 
.medium, 
                                                       timeStyle: 
.short) 
        cell.detailTextLabel?.text = "on \(dateString)" 
 
        return cell 
    }
}
Now, set up the interface to go along with the
MoodListViewController. Open Main.storyboard
and drag a Table View Controller onto the canvas. With the table
view controller selected, open its identity inspector and set the
Class to MoodListViewController.

--- Page 622 ---
Select the prototype cell. Open its attributes inspector and set
the Style to Subtitle and the Identifier to UITableViewCell.
Now find the Container View in the library. Drag one of these
onto the view of the Mood Selection View Controller. Notice that
there is now an embed segue from the container view to a new
view controller, and the size of that new view controller
matches the size of the container view (Figure 17.13).
Figure 17.13  Adding a container view


--- Page 623 ---
Next, resize and lay out the container view. Select the
container view on the canvas, open the Editor menu and select
Arrange → Send to Back. This will position the container view
behind everything else. (As of Xcode 11.4, you must select the
view on the canvas, not the document outline, to use the Editor
→ Arrange menu.)
You can also rearrange views in the document outline. If you
look at the elements in the Mood Selection View Controller’s View,
you will see that they are arranged back to front: Safe Area, Add
Mood Button, Visual Effect View, Container View. In other words, the
safe area is the back-most layer, with the add mood button and
visual effect view in front of it (closer to the user). The
container view is in front of everything else (unless you
already moved it); to move it back, drag the Container View in
the document outline to be between the Safe Area and the Visual
Effect View.
To finish laying out the container view, you need to pin the
container view to the edges of its superview. Selecting both
views, open the Align menu, select the four edge constraints,
and then Add 4 Constraints.
You want the embedded view controller to be the table view
controller, so select the view controller currently wired up to
the embed segue and delete it. To set the table view controller
as the embedded view controller, Control-drag from the
container view to the table view controller. Select Embed from
the menu in the panel that appears (Figure 17.14).

--- Page 624 ---
Figure 17.14  Connecting the embed segue
Build and run the application. While you cannot yet add mood
entries to the table view, you should see an empty table view
embedded within the container view.
HANDLING THE EMBED SEGUE
You need a way to add mood entries to the table view
controller. To accomplish this, you will store a reference to the
MoodListViewController within the

--- Page 625 ---
MoodSelectionViewController. But instead of
storing the reference types as
MoodListViewControllers, you will use a protocol to
abstract away the specific view controller needed.
By doing this, you are making the
MoodSelectionViewController more flexible; the
MoodSelectionViewController is not coupled with a
specific UIViewController subclass, but rather a protocol
that any view controller can conform to.
Create a new Swift file named MoodsConfigurable and
declare a protocol with one method, add(_:), that will allow
a MoodEntry to be added.
Listing 17.17  Implementing a new protocol
(MoodsConfigurable.swift)
import Foundation 
 
protocol MoodsConfigurable { 
    func add(_ moodEntry: MoodEntry)
}
Now that you have created this protocol, make
MoodListViewController conform to it and implement
the add(_:) method.
Open MoodListViewController.swift and declare an
extension at the bottom of the file. Use this extension to
conform to the MoodsConfigurable protocol and
implement the add(_:) method.
Listing 17.18  Conforming to the
MoodsConfigurable protocol
(MoodListViewController.swift)
class MoodListViewController: UIViewController { 
    ... 
} 
 
extension MoodListViewController: MoodsConfigurable { 

--- Page 626 ---
 
    func add(_ moodEntry: MoodEntry) { 
        moodEntries.insert(moodEntry, at: 0) 
        tableView.insertRows(at: [IndexPath(row: 0, section: 0)], with: 
.automatic) 
    } 
 
}
With the protocol created and conformed to, you can use it
within the MoodSelectionViewController class.
Earlier, you set up an embed segue from the
MoodSelectionViewController to the
MoodListViewController. Embed segues trigger
prepare(for:sender:), just as other segues do, and you
will use this to get a reference to the
MoodListViewController.
Open Main.storyboard and select the embed segue. Open
its attributes inspector and set its Identifier to
embedContainerViewController.
Now open MoodSelectionViewController.swift.
Declare a new property of type MoodsConfigurable and
implement prepare(for:sender:).
Listing 17.19  Handling the embed segue
(MoodSelectionViewController.swift)
var moodsConfigurable: MoodsConfigurable! 
 
override func prepare(for segue: UIStoryboardSegue, sender: Any?) { 
    switch segue.identifier { 
    case "embedContainerViewController": 
        guard let moodsConfigurable = segue.destination as? 
MoodsConfigurable else { 
            preconditionFailure( 
                    "View controller expected to conform to 
MoodsConfigurable") 
        } 
        self.moodsConfigurable = moodsConfigurable 
        segue.destination.additionalSafeAreaInsets = 
                UIEdgeInsets(top: 0, left: 0, bottom: 160, right: 0) 
    default: 
        preconditionFailure("Unexpected segue identifier") 
    }
}

--- Page 627 ---
Here you verify that the destination view controller conforms
to the MoodsConfigurable protocol and then store this
destination in the moodsConfigurable property.
You also set the additional safe area insets on the destination
view controller to account for the control and button at the
bottom of the interface.
Implement a method that will be triggered when the add button
is tapped. This will create a new MoodEntry and add it to the
table view controller via the protocol.
Listing 17.20  Adding new mood entries
(MoodSelectionViewController.swift)
@IBAction func addMoodTapped(_ sender: Any) { 
    guard let currentMood = currentMood else { 
        return 
    } 
 
    let newMoodEntry = MoodEntry(mood: currentMood, timestamp: Date()) 
    moodsConfigurable.add(newMoodEntry)
}
Open Main.storyboard and connect the add mood button
to the addMoodTapped: action.
Build and run the application. Select various emoji from the
emoji selection control and tap the add mood button. Each
mood will be added to an ongoing list of mood entries
(Figure 17.15).

--- Page 628 ---
Figure 17.15  Adding mood entries
In the next few chapters, you will rework the emoji selection
control to be a UIControl subclass. In doing so, you will

--- Page 629 ---
clean up the view controller code and create a reusable control
that works with any array of images.

--- Page 630 ---
18 
Custom Controls
You have used several controls in the course of this book,
including instances of UIButton, UITextField, and
UISegmentedControl. These controls are subclasses of
UIControl, and they allow you to respond to user
interaction – generally using the target-action design pattern.
Figure 18.1 shows some UIControl subclasses that you
have used or may have seen.
Figure 18.1  UIControl subclasses


--- Page 631 ---
We have discussed target-action pairs elsewhere in this book,
including in the overview of common iOS design patterns at
the end of Chapter 9. Recall that types that use the target-
action pattern have a target (another instance to inform of
some event that has occurred) and an action (some method to
call on that target).
In this chapter, you are going to add a custom control to the
Mandala application (Figure 18.2) that will indicate which
mood is currently selected by displaying a colored circle
beneath the emoji image. This custom control will replace the
stack view of buttons currently at the bottom of the interface
and will use the target-action pattern to inform the associated
view controller of selection changes.
Figure 18.2  Completed ImageSelector


--- Page 632 ---
Creating a Custom Control
Open Mandala.xcodeproj and create a new Swift file
named ImageSelector. Define a new UIControl
subclass within this file.
Listing 18.1  Creating the ImageSelector class
(ImageSelector.swift)
import Foundation
import UIKit 
 
class ImageSelector: UIControl { 
 
}
The interface for this control will be set up much like the
existing stack view of buttons. The primary difference, in
terms of code, is that the ImageSelector will not be tied
directly to the array of emoji images. Instead, it will hold on to
an arbitrary array of images, allowing the control to be flexible
and reusable.
Let’s start re-creating the interface. Add a property for a
horizontal stack view and configure some of its attributes.
Listing 18.2  Adding a stack view property
(ImageSelector.swift)
class ImageSelector: UIControl { 
 
    private let selectorStackView: UIStackView = { 
        let stackView = UIStackView() 
 
        stackView.axis = .horizontal 
        stackView.distribution = .fillEqually 
        stackView.alignment = .center 
        stackView.spacing = 12.0 
        stackView.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false 
 
        return stackView 
    }() 
 
} 

--- Page 633 ---
This stack view is an implementation detail of the
ImageSelector type. In other words, no other types need
to know about this property. To keep other files from being
able to access selectorStackView, the property has been
marked as private.
This is called access control. Access control allows you to
define what can access the properties and methods on your
types. There are five levels of access control that can be
applied to types, properties, and methods:
                      
                 
 
                   
                    
o
p
e
n 
                   
                
               
                 
 
                     Used only for classes and mostly by framework or 
third-party library authors. Anything can access this class, 
property, or method. Additionally, classes marked as open can 
be subclassed, and methods marked as open can be overridden 
outside of the module. 
                
               
                 
 
                   
                    
p
u
b
l
i
c 
                   
                
               
                 
 
                    Very similar to open, but public classes can 
only be subclassed and public methods can only be 
overridden inside (not outside of) the module. 
                
               
                 
 
                   
                    
                 
 
                    The default level. Anything in the current module 
can access this type, property, or method. For an app, only files 

--- Page 634 ---
i
n
t
e
r
n
a
l 
                   
                
               
within the same project can access internal types, 
properties, and methods. If you write a third-party library, then 
only files within that third-party library can access them – apps 
that use your third-party library cannot. 
                
               
                 
 
                   
                    
f
i
l
e
p
r
i
v
a
t
e 
                   
                
               
                 
 
                    Anything in the same source file can see this type, 
property, or method. 
                
               
                 
 
                   
                    
p
r
i
v
a
t
e 
                   
                
               
                 
 
                    Anything within the enclosing scope can access 
this type, property, or method. 
                
               
         

--- Page 635 ---
Now, implement a method that will configure the view
hierarchy for the control.
Listing 18.3  Configuring the view hierarchy
(ImageSelector.swift)
private func configureViewHierarchy() { 
    addSubview(selectorStackView) 
 
    NSLayoutConstraint.activate([ 
        selectorStackView.leadingAnchor.constraint(equalTo: 
leadingAnchor), 
        selectorStackView.trailingAnchor.constraint(equalTo: 
trailingAnchor), 
        selectorStackView.topAnchor.constraint(equalTo: topAnchor), 
        selectorStackView.bottomAnchor.constraint(equalTo: 
bottomAnchor), 
    ])
}
The control should be able to be created either
programmatically or within an interface file (such as a
storyboard), and the view hierarchy needs to be configured in
both cases. Override the initializer used for both of these
situations and call the method you just created to configure the
view hierarchy.
Listing 18.4  Overriding the control initializers
(ImageSelector.swift)
override init(frame: CGRect) { 
    super.init(frame: frame) 
    configureViewHierarchy()
} 
 
required init?(coder aDecoder: NSCoder) { 
    super.init(coder: aDecoder) 
    configureViewHierarchy()
}
Next, add properties to manage the images, buttons, and
selected index. Also add the method that will be called when a
button is tapped. This code will be nearly identical to the code
in MoodSelectionViewController.
Listing 18.5  Adding properties to manage the
images (ImageSelector.swift)

--- Page 636 ---
var selectedIndex = 0 
 
private var imageButtons: [UIButton] = [] { 
    didSet { 
        oldValue.forEach { $0.removeFromSuperview() } 
        imageButtons.forEach { selectorStackView.addArrangedSubview($0)} 
    }
} 
 
var images: [UIImage] = [] { 
    didSet { 
        imageButtons = images.map { image in 
            let imageButton = UIButton() 
 
            imageButton.setImage(image, for: .normal) 
            imageButton.imageView?.contentMode = .scaleAspectFit 
            imageButton.adjustsImageWhenHighlighted = false 
            imageButton.addTarget(self, 
                                  action: 
#selector(imageButtonTapped(_:)), 
                                  for: .touchUpInside) 
 
            return imageButton 
        } 
 
        selectedIndex = 0 
    }
} 
 
@objc private func imageButtonTapped(_ sender: UIButton) { 
    guard let buttonIndex = imageButtons.firstIndex(of: sender) else { 
        preconditionFailure("The buttons and images are not parallel.") 
    } 
 
    selectedIndex = buttonIndex
}
The imageButtons property stores the images. When it is
set, it creates and updates the array of buttons. This, in turn,
updates the stack view to remove the existing buttons and add
the new buttons.
RELAYING ACTIONS
When a button is tapped, the control needs to signal that its
value has changed. To accomplish this, you call the
sendActions(for:) method on the control, passing in the
type of event that has occurred.
Update imageButtonTapped(_:) to send the associated
actions.
Listing 18.6  Sending control event actions
(ImageSelector.swift)

--- Page 637 ---
@objc private func imageButtonTapped(_ sender: UIButton) { 
    guard let buttonIndex = imageButtons.firstIndex(of: sender) else { 
        preconditionFailure("The buttons and images are not parallel.") 
    } 
 
    selectedIndex = buttonIndex 
    sendActions(for: .valueChanged) 
} 
The .valueChanged event is one of the
UIControl.Events that were discussed in Chapter 5.
UISwitch, UISlider, and UISegmentedControl are
common controls that utilize the .valueChanged event.
The sendActions(for:) method will look through all the
target-action pairs that have been registered with this control
for the specified event (in this case, .valueChanged) and
will call the action method on that target. All this is being
handled for you by the UIControl superclass. Later in this
chapter, you will register the
MoodSelectionViewController as a target-action pair
with the control and associate it with the .valueChanged
control event.
The control is now ready for use, so let’s update the view
controller to take advantage of this control.

--- Page 638 ---
Using the Custom Control
MoodSelectionViewController has grown to
encompass multiple responsibilities, including managing the
selection control. Now that you have created the
ImageSelector class, there is a lot of code that is no
longer needed within the view controller. This is a good thing;
cleaning up your view controller will make its responsibility
more clear.
Open MoodSelectionViewController.swift and
start by replacing the stack view outlet with an image selector
outlet.
Listing 18.7  Replacing the stack view with an image
selector (MoodSelectionViewController.swift)
@IBOutlet var stackView: UIStackView!
@IBOutlet var moodSelector: ImageSelector!
You will still need the array of Mood instances, but the
property observer can be greatly simplified. Update the
property observer to set the images on the moodSelector.
Listing 18.8  Setting the mood selector images
(MoodSelectionViewController.swift)
var moods: [Mood] = [] { 
    didSet { 
        currentMood = moods.first 
        moodButtons = moods.map { mood in 
            let moodButton = UIButton() 
            moodButton.setImage(mood.image, for: .normal) 
            moodButton.imageView?.contentMode = .scaleAspectFit 
            moodButton.adjustsImageWhenHighlighted = false 
            moodButton.addTarget(self, 
                                 action: 
#selector(moodSelectionChanged(_:)), 
                                 for: .touchUpInside) 
            return moodButton 
        } 
        moodSelector.images = moods.map { $0.image } 
    } 
} 

--- Page 639 ---
Also, remove the moodButtons property, as the
ImageSelector is now managing the buttons.
Listing 18.9  Removing the moodButtons property
(MoodSelectionViewController.swift)
var moodButtons: [UIButton] = [] { 
    didSet { 
        oldValue.forEach { $0.removeFromSuperview() } 
        moodButtons.forEach { stackView.addArrangedSubview($0)} 
    }
}
Now, update the moodSelectionChanged(_:) method.
It will now be an @IBAction connected in the storyboard to
the ImageSelector instance.
Listing 18.10  Updating the mood selection action
(MoodSelectionViewController.swift)
@objc private func moodSelectionChanged(_ sender: UIButton) { 
    guard let selectedIndex = moodButtons.firstIndex(of: sender) else { 
        preconditionFailure("Unable to find the tapped button in the 
buttons array.") 
    }
@IBAction private func moodSelectionChanged(_ sender: ImageSelector) { 
    let selectedIndex = sender.selectedIndex 
 
    currentMood = moods[selectedIndex] 
} 
With the code changes finished, you are ready to update the
interface. 

--- Page 640 ---
Updating the Interface
Open Main.storyboard and locate the Mood Selection View
Controller Scene. Select and delete the stack view in its interface.
Drag a plain old View from the object library (it will be easier
to find if you search for the class name UIView) and place it
within the visual effect view’s content view, where the stack
view had been placed. You will want this new view to have the
same constraints that the stack view had.
To do this, first resize the new view to be smaller than its
superview; it should be positioned completely inside of its
superview. Then open the Add New Constraints menu and
configure it as shown in Figure 18.3. Confirm that Constrain to
margins is checked, and then click Add 5 Constraints.

--- Page 641 ---
Figure 18.3  Mood selector constraints
Open the identity inspector for the new view. Set the Class to
ImageSelector. Now open its attributes inspector and change the
Background to Clear Color.
Now you need to connect your outlets and actions. Control-
drag from the Mood Selection View Controller in the scene dock to
the ImageSelector on the canvas and connect the
moodSelector outlet. Now Control-drag from the
ImageSelector to the Mood Selection View Controller in the
scene dock and connect this control to the moodSelectionChanged:
action (Figure 18.4).

--- Page 642 ---
Figure 18.4  Making the ImageSelector
connections
Build and run the application. The application should work
just as it did at the end of the previous chapter.

--- Page 643 ---
Adding the Highlight View
Next you are going to add a circle beneath the currently
selected image (Figure 18.5). This will give users context as to
what is currently selected.
Figure 18.5  Completed highlight view
Open ImageSelector.swift and add a property for the
highlight view.
Listing 18.11  Adding the highlight view
(ImageSelector.swift)
private let highlightView: UIView = { 
    let view = UIView() 
    view.backgroundColor = view.tintColor 
    view.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false 
    return view
}()
You worked with the global tint color in Chapter 16. This tint
color is passed down the view hierarchy from the root level
window. You can access it via the tintColor property on
UIView instances, and you do so here to set the background
color for the highlight view.
Now add that view to the view hierarchy and configure its
constraints.

--- Page 644 ---
Listing 18.12  Adding the highlight view to the view
hierarchy (ImageSelector.swift)
private func configureViewHierarchy() { 
    addSubview(selectorStackView) 
    insertSubview(highlightView, belowSubview: selectorStackView) 
 
    NSLayoutConstraint.activate([ 
        selectorStackView.leadingAnchor.constraint(equalTo: 
leadingAnchor), 
        selectorStackView.trailingAnchor.constraint(equalTo: 
trailingAnchor), 
        selectorStackView.topAnchor.constraint(equalTo: topAnchor), 
        selectorStackView.bottomAnchor.constraint(equalTo: 
bottomAnchor), 
        highlightView.heightAnchor.constraint(equalTo: 
highlightView.widthAnchor), 
        highlightView.heightAnchor.constraint(equalTo: heightAnchor, 
multiplier: 0.9), 
        highlightView.centerYAnchor 
            .constraint(equalTo: selectorStackView.centerYAnchor), 
    ]) 
} 
The only constraint left to add is the highlight view’s
horizontal constraint. As the selectedIndex is updated,
the highlightView will be behind the corresponding
button within the stack view.
Add a property for this horizontal constraint.
Listing 18.13  Adding the horizontal constraint
(ImageSelector.swift)
private var highlightViewXConstraint: NSLayoutConstraint! { 
    didSet { 
        oldValue?.isActive = false 
        highlightViewXConstraint.isActive = true 
    }
}
Whenever this constraint is set, the previous constraint will be
deactivated and the new constraint will be activated.
Now, add a property observer to the selectedIndex that
sets the highlightViewXConstraint.
Listing 18.14  Updating the horizontal constraint
(ImageSelector.swift)

--- Page 645 ---
var selectedIndex = 0 { 
    didSet { 
        if selectedIndex < 0 { 
            selectedIndex = 0 
        } 
        if selectedIndex >= imageButtons.count { 
            selectedIndex = imageButtons.count - 1 
        } 
 
        let imageButton = imageButtons[selectedIndex] 
        highlightViewXConstraint = 
            highlightView.centerXAnchor.constraint(equalTo: 
imageButton.centerXAnchor) 
    }
}
First, you check that the selectedIndex is within the
bounds of the number of buttons. If not, it gets set to either the
lower or upper bound. Note that setting a property within its
own property observer will not cause the property observer to
get called again. Finally, you reference the corresponding
button to constrain the highlight view to that button.
Build and run the application. Tap different images and you
will notice that the highlight view jumps behind the
corresponding button (Figure 18.6).
Figure 18.6  Initial highlight view
Currently the highlight view is a blue square – functional, but
not attractive. To make it a circle, set its corner radius to be
half of its width.
Listing 18.15  Setting the corner radius
(ImageSelector.swift)
override func layoutSubviews() { 
    super.layoutSubviews() 

--- Page 646 ---
 
    highlightView.layer.cornerRadius = highlightView.bounds.width / 2.0
}
The corner radius is set in layoutSubviews(). This
method is called after a view has changed size. The method
updates the size and position of subviews based on the
constraints that have been set. It is important to update the
corner radius in this method because the corner radius is
dependent on the size of the highlight view, and the highlight
view’s size is a ratio of the total height of the
ImageSelector.
Build and run the application again and confirm that the square
is now a circle. The ImageSelector control is now
operational – and pretty good looking, though you will add
some polish to it in the next chapter. By creating a custom
control, you have accomplished a couple of things. Primarily,
you have created a reusable control that is not directly coupled
with a specific set of images. This control can now be used in
other applications and other contexts very easily. Additionally,
you have removed many of the responsibilities that the
MoodSelectionViewController previously had.
In the next chapter, you will finish your work on Mandala by
adding a little more color and some animations.

--- Page 647 ---
Bronze Challenge: More Access Control
Audit the Mandala application’s source code for other properties
and methods that can be marked private. It is a good habit
to only expose the properties, methods, and types that should
be available to use externally.

--- Page 648 ---
19 
Controlling Animations
The word “animation” is derived from a Latin word that means
“the act of bringing to life.” In your applications, animations
can smoothly bring interface elements onscreen or into focus,
they can draw the user’s attention to an actionable item, and
they can give clear indications of how your app is responding
to the user’s actions.
In this chapter, you will update the Mandala application and use
some animation techniques to bring the ImageSelector to
life. iOS makes these animations simple, so in no time your
app will have a polished, professional look and feel.
Before updating Mandala, though, let’s take a look at what can
be animated by looking at the documentation. To open the
documentation, open Xcode’s Help menu and select Developer
Documentation. This will open the documentation in a new
window.
With the documentation open, use the search bar at the top to
search for UIView. In the search results, click UIView to open the
class reference, then scroll down to the section titled
Animations. The documentation gives some information about
animations and lists the properties on UIView that can be
animated (Figure 19.1).

--- Page 649 ---
Figure 19.1  UIView animation documentation


--- Page 650 ---
Property Animators
As the documentation indicates, to animate a view you create
and start a property animator, which is an instance of
UIViewPropertyAnimator. This allows you to animate
one of the animatable view properties that you see listed.
BASIC ANIMATIONS
In Mandala, you are first going to animate the highlight view on
the ImageSelector. When a mood is selected, the
highlight will move smoothly instead of simply appearing
behind the selected mood. Later in this chapter, you will
animate color changes on both the highlight view and the add
mood button.
Open Mandala.xcodeproj and navigate to
ImageSelector.swift. Update
imageButtonTapped(_:) to animate the highlight view.
Listing 19.1  Animating the highlight view’s frame
(ImageSelector.swift)
@objc private func imageButtonTapped(_ sender: UIButton) { 
    guard let buttonIndex = imageButtons.firstIndex(of: sender) else { 
        preconditionFailure("The buttons and images are not parallel.") 
    } 
 
    selectedIndex = buttonIndex 
 
    let selectionAnimator = UIViewPropertyAnimator( 
        duration: 0.3, 
        curve: .easeInOut, 
        animations: { 
            self.selectedIndex = buttonIndex 
            self.layoutIfNeeded() 
        }) 
    selectionAnimator.startAnimation() 
 
    sendActions(for: .valueChanged) 
} 
You initialize the property animator with a duration in
seconds, a curve called a timing function (more on that

--- Page 651 ---
shortly), and a closure that contains the changes to be
animated. After the property animator is created, you call
startAnimation() on it to begin the animation.
Recall that the highlightViewXConstraint is updated
whenever the selectedIndex changes. Animating
constraints is a bit different than animating other properties. If
you update a constraint within an animation block, no
animation will occur. Why? After a constraint is modified, the
system needs to recalculate the frames for all the related views
in the hierarchy to accommodate the change. It would be
expensive for any constraint change to trigger this
automatically. (Imagine if you updated quite a few constraints
– you would not want it to recalculate the frames after each
change.) Instead, the changes are batched up, and the system
recalculates all the frames just before the next time the screen
is redrawn.
But in this case, you do not want to wait – you want the frames
to be recalculated as soon as selectedIndex changes and
highlightViewXConstraint is updated. So you must
explicitly ask the system to recalculate the frames, which you
do in the closure by calling the method
layoutIfNeeded() on the button’s view. This will force
the view to lay out its subviews based on the latest constraints.
Build and run the application. Select different images and you
will see the highlight view slide to its new position
(Figure 19.2).

--- Page 652 ---
Figure 19.2  Highlight view animating
TIMING FUNCTIONS
The acceleration of the animation is controlled by its timing
function. The animation you created uses an “ease-in/ease-out”
timing function (.easeInOut). This means that the
animation accelerates smoothly from rest to a constant speed
and then gradually slows down before coming to rest again.
Other timing functions include .linear (a constant speed
from beginning to end), .easeIn (accelerating to a constant
speed and then ending abruptly), and .easeOut (beginning
at full speed and then slowing down at the end). Figure 19.3
shows the progress over time of these four timing functions.
Try replacing the timing function in Mandala with the other
options to see the effect. (You can increase the duration to
make the difference more obvious.)

--- Page 653 ---
Figure 19.3  Timing functions
You can also create your own timing functions using a cubic
Bézier curve, but that is beyond the scope of this book. If you

--- Page 654 ---
are interested, look at the UIViewPropertyAnimator
initializer
init(duration:controlPoint1:controlPoint2:
animations:).
SPRING ANIMATIONS
iOS has a powerful physics engine built in. An easy way to
harness this power is by using a spring animation. Spring
animations define their own timing functions to add an
oscillation to the end of a movement that looks like the moved
element is settling into place.
Replace the basic animation for the highlight view with a
spring animation.
Listing 19.2  Using a spring animation
(ImageSelector.swift)
let selectionAnimator = UIViewPropertyAnimator( 
    duration: 0.3, 
    curve: .easeInOut, 
    dampingRatio: 0.7, 
    animations: { 
        self.selectedIndex = buttonIndex 
        self.layoutIfNeeded() 
    }) 
The damping ratio is a measure of the “springiness” of the
spring animation. It is a value between 0.0 and 1.0. A value
closer to 0.0 will be more “springy” and so will oscillate
more. A value closer to 1.0 will be less “springy” and so will
oscillate less.
Play around with the values for the duration and damping ratio
until you find a combination you like.

--- Page 655 ---
Animating Colors
Next, you are going to animate the highlight color. To begin,
add an array of highlight colors to ImageSelector to
correspond with each button. As the selectedIndex
changes, the highlight view will update its background color to
the corresponding color in this array.
Listing 19.3  Adding highlight colors
(ImageSelector.swift)
var highlightColors: [UIColor] = []
Users of ImageSelector do not need to provide an array of
highlight colors; if no colors are provided, a backup color will
be used.
Implement a method that returns either a highlight color from
the array or the default color, if none is provided.
Listing 19.4  Implementing a method to return a
highlight color (ImageSelector.swift)
private func highlightColor(forIndex index: Int) -> UIColor { 
    guard index >= 0 && index < highlightColors.count else { 
        return UIColor.blue.withAlphaComponent(0.6) 
    } 
 
    return highlightColors[index]
}
If the highlight colors ever change, the current background
color also needs to change. Add a property observer to the
highlightColors array that does this.
Listing 19.5  Updating the current background color
(ImageSelector.swift)

--- Page 656 ---
var highlightColors: [UIColor] = [] { 
    didSet { 
        highlightView.backgroundColor = highlightColor(forIndex: 
selectedIndex) 
    }
}
Whenever the selectedIndex changes, the background
color for the highlight view also needs to be updated. Make
this change in the property observer for the selectIndex.
Listing 19.6  Updating the highlight color
(ImageSelector.swift)
var selectedIndex = 0 { 
    didSet { 
        if selectedIndex < 0 { 
            selectedIndex = 0 
        } 
        if selectedIndex >= imageButtons.count { 
            selectedIndex = imageButtons.count - 1 
        } 
 
        highlightView.backgroundColor = highlightColor(forIndex: 
selectedIndex) 
 
        let imageButton = imageButtons[selectedIndex] 
        highlightViewXConstraint = 
            highlightView.centerXAnchor.constraint(equalTo: 
imageButton.centerXAnchor) 
    } 
} 
With the background color changes you have made, you no
longer need to set an initial background color on the
highlightView. Remove the code that sets the background
color on the highlight view when it is created.
Listing 19.7  Removing the existing background
color (ImageSelector.swift)
private let highlightView: UIView = { 
    let view = UIView() 
    view.backgroundColor = view.tintColor 
    view.translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints = false 
    return view 
}() 
Now open MoodSelectionViewController.swift
and set the highlightColors array whenever the moods
are set.

--- Page 657 ---
Listing 19.8  Setting the highlight colors
(MoodSelectionViewController.swift)
var moods: [Mood] = [] { 
    didSet { 
        currentMood = moods.first 
        moodSelector.images = moods.map { $0.image } 
        moodSelector.highlightColors = moods.map { $0.color } 
    } 
} 
Build and run the application. Tap different images in the
ImageSelector and you will see the highlight color
change (Figure 19.4).
Figure 19.4  Changing highlight view colors
The highlight view’s background color is set within the
property observer of selectedIndex. Since the
selectedIndex is set within the property animator, the
background color is also being animated. It can be difficult to
see the animation, because it happens so quickly. One way to
more easily see the animation is to increase the animation
duration. If you are running in the simulator, you can select
Debug → Slow Animations to slow everything down. Do not
forget to disable that option when you are done.

--- Page 658 ---
Animating a Button
Let’s add one final animation touch to the application. When
the current mood is changed, also animate the add mood
button’s background color. You will use the same property
animator technique that you used above.
Modify the property observer for currentMood to animate
the button’s background color.
Listing 19.9  Animating the button’s background
color (MoodSelectionViewController.swift)
var currentMood: Mood? { 
    didSet { 
        guard let currentMood = currentMood else { 
            addMoodButton?.setTitle(nil, for: .normal) 
            addMoodButton?.backgroundColor = nil 
            return 
        } 
 
        addMoodButton?.setTitle("I'm \(currentMood.name)", for: .normal) 
        addMoodButton?.backgroundColor = currentMood.color 
 
        let selectionAnimator = UIViewPropertyAnimator(duration: 0.3, 
                                                       dampingRatio: 
0.7) { 
            self.addMoodButton?.backgroundColor = currentMood.color 
        } 
        selectionAnimator.startAnimation() 
    } 
} 
Build and run the application one last time. Select different
images, and the add mood button’s background color will
animate as well.
Over the past three chapters, you have used container views to
separate different responsibilities of a screen into multiple
view controllers, you have implemented a custom control that
can be reused across projects, and you have used animations to
give a little more polish to your user interfaces.
Congratulations!

--- Page 659 ---
20 
Web Services
Over the next five chapters, you will create an application
named Photorama that reads in a list of interesting photos from
Flickr. This chapter will lay the foundation and focus on
implementing the web service requests responsible for
fetching the metadata for interesting photos as well as
downloading the image data for a specific photo. Figure 20.1
shows Photorama at the end of this chapter. In Chapter 21, you
will display all the interesting photos in a grid layout.
Figure 20.1  Photorama
Your web browser uses HTTP to communicate with a web
server. In the simplest interaction, the browser sends a request

--- Page 660 ---
to the server specifying a URL. The server responds by
sending back the requested page (typically HTML and
images), which the browser formats and displays.
In more complex interactions, browser requests include other
parameters, such as form data. The server processes these
parameters and returns a customized, or dynamic, web page.
Web browsers are widely used and have been around for a
long time, so the technologies surrounding HTTP are stable
and well developed: HTTP traffic passes neatly through most
firewalls, web servers are very secure and have great
performance, and web application development tools have
become easy to use.
You can write a client application for iOS that leverages the
HTTP infrastructure to talk to a web-enabled server. The
server side of this application is a web service. Your client
application and the web service can exchange requests and
responses via HTTP.
Because HTTP does not care what data it transports, these
exchanges can contain complex data. This data is typically in
JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) or XML format. If you
control the web server as well as the client, you can use any
format you like. If not, you have to build your application to
use whatever the server supports.
Photorama will make a web service request to get interesting
photos from Flickr. The web service is hosted at
https://api.flickr.com/services/rest. The
data that is returned will be JSON that describes the photos.

--- Page 661 ---
Starting the Photorama Application
Create a new Single View App. Name this application Photorama,
as shown in Figure 20.2.
Figure 20.2  Creating a single view application
Let’s knock out the basic UI before focusing on web services.
Open ViewController.swift. Control-click on
ViewController and select Refactor → Rename.... Change
the class name to PhotosViewController and click Rename. When
you are done, add an imageView outlet to this class.

--- Page 662 ---
Listing 20.1  Adding an image view
(PhotosViewController.swift)
import Foundation
import UIKit 
 
class PhotosViewController: UIViewController { 
 
    @IBOutlet private var imageView: UIImageView! 
 
} 
Open Main.storyboard and select the Photos View Controller.
Select the Editor menu and choose Embed In → Navigation
Controller.
Drag an Image View onto the canvas for
PhotosViewController and add constraints to pin it to
all edges of the superview. Connect the image view to the
imageView outlet on PhotosViewController. Open
the attributes inspector for the image view and change the
Content Mode to Aspect Fill.
Finally, double-click on the center of the navigation bar for the
Photos View Controller and give it a title of Photorama. Your
interface will look like Figure 20.3.

--- Page 663 ---
Figure 20.3  Initial Photorama interface
Build and run the application to make sure there are no errors.

--- Page 664 ---
Building the URL
Communication with servers is done via requests. A request
encapsulates information about the interaction between the
application and the server, and its most important piece of
information is the destination URL.
In this section, you will build up the URL for retrieving
interesting photos from the Flickr web service. The application
will be built with an eye to best practices. For example, each
type that you create will encapsulate a single responsibility.
This will make your types robust and flexible and your
application easier to reason about. To be a good iOS developer,
you need to not only get the job done but also get it done
thoughtfully and with foresight.
FORMATTING URLS AND REQUESTS
The format of a web service request varies depending on the
server that the request is reaching out to. There are no set-in-
stone rules when it comes to web services. You will need to
find the documentation for the web service to know how to
format a request. As long as a client application sends the
server what it wants, you have a working exchange.
Flickr’s interesting photos web service wants a URL that looks
like this:
    https://api.flickr.com/services/rest/?
method=flickr.interestingness.getList 
    &api_key=a6d819499131071f158fd740860a5a88&extras=url_z,date_taken 
    &format=json&nojsoncallback=1 
Web service requests come in all sorts of formats, depending
on what the creator of that web service is trying to accomplish.
The interesting photos web service, where pieces of
information are broken up into key-value pairs, is pretty
common.

--- Page 665 ---
The key-value pairs that are supplied as part of the URL are
called query items. Each of the query items for the interesting
photos request is defined by and is unique to the Flickr API.
                          
                   
 
                     
                      
m
e
t
h
o
d 
                     
                  
                 
                   
 
                        The endpoint you want to hit on the Flickr API. 
For the interesting photos, this is the string 
"flickr.interestingness.getList". 
                    
                 
                   
 
                     
                      
a
p
i
_
k
e
y 
                     
                  
                 
                   
 
                        A key that Flickr generates to authorize an 
application to use the Flickr API. 
                    
                 
                   
 
                     
                      
e
x
t
r
a
s 
                   
 
                        Attributes passed in to customize the response. 
Here, the url_z,date_taken value tells the Flickr server 
that you want the photo URL and the date the photo was taken 
to come back in the response. Another “extra” to be aware of is 
license, which indicates the copyright terms and usage 
rights for a photo. (We have permission to use all the photos in 
this book.) 
                    

--- Page 666 ---
                     
                  
                 
                 
                   
 
                     
                      
f
o
r
m
a
t 
                     
                  
                 
                   
 
                        The format that you want the payload coming 
back to be in – here, it is JSON. 
                    
                 
                   
 
                     
                      
n
o
j
s
o
n
c
a
l
l
b
a
c
k 
                     
                  
                 
                   
 
                        Whether you want the JSON back in its raw 
format; the value 1 indicates that yes, you do. 
                    
                 
           
URLCOMPONENTS
You will create two types to deal with all the web service
information. The FlickrAPI struct will be responsible for

--- Page 667 ---
knowing and handling all Flickr-related information. This
includes knowing how to generate the URLs that the Flickr
API expects as well as knowing the format of the incoming
JSON and how to parse that JSON into the relevant model
objects. The PhotoStore class will handle the actual web
service calls. Let’s start by creating the FlickrAPI struct.
Create a new Swift file named FlickrAPI and declare the
FlickrAPI struct, which will contain all the knowledge that
is specific to the Flickr API.
Listing 20.2  Creating the FlickrAPI struct
(FlickrAPI.swift)
import Foundation 
 
struct FlickrAPI { 
 
}
You are going to use an enumeration to specify which
endpoint on the Flickr server to hit. For this application, you
will only be working with the endpoint to get interesting
photos. However, Flickr supports many additional APIs, such
as searching for images based on a string. Using an enum now
will make it easier to add endpoints in the future.
In FlickrAPI.swift, create the EndPoint enumeration.
Each case of EndPoint has a raw value that matches the
corresponding Flickr endpoint.
Listing 20.3  Creating the EndPoint enumeration
(FlickrAPI.swift)
import Foundation 
 
enum EndPoint: String { 
    case interestingPhotos = "flickr.interestingness.getList"
} 
 
struct FlickrAPI { 
 
} 

--- Page 668 ---
In Chapter 2, you learned that enumerations can have raw
values associated with them. Although the raw values are often
Ints, you can see here a great use of String as the raw
value for the EndPoint enumeration.
Now declare a type-level property to reference the base URL
string for the web service requests.
Listing 20.4  Adding the base URL for the Flickr
requests (FlickrAPI.swift)
enum EndPoint: String { 
    case interestingPhotos = "flickr.interestingness.getList" 
} 
 
struct FlickrAPI { 
 
    private static let baseURLString = 
"https://api.flickr.com/services/rest" 
} 
A type-level property (or method) is one that is accessed on
the type itself – in this case, the FlickrAPI type. For structs,
type properties and methods are declared with the static
keyword. For classes, you can use the class keyword in
addition to the static keyword. (What is the difference?
class properties and methods can be overridden by a
subclass and static properties and methods cannot.) You
used a type method on UIImagePickerController in
Chapter 15 when you called the
isSourceTypeAvailable(_:) method. Here, you are
declaring a type-level property on FlickrAPI.
The baseURLString is an implementation detail of the
FlickrAPI type, and no other type needs to know about it.
Instead, other types will ask for a completed URL from
FlickrAPI. To keep other files from being able to access
baseURLString, you have marked the property as
private.

--- Page 669 ---
Now you are going to create a type method that builds up the
Flickr URL for a specific endpoint. This method will accept
two arguments: The first will specify which endpoint to hit
using the EndPoint enumeration, and the second will be an
optional dictionary of query item parameters associated with
the request.
Implement this method in your FlickrAPI struct in
FlickrAPI.swift. For now, this method will return an
empty URL.
Listing 20.5  Implementing a method to return a
Flickr URL (FlickrAPI.swift)
private static func flickrURL(endPoint: EndPoint, 
                              parameters: [String:String]?) -> URL { 
 
    return URL(string: "")!
}
Notice that the flickrURL(endPoint:parameters:)
method is private. Like baseURLString, it is an
implementation detail of the FlickrAPI struct. An internal
type method will be exposed to the rest of the project for each
of the specific endpoint URLs (currently, just the interesting
photos endpoint). These internal type methods will call
through to the flickrURL(endPoint:parameters:)
method.
Now, still in FlickrAPI.swift, define and implement the
interestingPhotosURL computed property.
Listing 20.6  Exposing a URL for interesting photos
(FlickrAPI.swift)
static var interestingPhotosURL: URL { 
    return flickrURL(endPoint: .interestingPhotos, 
                     parameters: ["extras": "url_z,date_taken"])
}

--- Page 670 ---
Time to construct the full URL. You have the base URL
defined as a constant, and the query items are being passed
into the flickrURL(endPoint:parameters:) method
via the parameters argument. You will build up the URL
using the URLComponents class, which is designed to take
in these various components and construct a URL from them.
Update the flickrURL(endPoint:parameters:)
method to construct an instance of URLComponents from
the base URL. Then, loop over the incoming parameters and
create the associated URLQueryItem instances.
Listing 20.7  Adding the additional parameters to the
URL (FlickrAPI.swift)
private static func flickrURL(endPoint: EndPoint, 
                              parameters: [String:String]?) -> URL { 
 
    return URL(string: "")! 
 
    var components = URLComponents(string: baseURLString)! 
    var queryItems = [URLQueryItem]() 
 
    if let additionalParams = parameters { 
        for (key, value) in additionalParams { 
            let item = URLQueryItem(name: key, value: value) 
            queryItems.append(item) 
        } 
    } 
    components.queryItems = queryItems 
 
    return components.url! 
} 
The last step in setting up the URL is to pass in the parameters
that are common to all requests: method, api_key,
format, and nojsoncallback.
The API key is a token generated by Flickr to identify your
application and authenticate it with the web service. We have
generated an API key for this application by creating a Flickr
account and registering this application. (If you would like
your own API key, you will need to register an application at
www.flickr.com/ services/ apps/ create.)

--- Page 671 ---
In FlickrAPI.swift, create a constant that references this
token.
Listing 20.8  Adding an API key property
(FlickrAPI.swift)
struct FlickrAPI { 
 
    private static let baseURLString = 
"https://api.flickr.com/services/rest" 
    private static let apiKey = "a6d819499131071f158fd740860a5a88"
Double-check to make sure you have typed in the API key
exactly as presented here. It has to match or the server will
reject your requests. If your API key is not working or if you
have any problems with the requests, check out the forums at
forums.bignerdranch.com for help.
Finish implementing
flickrURL(endPoint:parameters:) to add the
common query items to the URLComponents.
Listing 20.9  Adding the shared parameters to the
URL (FlickrAPI.swift)
private static func flickrURL(endPoint: EndPoint, 
                              parameters: [String:String]?) -> URL { 
 
    var components = URLComponents(string: baseURLString)! 
    var queryItems = [URLQueryItem]() 
 
    let baseParams = [ 
        "method": endPoint.rawValue, 
        "format": "json", 
        "nojsoncallback": "1", 
        "api_key": apiKey 
    ] 
 
    for (key, value) in baseParams { 
        let item = URLQueryItem(name: key, value: value) 
        queryItems.append(item) 
    } 
 
    if let additionalParams = parameters { 
        for (key, value) in additionalParams { 
            let item = URLQueryItem(name: key, value: value) 
            queryItems.append(item) 
        } 
    } 
    components.queryItems = queryItems 
 
    return components.url! 
} 

--- Page 673 ---
Sending the Request
A URL request encapsulates information about the
communication from the application to the server. Most
importantly, it specifies the URL of the server for the request,
but it also has a timeout interval, a cache policy, and other
metadata about the request. A request is represented by the
URLRequest class. Check out the For the More Curious
section at the end of this chapter for more information.
The URLSession API is a collection of classes that use a
request to communicate with a server in a number of ways.
The URLSessionTask class is responsible for
communicating with a server. The URLSession class is
responsible for creating tasks that match a given configuration.
In Photorama, a new class, PhotoStore, will be responsible
for initiating the web service requests. It will use the
URLSession API and the FlickrAPI struct to fetch a list
of interesting photos and download the image data for each
photo.
Create a new Swift file named PhotoStore and declare the
PhotoStore class.
Listing 20.10  Creating the PhotoStore class
(PhotoStore.swift)
import Foundation 
 
class PhotoStore { 
 
}
URLSESSION
Let’s look at a few of the properties on URLRequest:

--- Page 674 ---
                          
                   
 
                     
                      
allHTTPHe
aderField
s 
                     
                  
                 
                   
 
                         A dictionary of metadata about the 
HTTP transaction, including character encoding 
and how the server should handle caching. 
                    
                 
                   
 
                     
                      
allowsCel
lularAcce
ss 
                     
                  
                 
                   
 
                        A Boolean that represents whether a 
request is allowed to use cellular data. 
                    
                 
                   
 
                     
                      
cachePoli
cy 
                     
                  
                 
                   
 
                        The property that determines 
whether and how the local cache should be used. 
                    
                 
                   
 
                     
                      
httpMetho
d 
                     
                  
                 
                   
 
                        The request method. The default is 
GET, and other common values are POST, PUT, 
and DELETE. 
                    
                 
                                      

--- Page 675 ---
 
                     
                      
timeoutIn
terval 
                     
                  
                 
 
                        The maximum duration a 
connection to the server will be attempted for. 
                    
                 
           
The class that communicates with the web service is an
instance of URLSessionTask. There are three kinds of
tasks: data tasks, download tasks, and upload tasks.
URLSessionDataTask retrieves data from the server and
returns it as Data in memory.
URLSessionDownloadTask retrieves data from the server
and returns it as a file saved to the filesystem.
URLSessionUploadTask sends data to the server.
Often, you will have a group of requests that have many
properties in common. For example, maybe some downloads
should never happen over cellular data, or maybe certain
requests should be cached differently than others. It can
become tedious to configure related requests the same way.
This is where URLSession comes in handy. URLSession
acts as a factory for URLSessionTask instances. The
session is created with a configuration that specifies properties
that are common across all the tasks that it creates. Although
many applications might only need to use a single instance of
URLSession, having the power and flexibility of multiple
sessions is a great tool to have at your disposal.
In PhotoStore.swift, add a property to hold on to an
instance of URLSession.
Listing 20.11  Adding a URLSession property
(PhotoStore.swift)

--- Page 676 ---
class PhotoStore { 
 
    private let session: URLSession = { 
        let config = URLSessionConfiguration.default 
        return URLSession(configuration: config) 
    }() 
 
} 
In PhotoStore.swift, implement the
fetchInterestingPhotos() method to create a
URLRequest that connects to api.flickr.com and asks
for the list of interesting photos. Then, use the URLSession
to create a URLSessionDataTask that transfers this
request to the server.
Listing 20.12  Implementing a method to start the
web service request (PhotoStore.swift)
func fetchInterestingPhotos() { 
 
    let url = FlickrAPI.interestingPhotosURL 
    let request = URLRequest(url: url) 
    let task = session.dataTask(with: request) { 
        (data, response, error) in 
 
        if let jsonData = data { 
            if let jsonString = String(data: jsonData, 
                                       encoding: .utf8) { 
                print(jsonString) 
            } 
        } else if let requestError = error { 
            print("Error fetching interesting photos: \(requestError)") 
        } else { 
            print("Unexpected error with the request") 
        } 
    } 
    task.resume()
}
Creating the URLRequest is fairly straightforward: You
create a URL instance using the FlickrAPI struct and
instantiate a request object with it.
By giving the session a request and a completion closure to
call when the request finishes, you ensure that the session will
return an instance of URLSessionTask. Because Photorama
is requesting data from a web service, the type of task will be
an instance of URLSessionDataTask. Tasks are always
created in the suspended state, so calling resume() on the

--- Page 677 ---
task will start the web service request. For now, the completion
block will just print out the JSON data returned from the
request. 
To make a request, PhotosViewController will call the
appropriate methods on PhotoStore. To do this,
PhotosViewController needs a reference to an instance
of PhotoStore.
At the top of PhotosViewController.swift, add a
property to hang on to an instance of PhotoStore.
Listing 20.13  Adding a PhotoStore property
(PhotosViewController.swift)
class PhotosViewController: UIViewController { 
 
    @IBOutlet private var imageView: UIImageView! 
    var store: PhotoStore!
The store is a dependency of the
PhotosViewController. You will use property injection
to give the PhotosViewController its store
dependency, just as you did with the view controllers in
LootLogger.
Open SceneDelegate.swift and use property injection
to give the PhotosViewController an instance of
PhotoStore.
Listing 20.14  Injecting the PhotoStore instance
(SceneDelegate.swift)
func scene(_ scene: UIScene, 
           willConnectTo session: UISceneSession, 
           options connectionOptions: UIScene.ConnectionOptions) { 
    guard let _ = (scene as? UIWindowScene) else { return } 
 
    let rootViewController = window!.rootViewController as! 
UINavigationController 
    let photosViewController = 
        rootViewController.topViewController as! PhotosViewController 
    photosViewController.store = PhotoStore() 
} 

--- Page 678 ---
Now that the PhotosViewController can interact with
the PhotoStore, kick off the web service exchange when
the view controller is coming onscreen for the first time.
In PhotosViewController.swift, override
viewDidLoad() and fetch the interesting photos.
Listing 20.15  Initiating the web service request
(PhotosViewController.swift)
override func viewDidLoad() { 
    super.viewDidLoad() 
 
    store.fetchInterestingPhotos()
}
Build and run the application. A string representation of the
JSON data coming back from the web service will print to the
console. (If you do not see anything print to the console, make
sure you typed the URL and API key correctly.) 
The response will look something like Figure 20.4.

--- Page 679 ---
Figure 20.4  Web service console output


--- Page 680 ---
Modeling the Photo
Next, you will create a Photo class to represent each photo
that is returned from the web service request. The relevant
pieces of information that you will need for this application are
the id, the title, the url_z, and the datetaken.
Create a new Swift file called Photo and declare the Photo
class with properties for the photoID, the title, and the
remoteURL. Finally, add a designated initializer that sets up
the instance.
Listing 20.16  Creating the Photo class
(Photo.swift)
import Foundation 
 
class Photo { 
    let title: String 
    let remoteURL: URL 
    let photoID: String 
    let dateTaken: Date
}
You will use this class shortly, once you are parsing the JSON
data.

--- Page 681 ---
JSON Data
JSON data, especially when it is condensed like it is in your
console, may seem daunting. However, it is actually a very
simple syntax. JSON can contain the most basic types used to
represent model objects: arrays, dictionaries, strings, numbers,
Booleans, and null (nil). JSON dictionaries must have keys
that are strings, but the values can be any other JSON type.
Finally, arrays can contain any JSON type. Thus, a JSON
document is a nested set of these types of values.
Here is an example of some really simple JSON:
    { 
        "name" : "Christian", 
        "friends" : ["Stacy", "Mikey"], 
        "job" : { 
            "company" : "Big Nerd Ranch", 
            "title" : "Senior Nerd" 
        } 
    } 
This JSON document begins and ends with curly braces ({ and
}), which in JSON delimit a dictionary. Within the curly
braces are the key-value pairs that belong to the dictionary.
This dictionary contains three key-value pairs (name,
friends, and job).
A string is represented by text within quotation marks. Strings
are used as the keys within a dictionary and can be used as
values, too. Thus, the value associated with the name key in
the top-level dictionary is the string Christian.
Arrays are represented with square brackets ([ and ]). An
array can contain any other JSON information. In this case, the
friends key holds an array of strings (Stacy and Mikey).
A dictionary can contain other dictionaries, and the final key
in the top-level dictionary, job, is associated with a dictionary

--- Page 682 ---
that has two key-value pairs (company and title).
Photorama will parse out the useful information from the JSON
data and store it in a Photo instance.
JSONDECODER AND JSONENCODER
Apple has built-in classes for decoding JSON data into
instances of some type (generally model objects) and
generating JSON data from instances of some type. These are
the JSONDecoder and JSONEncoder classes, respectively.
For decoding, you hand JSONDecoder a chunk of JSON
data and tell it what type you expect to decode that data to, and
it will create the instances for you. This works by leveraging
the Codable protocol that you learned about in Chapter 13
and works exactly like the PropertyListDecoder that
you used in that chapter. Let’s see how this class helps you.
In Photo.swift, update the Photo type to conform to
Codable.
Listing 20.17  Conforming Photo to Codable
(Photo.swift)
class Photo: Codable { 
    let title: String 
    let remoteURL: URL 
    let photoID: String 
    let dateTaken: Date 
} 
All the types contained within Photo are themselves codable,
so no further work is needed.
Parsing the data that comes back from the server could go
wrong in a number of ways: The data might not contain JSON.
The data could be corrupt. The data might contain JSON but
not match the format that you expect. To manage the
possibility of failure, you will use an enumeration with

--- Page 683 ---
associated values (which we will explain shortly) to
represent the success or failure of the parsing. 
PARSING JSON DATA
When working with JSONDecoder, the structure of the type
you are decoding into must match the structure of the JSON
that is returned from the server. If you look at the JSON string
that you logged to the console earlier, you will notice that the
JSON structure that is returned by Flickr has the following
format:
    { "photos": 
        { "page": 1, 
          "pages": 4, 
          "perpage": 100, 
          "total": "386", 
          "photo": [ 
              { "id": "123456", 
                "title": "Photo title", 
                "datetaken":"2019-09-28 17:34:22", 
                "url_z":"https://live.staticflickr.com/123/123456.jpg", 
                ... 
              }, 
              { 
                ... 
              }, 
              { 
                ... 
              } 
            ] 
        } 
    } 
As you can see, the photo data itself is nested a bit within the
JSON structure. You will need to define a type to represent
each layer of that structure for JSONDecoder to unpack.
Open FlickrAPI.swift and define structures for each of
the layers.
Listing 20.18  Defining the response structures
(FlickrAPI.swift)
struct FlickrResponse: Codable { 
    let photos: FlickrPhotosResponse
}
struct FlickrPhotosResponse: Codable { 
    let photo: [Photo]
}

--- Page 684 ---
The type names (FlickrResponse and
FlickrPhotosResponse) do not matter, but the property
names (photos and photo) need to match the names of the
keys coming back within the JSON.
Often, the key names in the JSON are not what you want the
property names to be in your data structure. For example, a
web service might return a key named first_name, but you
would like to name the property firstName. To accomplish
this, you can create an enumeration that conforms to the
CodingKey protocol that maps the preferred property name
to the key name in the JSON.
In the Flickr JSON, the photos and photo keys do not
accurately describe their contents. The photos key is
associated with metadata information about the photos, and the
photo key is associated with all the information for the
photos themselves. Let’s update how those keys are referenced
in the Swift code.
Update FlickrResponse and
FlickrPhotosResponse to use custom property names.
Listing 20.19  Adding coding keys to the response
structures (FlickrAPI.swift)
struct FlickrResponse: Codable { 
    let photos: FlickrPhotosResponse 
    let photosInfo: FlickrPhotosResponse 
 
    enum CodingKeys: String, CodingKey { 
        case photosInfo = "photos" 
    } 
} 
struct FlickrPhotosResponse: Codable { 
    let photo: [Photo] 
    let photos: [Photo] 
 
    enum CodingKeys: String, CodingKey { 
        case photos = "photo" 
    } 
} 
You will want to do the same mapping for Photo, since the
property names do not match the JSON keys.

--- Page 685 ---
Open Photo.swift and add a CodingKeys enumeration.
Listing 20.20  Adding coding keys to the Photo class
(Photo.swift)
class Photo: Codable { 
    let title: String 
    let remoteURL: URL 
    let photoID: String 
    let dateTaken: Date 
 
    enum CodingKeys: String, CodingKey { 
        case title 
        case remoteURL = "url_z" 
        case photoID = "id" 
        case dateTaken = "datetaken" 
    } 
} 
(Do not miss the capitalization difference between
dateTaken and "datetaken".)
With the Codable response structures in place, you can now
use JSONDecoder to parse the JSON into instances of the
types you just created.

--- Page 686 ---
Enumerations and Associated Values
You learned about the basics of enumerations in Chapter 2,
and you have been using them throughout this book –
including in this chapter. Associated values are a useful feature
of enumerations. Let’s take a moment to look at a simple
example before you use this feature in Photorama.
Enumerations are a convenient way of defining and restricting
the possible values for a variable. For example, let’s say you
are working on a home automation app. You could define an
enumeration to specify the oven state, like this:
    enum OvenState { 
        case on 
        case off 
    } 
If the oven is on, you also need to know what temperature it is
set to. Associated values are a perfect solution to this situation.
    enum OvenState { 
        case on(Double) 
        case off 
    } 
 
    var ovenState = OvenState.on(450) 
Each case of an enumeration can have data of any type
associated with it. For OvenState, its on case has an
associated Double that represents the oven’s temperature.
Notice that not all cases need to have associated values.
Retrieving the associated value from an enum is often done
using a switch statement.
    switch ovenState { 
    case let .on(temperature): 
        print("The oven is on and set to \(temperature) degrees.") 
    case .off: 
        print("The oven is off.") 
    } 

--- Page 687 ---
Note that the on case uses a let keyword to store the
associated value in the temperature constant, which can be
used within the case clause. (You can use the var keyword
instead if temperature needs to be a variable.) Considering
the value given to ovenState, the switch statement above
would result in the line The oven is on and set to
450 degrees. printed to the console.
In the next section, you will use an enumeration with
associated values to tie the result status of a request to the
Flickr web service with data. A successful result status will be
tied to the data containing interesting photos; a failure result
status will be tied with error information.

--- Page 688 ---
Passing the Photos Around
Let’s finish parsing the photos. Open FlickrAPI.swift
and implement a method that takes in an instance of Data and
uses the JSONDecoder class to convert the data into an
instance of FlickrResponse.
Listing 20.21  Decoding the JSON data
(FlickrAPI.swift)
static func photos(fromJSON data: Data) -> Result<[Photo], Error> { 
    do { 
        let decoder = JSONDecoder() 
        let flickrResponse = try decoder.decode(FlickrResponse.self, 
from: data) 
        return .success(flickrResponse.photosInfo.photos) 
    } catch { 
        return .failure(error) 
    }
}
If the incoming data is structured JSON in the form expected,
then it will be parsed successfully, and the
flickrResponse instance will be set. If there is a problem
with the data, an error will be thrown, which you catch and
pass along. 
Notice that this new method returns a Result type. Result
is an enumeration defined within the Swift standard library
that is useful for encapsulating the result of an operation that
might succeed or fail. Result has two cases, success and
failure, and each of these cases has an associated value that
represents the successful value and error, respectively:
    public enum Result<Success, Failure> where Failure : Error { 
 
        /// A success, storing a `Success` value. 
        case success(Success) 
 
        /// A failure, storing a `Failure` value. 
        case failure(Failure) 
    } 

--- Page 689 ---
Unlike most of the types you have worked with, Result is a
generic type, which means that it uses placeholder types that
are defined when you use it. For Result, there are two
placeholders that you define: what kind of value it should
contain on success and what kind of value it should contain on
failure. Notice the where clause at the end of the first line;
this limits the failure associated value to be some kind of
Error.
To fill in these generic placeholders, you specify the values
when using the type by enclosing them within the angled
brackets, as you did in Result<[Photo], Error>. This
defines a Result where the success case is associated
with an array of photos, and the failure case is associated
with any Error.
Incidentally, Array is another generic type you have used. Its
placeholder type defines what kind of elements will exist
within the array. As you saw in Chapter 2, you can use the
angled bracket syntax (Array<String>), but it is much
more common to use the shorthand notation ([String]).
Next, in PhotoStore.swift, write a new method that will
process the JSON data that is returned from the web service
request.
Listing 20.22  Processing the web service data
(PhotoStore.swift)
private func processPhotosRequest(data: Data?, 
                                  error: Error?) -> Result<[Photo], 
Error> { 
    guard let jsonData = data else { 
        return .failure(error!) 
    } 
 
    return FlickrAPI.photos(fromJSON: jsonData)
}
Now, update fetchInterestingPhotos() to use the
method you just created.

--- Page 690 ---
Listing 20.23  Factoring out the data parsing code
(PhotoStore.swift)
func fetchInterestingPhotos() { 
 
    let url = FlickrAPI.interestingPhotosURL 
    let request = URLRequest(url: url) 
    let task = session.dataTask(with: request) { 
        (data, response, error) in 
 
        if let jsonData = data { 
            if let jsonString = String(data: jsonData, 
                                       encoding: .utf8) { 
                print(jsonString) 
            } 
        } else if let requestError = error { 
            print("Error fetching interesting photos: \(requestError)") 
        } else { 
            print("Unexpected error with the request") 
        } 
 
        let result = self.processPhotosRequest(data: data, error: error) 
    } 
    task.resume() 
} 
Finally, update the method signature for
fetchInterestingPhotos() to take in a completion
closure that will be called once the web service request is
completed.
Listing 20.24  Adding a completion handler
(PhotoStore.swift)
func fetchInterestingPhotos(completion: @escaping (Result<[Photo], 
Error>) -> Void) { 
 
    let url = FlickrAPI.interestingPhotosURL 
    let request = URLRequest(url: url) 
    let task = session.dataTask(with: request) { 
        (data, response, error) in 
 
        let result = self.processPhotosRequest(data: data, error: error) 
        completion(result) 
    } 
    task.resume() 
} 
The completion closure takes in a Result instance and
returns nothing. But to indicate that this is a closure, you need
to specify the return type – so you specify Void (in other
words, no return type). Without -> Void, the compiler

--- Page 691 ---
would assume that the completion parameter takes in a
Result instance instead of a closure.
Fetching data from a web service is an asynchronous process:
Once the request starts, it may take a nontrivial amount of time
for a response to come back from the server. Because of this,
the fetchInterestingPhotos(completion:)
method cannot directly return an instance of
Result<[Photo], Error>. Instead, the caller of this
method will supply a completion closure for the
PhotoStore to call once the request is complete.
This follows the same pattern that URLSessionTask uses
with its completion handler: The task is created with a closure
for it to call once the web service request completes.
Figure 20.5 describes the flow of data with the web service
request.

--- Page 692 ---
Figure 20.5  Web service request data flow
The closure is marked with the @escaping annotation. This
annotation lets the compiler know that the closure might not
get called immediately within the method. In this case, the
closure is getting passed to the URLSessionDataTask,
which will call it when the web service request completes.
In PhotosViewController.swift, update the
implementation of viewDidLoad() using the trailing
closure syntax to print out the result of the web service
request.
Listing 20.25  Printing the results of the request
(PhotosViewController.swift)

--- Page 693 ---
override func viewDidLoad() { 
    super.viewDidLoad() 
 
    store.fetchInterestingPhotos() 
    store.fetchInterestingPhotos { 
        (photosResult) in 
 
        switch photosResult { 
        case let .success(photos): 
            print("Successfully found \(photos.count) photos.") 
        case let .failure(error): 
            print("Error fetching interesting photos: \(error)") 
        } 
 
    } 
} 
Build and run the application. Take a look at the console, and
you will notice an error message printed out. (We have broken
the error onto multiple lines due to page length constraints.)
    Error fetching interesting photos: typeMismatch(Swift.Double 
 , 
        Swift.DecodingError.Context(codingPath: 
  
        [CodingKeys(stringValue: "photos" 
 , intValue: nil), 
        CodingKeys(stringValue: "photo" 
 , intValue: nil), 
        _JSONKey(stringValue: "Index 0", intValue: 0) 
 , 
        CodingKeys(stringValue: "datetaken" 
 , intValue: nil)], 
        debugDescription: "Expected to decode Double but found a 
        string/data instead." 
 , underlyingError: nil)) 
There is a lot to parse here, but it is important to be able to
understand these error messages. Let’s break this down piece
by piece.
           
               
 
             
               
Indicates that the decoder was expecting a Double but received 
something different.
             
           
               
 
             
               
Shows the path to the key within the JSON structure that triggered 
the error.
             
           
                              

--- Page 694 ---
 
             
Indicates that the problematic key is within the photos key 
object.
             
           
               
 
             
               
Indicates that, within the photos object, the problematic key is 
within the photo key object.
             
           
               
 
             
               
Informs us that photo is an array, and the issue is related to the 
object at index 0 within that array.
             
           
               
 
             
               
Shows the final part of the coding path array, indicating that the 
problem is with the datetaken key.
             
           
               
 
             
               
Describes the reason for the type mismatch, to give you context.
             
         
The error message says that the datetaken key is triggering
the error, and the debugDescription tells you that the
reason for the error is that the decoder expected to get a
Double from the JSON, but it found a String or Data
instead.
If you take a look at the JSON output that the server sends,
you will notice that the date is formatted like this:
    2019-07-25 15:06:30 

--- Page 695 ---
This is the string that the debug description is referring to. By
default, JSONDecoder expects JSON dates to be represented
as a time interval from the reference date (00:00:00 UTC on 1
January 2001), which is expressed as a Double. This explains
the type mismatch error you are currently experiencing.
To address this issue, you can provide JSONDecoder a
custom date decoding strategy.
Open FlickrAPI.swift and update
photos(fromJSON:) to use a custom date decoding
strategy.
Listing 20.26  Adding a custom date decoding
strategy (FlickrAPI.swift)
static func photos(fromJSON data: Data) -> Result<[Photo], Error> { 
    do { 
        let decoder = JSONDecoder() 
 
        let dateFormatter = DateFormatter() 
        dateFormatter.dateFormat = "yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm:ss" 
        dateFormatter.locale = Locale(identifier: "en_US_POSIX") 
        dateFormatter.timeZone = TimeZone(secondsFromGMT: 0) 
        decoder.dateDecodingStrategy = .formatted(dateFormatter) 
 
        let flickrResponse = try decoder.decode(FlickrResponse.self, 
from: data) 
        return .success(flickrResponse.photosInfo.photos) 
    } catch let error { 
        return .failure(error) 
    } 
} 
There are a few built-in date decoding strategies, but Flickr’s
date format does not follow any of the these. (Flickr’s API
says it sends dates in the MySQL ‘datetime’ format.) Because
of this, you create a custom date formatter, setting the date
format to what the Flickr API sends. This date is sent in the
Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) time zone, so to accurately
represent the date you set the locale and timeZone on the
date formatter. Finally, you use this date formatter to assign a
custom formatted date decoding strategy to the decoder.
Build and run again. Look at the console, and you may notice
another error:

--- Page 696 ---
    Error fetching recent photos: 
        keyNotFound(CodingKeys(stringValue: "url_z", intValue: nil), 
        Swift.DecodingError.Context(codingPath: 
        [CodingKeys(stringValue: "photos", intValue: nil), 
        CodingKeys(stringValue: "photo", intValue: nil), 
        _JSONKey(stringValue: "Index 13", intValue: 13)], 
        debugDescription: "No value associated with key CodingKeys 
            (stringValue: \"url_z\", intValue: nil) (\"url_z\").", 
            underlyingError: nil)) 
Thankfully this error is easier to address. Looking at the debug
description, you will notice that one of the photo objects did
not have a "url_z" key associated with it. In the example
above, the _JSONKey line mentions index 13, implying that
the previous photos were decoded successfully but that the
photo at index 13 failed.
Flickr photos can have multiple URLs that are associated with
different sizes, and not every photo will have every size. (If
you did not get an error message, it is because every photo that
came back from your web service request had a "url_z" key
associated with it.)
Since Photo has non-optional properties, JSONDecoder
requires these properties to be in the JSON data, or the
decoding fails. To address the issue, you need to mark the
remoteURL property (which is your custom property name
for url_z) as optional.
Open Photo.swift and change the remoteURL property
from non-optional to optional.
Listing 20.27  Making the remoteURL optional
(Photo.swift)
class Photo: Codable { 
    let title: String 
    let remoteURL: URL 
    let remoteURL: URL? 
    let photoID: String 
    let dateTaken: Date 
 
    enum CodingKeys: String, CodingKey { 
        case title 
        case remoteURL = "url_z" 
        case photoID = "id" 
        case dateTaken = "datetaken" 

--- Page 697 ---
    } 
} 
Build and run again, and you should now see the photo parsing
successfully. The console should print something like
Successfully found 93 photos.
No error is good, but you do not want to work with photos that
do not have a URL. Open FlickrAPI.swift and update
photos(fromJSON:) to remove any photos missing a
URL.
Listing 20.28  Filtering out photos with a missing
URL (FlickrAPI.swift)
static func photos(fromJSON data: Data) -> Result<[Photo], Error> { 
    do { 
        let decoder = JSONDecoder() 
 
        let dateFormatter = DateFormatter() 
        dateFormatter.dateFormat = "yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm:ss" 
        dateFormatter.locale = Locale(identifier: "en_US_POSIX") 
        dateFormatter.timeZone = TimeZone(secondsFromGMT: 0) 
        decoder.dateDecodingStrategy = .formatted(dateFormatter) 
 
        let flickrResponse = try decoder.decode(FlickrResponse.self, 
from: data) 
        return .success(flickrResponse.photosInfo.photos) 
 
        let photos = flickrResponse.photosInfo.photos.filter { 
$0.remoteURL != nil } 
        return .success(photos) 
    } catch let error { 
        return .failure(error) 
    } 
} 
The filter(_:) method acts on an array and generates a
new array. It takes in a closure that determines whether each
element in the original array should be included in the new
array. The closure gets called on each element and returns a
Boolean indicating whether that element should be included in
the new array. Here, you are including each Photo that has a
remoteURL that is not nil.
Build and run the app. After the web service request
completes, you should again see the app successfully parsing
some number of photos.

--- Page 698 ---
With that complete, turn your attention to downloading the
image data associated with the photos.

--- Page 699 ---
Downloading and Displaying the Image
Data
You have done a lot already in this chapter: You have
successfully interacted with the Flickr API via a web service
request, and you have parsed the incoming JSON data into
Photo model objects. Unfortunately, you have nothing to
show for it except some log messages in the console.
In this section, you will use the URL returned from the web
service request to download the image data. Then you will
create an instance of UIImage from that data, and, finally,
you will display the first image returned from the request in a
UIImageView. (In the next chapter, you will display all the
images that are returned in a grid layout driven by a
UICollectionView.)
The first step is downloading the image data. This process will
be very similar to the web service request to download the
photos’ JSON data.
Open PhotoStore.swift, import UIKit, and add an
Error type to represent photo errors.
Listing 20.29  Adding an error type
(PhotoStore.swift)
import Foundation
import UIKit 
 
enum PhotoError: Error { 
    case imageCreationError 
    case missingImageURL
}
You will still be working with a Result type, like you did
before, but in this case it will be Result<UIImage,
Error>. If the download of the photo is successful, the
success case will have a UIImage associated with it. If

--- Page 700 ---
there is an error, the failure case will have the Error
associated with it, which may be a PhotoError, as you just
declared.
Now, within the PhotoStore type scope, implement a
method to download the image data. Like the
fetchInterestingPhotos(completion:) method,
this new method will take in a completion closure that will
expect an instance of Result<UIImage, Error>.
Listing 20.30  Implementing a method to download
image data (PhotoStore.swift)
func fetchImage(for photo: Photo, 
                completion: @escaping (Result<UIImage, Error>) -> Void) 
{ 
    guard let photoURL = photo.remoteURL else { 
        completion(.failure(PhotoError.missingImageURL)) 
        return 
    } 
    let request = URLRequest(url: photoURL) 
 
    let task = session.dataTask(with: request) { 
        (data, response, error) in 
 
    } 
    task.resume()
}
Now implement a method that processes the data from the web
service request into an image, if possible.
Listing 20.31  Processing the image request data
(PhotoStore.swift)
private func processImageRequest(data: Data?, 
                                 error: Error?) -> Result<UIImage, 
Error> { 
    guard 
        let imageData = data, 
        let image = UIImage(data: imageData) else { 
 
            // Couldn't create an image 
            if data == nil { 
                return .failure(error!) 
            } else { 
                return .failure(PhotoError.imageCreationError) 
            } 
    } 
 
    return .success(image)
}

--- Page 701 ---
Still in PhotoStore.swift, update
fetchImage(for:completion:) to use this new
method.
Listing 20.32  Executing the image completion
handler (PhotoStore.swift)
func fetchImage(for photo: Photo, 
                completion: @escaping (Result<UIImage, Error>) -> Void) 
{ 
    guard let photoURL = photo.remoteURL else { 
        completion(.failure(PhotoError.missingImageURL)) 
        return 
    } 
    let request = URLRequest(url: photoURL) 
 
    let task = session.dataTask(with: request) { 
        (data, response, error) in 
 
        let result = self.processImageRequest(data: data, error: error) 
        completion(result) 
    } 
    task.resume() 
} 
To test this code, you will download the image data for the
first photo that is returned from the interesting photos request
and display it on the image view.
Open PhotosViewController.swift and add a new
method that will fetch the image and display it on the image
view.
Listing 20.33  Updating the image view
(PhotosViewController.swift)
func updateImageView(for photo: Photo) { 
    store.fetchImage(for: photo) { 
        (imageResult) in 
 
        switch imageResult { 
        case let .success(image): 
            self.imageView.image = image 
        case let .failure(error): 
            print("Error downloading image: \(error)") 
        } 
    }
}
Now update viewDidLoad() to use this new method.

--- Page 702 ---
Listing 20.34  Showing the first photo
(PhotosViewController.swift)
override func viewDidLoad() { 
    super.viewDidLoad() 
 
    store.fetchInterestingPhotos { 
        (photosResult) in 
 
        switch photosResult { 
        case let .success(photos): 
            print("Successfully found \(photos.count) photos.") 
            if let firstPhoto = photos.first { 
                self.updateImageView(for: firstPhoto) 
            } 
        case let .failure(error): 
            print("Error fetching interesting photos: \(error)") 
        } 
    } 
} 
Although you could build and run the application at this point,
the image may or may not appear in the image view when the
web service request finishes. Why? The code that updates the
image view is not being run on the main thread.

--- Page 703 ---
The Main Thread
iOS devices can run multiple chunks of code simultaneously.
These computations proceed in parallel, so this is referred to as
parallel computing. A common way to express this is by
representing each computation with a different thread of
control.
So far in this book, all your code has been running on the main
thread. The main thread is sometimes referred to as the UI
thread, because any code that modifies the UI must run on the
main thread.
When the web service completes, you want it to update the
image view. To avoid blocking the main thread with long-
running tasks, URLSessionDataTask runs on a
background thread, and the completion handler is called on
this thread. You need a way to force code to run on the main
thread so that you can update the image view. You can do that
easily using the OperationQueue class.
You will update the asynchronous PhotoStore methods to
call their completion handlers on the main thread.
In PhotoStore.swift, update
fetchInterestingPhotos(completion:) to call the
completion closure on the main thread.
Listing 20.35  Executing the interesting photos
completion handler on the main thread
(PhotoStore.swift)
func fetchInterestingPhotos(completion: @escaping (Result<[Photo], 
Error>) -> Void) { 
 
    let url = FlickrAPI.interestingPhotosURL 
    let request = URLRequest(url: url) 
    let task = session.dataTask(with: request) { 
        (data, response, error) in 

--- Page 704 ---
 
        let result = self.processPhotosRequest(data: data, error: error) 
        OperationQueue.main.addOperation { 
            completion(result) 
        } 
    } 
    task.resume() 
} 
Do the same for fetchImage(for:completion:).
Listing 20.36  Executing the image fetching
completion handler on the main thread
(PhotoStore.swift)
func fetchImage(for photo: Photo, 
                completion: @escaping (Result<UIImage, Error>) -> Void) 
{ 
 
    let photoURL = photo.remoteURL 
    let request = URLRequest(url: photoURL) 
 
    let task = session.dataTask(with: request) { 
        (data, response, error) in 
 
        let result = self.processImageRequest(data: data, error: error) 
        OperationQueue.main.addOperation { 
            completion(result) 
        } 
    } 
    task.resume() 
} 
Build and run the application. Now that the image view is
being updated on the main thread, you will have something to
show for all your hard work: An image will appear when the
web service request finishes. (It might take a little time to
show the image if the web service request takes a while to
finish.)

--- Page 705 ---
Bronze Challenge: Printing the
Response Information
The completion handler for
dataTask(with:completionHandler:) provides an
instance of URLResponse. When making HTTP requests,
this response is of type HTTPURLResponse (a subclass of
URLResponse).
Print the statusCode and allHeaderFields to the
console. These properties are very useful when debugging web
service calls.

--- Page 706 ---
Silver Challenge: Fetch Recent Photos
from Flickr
In this chapter, you fetched the interesting photos from Flickr
using the flickr.interestingness.getList
endpoint. Add a new case to your EndPoint enumeration for
recent photos. The endpoint for this is
flickr.photos.getRecent. Extend the application so
you are able to switch between interesting photos and recent
photos. (Hint: The JSON format for both endpoints is the
same, so your existing parsing code will still work.) Note that
the recent photos collection is not curated by Flickr, unlike the
interesting photos, so you might occasionally come across
questionable content.

--- Page 707 ---
For the More Curious: HTTP
When URLSessionTask interacts with a web server, it does
so according to the rules outlined in the HTTP specification.
The specification is very clear about the exact format of the
request/response exchange between the client and the server.
An example of a simple HTTP request is shown in
Figure 20.6.
Figure 20.6  HTTP request format
An HTTP request has three parts: a request line, request
headers, and an optional request body. The request line is the
first line of the request and tells the server what the client is
trying to do. In this request, the client is trying to GET the
resource at /index.html. (It also specifies the HTTP
version that the request will be conforming to.)

--- Page 708 ---
The word GET is an HTTP method. While there are a number
of supported HTTP methods, you will see GET and POST
most often. The default of URLRequest, GET, indicates that
the client wants a resource from the server. The resource
requested might be an actual file on the web server’s
filesystem, or it could be generated dynamically at the moment
the request is received. As a client, you should not care about
this detail, but more than likely the JSON resources you
requested in this chapter were created dynamically.
In addition to getting things from a server, you can send it
information. For example, many web servers allow you to
upload photos. A client application would pass the image data
to the server through an HTTP request. In this situation, you
would use the HTTP method POST, and you would include a
request body. The body of a request is the payload you are
sending to the server – typically JSON, XML, or binary data.
When the request has a body, it must also have the Content-
Length header. Handily, URLRequest will compute the
size of the body and add this header for you.
Here is an example of how you might POST an image to an
imaginary site using a URLRequest.
    if let someURL = URL(string: "http://www.photos.example.com/upload") 
{ 
        let image = profileImage() 
        let data = image.pngData() 
 
        var req = URLRequest(url: someURL) 
 
        // Adds the HTTP body data and automatically sets the content-
length header 
        req.httpBody = data 
 
        // Changes the HTTP method in the request line 
        req.httpMethod = "POST" 
 
        // If you wanted to set a request header, such as the Accept 
header 
        req.setValue("text/json", forHTTPHeaderField: "Accept") 
    } 
Figure 20.7 shows what a simple HTTP response might look
like. While you will not be modifying the corresponding

--- Page 709 ---
HTTPURLResponse instance, it is nice to understand what it
is modeling.
Figure 20.7  HTTP response format
As you can see, the format of the response is not too different
from the request. It includes a status line, response headers,
and, of course, the response body. Yes, this is where that pesky
404 Not Found comes from! 

--- Page 710 ---
21 
Collection Views
In this chapter, you will continue working on the Photorama
application to display the interesting Flickr photos in a grid
using the UICollectionView class. This chapter will also
reinforce the data source design pattern that you used in
previous chapters. Figure 21.1 shows you what the application
will look like at the end of this chapter.

--- Page 711 ---
Figure 21.1  Photorama with a collection view


--- Page 712 ---
In Chapter 9, you worked with UITableView. Table views
are a great way to display rows of data. Like a table view, a
collection view also displays an ordered collection of items,
but instead of displaying the information in rows, the
collection view has a layout object that drives the display of
information. You will use a built-in layout object, the
UICollectionViewFlowLayout, to present the
interesting photos in a scrollable grid.

--- Page 713 ---
Displaying the Grid
Let’s tackle the interface first. You are going to change the UI
for PhotosViewController to display a collection view
instead of displaying the image view.
Open Main.storyboard and locate the Photorama scene.
You want to delete both the image view and the background
view. To do this, select the background view in the document
outline and press Delete. Now, drag a Collection View onto the
canvas.
Because it is the rear-most view, the collection view will be
pinned to the top of the entire view instead of to the top of the
safe area. This is useful for scroll views (and their subclasses,
like UITableView and UICollectionView) so that the
content will scroll underneath the navigation bar. The scroll
view will automatically update its insets to make the content
visible. (You might have noticed this with LootLogger’s table
view.)
The canvas will now look like Figure 21.2.

--- Page 714 ---
Figure 21.2  Storyboard canvas
Currently, the collection view cells have a clear background
color. Select the collection view cell – the small rectangle in
the upper-left corner of the collection view – and give it a
black background color. Set its Identifier to PhotoCollectionViewCell
(Figure 21.3).

--- Page 715 ---
Figure 21.3  Setting the reuse identifier
The collection view is now on the canvas, but you need a way
to populate the cells with data. To do this, you will create a
new class to act as the data source of the collection view.

--- Page 716 ---
Collection View Data Source
Applications are constantly changing, so part of being a good
iOS developer is building applications in a way that allows
them to adapt to changing requirements.
The Photorama application will display a single collection view
of photos. You could do something similar to what you did in
LootLogger and make the PhotosViewController be the
data source of the collection view. The view controller would
implement the required data source methods, and everything
would work just fine.
At least, it would work for now. What if, sometime in the
future, you decided to have a different screen that also
displayed a collection view of photos? Maybe instead of
displaying the interesting photos, it would use a different web
service to display all the photos matching a search term. In this
case, you would need to reimplement the same data source
methods within the new view controller with essentially the
same code. That would not be ideal.
Instead, you will abstract out the collection view data source
code into a new class. This class will be responsible for
responding to data source questions – and it will be reusable if
necessary.
Create a new Swift file named PhotoDataSource and
declare the PhotoDataSource class.
Listing 21.1  Creating the PhotoDataSource class
(PhotoDataSource.swift)
import Foundation
import UIKit 
 
class PhotoDataSource: NSObject, UICollectionViewDataSource { 
 
    var photos = [Photo]() 

--- Page 717 ---
 
}
To conform to the UICollectionViewDataSource
protocol, a type also needs to conform to the
NSObjectProtocol. The easiest and most common way to
conform to this protocol is to subclass from NSObject, as
you did above.
The UICollectionViewDataSource protocol declares
two required methods to implement:
    func collectionView(_ collectionView: UICollectionView, 
                        numberOfItemsInSection section: Int) -> Int 
    func collectionView(_ collectionView: UICollectionView, 
                        cellForItemAt indexPath: IndexPath) -> 
UICollectionViewCell 
You might notice that these two methods look very similar to
the two required methods of UITableViewDataSource
that you saw in Chapter 9. The first data source callback asks
how many cells to display, and the second asks for the
UICollectionViewCell to display for a given index
path.
Implement these two methods in
PhotoDataSource.swift.
Listing 21.2  Implementing the collection view data
source methods (PhotoDataSource.swift)
class PhotoDataSource: NSObject, UICollectionViewDataSource { 
 
    var photos = [Photo]() 
 
    func collectionView(_ collectionView: UICollectionView, 
                        numberOfItemsInSection section: Int) -> Int { 
        return photos.count 
    } 
 
    func collectionView(_ collectionView: UICollectionView, 
                        cellForItemAt indexPath: IndexPath) -> 
UICollectionViewCell { 
 
        let identifier = "PhotoCollectionViewCell" 
        let cell = 
            collectionView.dequeueReusableCell(withReuseIdentifier: 
identifier, 
                                               for: indexPath) 
 

--- Page 718 ---
        return cell 
    } 
} 
Next, the collection view needs to know that an instance of
PhotoDataSource is the data source object.
In PhotosViewController.swift, add a property to
reference an instance of PhotoDataSource and an outlet
for a UICollectionView instance. Also, you will not need
the imageView anymore, so delete it.
Listing 21.3  Declaring new properties for collection
view support (PhotosViewController.swift)
class PhotosViewController: UIViewController { 
 
    @IBOutlet var imageView: UIImageView! 
    @IBOutlet var collectionView: UICollectionView! 
 
    var store: PhotoStore! 
    let photoDataSource = PhotoDataSource()
Without the imageView property, you will not need the
method updateImageView(for:) anymore. Go ahead
and remove that, too.
Listing 21.4  Removing updateImageView(_:)
(PhotosViewController.swift)
func updateImageView(for photo: Photo) { 
    store.fetchImage(for: photo) { 
        (imageResult) -> Void in 
 
        switch imageResult { 
        case let .success(image): 
            self.imageView.image = image 
        case let .failure(error): 
            print("Error downloading image: \(error)") 
        } 
    }
}
Update viewDidLoad() to set the data source on the
collection view.

--- Page 719 ---
Listing 21.5  Setting the collection view data source
(PhotosViewController.swift)
override func viewDidLoad() { 
    super.viewDidLoad() 
 
    collectionView.dataSource = photoDataSource
Finally, update the photoDataSource instance with the
result of the web service request and reload the collection
view.
Listing 21.6  Updating the collection view with the
web service data (PhotosViewController.swift)
override func viewDidLoad() { 
    super.viewDidLoad() 
 
    collectionView.dataSource = photoDataSource 
 
    store.fetchInterestingPhotos { 
        (photosResult) -> Void in 
 
        switch photosResult { 
        case let .success(photos): 
            print("Successfully found \(photos.count) photos.") 
            if let firstPhoto = photos.first { 
                self.updateImageView(for: firstPhoto) 
            } 
            self.photoDataSource.photos = photos 
        case let .failure(error): 
            print("Error fetching interesting photos: \(error)") 
            self.photoDataSource.photos.removeAll() 
        } 
        self.collectionView.reloadSections(IndexSet(integer: 0)) 
    } 
} 
The last thing you need to do is make the collectionView
outlet connection.
Open Main.storyboard and navigate to the collection
view. Control-drag from the Photorama view controller to the
collection view and connect it to the collectionView outlet.
Build and run the application. After the web service request
completes, check the console to confirm that photos were
found. In the running app, there will be a grid of black squares
corresponding to the number of photos found (Figure 21.4).

--- Page 720 ---
These cells are arranged in a flow layout. A flow layout fits
as many cells on a row as possible before flowing down to the
next row. If you rotate the iOS device, you will see the cells
fill the given area.

--- Page 721 ---
Figure 21.4  Initial flow layout


--- Page 722 ---
Customizing the Layout
The display of cells is not driven by the collection view itself
but by the collection view’s layout. The layout object is
responsible for the placement of cells onscreen. Layouts, in
turn, are driven by a subclass of
UICollectionViewLayout.
The layout that Photorama is currently using is
UICollectionViewFlowLayout, which is the only
concrete UICollectionViewLayout subclass provided
by the UIKit framework.
Some of the properties you can customize on
UICollectionViewFlowLayout are:
scrollDirection
Do you want to scroll vertically or horizontally?
minimumLineSpacing
What is the minimum spacing between lines?
minimumInteritemSpacing
What is the minimum spacing between items in a row
(or column, if scrolling horizontally)?
itemSize
What is the size of each item?
sectionInset
What are the margins used to lay out content for each
section?
Figure 21.5 shows how these properties affect the presentation
of cells using UICollectionViewFlowLayout.

--- Page 723 ---
Figure 21.5  UICollectionViewFlowLayout
properties


--- Page 724 ---
You will use some of these properties to make the photos in
your collection view larger and closer together.
Open Main.storyboard and select the collection view.
Open the size inspector and configure the Cell Size, Estimate Size,
Min Spacing, and Section Insets as shown in Figure 21.6. 
Figure 21.6  Collection view size inspector
You learned in Chapter 10 that setting the
estimatedRowHeight for a table view cell can improve

--- Page 725 ---
performance. A collection view flow layout’s
estimatedItemCell serves the same purpose.
Build and run the application to see how the layout has
changed.

--- Page 726 ---
Creating a Custom
UICollectionViewCell
Next you are going to create a custom
UICollectionViewCell subclass to display the photos.
While the image data is downloading, the collection view cell
will display a spinning activity indicator using the
UIActivityIndicatorView class.
Create a new Swift file named
PhotoCollectionViewCell and define
PhotoCollectionViewCell as a subclass of
UICollectionViewCell. Then add outlets to reference
the image view and the activity indicator view.
Listing 21.7  Creating the
PhotoCollectionViewCell class
(PhotoCollectionViewCell.swift)
import Foundation
import UIKit 
 
class PhotoCollectionViewCell: UICollectionViewCell { 
 
    @IBOutlet var imageView: UIImageView! 
    @IBOutlet var spinner: UIActivityIndicatorView! 
 
}
The activity indicator view should only spin when the cell is
not displaying an image. Instead of always updating the
spinner when the imageView is updated, or vice versa,
you will write a helper method to take care of it for you.
Create this helper method in
PhotoCollectionViewCell.swift.
Listing 21.8  Updating the cell contents
(PhotoCollectionViewCell.swift)

--- Page 727 ---
func update(displaying image: UIImage?) { 
    if let imageToDisplay = image { 
        spinner.stopAnimating() 
        imageView.image = imageToDisplay 
    } else { 
        spinner.startAnimating() 
        imageView.image = nil 
    }
}
You will use a prototype cell to set up the interface for the
collection view cell in the storyboard, just as you did in
Chapter 10 for ItemCell. If you recall, each prototype cell
corresponds to a visually unique cell with a unique reuse
identifier. Most of the time, the prototype cells will be
associated with different UICollectionViewCell
subclasses to provide behavior specific to that kind of cell.
In the collection view’s attributes inspector, you can adjust the
number of Items that the collection view displays, and each
item corresponds to a prototype cell in the canvas. For
Photorama, you only need one kind of cell: the
PhotoCollectionViewCell that displays a photo.
Open Main.storyboard and select the collection view
cell. In the identity inspector, change the Class to
PhotoCollectionViewCell (Figure 21.7).
Figure 21.7  Changing the cell class


--- Page 728 ---
Drag an image view onto the Photo Collection View Cell. Add
constraints to pin the image view to the edges of the cell. Open
the attributes inspector for the image view and set the Content
Mode to Aspect Fill. This will cut off parts of the photos, but it
will allow the photos to completely fill in the collection view
cell.
Next, drag an activity indicator view on top of the image view.
Add constraints to center the activity indicator view both
horizontally and vertically with the image view. Open its
attributes inspector and configure it as shown in Figure 21.8.
Figure 21.8  Configuring the activity indicator
Select the collection view cell again. This can be a bit tricky to
do on the canvas, because the newly added subviews
completely cover the cell itself. A helpful Interface Builder tip is
to hold Control and Shift together and then click on top of the
view you want to select. You will be presented with a list of all
the views and controllers under the point you clicked on
(Figure 21.9).

--- Page 729 ---
Figure 21.9  Selecting the cell on the canvas
With the cell selected, open the connections inspector and
connect the imageView and spinner properties to the image view
and activity indicator view on the canvas (Figure 21.10).

--- Page 730 ---
Figure 21.10  Connecting
PhotoCollectionViewCell outlets
Next, open PhotoDataSource.swift and update the data
source method to use PhotoCollectionViewCell.
Listing 21.9  Dequeuing
PhotoCollectionViewCell instances
(PhotoDataSource.swift)
func collectionView(_ collectionView: UICollectionView, 
                    cellForItemAt indexPath: IndexPath) -> 
UICollectionViewCell { 
 
    let identifier = "PhotoCollectionViewCell" 
    let cell = 
        collectionView.dequeueReusableCell(withReuseIdentifier: 
identifier, 

--- Page 731 ---
                                           for: indexPath) as! 
PhotoCollectionViewCell 
    cell.update(displaying: nil) 
 
    return cell 
} 
Build and run the application. When the interesting photos
request completes, you will see the activity indicator views all
spinning (Figure 21.11). 
Figure 21.11  Custom collection view subclass


--- Page 733 ---
Downloading the Image Data
Now all that is left is downloading the image data for the
photos that come back in the request. This task is not very
difficult, but it requires some thought. Images are large files,
and downloading them could eat up your users’ cellular data
allowance. As a considerate iOS developer, you want to make
sure your app’s data usage is only what it needs to be.
Consider your options. You could download the image data in
viewDidLoad() when the
fetchInterestingPhotos(completion:) method
calls its completion closure. At that point, you already assign
the incoming photos to the photos property, so you could
iterate over the photos and download their image data then.
Although this would work, it would be very costly. There
could be a large number of photos coming back in the initial
request, and the user may never even scroll down in the
application far enough to see some of them. Also, if you
initialize too many requests simultaneously, some of the
requests may time out while waiting for other requests to
finish. So this is probably not the best solution.
Instead, it makes sense to download the image data only for
the cells that the user is attempting to view.
UICollectionView has a mechanism to support this
through its UICollectionViewDelegate method
collectionView(_:willDisplay:forItemAt:).
This delegate method will be called every time a cell is getting
displayed onscreen and is a great opportunity to download the
image data.
Recall that the data for the collection view is driven by an
instance of PhotoDataSource, a reusable class with the
single responsibility of providing the data for a collection view

--- Page 734 ---
that will display the photos. Collection views also have a
delegate, which is responsible for handling user interaction
with the collection view. This includes tasks such as managing
cell selection and tracking cells coming into and out of view.
This responsibility is more tightly coupled with the view
controller itself, so whereas the data source is an instance of
PhotoDataSource, the collection view’s delegate will be
the PhotosViewController.
In PhotosViewController.swift, have the class
conform to the UICollectionViewDelegate protocol.
Listing 21.10  Conforming to
UICollectionViewDelegate
(PhotosViewController.swift)
class PhotosViewController: UIViewController, UICollectionViewDelegate { 
(Because the UICollectionViewDelegate protocol
only defines optional methods, Xcode does not report any errors
when you add this declaration.)
Update viewDidLoad() to set the
PhotosViewController as the delegate of the collection
view.
Listing 21.11  Setting the collection view delegate
(PhotosViewController.swift)
override func viewDidLoad() { 
    super.viewDidLoad() 
 
    collectionView.dataSource = photoDataSource 
    collectionView.delegate = self
Finally, implement the delegate method. 
Listing 21.12  Fetching the cell’s image
(PhotosViewController.swift)

--- Page 735 ---
func collectionView(_ collectionView: UICollectionView, 
                    willDisplay cell: UICollectionViewCell, 
                    forItemAt indexPath: IndexPath) { 
 
    let photo = photoDataSource.photos[indexPath.row] 
 
    // Download the image data, which could take some time 
    store.fetchImage(for: photo) { (result) -> Void in 
 
        // The index path for the photo might have changed between the 
        // time the request started and finished, so find the most 
        // recent index path 
        guard let photoIndex = 
self.photoDataSource.photos.firstIndex(of: photo), 
            case let .success(image) = result else { 
                return 
        } 
        let photoIndexPath = IndexPath(item: photoIndex, section: 0) 
 
        // When the request finishes, find the current cell for this 
photo 
        if let cell = self.collectionView.cellForItem(at: 
photoIndexPath) 
                                                     as? 
PhotoCollectionViewCell { 
            cell.update(displaying: image) 
        } 
    }
}
(You will have an error on the line where you find photo’s
index. You will fix it shortly.)
Notice the comment mentioning that the photo’s index path
might have changed. Why might this happen? Fetching the
image data is an asynchronous operation and might take some
time. If other photos are inserted or deleted while the
download is in progress, the photo’s index path could change –
or no longer exist. Also, if the user scrolls the photo offscreen
before the download completes, there would be no cell to
update. To account for these possibilities, you need to fetch the
latest index path for the photo and update the corresponding
cell.
You are using a new form of pattern matching here to check
for a specific enumeration case. The result that is returned
from fetchImage(for:completion:) is an
enumeration with two cases: success and failure.
Because you only need to handle the success case, you
match a pattern in the guard statement to check whether
result has a value of success.

--- Page 736 ---
Compare the following code to see how you could use pattern
matching in an if statement versus a switch statement.
This code:
    if case let .success(image) = result { 
        photo.image = image 
    } 
behaves just like this code:
    switch result { 
    case let .success(image): 
        photo.image = image 
    case .failure: 
        break 
    } 
Let’s fix the error you see when finding the index of photo in
the photos array. The firstIndex(of:) method works
by comparing the item that you are looking for to each of the
items in the collection. It does this using the == operator, but
Photo does not yet implement this operator to define how
two instances are “equal.” To fix this, Photo must conform to
the Equatable protocol, which requires implementation of
the == operator.
In Photo.swift, use an extension to declare that Photo
conforms to the Equatable protocol and to implement the
required overloading of the == operator.
Listing 21.13  Defining Photo equality
(Photo.swift)
class Photo: Codable { 
    ... 
} 
 
extension Photo: Equatable { 
    static func == (lhs: Photo, rhs: Photo) -> Bool { 
        // Two Photos are the same if they have the same photoID 
        return lhs.photoID == rhs.photoID 
    }
}

--- Page 737 ---
Recall from Chapter 17 that extensions are often used to group
protocol requirements. This can be an effective way to
organize your code.
Build and run the application. The image data will download
for the cells visible onscreen (Figure 21.12). Scroll down to
make more cells visible. At first, you will see the activity
indicator views spinning, but soon the image data for those
cells will load.
Figure 21.12  Image downloads in progress


--- Page 738 ---
If you scroll back up, you will see a delay in loading the image
data for the previously visible cells. This is because whenever
a cell comes onscreen, the image data is redownloaded. To fix
this, you will implement image caching, similar to what you
did in the LootLogger application.
IMAGE CACHING
In fact, your image caching for Photorama will not just be
similar to what you did in LootLogger. You are going to use the
same ImageStore class that you wrote for that project.
Open LootLogger.xcodeproj and drag the
ImageStore.swift file from the LootLogger application to
the Photorama application. Make sure to choose Copy items if
needed. Once the ImageStore.swift file has been added
to Photorama, you can close the LootLogger project.
Back in Photorama, open PhotoStore.swift and give it a
property for an ImageStore.
Listing 21.14  Adding an ImageStore property
(PhotoStore.swift)

--- Page 739 ---
class PhotoStore { 
 
    let imageStore = ImageStore()
Then update fetchImage(for:completion:) to save
the images using the imageStore.
Listing 21.15  Using the image store to cache images
(PhotoStore.swift)
func fetchImage(for photo: Photo, 
                completion: @escaping (Result<UIImage, Error>) -> Void) 
{ 
 
    let photoKey = photo.photoID 
    if let image = imageStore.image(forKey: photoKey) { 
        OperationQueue.main.addOperation { 
            completion(.success(image)) 
        } 
        return 
    } 
 
    guard let photoURL = photo.remoteURL else { 
        completion(.failure(PhotoError.missingImageURL)) 
        return 
    } 
    let request = URLRequest(url: photoURL) 
 
    let task = session.dataTask(with: request) { 
        (data, response, error) -> Void in 
 
        let result = self.processImageRequest(data: data, error: error) 
 
        if case let .success(image) = result { 
            self.imageStore.setImage(image, forKey: photoKey) 
        } 
 
        OperationQueue.main.addOperation { 
            completion(result) 
        } 
    } 
    task.resume() 
} 
Build and run the application. Now when the image data is
downloaded, it will be saved to the filesystem. The next time
that photo is requested, it will be loaded from the filesystem if
it is not currently in memory.

--- Page 740 ---
Navigating to a Photo
In this section, you are going to add functionality to allow a
user to navigate to and display a single photo.
Create a new Swift file named
PhotoInfoViewController, declare the
PhotoInfoViewController class, and add an
imageView outlet.
Listing 21.16  Creating the
PhotoInfoViewController class
(PhotoInfoViewController.swift)
import Foundation
import UIKit 
 
class PhotoInfoViewController: UIViewController { 
 
    @IBOutlet var imageView: UIImageView!
}
Now set up the interface for this view controller. Open
Main.storyboard and drag a new View Controller onto the
canvas from the library. With this view controller selected,
open its identity inspector and change the Class to
PhotoInfoViewController.
Add an image view to the Photo Info View Controller’s view. Set up
its Auto Layout constraints to pin the image view to all four
sides of the safe area. Open the attributes inspector for the
image view and confirm that its Content Mode is set to Aspect Fit.
Finally, connect the image view to the imageView outlet in
the PhotoInfoViewController.
When the user taps on one of the collection view cells, the
application will navigate to this new view controller. Control-
drag from the PhotoCollectionViewCell to the Photo Info View
Controller and select the Show segue. With the new segue

--- Page 741 ---
selected, open its attributes inspector and give the segue an
Identifier of showPhoto (Figure 21.13).

--- Page 742 ---
Figure 21.13  Navigation to a photo


--- Page 743 ---
When the user taps a cell, the showPhoto segue will be
triggered. At this point, the PhotosViewController will
need to pass both the Photo and the PhotoStore to the
PhotoInfoViewController.
Open PhotoInfoViewController.swift and add two
properties.
Listing 21.17  Adding a Photo property
(PhotoInfoViewController.swift)
class PhotoInfoViewController: UIViewController { 
 
    @IBOutlet var imageView: UIImageView! 
 
    var photo: Photo! { 
        didSet { 
            navigationItem.title = photo.title 
        } 
    } 
    var store: PhotoStore! 
} 
When photo is set on this view controller, the navigation
item will be updated to display the name of the photo.
Now override viewDidLoad() to set the image on the
imageView when the view is loaded.
Listing 21.18  Updating the interface with the photo
(PhotoInfoViewController.swift)
override func viewDidLoad() { 
    super.viewDidLoad() 
 
    store.fetchImage(for: photo) { (result) -> Void in 
        switch result { 
        case let .success(image): 
            self.imageView.image = image 
        case let .failure(error): 
            print("Error fetching image for photo: \(error)") 
        } 
    }
}
In PhotosViewController.swift, implement
prepare(for:sender:) to pass along the photo and the
store.

--- Page 744 ---
Listing 21.19  Injecting the photo and store
(PhotosViewController.swift)
override func prepare(for segue: UIStoryboardSegue, sender: Any?) { 
    switch segue.identifier { 
    case "showPhoto": 
        if let selectedIndexPath = 
                collectionView.indexPathsForSelectedItems?.first { 
 
            let photo = photoDataSource.photos[selectedIndexPath.row] 
 
            let destinationVC = segue.destination as! 
PhotoInfoViewController 
            destinationVC.photo = photo 
            destinationVC.store = store 
        } 
    default: 
        preconditionFailure("Unexpected segue identifier.") 
    }
}
Build and run the application. After the web service request
has finished, tap one of the photos to see it in the new view
controller (Figure 21.14).
Figure 21.14  Displaying a photo


--- Page 745 ---
Collection views are a powerful way to display data using a
flexible layout. You have just barely tapped into the power of
collection views in this chapter. See Apple’s guide on
Customizing Collection View Layouts to learn more.

--- Page 746 ---
Bronze Challenge: Horizontal Scrolling
Have the collection view scroll horizontally instead of
vertically.

--- Page 747 ---
Silver Challenge: Updated Item Sizes
Have the collection view always display four items per row,
taking up as much of the screen width as possible. This should
work in both portrait and landscape orientations. Consider
making adjustments to the flow layout in the
viewDidLayoutSubviews() method.

--- Page 748 ---
22 
Core Data
When deciding between approaches to saving and loading for
iOS applications, the first question is “Local or remote?” If
you want to save data to a remote server, you will likely use a
web service. If you want to store data locally, you have to ask
another question: “Archiving or Core Data?”
Your LootLogger application leveraged the Codable APIs
along with a PropertyListEncoder to serialize your data
so it could be persisted to the filesystem. The biggest
drawback to that mode of archiving is its all-or-nothing nature:
To access anything in the archive, you must deserialize the
entire file, and to save any changes, you must serialize the
entire file.
Core Data, on the other hand, can fetch a subset of the stored
objects. And if you change just one object, you can update
only that object. This incremental fetching, updating, deleting,
and inserting can radically improve the performance of your
application when you have a lot of model objects being
shuttled between the filesystem and RAM.

--- Page 749 ---
Object Graphs
Core Data is a framework that lets you express what your
model objects are and how they are related to one another.
This collection of model objects is often called an object
graph, as the objects can be thought of as nodes and the
relationships as vertices in a mathematical graph. Core Data
takes control of the lifetimes of these objects, making sure the
relationships are kept up to date. When you save and load the
objects, Core Data makes sure everything is consistent.
Often you will have Core Data save your object graph to a
SQLite database. Developers who are used to other SQL
technologies might expect to treat Core Data like an object-
relational mapping system, but this mindset will lead to
confusion. Unlike an ORM, Core Data takes complete control
of the storage, which just happens to be a relational database.
You do not have to describe things like the database schema
and foreign keys – Core Data does that. You just tell Core Data
what needs storing and let it work out how that is represented
on the filesystem.
Core Data gives you the ability to fetch and store data in a
relational database without having to know the details of the
underlying storage mechanism. This chapter will give you an
understanding of Core Data as you add persistence to the
Photorama application.

--- Page 750 ---
Entities
A relational database has something called a table. A table
represents a type: You can have a table of people, a table of a
credit card purchases, or a table of real estate listings. Each
table has a number of columns to hold pieces of information
about the type. A table that represents people might have
columns for last name, date of birth, and height. Every row in
the table represents an example of the type – e.g., a single
person.
This organization translates well to Swift. Every table is like a
Swift type. Every column is one of the type’s properties. Every
row is an instance of that type. Thus, Core Data’s job is to
move data to and from these two representations (Figure 22.1).
Figure 22.1  Role of Core Data
Core Data uses different terminology to describe these ideas:
A table/type is called an entity, and the columns/properties
are called attributes. A Core Data model file is the

--- Page 751 ---
description of every entity along with its attributes in your
application. In Photorama, you are going to describe a Photo
entity in a model file and give it attributes like title,
remoteURL, and dateTaken.
MODELING ENTITIES
The project currently uses an instance of JSONDecoder to
map the incoming JSON into model objects for the application
to use, and this is still a good idea to avoid manually parsing
the JSON. You are about to create a new type to represent a
Photo entity, but it will be problematic to have this entity
also handle the JSON decoding. It works well to separate the
JSON decoding responsibility from the rest of Photo’s
responsibilities, so these will be handled by separate types.
The existing Photo type will be renamed to FlickrPhoto,
and the new entity will be called Photo.
Open Photorama.xcodeproj. In Photo.swift,
Control-click the Photo class and select Refactor → Rename....
Enter FlickrPhoto as the new class name, but do not click
Rename yet. While FlickrAPI will use FlickrPhoto, the
rest of the app will use a Core Data Photo entity, so you do
not want to rename all existing instances of Photo. Within
the rename dialog, uncheck the checkboxes for
PhotoStore.swift, PhotoDataSource.swift, and
PhotoInfoViewController.swift (Figure 22.2).
Once you have done that, click Rename to finalize the
operation.

--- Page 752 ---
Figure 22.2  Renaming the Photo class
There will be some errors in the project now, since there are
references to a Photo type that no longer exists. That is OK;
you will fix these errors shortly.

--- Page 753 ---
Now create a new file, but do not make it a Swift file like the
ones you have created before. Instead, select iOS at the top and
scroll down to the Core Data section. Create a new Data Model
file (Figure 22.3). Name it Photorama.
Figure 22.3  Creating the model file
This will create the Photorama.xcdatamodeld file and
add it to your project. Select this file from the project
navigator and the editor area will reveal the UI for
manipulating a Core Data model file.

--- Page 754 ---
Find the Add Entity button at the bottom left of the window and
click it. A new entity will appear in the list of entities in the
lefthand table. Double-click this entity and change its name to
Photo (Figure 22.4).
Figure 22.4  Creating the Photo entity


--- Page 755 ---
Now your Photo entity needs attributes. Remember that these
will be the properties of the Photo class. The necessary
attributes are listed below. For each attribute, click the 
button in the Attributes section and edit the Attribute and Type
values.
photoID – a String
title – a String
dateTaken – a Date
remoteURL – a URI
When you are done, your model will look like Figure 22.5.

--- Page 756 ---
Figure 22.5  Photo entity with attributes
Let’s fix some of the errors currently in the project. (If you do
not see any errors, you might need to build the project.)

--- Page 757 ---
By default, all attributes for a Core Data entity are optional.
Core Data uses the term “optional” to mean something slightly
different than Swift optionals. In Core Data, a non-optional
attribute must have a value at the time it is saved; it does not
need to have a value prior to being saved. Because of this
contract, Core Data entity attributes are always represented by
Swift optional properties.
This means that while photoID is a String in the Core Data
model editor, it is represented by a String? in code. This is
the cause of some of the current errors.
Open PhotoStore.swift and navigate to
fetchImage(for:completion:). Take a look at the
errors you see in this method.
    Value of optional type 'String?' must be unwrapped to a value of 
type 'String' 
To fix this, you will unwrap the optional at the beginning of
the method.
At the beginning of fetchImage(for:completion:),
unwrap photoKey into a non-optional string. Although this
type is optional, in practice it will always have a value.
Listing 22.1  Unwrapping the photoKey
(PhotoStore.swift)
func fetchImage(for photo: Photo, 
                completion: @escaping (Result<UIImage, Error>) -> Void) 
{ 
 
    guard let photoKey = photo.photoID else { 
        preconditionFailure("Photo expected to have a photoID.") 
    } 
 
    let request = URLRequest(url: photoURL) 
Build the project. While you will still have errors in the
project, the errors in fetchImage(for:completion:)
should be resolved.

--- Page 758 ---
NSMANAGEDOBJECT AND SUBCLASSES
When an object is fetched with Core Data, its class, by default,
is NSManagedObject. NSManagedObject is a subclass
of NSObject that knows how to cooperate with the rest of
Core Data. An NSManagedObject works a bit like a
dictionary: It holds a key-value pair for every property
(attribute or relationship) in the entity.
An NSManagedObject is little more than a data container.
If you need your model objects to do something in addition to
holding data, you must subclass NSManagedObject. Then,
in your model file, you specify that this entity is represented
by instances of your subclass, not the standard
NSManagedObject.
Xcode can generate NSManagedObject subclasses for you
based on what you have defined in your Core Data model file.
Open Photorama.xcdatamodeld, select the Photo entity,
and open the data model inspector by clicking the right-most
icon in the inspector area. Locate the Codegen option and select
Manual/None.
With the Photo entity still selected, open Xcode’s Editor menu and
select Create NSManagedObject Subclass…. On the screens that
follow, make sure the checkbox for Photorama is checked and
click Next, then make sure the checkbox for the Photo entity is
checked and click Next again. Finally, click Create.
The template will create two files for you:
Photo+CoreDataClass.swift and
Photo+CoreDataProperties.swift. The template
places all the attributes that you defined in the model file into
Photo+CoreDataProperties.swift. If you ever
change your entity in the model file, you can simply delete
Photo+CoreDataProperties.swift and regenerate
the NSManagedObject subclass. Xcode will recognize that

--- Page 759 ---
you already have Photo+CoreDataClass.swift and
will only re-create
Photo+CoreDataProperties.swift.
Open Photo+CoreDataProperties.swift and take a
look at what the template created for you.
All the properties are marked with the @NSManaged
keyword. This keyword, which is specific to Core Data, lets
the compiler know that the storage and implementation of
these properties will be provided at runtime. Because Core
Data will create the NSManagedObject instances, you can
no longer use a custom initializer, so the properties are
declared as variables instead of constants. If you wanted to add
computed properties or convenience methods, you would add
them to Photo+CoreDataClass.swift, keeping
Photo+CoreDataProperties.swift unchanged.
You have created your data model and defined your Photo
entity. The next step is to set up the persistent container, which
will manage the interactions between the application and Core
Data. 

--- Page 760 ---
NSPersistentContainer
Core Data is represented by a collection of classes often
referred to as the Core Data stack. This collection of classes
is abstracted away from you via the
NSPersistentContainer class. You will learn more
about the Core Data stack classes in the For the More Curious
section at the end of this chapter.
To use Core Data, you will need to import the Core Data
framework in the files that need it.
Open PhotoStore.swift and import Core Data at the top
of the file.
Listing 22.2  Importing Core Data
(PhotoStore.swift)
import UIKit 
import CoreData
Also in PhotoStore.swift, add a property to hold on to
an instance of NSPersistentContainer.
Listing 22.3  Adding an NSPersistentContainer
property (PhotoStore.swift)
class PhotoStore { 
 
    let imageStore = ImageStore() 
 
    let persistentContainer: NSPersistentContainer = { 
        let container = NSPersistentContainer(name: "Photorama") 
        container.loadPersistentStores { (description, error) in 
            if let error = error { 
                print("Error setting up Core Data (\(error)).") 
            } 
        } 
        return container 
    }()

--- Page 761 ---
You instantiate an NSPersistentContainer with a
name. This name must match the name of the data model file
that describes your entities. After creating the container, it
needs to load its persistent stores. The store is where the data
is actually stored on disk. By default, this is going to be a
SQLite database. Due to the possibility of this operation taking
some time, loading the persistent stores is an asynchronous
operation that calls a completion handler when complete.

--- Page 762 ---
Updating Items
With the persistent container set up, you can now interact with
Core Data. Primarily, you will do this through its
viewContext. This is how you will both create new entities
and save changes.
The viewContext is an instance of
NSManagedObjectContext. This is the portal through
which you interact with your entities. You can think of the
managed object context as an intelligent scratch pad. When
you ask the context to fetch some entities, the context will
work with its persistent store to bring temporary copies of the
entities and object graph into memory. Unless you ask the
context to save its changes, the persisted data remains the
same.
INSERTING INTO THE CONTEXT
When an entity is created, it should be inserted into a managed
object context.
Update processPhotosRequest(data:error:) to
use a managed object context to insert new Photo instances.
Listing 22.4  Inserting a Photo into a context
(PhotoStore.swift)
private func processPhotosRequest(data: Data?, 
                                  error: Error?) -> Result<[Photo], 
Error> { 
    guard let jsonData = data else { 
        return .failure(error!) 
    } 
 
    return FlickrAPI.photos(fromJSON: jsonData) 
 
    let context = persistentContainer.viewContext 
 
    switch FlickrAPI.photos(fromJSON: jsonData) { 
    case let .success(flickrPhotos): 
        let photos = flickrPhotos.map { flickrPhoto -> Photo in 
            var photo: Photo! 

--- Page 763 ---
            context.performAndWait { 
                photo = Photo(context: context) 
                photo.title = flickrPhoto.title 
                photo.photoID = flickrPhoto.photoID 
                photo.remoteURL = flickrPhoto.remoteURL 
                photo.dateTaken = flickrPhoto.dateTaken 
            } 
            return photo 
        } 
        return .success(photos) 
    case let .failure(error): 
        return .failure(error) 
    } 
} 
Each NSManagedObjectContext is associated with a
specific queue, and the viewContext is associated with the
main queue (Core Data uses the term “queue” instead of
“thread”). You have to interact with a context on the queue
that it is associated with.
NSManagedObjectContext has two methods that ensure
this happens: perform(_:) and performAndWait(_:).
The difference between them is that perform(_:) is
asynchronous and performAndWait(_:) is synchronous.
Because you are returning the result of the insert operation
from the photo(fromJSON:into:) method, you use the
synchronous method.
You are using the map method on Array to transform one
array into another array. This code:
    let numbers = [1, 2, 3] 
    let doubledNumbers = numbers.map { $0 * $0 } 
has the same result as this code:
    let numbers = [1, 2, 3] 
    var doubledNumbers = [Int]() 
    for number in numbers { 
        doubledNumbers.append(number * number) 
    } 
Build and run the application. Although the behavior remains
unchanged, the application is now backed by Core Data. In the
next section, you will implement saving for both the photos
and their associated image data.

--- Page 764 ---
SAVING CHANGES
Recall that NSManagedObject changes do not persist until
you tell the context to save these changes.
Open PhotoStore.swift and update
fetchInterestingPhotos(completion:) to save
the changes to the context after Photo entities have been
inserted into the context.
Listing 22.5  Saving photos on successful fetch
(PhotoStore.swift)
func fetchInterestingPhotos(completion: @escaping (Result<[Photo], 
Error>) -> Void) { 
 
    let url = FlickrAPI.interestingPhotosURL 
    let request = URLRequest(url: url) 
    let task = session.dataTask(with: request) { 
        (data, response, error) -> Void in 
 
        let result = self.processPhotosRequest(data: data, error: error) 
        var result = self.processPhotosRequest(data: data, error: error) 
        if case .success = result { 
            do { 
                try self.persistentContainer.viewContext.save() 
            } catch { 
                result = .failure(error) 
            } 
        } 
 
        OperationQueue.main.addOperation { 
            completion(result) 
        } 
    } 
    task.resume() 
} 

--- Page 765 ---
Updating the Data Source
One problem with the app at the moment is that
fetchInterestingPhotos(completion:) only
returns the newly inserted photos. Now that the application
supports saving, it should return all the photos – the previously
saved photos as well as the newly inserted ones. You need to
ask Core Data for all the Photo entities, and you will
accomplish this using a fetch request.
FETCH REQUESTS AND PREDICATES
To get objects back from the NSManagedObjectContext,
you must prepare and execute an NSFetchRequest. After a
fetch request is executed, you will get an array of all the
objects that match the parameters of that request.
A fetch request needs an entity description that defines which
entity you want to get objects from. To fetch Photo instances,
you specify the Photo entity. You can also set the request’s
sort descriptors to specify the order of the objects in the
array. A sort descriptor has a key that maps to an attribute of
the entity and a Bool that indicates whether the order should
be ascending or descending.
The sortDescriptors property on NSFetchRequest is
an array of NSSortDescriptor instances. Why an array?
The array is useful if you think there might be collisions when
sorting. For example, say you are sorting an array of people by
their last names. It is entirely possible that multiple people
have the same last name, so you can specify that people with
the same last name should be sorted by their first names. This
would be implemented by an array of two
NSSortDescriptor instances. The first sort descriptor
would have a key that maps to the person’s last name, and the

--- Page 766 ---
second sort descriptor would have a key that maps to the
person’s first name.
A predicate is represented by the NSPredicate class and
contains a condition that can be true or false. If you wanted to
find all photos with a given identifier, you would create a
predicate and add it to the fetch request like this:
    let predicate = NSPredicate(format: "\(#keyPath(Photo.photoID)) == \
(identifier)") 
    request.predicate = predicate 
The format string for a predicate can be very long and
complex. Apple’s Predicate Programming Guide is a complete
discussion of what is possible.
You want to sort the returned instances of Photo by
dateTaken in descending order. To do this, you will
instantiate an NSFetchRequest for requesting Photo
entities. Then you will give the fetch request an array of
NSSortDescriptor instances. For Photorama, this array
will contain a single sort descriptor that sorts photos by their
dateTaken properties. Finally, you will ask the managed
object context to execute this fetch request.
In PhotoStore.swift, implement a method that will fetch
the Photo instances from the view context.
Listing 22.6  Implementing a method to fetch all
photos from disk (PhotoStore.swift)
func fetchAllPhotos(completion: @escaping (Result<[Photo], Error>) -> 
Void) { 
    let fetchRequest: NSFetchRequest<Photo> = Photo.fetchRequest() 
    let sortByDateTaken = NSSortDescriptor(key: 
#keyPath(Photo.dateTaken), 
                                           ascending: true) 
    fetchRequest.sortDescriptors = [sortByDateTaken] 
 
    let viewContext = persistentContainer.viewContext 
    viewContext.perform { 
        do { 
            let allPhotos = try viewContext.fetch(fetchRequest) 
            completion(.success(allPhotos)) 
        } catch { 
            completion(.failure(error)) 

--- Page 767 ---
        } 
    }
}
Next, open PhotosViewController.swift and add a
new method that will update the data source with all the
photos.
Listing 22.7  Implementing a method to update the
data source (PhotosViewController.swift)
private func updateDataSource() { 
    store.fetchAllPhotos { 
        (photosResult) in 
 
        switch photosResult { 
        case let .success(photos): 
            self.photoDataSource.photos = photos 
        case .failure: 
            self.photoDataSource.photos.removeAll() 
        } 
        self.collectionView.reloadSections(IndexSet(integer: 0)) 
    }
}
Now update viewDidLoad() to call this method to fetch
and display all the photos saved to Core Data.
Listing 22.8  Updating the data source after a web
service fetch (PhotosViewController.swift)
override func viewDidLoad() 
    super.viewDidLoad() 
 
    collectionView.dataSource = photoDataSource 
    collectionView.delegate = self 
 
    store.fetchInterestingPhotos { 
        (photosResult) -> Void in 
 
        switch photosResult { 
        case let .success(photos): 
            print("Successfully found \(photos.count) photos.") 
            self.photoDataSource.photos = photos 
        case let .failure(error): 
            print("Error fetching interesting photos: \(error)") 
            self.photoDataSource.photos.removeAll() 
        } 
        self.collectionView.reloadSections(IndexSet(integer: 0)) 
 
        self.updateDataSource() 
    } 
} 

--- Page 768 ---
Previously saved photos will now be returned when the web
service request finishes. But there is still one problem: If the
application is run multiple times and the same photo is
returned from the web service request, it will be inserted into
the context multiple times. This is not good – you do not want
duplicate photos.
Luckily there is a unique identifier for each photo. When the
interesting photos web service request finishes, the identifier
for each photo in the incoming JSON data can be compared to
the photos stored in Core Data. If one is found with the same
identifier, that photo will be returned. Otherwise, a new photo
will be inserted into the context.
To do this, you need a way to tell the fetch request that it
should not return all photos but instead only the photos that
match some specific criteria. In this case, the specific criteria
is “only photos that have this specific identifier,” of which
there should either be zero or one photo. In Core Data, this is
done with a predicate.
In PhotoStore.swift, update
processPhotosRequest(data:error:) to check
whether there is an existing photo with a given ID before
inserting a new one.
Listing 22.9  Fetching previously saved photos
(PhotoStore.swift)
private func processPhotosRequest(data: Data?, 
                                  error: Error?) -> Result<[Photo], 
Error> { 
    guard let jsonData = data else { 
        return .failure(error!) 
    } 
 
    let context = persistentContainer.viewContext 
 
    switch FlickrAPI.photos(fromJSON: jsonData) { 
    case let .success(flickrPhotos): 
        let photos = flickrPhotos.map { flickrPhoto -> Photo in 
            let fetchRequest: NSFetchRequest<Photo> = 
Photo.fetchRequest() 
            let predicate = NSPredicate( 
                format: "\(#keyPath(Photo.photoID)) == \
(flickrPhoto.photoID)" 
            ) 

--- Page 769 ---
            fetchRequest.predicate = predicate 
            var fetchedPhotos: [Photo]? 
            context.performAndWait { 
                fetchedPhotos = try? fetchRequest.execute() 
            } 
            if let existingPhoto = fetchedPhotos?.first { 
                return existingPhoto 
            } 
 
            var photo: Photo! 
            context.performAndWait { 
                photo = Photo(context: context) 
                photo.title = flickrPhoto.title 
                photo.photoID = flickrPhoto.photoID 
                photo.remoteURL = flickrPhoto.remoteURL 
                photo.dateTaken = flickrPhoto.dateTaken 
            } 
            return photo 
        } 
        return .success(photos) 
    case let .failure(error): 
        return .failure(error) 
    } 
} 
Duplicate photos will no longer be inserted into Core Data.
Build and run the application. The photos will appear just as
they did before introducing Core Data. Kill the application and
launch it again; you will see the photos that Core Data saved in
the collection view.
There is one last small problem to address: The user will not
see any photos appear in the collection view unless the web
service request completes. If the user has slow network access,
it might take up to 60 seconds (which is the default timeout
interval for the request) to see any photos. It would be best to
see the previously saved photos immediately on launch and
then refresh the collection view once new photos are fetched
from Flickr.
Go ahead and do this. In
PhotosViewController.swift, update the data source
as soon as the view is loaded.
Listing 22.10  Updating the data source on load
(PhotosViewController.swift)
override func viewDidLoad() 
    super.viewDidLoad() 
 

--- Page 770 ---
    collectionView.dataSource = photoDataSource 
    collectionView.delegate = self 
 
    updateDataSource() 
 
    store.fetchInterestingPhotos { 
        (photosResult) -> Void in 
 
        self.updateDataSource() 
    } 
} 
The Photorama application is now persisting its data between
runs. The photo metadata is being persisted using Core Data,
and the image data is being persisted directly to the filesystem.
As you have seen, there is no one-size-fits-all approach to data
persistence. Instead, each persistence mechanism has its own
set of benefits and drawbacks. In this chapter, you have
explored one approach, Core Data, but you have only seen the
tip of the iceberg. In Chapter 23, you will explore the Core
Data framework further to learn about relationships and
performance.

--- Page 771 ---
Silver Challenge: Photo View Count
Add an attribute to the Photo entity that tracks how many
times a photo is viewed. Display this number somewhere on
the PhotoInfoViewController interface. (Note: You
will need to regenerate the Photo files after adding the new
attribute. This is discussed in Chapter 23.)

--- Page 772 ---
For the More Curious: The Core Data
Stack
NSMANAGEDOBJECTMODEL
You worked with the model file earlier in the chapter. The
model file is where you define the entities for your application
along with their attributes. The model file is represented as an
instance of NSManagedObjectModel.
NSPERSISTENTSTORECOORDINATOR
Core Data can persist data in several formats:
                          
                   
 
                    
SQLite 
                  
                 
                   
 
                            Data is saved to disk using a SQLite 
database. This is the most commonly used store type. 
                        
                 
                   
 
                    
Atomic 
                  
                 
                   
 
                            Data is saved to disk using a binary 
format. 
                        
                 
                   
 
                    
XML 
                  
                 
                   
 
                            Data is saved to disk using an XML 
format. This store type is not available on iOS. 
                        
                 
                                      

--- Page 773 ---
 
                    
In-
Memory 
                  
                 
 
                            Data is not saved to disk, but instead 
is stored in memory. 
                        
                 
           
The mapping between an object graph and the persistent store
is accomplished using an instance of
NSPersistentStoreCoordinator. The persistent store
coordinator needs to know two things: “What are my entities?”
and, “Where am I saving to and loading data from?” To
answer these questions, you instantiate an
NSPersistentStoreCoordinator with the
NSManagedObjectModel. Then you add a persistent store,
representing one of the persistence formats above, to the
coordinator.
After the coordinator is created, a specific store is added to the
coordinator. At a minimum, this store needs to know its type
and where it should persist the data.
NSMANAGEDOBJECTCONTEXT
The portal through which you interact with your entities is the
NSManagedObjectContext. The managed object context
is associated with a specific persistent store coordinator. As we
said earlier in this chapter, you can think of the managed
object context as an intelligent scratch pad. When you ask the
context to fetch some entities, the context will work with its
persistent store coordinator to bring temporary copies of the
entities and object graph into memory. Unless you ask the
context to save its changes, the persisted data remains the
same.

--- Page 774 ---
23 
Core Data Relationships
Core Data is not that exciting with just one entity. Core Data
shines when there are multiple entities that are related to one
another, because Core Data manages relationships between
entities.
In this chapter, you are going to add tags to the photos in
Photorama with labels such as “Nature,” “Electronics,” or
“Selfies.” Users will be able to add one or more tags to photos
and also create their own custom tags (Figure 23.1).

--- Page 775 ---
Figure 23.1  Final Photorama application


--- Page 776 ---
Relationships
One of the benefits of using Core Data is that entities can be
related to one another in a way that allows you to describe
complex models. Relationships between entities are
represented by references between objects. There are two
kinds of relationships: to-one and to-many.
When an entity has a to-one relationship, each instance of that
entity has a reference to a single instance of another entity.
When an entity has a to-many relationship, each instance of
that entity has a reference to a Set. This set contains the
instances of the entity that it has a relationship with. To see
this in action, you are going to add a new entity to the model
file.
Open the Photorama application. In
Photorama.xcdatamodeld, add an entity called Tag.
Give it an attribute called name of type String. Tag will
allow users to tag photos.
In Chapter 22, you generated an NSManagedObject
subclass for the Photo entity. For Tag, you will let Xcode
autogenerate a subclass for you through a feature called code
generation. If you do not need any custom behavior for your
Core Data entity, letting Xcode generate your subclass is quite
helpful.
The NSManagedObject subclass for the Tag entity is
already being generated for you. To see the setting that
determines this, select the Tag entity and open its data model
inspector. In the Class section, notice the setting for Codegen: It
is currently set to Class Definition. This setting means that an
entire class definition will be generated for you.

--- Page 777 ---
In Chapter 22, you used the Manual/None setting (which tells
Xcode not to generate any code for the entity) for the Photo
entity. The other code generation setting is Category/Extension,
which allows you to define an NSManagedObject subclass
with custom behavior while still allowing Xcode to generate the
extension that defines the attributes and relationships.
A photo might have multiple tags that describe it, and a tag
might be associated with multiple photos. For example, a
picture of an iPhone might be tagged “Electronics” and
“Apple,” and a picture of a Betamax player might be tagged
“Electronics” and “Rare.” So the Tag entity will have a to-
many relationship to the Photo entity because many instances
of Photo can have the same Tag. And the Photo entity will
have a to-many relationship to the Tag entity because a photo
can be associated with many Tags.
As Figure 23.2 shows, a Photo will have a reference to a set
of Tags, and a Tag will have a reference to a set of Photos.

--- Page 778 ---
Figure 23.2  Entities in Photorama
When these relationships are set up, you will be able to ask a
Photo object for the set of Tag objects that it is associated
with and ask a Tag object for the set of Photo objects that it
is associated with.
To add these two relationships to the model file, first select the
Tag entity and click the 
  button in the Relationships section. For
the Relationship, enter photos. In the Destination column, select

--- Page 779 ---
Photo. In the data model inspector, change the Type menu from
To One to To Many (Figure 23.3).
Figure 23.3  Creating the photos relationship
Next, select the Photo entity. Add a relationship named tags and
pick Tag as its destination. In the data model inspector, change
the Type menu to To Many and uncheck its Optional checkbox.
Now that you have two unidirectional relationships, you can
make them into an inverse relationship. An inverse
relationship is a bidirectional relationship between two
entities. With an inverse relationship set up between Photo
and Tag, Core Data can ensure that your object graph remains
in a consistent state when any changes are made.
To create the inverse relationship, click the pop-up button next
to Inverse in the data model inspector and change it from No
Inverse Relationship to photos (Figure 23.4). (You can also make
this change in the Relationships section in the editor area by
clicking No Inverse in the Inverse column and selecting photos.)

--- Page 780 ---
Figure 23.4  Creating the tags relationship
If you return to the Tag entity, you will see that the photos
relationship now shows tags as its inverse.
Now that the model has changed for the Photo entity, you
will need to regenerate the
Photo+CoreDataProperties.swift file.
From the project navigator, select and delete the
Photo+CoreDataProperties.swift file. Make sure
to select Move to Trash when prompted. Open
Photorama.xcdatamodeld and select the Photo entity.
From the Editor menu, select Create NSManagedObject Subclass….
On the next screens, check the Photorama checkbox and click
Next, then check the Photo entity checkbox and click Next. Make
sure you are creating the file in the same directory as the
Photo+CoreDataClass.swift file; this will ensure that
Xcode will only create the necessary
Photo+CoreDataProperties.swift file. Once you
have confirmed this, click Create. 

--- Page 782 ---
Adding Tags to the Interface
When users navigate to a specific photo, they currently see
only the title of the photo and the image itself. Let’s update the
interface to include a photo’s associated tags.
Open Main.storyboard and navigate to the interface for
Photo Info View Controller. Add a toolbar to the bottom of the view.
Update the Auto Layout constraints so that the toolbar is
anchored to the bottom of the screen, just as it was in
LootLogger.
The bottom constraint for the imageView should be
anchored to the top of the toolbar instead of the bottom of the
superview. You will also want to lower the vertical content
hugging priority on the image view to be lower than that of the
toolbar. Add a UIBarButtonItem to the toolbar, if one is
not already present, and give it a title of Tags. Your interface
will look like Figure 23.5.
Figure 23.5  Photo info view controller interface


--- Page 783 ---
Create a new Swift file named TagsViewController.
Open this file and declare the TagsViewController class
as a subclass of UITableViewController. Import
UIKit and CoreData in this file.
Listing 23.1  Creating the TagsViewController
class (TagsViewController.swift)
import Foundation
import UIKit
import CoreData 
 
class TagsViewController: UITableViewController { 
 
}

--- Page 784 ---
The TagsViewController will display a list of all the
tags. The user will see and be able to select the tags that are
associated with a specific photo. The user will also be able to
add new tags from this screen. The completed interface will
look like Figure 23.6.
Figure 23.6  TagsViewController
Give the TagsViewController class a property to
reference the PhotoStore as well as a specific Photo. You
will also need a property to keep track of the currently selected
tags, which you will track using an array of IndexPath
instances.
Listing 23.2  Adding model properties
(TagsViewController.swift)
class TagsViewController: UITableViewController { 
 

--- Page 785 ---
    var store: PhotoStore! 
    var photo: Photo! 
 
    var selectedIndexPaths = [IndexPath]() 
} 
The data source for the table view will be a separate class. As
we discussed when you created PhotoDataSource in
Chapter 21, an application whose types have a single
responsibility is easier to adapt to future changes. This class
will be responsible for displaying the list of tags in the table
view.
Create a new Swift file named TagDataSource.swift.
Declare the TagDataSource class and implement the table
view data source methods. You will need to import UIKit
and CoreData.
Listing 23.3  Creating the TagDataSource class
(TagDataSource.swift)
import Foundation
import UIKit
import CoreData 
 
class TagDataSource: NSObject, UITableViewDataSource { 
 
    var tags = [Tag]() 
 
    func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, 
                   numberOfRowsInSection section: Int) -> Int { 
        return tags.count 
    } 
 
    func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, 
                   cellForRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) -> UITableViewCell 
{ 
 
        let cell = tableView.dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier: 
"UITableViewCell", 
                                                 for: indexPath) 
 
        let tag = tags[indexPath.row] 
        cell.textLabel?.text = tag.name 
 
        return cell 
    } 
 
}
Open PhotoStore.swift and define a new method that
fetches all the tags from the view context.

--- Page 786 ---
Listing 23.4  Implementing a method to fetch all tags
(PhotoStore.swift)
func fetchAllTags(completion: @escaping (Result<[Tag], Error>) -> Void) 
{ 
    let fetchRequest: NSFetchRequest<Tag> = Tag.fetchRequest() 
    let sortByName = NSSortDescriptor(key: #keyPath(Tag.name), 
ascending: true) 
    fetchRequest.sortDescriptors = [sortByName] 
 
    let viewContext = persistentContainer.viewContext 
    viewContext.perform { 
        do { 
            let allTags = try fetchRequest.execute() 
            completion(.success(allTags)) 
        } catch { 
            completion(.failure(error)) 
        } 
    }
}
Open TagsViewController.swift and set the
dataSource for the table view to be an instance of
TagDataSource.
Listing 23.5  Setting the table view’s data source
(TagsViewController.swift)
class TagsViewController: UITableViewController { 
 
    var store: PhotoStore! 
    var photo: Photo! 
 
    var selectedIndexPaths = [IndexPath]() 
 
    let tagDataSource = TagDataSource() 
 
    override func viewDidLoad() { 
        super.viewDidLoad() 
 
        tableView.dataSource = tagDataSource 
    } 
} 
Now fetch the tags and associate them with the tags property
on the data source.
Listing 23.6  Updating the tags table view
(TagsViewController.swift)
override func viewDidLoad() { 
    super.viewDidLoad() 
 

--- Page 787 ---
    tableView.dataSource = tagDataSource 
 
    updateTags() 
} 
 
private func updateTags() { 
    store.fetchAllTags { 
        (tagsResult) in 
 
        switch tagsResult { 
        case let .success(tags): 
            self.tagDataSource.tags = tags 
        case let .failure(error): 
            print("Error fetching tags: \(error).") 
        } 
 
        self.tableView.reloadSections(IndexSet(integer: 0), 
                                      with: .automatic) 
    }
}
The TagsViewController needs to manage the selection
of tags and update the Photo instance when the user selects
or deselects a tag.
In TagsViewController.swift, add the appropriate
index paths to the selectedIndexPaths array.
Listing 23.7  Updating the selected index paths
(TagsViewController.swift)
override func viewDidLoad() { 
    super.viewDidLoad() 
 
    tableView.dataSource = tagDataSource 
    tableView.delegate = self 
 
    updateTags() 
} 
 
func updateTags() { 
    store.fetchAllTags { 
        (tagsResult) in 
 
        switch tagsResult { 
        case let .success(tags): 
            self.tagDataSource.tags = tags 
 
            guard let photoTags = self.photo.tags as? Set<Tag> else { 
                return 
            } 
 
            for tag in photoTags { 
                if let index = self.tagDataSource.tags.firstIndex(of: 
tag) { 
                    let indexPath = IndexPath(row: index, section: 0) 
                    self.selectedIndexPaths.append(indexPath) 
                } 
            } 
        case let .failure(error): 
            print("Error fetching tags: \(error).") 

--- Page 788 ---
        } 
 
        self.tableView.reloadSections(IndexSet(integer: 0), 
                                      with: .automatic) 
    } 
} 
Now add the appropriate UITableViewDelegate methods
to handle selecting and displaying the checkmarks.
Listing 23.8  Handling tag selection
(TagsViewController.swift)
override func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, 
                        didSelectRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) { 
 
    let tag = tagDataSource.tags[indexPath.row] 
 
    if let index = selectedIndexPaths.firstIndex(of: indexPath) { 
        selectedIndexPaths.remove(at: index) 
        photo.removeFromTags(tag) 
    } else { 
        selectedIndexPaths.append(indexPath) 
        photo.addToTags(tag) 
    } 
 
    do { 
        try store.persistentContainer.viewContext.save() 
    } catch { 
        print("Core Data save failed: \(error).") 
    } 
 
    tableView.reloadRows(at: [indexPath], with: .automatic)
} 
 
override func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, 
                        willDisplay cell: UITableViewCell, 
                        forRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) { 
 
    if selectedIndexPaths.firstIndex(of: indexPath) != nil { 
        cell.accessoryType = .checkmark 
    } else { 
        cell.accessoryType = .none 
    }
}
Let’s set up TagsViewController to be presented
modally when the user taps the Tags bar button item on the
PhotoInfoViewController.
Open Main.storyboard and drag a Navigation Controller onto
the canvas. This should give you a
UINavigationController with a root view controller
that is a UITableViewController. If the root view
controller is not a UITableViewController, delete the

--- Page 789 ---
root view controller, drag a Table View Controller onto the canvas,
and make it the root view controller of the Navigation Controller.
Control-drag from the Tags item on Photo Info View Controller to
the new Navigation Controller and select the Present Modally segue
type (Figure 23.7). Open the attributes inspector for the segue
and give it an Identifier named showTags.
Figure 23.7  Adding the tags view controller


--- Page 790 ---
Select the Root View Controller that you just added to the canvas
and open its identity inspector. Change its Class to
TagsViewController. If this new view controller does not have a
navigation item associated with it, find Navigation Item in the
object library and drag it onto the view controller. Double-
click the new navigation item’s Title label and change it to Tags.
Next, the UITableViewCell on the Tags View Controller
interface needs to match what the TagDataSource expects.
It needs to use the correct style and have the correct reuse
identifier.
Select the UITableViewCell. (It might be easier to select
in the document outline.) Open its attributes inspector. Change
the Style to Basic and set the Identifier to UITableViewCell
(Figure 23.8).
Figure 23.8  Configuring the UITableViewCell
Now, the Tags View Controller needs two bar button items on its
navigation bar: a Done button that dismisses the view controller
and a 
  button that allows the user to add a new tag.
Drag bar button items to the left and right bar button item slots
for the Tags View Controller. Set the left item to use the Done style
and system item. Set the right item to use the Bordered style and
Add system item (Figure 23.9).

--- Page 791 ---
Figure 23.9  Bar button item attributes
Create and connect an action for each of these items to the
TagsViewController. The Done item should be
connected to a method named done(_:), and the 
  item
should be connected to a method named addNewTag(_:).
The two methods in TagsViewController.swift will
be:
    @IBAction func done(_ sender: UIBarButtonItem) { 
 
    } 
 
    @IBAction func addNewTag(_ sender: UIBarButtonItem) { 
 
    } 
The implementation of done(_:) is simple: The view
controller just needs to be dismissed. Implement this
functionality in done(_:).

--- Page 792 ---
Listing 23.9  Dismissing the tags view controller
(TagsViewController.swift)
@IBAction func done(_ sender: UIBarButtonItem) { 
    presentingViewController?.dismiss(animated: true) 
} 
When the user taps the 
  item, an alert will be presented that
will allow the user to type in the name for a new tag
(Figure 23.10).
Figure 23.10  Adding a new tag
Set up and present an instance of UIAlertController in
addNewTag(_:).
Listing 23.10  Presenting an alert controller
(TagsViewController.swift)
@IBAction func addNewTag(_ sender: UIBarButtonItem) { 
    let alertController = UIAlertController(title: "Add Tag", 
                                            message: nil, 
                                            preferredStyle: .alert) 
 
    alertController.addTextField { 
        (textField) in 
        textField.placeholder = "tag name" 
        textField.autocapitalizationType = .words 
    } 
 
    let okAction = UIAlertAction(title: "OK", style: .default) { 
        (action) in 
 
    } 
    alertController.addAction(okAction) 
 
    let cancelAction = UIAlertAction(title: "Cancel", 

--- Page 793 ---
                                     style: .cancel, 
                                     handler: nil) 
    alertController.addAction(cancelAction) 
 
    present(alertController, 
            animated: true) 
} 
Update the completion handler for the okAction to insert a
new Tag into the context. Then save the context, update the
list of tags, and reload the table view section.
Listing 23.11  Adding new tags
(TagsViewController.swift)
let okAction = UIAlertAction(title: "OK", style: .default) { 
    (action) in 
 
    if let tagName = alertController.textFields?.first?.text { 
        let context = self.store.persistentContainer.viewContext 
        let newTag = Tag(context: context) 
        newTag.setValue(tagName, forKey: "name") 
 
        do { 
            try context.save() 
        } catch { 
            print("Core Data save failed: \(error).") 
        } 
        self.updateTags() 
    } 
} 
alertController.addAction(okAction) 
Finally, when the Tags bar button item on
PhotoInfoViewController is tapped, the
PhotoInfoViewController needs to pass along its
store and photo to the TagsViewController.
Open PhotoInfoViewController.swift and
implement prepare(for:).
Listing 23.12  Injecting data into the
TagsViewController
(PhotoInfoViewController.swift)
override func prepare(for segue: UIStoryboardSegue, sender: Any?) { 
    switch segue.identifier { 
    case "showTags": 
        let navController = segue.destination as! UINavigationController 
        let tagController = navController.topViewController as! 
TagsViewController 

--- Page 794 ---
 
        tagController.store = store 
        tagController.photo = photo 
    default: 
        preconditionFailure("Unexpected segue identifier.") 
    }
}
Build and run the application. Navigate to a photo and tap the
Tags item on the toolbar at the bottom. The
TagsViewController will be presented modally. Tap the 
 item, enter a new tag, and select the new tag to associate it
with the photo.

--- Page 795 ---
Background Tasks
You learned in Chapter 20 that blocking the main queue can
lead to an unresponsive application, so it is often a good idea
to do expensive operations using a background task. The
viewContext of NSPersistentContainer is
associated with the main queue, so long-running operations
using the viewContext – like the insertion of photos from
the web service – are good candidates for a background task.
You are going to update
processPhotosRequest(data:error:) to use a
background task. Background tasks are an asynchronous
operation, so instead of returning a Result synchronously
from your method, you will pass a completion handler to be
called asynchronously.
Open PhotoStore.swift and update
processPhotosRequest(data:error:) to take in a
completion handler. You will have some errors in the code due
to the signature change; you will fix these shortly.
Listing 23.13  Making the processing asynchronous
(PhotoStore.swift)
private func processPhotosRequest(data: Data?, 
                                  error: Error?) -> Result<[Photo], 
Error> {
private func processPhotosRequest(data: Data?, 
                          error: Error?, 
                          completion: @escaping (Result<[Photo], Error>) 
-> Void) { 
    guard let jsonData = data else { 
        return .failure(error!) 
    } 
    ... 
With the completion parameter in place, you will need to
replace the return statements with a call to the completion
handler instead.

--- Page 796 ---
Listing 23.14  Calling the completion handler
(PhotoStore.swift)
private func processPhotosRequest(data: Data?, 
                          error: Error?, 
                          completion: @escaping (Result<[Photo], Error>) 
-> Void) { 
    guard let jsonData = data else { 
        return .failure(error!) 
        completion(.failure(error!)) 
        return 
    } 
 
    let context = persistentContainer.viewContext 
 
    switch FlickrAPI.photos(fromJSON: jsonData) { 
    case let .success(flickrPhotos): 
        let photos = flickrPhotos.map { flickrPhoto -> Photo in 
            ... 
        } 
        return .success(photos) 
        completion(.success(photos)) 
    case let .failure(error): 
        return .failure(error) 
        completion(.failure(error)) 
    } 
} 
Notice the use of return within the guard statement.
Recall that with a guard statement, you must exit scope. The
scope of the guard statement is the function itself, so you
must exit the scope of the function somehow. This is a
fantastic benefit to using a guard statement. The compiler
will enforce this requirement, so you can be certain that no
code below the guard statement will be executed.
Now you can add in the code for the background task.
NSPersistentContainer has a method to perform a
background task. This method takes in a closure to call, and
the closure vends a new NSManagedObjectContext to
use.
Update
processPhotosRequest(data:error:completion
:) to kick off a new background task. (Do not neglect to add
the new closing brace.)

--- Page 797 ---
Listing 23.15  Starting a new background task
(PhotoStore.swift)
private func processPhotosRequest(data: Data?, 
                          error: Error?, 
                          completion: @escaping (Result<[Photo], Error>) 
-> Void) { 
    guard let jsonData = data else { 
        completion(.failure(error!)) 
        return 
    } 
 
    let context = persistentContainer.viewContext 
 
    persistentContainer.performBackgroundTask { 
        (context) in 
 
        switch FlickrAPI.photos(fromJSON: jsonData) { 
        case let .success(flickrPhotos): 
            let photos = flickrPhotos.map { flickrPhoto -> Photo in 
                ... 
            } 
            completion(.success(photos)) 
        case let .failure(error): 
            completion(.failure(error)) 
        } 
    } 
} 
For the insertions to persist and be available to other managed
object contexts, you need to save the changes to the
background context.
Update the background task in
processPhotosRequest(data:error:completion
:) to do this.
Listing 23.16  Importing photos in a background task
(PhotoStore.swift)
persistentContainer.performBackgroundTask { 
    (context) in 
 
    switch FlickrAPI.photos(fromJSON: jsonData) { 
    case let .success(flickrPhotos): 
        let photos = flickrPhotos.map { flickrPhoto -> Photo in 
            ... 
        } 
        do { 
            try context.save() 
        } catch { 
            print("Error saving to Core Data: \(error).") 
            completion(.failure(error)) 
            return 
        } 
        completion(.success(photos)) 
    case let .failure(error): 

--- Page 798 ---
        completion(.failure(error)) 
    } 
} 
Here is where things change a bit. An NSManagedObject
should only be accessed from the context that it is associated
with. After the expensive operation of inserting the Photo
instances and saving the context, you will want to fetch the
same photos – but only those that are associated with the
viewContext (that is, the photos associated with the main
queue).
Each NSManagedObject has an objectID that is the
same across different contexts. You will use this objectID
to fetch the corresponding Photo instances associated with
the viewContext.
Update
processPhotosRequest(data:error:completion
:) to get the Photo instances associated with the
viewContext and pass them back to the caller via the
completion handler.
Listing 23.17  Fetching the main queue photos
(PhotoStore.swift)
persistentContainer.performBackgroundTask { 
    (context) in 
 
    switch FlickrAPI.photos(fromJSON: jsonData) { 
    case let .success(flickrPhotos): 
        let photos = flickrPhotos.map { flickrPhoto -> Photo in 
            ... 
        } 
        do { 
            try context.save() 
        } catch { 
            print("Error saving to Core Data: \(error).") 
            completion(.failure(error)) 
            return 
        } 
        completion(.success(photos)) 
 
        let photoIDs = photos.map { $0.objectID } 
        let viewContext = self.persistentContainer.viewContext 
        let viewContextPhotos = 
            photoIDs.map { viewContext.object(with: $0) } as! [Photo] 
        completion(.success(viewContextPhotos)) 
    case let .failure(error): 
        completion(.failure(error)) 

--- Page 799 ---
    } 
} 
First, you get an array of all the objectIDs associated with
the Photo instances. This will be an array of
NSManagedObjectID instances. Within the closure, $0 is
of type Photo.
Then you create a local variable to reference the
viewContext. Next, you map over the photoIDs. Within
the closure, $0 is of type NSManagedObjectID. You use
this managed object ID to ask the viewContext for the
object associated with a specific object identifier.
The method object(with:) returns an
NSManagedObject, so the result of the entire map
operation will be an array of NSManagedObject instances.
You know that the instances being returned will be of type
Photo, so you downcast the array of NSManagedObject
instances into an array of Photo instances.
The map method is a useful tool for the common operation of
converting one array into another array.
The final change you need to make is to update
fetchInterestingPhotos(completion:) to use the
updated
processPhotosRequest(data:error:completion
:) method.
Listing 23.18  Using the asynchronous process
method (PhotoStore.swift)
func fetchInterestingPhotos(completion: @escaping (Result<[Photo], 
Error>) -> Void) { 
 
    let url = FlickrAPI.interestingPhotosURL 
    let request = URLRequest(url: url) 
    let task = session.dataTask(with: request) { 
        (data, response, error) in 
 
        var result = self.processPhotosRequest(data: data, error: error) 
 

--- Page 800 ---
        if case .success = result { 
            do { 
                try self.persistentContainer.viewContext.save() 
            } catch let error { 
                result = .failure(error) 
            } 
        } 
 
        OperationQueue.main.addOperation { 
            completion(result) 
        } 
 
        self.processPhotosRequest(data: data, error: error) { 
            (result) in 
 
            OperationQueue.main.addOperation { 
                completion(result) 
            } 
        } 
    } 
    task.resume() 
} 
Build and run the application. Although the behavior has not
changed, the application is no longer in danger of becoming
unresponsive while new photos are being added. As the scale
of your applications increases, handling Core Data entities
somewhere other than the main queue, as you have done here,
can result in huge performance wins. 

--- Page 801 ---
Silver Challenge: Favorites
Allow the user to favorite photos. Be creative in how you
present the favorite photos to the user. Two possibilities
include viewing them using a UITabBarController or
adding a UISegmentedControl to the
PhotosViewController that switches between all photos
and favorite photos. (Hint: You will need to add a new
attribute to the Photo entity.)

--- Page 802 ---
24 
Accessibility
iOS is the most accessible mobile platform in the world.
Whether a user needs support for vision, hearing, motor skills,
or learning challenges, iOS provides ways to help.
Most accessibility features are built into the system, so you,
the developer, do not need to do anything. Some allow the
developer to provide an even richer experience for the user,
often with very little work on the developer’s part. Let’s take a
look at one accessibility option that does require some
developer input: VoiceOver.

--- Page 803 ---
VoiceOver
VoiceOver is an accessibility feature that helps users with
visual impairments navigate an application’s interface. Apple
provides hooks into the system that allow you to describe
aspects of your interface to the user. Most UIKit views and
controls automatically provide information to the user, but it is
often beneficial to provide additional information that cannot
be inferred. Additionally, you always need to provide the
information yourself for custom views or controls you create.
These hints to the user are largely provided through the
UIAccessibility protocol. UIAccessibility is an
informal protocol that is implemented on all the standard
UIKit views and controls. An informal protocol is a looser
“contract” than the formal protocols that you have been
introduced to before. A formal protocol is declared using the
protocol keyword and declares a list of methods and
properties that must be implemented by something that
conforms to that protocol. An informal protocol is
implemented as an extension on NSObject; therefore, all
subclasses of NSObject implicitly conform to the protocol.
You might be wondering why UIAccessibility is not a
regular, formal protocol like the others you have seen
throughout this book. Informal protocols are a legacy of the
days when Objective-C did not have optional methods in
formal protocols. Informal protocols were a workaround to
solve this issue. Essentially, they required every NSObject to
have methods with no meaningful implementations. Then,
subclasses could override the methods that they were
interested in.
Some of the useful properties provided by the
UIAccessibility protocol are:

--- Page 804 ---
accessibilityLabel
A short description of an element. For views with
text, this is often the text that the view is displaying.
accessibilityHint
A short description of the result of interacting with
the associated element. For example, the accessibility
hint for a button that stops video recording might be
“Stop recording.”
accessibilityFrame
The frame of the accessibility element. For UIView
objects, this is equal to the frame of the view.
accessibilityTraits
Descriptions of the characteristics of the element.
There are a lot of traits, and multiple traits can be
used to describe the element. To see a list of all the
possible traits, look at the documentation for
UIAccessibilityTraits.
accessibilityValue
A description of the value of an element, independent
of its label description. For example, a
UITextField will have an accessibility value that
is the contents of the text field, and a UISlider
will have an accessibility value that is the percentage
that the slider has been set to.
Let’s take a look at how to implement VoiceOver accessibility
via the Photorama application. Photorama already provides a fair
amount of information to users with visual impairments
through features built into iOS. Start by considering the
current experience for someone with visual impairments.
TESTING VOICEOVER
Open Photorama.xcodeproj. The best way to test
VoiceOver is with an actual device, so we strongly recommend
using a device if you have one available.

--- Page 805 ---
If you do not have a device available, you can use the
simulator. Begin by clicking the Xcode menu and choosing
Open Developer Tool → Accessibility Inspector. Build and run the
application; once the simulator is running the app, switch to
the Accessibility Inspector and select the simulator from the target
pop-up menu (Figure 24.1).

--- Page 806 ---
Figure 24.1  Changing targets in the Accessibility
Inspector
Once the target has been set to the simulator, click the Start
inspection follows point button on the Accessibility Inspector’s toolbar
(the button with a target icon). As you mouse over and
navigate in the simulator, the Accessibility Inspector will
provide information about whatever element has focus on the

--- Page 807 ---
simulator’s screen. VoiceOver is not included on the simulator,
but the information shown in the Accessibility Inspector is similar.
If you have a device, open Settings, choose Accessibility →
VoiceOver, and finally turn on VoiceOver (Figure 24.2).
Figure 24.2  Enabling VoiceOver


--- Page 808 ---
There are a couple ways to navigate with VoiceOver on. There
are a couple ways to navigate with VoiceOver on. To start,
slide your finger around the screen. Notice that the system
speaks a description of whatever element your finger is
currently over. Now tap the Back button in the top-left corner
of the screen that says Accessibility. The system will tell you that
this element is the “Accessibility – Back button.” The system
is reading you both the accessibilityLabel as well as
what is essentially the accessibilityTraits.
Notice that tapping the Accessibility Back button does not take
you back to the previous screen. To activate the selected item,
double-tap anywhere on the screen. This corresponds to a
single-tap with VoiceOver disabled. This will take you to the
previous screen for Accessibility.
Another way to navigate is to swipe left and right on the
screen. This will select the previous and next accessible
elements on the screen, respectively. The VoiceOver row should
be selected. Play around with swiping left and right to move
the focus around the screen.
Swipe with three fingers to scroll. Note that to scroll, the scroll
view or one of its subviews must be the currently focused
element. Play around with single- and double-taps to select
and activate items as well as using three fingers to scroll. This
is how you will navigate with VoiceOver enabled.
One other gesture that is useful to know is how to enable
Screen Curtain. Using three fingers, triple-tap anywhere on the
screen. The entire screen will go black, allowing you to truly

--- Page 809 ---
test and experience how your app will feel to someone with a
visual impairment. Three-finger triple-tap anywhere again to
turn Screen Curtain off.
ACCESSIBILITY IN PHOTORAMA
With VoiceOver still enabled, build and run Photorama on your
device to test its accessibility. Once the application is running,
drag your finger around the screen. Notice that the system is
playing a dulled beeping sound as you drag over the photos.
This is the system’s way of informing you that it is not able to
find an accessibility element under your finger.
Currently, the PhotoCollectionViewCells are not
accessibility elements. This is easy to fix.
Open PhotoCollectionViewCell.swift and override
the isAccessibilityElement property to let the system
know that each cell is accessible.
Listing 24.1  Making the cell accessible
(PhotoCollectionViewCell.swift)
override var isAccessibilityElement: Bool { 
    get { 
        return true 
    } 
    set { 
        // Ignore attempts to set 
    }
}
Now build and run the application. As you drag your finger
across the photos, you will hear a more affirming beep and see
each cell outlined with the VoiceOver cursor (Figure 24.3). No
description is spoken, but you are making progress.

--- Page 810 ---
Figure 24.3  VoiceOver cursor


--- Page 811 ---
Go back to PhotoCollectionViewCell.swift. You
are going to add an accessibility label for VoiceOver to read
when an item is selected. Currently, a cell knows nothing
about the Photo that it is displaying, so add a new property to
hold on to this information.
Listing 24.2  Giving the cell a description
(PhotoCollectionViewCell.swift)
class PhotoCollectionViewCell: UICollectionViewCell { 
 
    @IBOutlet var imageView: UIImageView! 
    @IBOutlet var spinner: UIActivityIndicatorView! 
 
    var photoDescription: String?
In the same file, override the accessibilityLabel to
return this string.
Listing 24.3  Using the description for the
accessibility label
(PhotoCollectionViewCell.swift)
override var accessibilityLabel: String? { 
    get { 
        return photoDescription 
    } 
    set { 
        // Ignore attempts to set 
    }
}
Open PhotoDataSource.swift and update
collectionView(_:cellForItemAt:) to set the
photoDescription on the cell.
Listing 24.4  Setting the photo description
(PhotoDataSource.swift)
func collectionView(_ collectionView: UICollectionView, 
                    cellForItemAt indexPath: IndexPath) -> 
UICollectionViewCell { 
 
    let identifier = "PhotoCollectionViewCell" 
    let cell = 
        collectionView.dequeueReusableCell(withReuseIdentifier: 
identifier, 

--- Page 812 ---
                                           for: indexPath) as! 
PhotoCollectionViewCell 
 
    let photo = photos[indexPath.row] 
    cell.photoDescription = photo.title 
    cell.update(displaying: nil) 
 
    return cell 
} 
Build and run the application. Drag your finger over the screen
and you will hear the titles for each photo.
Accessibility traits inform the user how an element should be
treated. Some traits include
UIAccessibilityTraits.button,
UIAccessibilityTraits.link, and
UIAccessibilityTraits.staticText. For
PhotoCollectionViewCell, a relevant trait that should
be included is the UIAccessibilityTraits.image.
Additionally, to communicate to the user that action can be
taken on the cell, you will add the
UIAccessibilityTraits.button trait.
In PhotoCollectionViewCell.swift, override the
accessibilityTraits property to let the system know
that a cell holds an image, and that it can be tapped.
Listing 24.5  Adding an accessibility trait to the cell
(PhotoCollectionViewCell.swift)
override var accessibilityTraits: UIAccessibilityTraits { 
    get { 
        return super.accessibilityTraits.union([.image, .button]) 
    } 
    set { 
        // Ignore attempts to set 
    }
}
You are combining any traits inherited from the superclass
with .image and .button. This is done using
union(_:), which joins all the members of two sets.
Build and run the application. Notice that the new traits you
added are spoken when you select a cell. You might also

--- Page 813 ---
notice that sometimes an actual description of the image is
spoken. This is Apple being smart about the .image trait and
using computer vision to attempt to further describe the image.
The remaining parts of the application are mostly accessible
because they use standard views and controls. The only thing
you need to update is the image view when drilling down to a
specific Photo. You can customize many views’ accessibility
information from within storyboards, and you will be able to
do that for the image view.
Open Main.storyboard and navigate to the scene
associated with the PhotoInfoViewController. Select
the image view and open its identity inspector. Scroll to the
bottom, to the section labeled Accessibility. Check the Enabled
checkbox at the top of this section to enable accessibility for
this image view and uncheck the User Interaction Enabled
checkbox (Figure 24.4).

--- Page 814 ---
Figure 24.4  Updating the accessibility options
Open PhotoInfoViewController.swift and update
viewDidLoad() to give the image view a more meaningful
accessibility label.

--- Page 815 ---
Listing 24.6  Setting the image’s accessibility label
(PhotoInfoViewController.swift)
override func viewDidLoad() { 
    super.viewDidLoad() 
 
    imageView.accessibilityLabel = photo.title
Build and run the application and navigate to a specific photo.
You will notice that with this small addition, this entire screen
is accessible. Finally, turn your attention to the
TagsViewController.
While still running the application, drill down to the
TagsViewController. Add a tag to the table view if one
is not already present. Select a row in the table and notice that
VoiceOver reads the name of this tag; however, there is no
indication to users that they can toggle the checkmark for each
row.
Open TagDataSource.swift and update the cell’s
accessibility hint and traits in
tableView(_:cellForRowAt:).
Listing 24.7  Giving the cell an accessibility hint and
traits (TagDataSource.swift)
func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, 
               cellForRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) -> UITableViewCell { 
 
    let cell = tableView.dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier: 
"UITableViewCell", 
                                             for: indexPath) 
 
    let tag = tags[indexPath.row] 
    cell.textLabel?.text = tag.name 
 
    cell.accessibilityHint = "Toggles selection" 
    cell.accessibilityTraits = [.button] 
 
    return cell 
} 
Build and run the application and marvel at its accessibility.
One of the most common reasons developers cite for not
making their apps more accessible is lack of awareness about

--- Page 816 ---
the topic. Be mindful of supporting VoiceOver, and other
accessibility features, during all stages of iOS development,
and you will make apps that are accessible to a wider
audience.
You can learn more about the ways iOS and other Apple
platforms are accessible to users by visiting
www.apple.com/ accessibility/. To learn how to
take advantage of these capabilities as a developer, check out
developer.apple.com/ accessibility/.
Congratulations! Over the past five chapters, you have worked
on a rather complex app. Photorama is able to make multiple
web service calls, display photos in a grid, cache image data to
the filesystem, and persist photo data using Core Data. On top
of all that, it is accessible to users with visual impairments. To
accomplish this, you used knowledge that you have gained
throughout this book, and you applied that knowledge to create
an awesome app that is also robust and maintainable. It was
hard work, and you should be proud of yourself.

--- Page 817 ---
Bronze Challenge: VoiceOver
Pronunciation
Sometimes VoiceOver struggles with the pronunciation of
some words. In these cases, it can be useful to provide
VoiceOver with a phonetic spelling. Update the navigation
item for PhotosViewController to provide a phonetic
spelling for “Photorama.”

--- Page 818 ---
25 
Afterword
Welcome to the end of the book! You should be very proud of
all your work and all that you have learned. Now there is good
news and bad news:
The good news: The stuff that leaves programmers befuddled when
they come to the iOS platform is behind you now. You are an iOS
developer.
The bad news: You are probably not a very good iOS developer.

--- Page 819 ---
What to Do Next
It is now time to make some mistakes, read some really
tedious documentation, and be humbled by the heartless
experts who will ridicule your questions. Here is what we
recommend:
Write apps now. If you do not immediately use what you
have learned, it will fade. Exercise and extend your
knowledge. Now.
Go deep. This book has consistently favored breadth over
depth; any chapter could have been expanded into an entire
book. Find a topic that you find interesting and really wallow
in it – do some experiments, read Apple’s docs on the topic,
and read postings on blogs and StackOverflow.
Connect. There are iOS Developer Meetups in most cities,
and the talks are surprisingly good. There are CocoaHeads
chapters around the world. There are discussion groups online.
If you are doing a project, find people to help you: designers,
testers (AKA guinea pigs), and other developers.
Make mistakes and fix them. You will learn a lot on the
days when you say, “This application has become a ball of
crap! I’m going to throw it away and write it again with an
architecture that makes sense.” Polite programmers call this
refactoring.
Give back. Share the knowledge. Answer a dumb question
with grace. Give away some code.

--- Page 820 ---
Shameless Plugs
Keep an eye out for other guides from Big Nerd Ranch. We
also offer week-long courses for developers. And if you just
need some code written, we do contract programming. For
more information, visit our website at
www.bignerdranch.com.
You, dear reader, make our lives of writing, coding, and
teaching possible. So thank you for buying our book.

--- Page 821 ---
Index
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X
SYMBOLS
#column expression, Caveman debugging
#file expression, Caveman debugging
#function expression, Caveman debugging, For the More Curious: Scene State Transitions
#line expression, Caveman debugging
$0, $1... (shorthand argument names), Creating the MoodSelectionViewController
%H (breakpoint hit count), Stepping through code
.atomic, Persisting the Items
.xcassets (Asset Catalog), Application Icons
.xcdatamodeld (data model file), Modeling entities
// MARK:, // MARK:
== operator, Downloading the Image Data
@discardableResult, UITableView’s Data Source
@escaping annotation, Passing the Photos Around
@IBAction, Defining action methods
@IBOutlet, Declaring outlets, Hooking Up the Content
@NSManaged keyword, NSManagedObject and subclasses
@objc annotation, Programmatic Controls, Saving the Items
A
access control, Creating a Custom Control
accessibility
adding accessibility hints, Accessibility in Photorama
adding accessibility labels, Accessibility in Photorama
creating accessibility elements, Accessibility in Photorama
setting accessibility information in storyboards, Accessibility
in Photorama
setting accessibility traits, Accessibility in Photorama
UIAccessibility protocol, VoiceOver
VoiceOver, VoiceOver, Testing VoiceOver
Accessibility Inspector, Testing VoiceOver
accessory view (UITableViewCell), UITableViewCells
action methods
about, Defining action methods
implementing, Implementing action methods
activity indicators, Creating a Custom UICollectionViewCell
addSubview(_:) method, Views and Frames
alert controllers, Alert Controllers
alerts, Alert Controllers
alignment rectangle, The alignment rectangle and layout attributes
anchors, Anchors
animations
about, Controlling Animations

--- Page 822 ---
animating colors, Animating Colors
damping ratio, Spring animations
property animators, Property Animators
spring, Spring animations
timing functions, Timing functions
triggering, Basic animations
anti-aliasing, For the More Curious: Retina Display
App ID, For the More Curious: Running an Application on a Device
append(_:) method, Instance methods
application bundle
about, For the More Curious: The Application Bundle
internationalization and, For the More Curious: Bundle’s Role in
Internationalization
localization and, Base internationalization
application sandbox, Application Sandbox, For the More Curious: The Application Bundle
applications
(see also application bundle, debugging, projects)
building, Running on the simulator
data storage, Application Sandbox
deploying, For the More Curious: Running an Application on a Device
directories in, Application Sandbox
icons for, Application Icons
launch images for, Launch Screen
multiple threads in, The Main Thread
running on simulator, Running on the simulator
archiving
for application data, Application Sandbox
Core Data vs, Core Data
arrays, Array type
about, Types in Swift, Collection types
count property, Properties
filter(_:), Passing the Photos Around
forEach(_:), Creating the MoodSelectionViewController
literal, Literals and subscripting
map(_:), Creating the MoodSelectionViewController
sort(by:), Closures
subscripting, Literals and subscripting
Asset Catalog
about, Application Icons
adding colors to, Adding colors to the Asset Catalog

--- Page 823 ---
adding images to, Application Icons
assets
about, Application Icons, For the More Curious: Retina Display, Tab bar items
accessing programmatically, Extensions
asynchronous processes, Passing the Photos Around
.atomic, Persisting the Items
attributes (Core Data), Entities
attributes inspector (Xcode), Customizing the labels
Auto Layout
(see also views)
about, A brief introduction to Auto Layout
alignment rectangle, The alignment rectangle and layout attributes
autoresizing masks and, For the More Curious:
NSAutoresizingMaskLayoutConstraint
constraints, A brief introduction to Auto Layout
(see also constraints)
dynamic cell heights, Dynamic Cell Heights
layout attributes, The alignment rectangle and layout attributes
nearest neighbor and, Constraints
purpose of, The Auto Layout System
autoresizing masks, Programmatic Constraints, For the More Curious:
NSAutoresizingMaskLayoutConstraint
B
background state, Scene States and Transitions, For the More Curious: Scene State
Transitions
base internationalization, Base internationalization
baselines, The alignment rectangle and layout attributes
becomeFirstResponder() method, Dismissing the keyboard
Booleans, Boolean type, Types in Swift, Number and Boolean types
breakpoints
adding actions to, Stepping through code
advancing through code, Stepping through code
breakpoint hit count (%H), Stepping through code
deleting, Stepping through code
exception, Stepping through code
setting, Setting breakpoints
symbolic, Stepping through code
using to log to the console, Stepping through code
bundles, Bundle class
(see also application bundle)
about, Base internationalization, For the More Curious: Bundle’s Role in
Internationalization

--- Page 824 ---
identifiers for, For the More Curious: Running an Application on a Device
buttons
(see also target-action pairs, UIBarButtonItem class, views)
adding to navigation bars, Adding buttons to the navigation bar
camera, Adding a Camera Button
C
caches, Creating ImageStore
callbacks
(see also delegation, target-action pairs)
camera
(see also images)
requesting permission to access, Permissions
cells
(see also UITableViewCell class)
changing cell class, Creating ItemCell
customizing layout, Customizing the Layout
dynamic cell heights, Dynamic Cell Heights
prototype, Reusing UITableViewCells
CGPoint type, Views and Frames
CGRect type, Views and Frames
CGSize type, Views and Frames
characters, Character type, Types in Swift
class methods, Types in Swift
classes
(see also types)
Bundle, Base internationalization, For the More Curious: Bundle’s Role in
Internationalization
Data, Persisting Images to Disk
DateFormatter, Hooking Up the Content
IndexPath, Creating and retrieving UITableViewCells, Deleting rows
JSONDecoder, JSONDecoder and JSONEncoder
JSONEncoder, Codable, JSONDecoder and JSONEncoder
NotificationCenter, Notification center
NSCache, Creating ImageStore
NSFetchRequest, Fetch requests and predicates
NSLayoutConstraint, Explicit constraints
NSManagedObject, NSManagedObject and subclasses
NumberFormatter, Number formatters
open access level, Creating a Custom Control
OperationQueue, The Main Thread

--- Page 825 ---
PropertyListEncoder, Codable, Property Lists
public access level, Creating a Custom Control
SceneDelegate, Giving the controller access to the store
UIActivityIndicatorView, Creating a Custom UICollectionViewCell
UIAlertAction, Alert Controllers
UIAlertController, Alert Controllers
UIBarButtonItem (see UIBarButtonItem class)
UICollectionViewCell, Creating a Custom UICollectionViewCell
UICollectionViewFlowLayout, Collection Views
UICollectionViewLayout, Customizing the Layout
UIColor, Views and Frames
UIControl (see UIControl class, subclassing)
UIGestureRecognizer (see UIGestureRecognizer class, subclasses)
UIImagePickerController (see UIImagePickerController class)
UIImageView, Displaying Images and UIImageView
UINavigationBar, UINavigationController, Navigating with UINavigationController
UINavigationController (see UINavigationController class)
UINavigationItem, UINavigationBar
UIScene, Scene States and Transitions
UIStackView, Using UIStackView
UIStoryboardSegue, Segues
UITabBarController (see UITabBarController class)
UITabBarItem, Tab bar items
UITableView (see UITableView class)
UITableViewCell (see UITableViewCell class)
UITableViewController (see UITableViewController class)
UITapGestureRecognizer, Dismissing the keyboard
UITextField (see UITextField class)
UIToolbar, UINavigationBar
(see also toolbars)
UITraitCollection, Adapting to Dark Mode
UIView (see UIView class)
UIViewController (see UIViewController class)
UIViewPropertyAnimator, Property Animators
UIWindow (see UIWindow class)
URLComponents, URLComponents

--- Page 826 ---
URLRequest, Sending the Request, For the More Curious: HTTP
URLSession, Sending the Request
URLSessionDataTask, URLSession, The Main Thread
URLSessionDownloadTask, URLSession
URLSessionTask, Sending the Request, For the More Curious: HTTP
URLSessionUploadTask, URLSession
UserDefaults, Application Sandbox
UUID, Creating and Using Keys
closures, Closures, Constructing a file URL
Codable protocol, Codable
coders, Codable
collection views
customizing layout, Customizing the Layout
displaying, Displaying the Grid
downloading image data, Downloading the Image Data
layout object, Collection Views
setting data source, Collection View Data Source
colors
adding to Asset Catalog, Adding colors to the Asset Catalog
animating, Animating Colors
background, Views and Frames
customizing, Customizing the labels
dynamic (see dynamic colors)
levels, Adapting to Dark Mode
#column expression, Caveman debugging
common ancestor, Activating constraints
concurrency, The Main Thread
conditionals
if-let, Optionals
switch, Enumerations and the Switch Statement
connections
connections inspector, Summary of connections
in Interface Builder, Making connections
console
interpreting messages, Interpreting console messages
literal expressions for debugging, Caveman debugging
printing to, Using a delegate
viewing in playground, Optionals
constants, Creating the Model Layer, Using Standard Types
constraint(equalTo:) method, Anchors
constraints
about, A brief introduction to Auto Layout, Constraints
activating programmatically, Activating constraints

--- Page 827 ---
Add New Constraints Auto Layout menu, Adding constraints in
Interface Builder
Align Auto Layout menu, Adding constraints in Interface Builder
alignment, Adding constraints in Interface Builder
clearing, A brief introduction to Auto Layout, Adding more constraints
collection views, Displaying the Grid
creating in Interface Builder, Adding constraints in Interface Builder,
Preparing for localization
creating programmatically, Programmatic Constraints, Explicit constraints,
Creating a Custom Control
implicit, Implicit constraints
isActive property for programmatic constraints, Activating
constraints
resolving unsatisfiable, For the More Curious:
NSAutoresizingMaskLayoutConstraint
content compression resistance priority, Content compression resistance priorities
content hugging priority, Content hugging priorities
contentMode property (UIImageView), Displaying Images and UIImageView
contentView (UITableViewCell), UITableViewCells
controllers, in Model-View-Controller, Model-View-Controller
controls
about, Caveman debugging
custom (see custom controls)
programmatic, Programmatic Controls
Core Data
@NSManaged keyword, NSManagedObject and subclasses
archiving vs, Core Data
attributes, Entities
creating a persistent container, NSPersistentContainer
entities (see entities (Core Data))
fetch requests, Fetch requests and predicates
persistent store formats, NSPersistentStoreCoordinator
relationship management with, Core Data Relationships
role of, Entities
subclassing NSManagedObject, NSManagedObject and subclasses
Core Graphics, For the More Curious: Retina Display
count property (Array), Properties
current property (Locale), Formatters
custom controls
creating, Creating a Custom Control
using, Using the Custom Control

--- Page 828 ---
D
Dark Mode, adapting to, Adapting to Dark Mode
Data class, Persisting Images to Disk
data source methods, Implementing data source methods, Collection View Data Source,
Updating the Data Source
data sources, Design Patterns
data storage
(see also archiving, Core Data)
for application data, Application Sandbox
with Data class, Persisting Images to Disk
dataSource (UITableView), UITableViewController, UITableView’s Data Source
DateFormatter class, Hooking Up the Content
debugging
(see also debugging tools, exceptions, interpreting stack traces)
breakpoints (see breakpoints)
caveman debugging, Caveman debugging
literal expressions for, Caveman debugging
LLDB console commands, The LLDB console
stack traces, Interpreting console messages
using the console, Interpreting console messages
debugging tools
issue navigator, Building the Finished Application
in playgrounds, Optionals
Decodable protocol, Codable
default: (switch statement), Enumerations and the Switch Statement
delegation
about, Delegation
as a design pattern, Design Patterns
protocols for, Conforming to a protocol
for UICollectionView, Downloading the Image Data
for UIImagePickerController, Setting the image picker’s delegate
for UITableView, UITableViewController
deleteRows(at:with:) method, Deleting rows
dependency injection, Giving the controller access to the store
dependency inversion principle, Giving the controller access to the store
dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier:for:) method, Reusing UITableViewCells
design patterns, Design Patterns
devices
checking for camera, Creating a UIImagePickerController
deploying to, For the More Curious: Running an Application on a Device
display resolution, Views and Frames, For the More Curious: Retina Display
enabling VoiceOver, Testing VoiceOver
provisioning, For the More Curious: Running an Application on a Device
Retina display, For the More Curious: Retina Display
screen sizes, Size Classes

--- Page 829 ---
dictionaries, Dictionary type
(see also JSON data)
about, Types in Swift, Collection types
accessing, Subscripting dictionaries
literal, Literals and subscripting
subscripting, Subscripting dictionaries
using, Creating and Using Keys
directories
application, Application Sandbox
Documents, Application Sandbox
Library/Caches, Application Sandbox
Library/Preferences, Application Sandbox
lproj, Base internationalization, For the More Curious: Bundle’s Role in
Internationalization
tmp, Application Sandbox
@discardableResult, UITableView’s Data Source
display resolution, Views and Frames, For the More Curious: Retina Display
do-catch statements, Error Handling
document outline (Interface Builder), Interface Builder
documentation
opening, Controlling Animations
for Swift, Exploring Apple’s Swift Documentation
Documents directory, Application Sandbox
doubles, Double type, Types in Swift, Number and Boolean types
drawing (see views)drill-down interface, Navigation Controllers
dynamic colors
about, Adapting to Dark Mode
creating, Adding colors to the Asset Catalog
Dynamic Type, Dynamic Type
E
editButtonItem property (UITableView), Adding buttons to the navigation bar
editing property (UITableView, UITableViewController), Editing mode
Encodable protocol, Codable
encode(_:) method (PropertyListEncoder), Property Lists
endEditing(_:) method, Dismissing by tapping elsewhere
entities (Core Data)
about, Entities
modeling, Modeling entities
relationships between, Relationships
saving changes to, Saving changes
enumerated() function, Loops and String Interpolation
enums (enumerations)
about, Enumerations and the Switch Statement
associated values and, Enumerations and Associated Values

--- Page 830 ---
raw values and, Enumerations and raw values
switch statements and, Enumerations and the Switch Statement
Equatable protocol, Downloading the Image Data
error handling
with do-catch, Error Handling
with optionals, Error Handling
errors
in playgrounds, Using Standard Types
traps, Literals and subscripting
@escaping annotation, Passing the Photos Around
events
.editingChanged, Programmatic Controls
.touchDown, Programmatic Controls
.touchUpInside, Programmatic Controls
.valueChanged, Programmatic Controls, Relaying actions
control, Programmatic Controls
event handling, Event handling basics
touch, Event handling basics
(see also touch events)
exception breakpoints, Stepping through code
exceptions, interpreting stack traces, Interpreting console messages
expressions, string interpolation and, Loops and String Interpolation
extensions
about, Extensions
naming conventions, Extensions
F
fallthrough (switch statement), Enumerations and the Switch Statement
fetch requests, Fetch requests and predicates
#file expression, Caveman debugging
file inspector (Xcode), Localization
file URLs, constructing, Constructing a file URL
fileprivate access level, Creating a Custom Control
filesystem, writing to, Persisting Images to Disk
filter(_:) method (Array), Passing the Photos Around
first responders
about, Event handling basics
becoming, Dismissing the keyboard
resigning, Dismissing the keyboard, Dismissing by pressing the Return key,
Dismissing by tapping elsewhere
Float type, Types in Swift, Number and Boolean types
Float80 type, Number and Boolean types
flow layouts, Collection View Data Source
for-in loops, Loops and String Interpolation
forced unwrapping (of optionals), Optionals
forEach(_:) method (Array), Creating the MoodSelectionViewController
foreground active state, Scene States and Transitions
foreground inactive state, Scene States and Transitions

--- Page 831 ---
frame property (UIView), Views and Frames
frameworks
about, Views and Frames
Core Data (see Core Data)
linking manually, Loaded and Appearing Views
UIKit, Views and Frames
#function expression, Caveman debugging, For the More Curious: Scene State Transitions
functions
(see also methods)
callback, Delegation
compared to closures, Closures
enumerated(), Loops and String Interpolation
NSLocalizedString(_:comment:), NSLocalizedString and strings tables
G
generic type, Passing the Photos Around
genstrings, NSLocalizedString and strings tables
gestures, gesture recognizers (see UIGestureRecognizer class, subclasses)globally unique identifiers (GUIDs), Creating and Using Keys
H
%H (breakpoint hit count), Stepping through code
header view (UITableView), Editing mode
HTTP
methods, For the More Curious: HTTP
request specifications, For the More Curious: HTTP
I
@IBAction, Defining action methods
@IBOutlet, Declaring outlets, Hooking Up the Content
icons
(see also images)
application, Application Icons
in Asset Catalog, Application Icons
identity inspector (Xcode), Loaded and Appearing Views
if-let statements, Optionals
image picker (see UIImagePickerController class)imagePickerController(_:didFinishPickingMediaWithInfo:) method, Setting the
image picker’s delegate, Saving the image
imagePickerControllerDidCancel(_:) method, Setting the image picker’s delegate
images
(see also camera, icons)
accessing from the cache, Creating and Using Keys
caching, Persisting Images to Disk
displaying in UIImageView, Displaying Images and UIImageView

--- Page 832 ---
downloading image data, Downloading and Displaying the Image Data,
Downloading the Image Data
fetching, Giving View Controllers Access to the Image Store
for Retina display, For the More Curious: Retina Display
saving, Saving the image
storing, Creating ImageStore
implementation files, navigating, For the More Curious: Navigating Implementation Files
implicit constraints, Implicit constraints
IndexPath class, Creating and retrieving UITableViewCells, Deleting rows
inequality constraints, Preparing for localization
init(coder:) method, Interacting with View Controllers and Their Views
init(contentsOfFile:) method, Persisting Images to Disk
init(frame:) initializer, Views and Frames
init(nibName:bundle:) method, Interacting with View Controllers and Their Views
initial view controller, Setting the Initial View Controller
initializers
about, Initializers
for classes vs structs, Custom initializers
convenience, Custom initializers
custom, Custom initializers
designated, Custom initializers
free, Custom initializers
returning empty literals, Initializers
instance methods, Types in Swift
instance variables (see outlets, properties)instances, Initializers
integers, Int type, Types in Swift, Number and Boolean types
Interface Builder
(see also Xcode)
adding constraints, Adding constraints in Interface Builder
attributes inspector, Customizing the labels
Auto Layout (see Auto Layout)
bounds rectangles, Customizing the labels
canvas, Interface Builder
connecting objects, Making connections
connecting with source files, Exposing the Properties of ItemCell
connections inspector, Summary of connections
document outline, Interface Builder
file inspector, Localization
identity inspector, Loaded and Appearing Views
preview, Preparing for localization
properties and, Exposing the Properties of ItemCell
renaming UI elements, Modifying traits for a specific size class

--- Page 833 ---
scenes, Interface Builder
selecting an item when multiple items are under the
cursor, Creating a Custom UICollectionViewCell
setting outlets in, Setting outlets, Hooking Up the Content
setting target-action pairs in, Setting targets and actions
size inspector, Views and Frames
interface files
bad connections in, Hooking Up the Content
base internationalization and, Base internationalization
internal access level, Creating a Custom Control
internationalization, Internationalization and Localization, For the More Curious: Bundle’s
Role in Internationalization
(see also localization)
intrinsic vs explicit content size, Intrinsic content size
inverse relationships, Relationships
iOS simulator (see simulator)iPad
(see also devices)
application icons for, Application Icons
isEmpty property (String), Properties
isSourceTypeAvailable(_:) method, Creating a UIImagePickerController
issue navigator (Xcode), Building the Finished Application
J
jpegData(compressionQuality:) method, Persisting Images to Disk
JSON data, JSON Data
JSONDecoder class, JSONDecoder and JSONEncoder
JSONEncoder class, Codable, JSONDecoder and JSONEncoder
K
key-value pairs
creating/using keys, Creating and Using Keys
in dictionaries, Collection types
in JSON data, JSON Data
in web services, Formatting URLs and requests
keyboards
attributes, Keyboard attributes
dismissing, Dismissing the keyboard, Dismissing the Keyboard
L
labels
adding text to views, Views and Frames
adding to tab bar, Tab bar items
customizing, Customizing the labels

--- Page 834 ---
updating preferred text size, Responding to user changes
language settings, Internationalization and Localization
(see also localization)
launch images, Launch Screen
layout attributes, The alignment rectangle and layout attributes
layout guides, Layout guides
layoutIfNeeded() method, Basic animations
layoutSubviews() method, Adding the Highlight View
lazy loading, The View of a View Controller, Loaded and Appearing Views, Interacting with
View Controllers and Their Views
let keyword, Using Standard Types
libraries (see frameworks)library (Xcode), Creating view objects
Library/Caches directory, Application Sandbox
Library/Preferences directory, Application Sandbox
#line expression, Caveman debugging
literal values, Literals and subscripting
loadView() method, The View of a View Controller, Interacting with View Controllers and
Their Views, Creating a View Programmatically
locale property (NumberFormatter), Formatters
Locale type, current property, Formatters
localization
base internationalization and, Base internationalization
Bundle class, For the More Curious: Bundle’s Role in Internationalization
internationalization, Internationalization and Localization, For the More Curious:
Bundle’s Role in Internationalization
lproj directories, Base internationalization, For the More Curious: Bundle’s Role in
Internationalization
number formatters, Formatters
strings tables, NSLocalizedString and strings tables
user settings for, Internationalization and Localization
XLIFF data type, For the More Curious: Importing and Exporting as XLIFF
loops
examining in Value History, Loops and String Interpolation
for-in, Loops and String Interpolation
in Swift, Loops and String Interpolation
low-memory warnings, Saving the image
lproj directories, Base internationalization, For the More Curious: Bundle’s Role in
Internationalization
M
main bundle, Base internationalization, For the More Curious: Bundle’s Role in
Internationalization
(see also application bundle)
main interface, Setting the Initial View Controller
main thread, The Main Thread
map(_:) method (Array), Creating the MoodSelectionViewController
margins
accessing programmatically, Margins
safe area and, Creating the MoodSelectionViewController

--- Page 835 ---
// MARK:, // MARK:
memory management
memory warnings, Saving the image
UITableViewCell class, Reusing UITableViewCells
messages
in delegation design pattern, Delegation
interpreting stack traces in the console, Interpreting console
messages
literal expressions in console messages, Caveman debugging
overriding methods to print messages to the console,
Loaded and Appearing Views
methods
(see also functions)
about, Instance methods
action, Defining action methods
addSubview(_:), Views and Frames
append(_:), Instance methods
becomeFirstResponder(), Dismissing the keyboard
class, Types in Swift
constraint(equalTo:), Anchors
data source, Implementing data source methods, Collection View Data Source,
Updating the Data Source
deleteRows(at:with:), Deleting rows
dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier:for:), Reusing
UITableViewCells
encode(_:), Property Lists
endEditing(_:), Dismissing by tapping elsewhere
filter(_:), Passing the Photos Around
forEach(_:), Creating the MoodSelectionViewController
HTTP, For the More Curious: HTTP
imagePickerController(_:didFinishPickingMediaWithInf
o:), Setting the image picker’s delegate, Saving the image
imagePickerControllerDidCancel(_:), Setting the image picker’s
delegate
init(coder:), Interacting with View Controllers and Their Views
init(contentsOfFile:), Persisting Images to Disk
init(nibName:bundle:), Interacting with View Controllers and Their Views
instance, Types in Swift, Instance methods

--- Page 836 ---
isSourceTypeAvailable(_:), Creating a UIImagePickerController
jpegData(compressionQuality:), Persisting Images to Disk
layoutIfNeeded(), Basic animations
layoutSubviews()Mood, Adding the Highlight View
loadView(), The View of a View Controller, Interacting with View Controllers and
Their Views, Creating a View Programmatically
map(_:), Creating the MoodSelectionViewController
open access level, Creating a Custom Control
overriding, Loading the first question
prepare(for:sender:), Passing Data Around
present(_:animated:completion:), Alert Controllers
protocol, More on protocols
public access level, Creating a Custom Control
resignFirstResponder(), Dismissing the keyboard, Dismissing by pressing
the Return key
reverse(), Instance methods
sceneDidBecomeActive(_:), For the More Curious: Scene State
Transitions
sceneWillEnterForeground(_:), For the More Curious: Scene State
Transitions
sceneWillResignActive(_:), For the More Curious: Scene State Transitions
selectors, Interpreting console messages
setEditing(_:animated:), Editing mode
sort(by:), Closures
startAnimation(), Basic animations
static, Types in Swift
tableView(_:cellForRowAt:), Implementing data source methods,
Creating and retrieving UITableViewCells
tableView(_:commit:forRowAt:), Deleting rows
tableView(_:moveRowAt:to:), Moving rows
tableView(_:numberOfRowsInSection:), Implementing data
source methods
textFieldShouldReturn(_:), Dismissing by pressing the Return key
type-level, URLComponents
url(forResource:withExtension:), For the More Curious: Bundle’s Role
in Internationalization

--- Page 837 ---
urls(for:in:), Constructing a file URL
viewDidAppear(_:), Interacting with View Controllers and Their Views
viewDidDisappear(_:), Interacting with View Controllers and Their Views
viewDidLoad() (see viewDidLoad() method)
viewWillAppear(_:), Accessing subviews, Appearing and Disappearing Views
viewWillDisappear(_:), Interacting with View Controllers and Their Views,
Appearing and Disappearing Views
.mobileprovision files, For the More Curious: Running an Application on a Device
modal view controllers, Alert Controllers, Presenting the image picker modally
Model-View-Controller (MVC), Model-View-Controller, UITableViewController, Design
Patterns
models, in Model-View-Controller, Model-View-Controller
multithreading, The Main Thread
MVC (Model-View-Controller), Model-View-Controller, UITableViewController, Design
Patterns
N
naming conventions
cell reuse identifiers, Reusing UITableViewCells
delegate protocols, Conforming to a protocol
extensions, Extensions
navigation controllers (see UINavigationController class)navigationItem (UIViewController), UINavigationBar
nearest neighbor, Constraints
nil (notification wildcard), Notification center
NotificationCenter class, Notification center
notifications
about, Notification center
UIScene, Saving the Items
UIScene.didBecomeActiveNotification, Saving the Items
UIScene.didEnterBackgroundNotification, Saving the Items
UIScene.didFinishLaunchingNotification, Saving the Items
UIScene.willEnterForegroundNotification, Saving the Items
UIScene.willResignActiveNotification, Saving the Items
NSCache class, Creating ImageStore
NSFetchRequest class, Fetch requests and predicates
NSLayoutConstraint class, Explicit constraints
NSLocalizedString(_:comment:) function, NSLocalizedString and strings tables
@NSManaged keyword, NSManagedObject and subclasses
NSManagedObject class, NSManagedObject and subclasses
number formatters
for localization, Formatters
to set fractional digits, Number formatters
NumberFormatter class, Number formatters, Formatters
numeric types
(see also individual types)
about, Number and Boolean types

--- Page 838 ---
literal, Literals and subscripting
O
@objc annotation, Saving the Items
object graphs, Object Graphs
Objective-C in iOS frameworks, Programmatic Controls
objects (see memory management)open access level, Creating a Custom Control
OperationQueue class, The Main Thread
optionals
about, Optionals
dictionary subscripting and, Subscripting dictionaries
forced unwrapping, Optionals
if-let statements, Optionals
optional binding, Optionals
unwrapping, Optionals
outlets
about, Making connections
autogenerating/connecting, Hooking Up the Content
connecting with source files, Exposing the Properties of ItemCell
setting, Making connections
setting in Interface Builder, Hooking Up the Content
override keyword, Loading the first question
P
parallel computing, The Main Thread
permissions, Permissions
photos (see camera, images)pixels (vs points), Views and Frames
playgrounds (Xcode)
about, Using Standard Types
errors in, Using Standard Types
Value History, Loops and String Interpolation
viewing console in, Optionals
pointers, in Interface Builder (see outlets)points (vs pixels), Views and Frames
predicates, Fetch requests and predicates
preferences, Application Sandbox
(see also Dynamic Type, localization)
prepare(for:sender:) method, Passing Data Around
present(_:animated:completion:) method, Alert Controllers
previewing layouts, Preparing for localization
private access level, Creating a Custom Control
processes, asynchronous, Passing the Photos Around
programmatic views
accessing margins, Margins
anchors, Anchors

--- Page 839 ---
constraint(equalTo:), Anchors
constraints in, Programmatic Constraints
constraints, activating, Activating constraints
controls, Programmatic Controls
creating explicit constraints, Explicit constraints
isActive property on constraints, Activating constraints
layout guides, Layout guides
loadView(), Creating a View Programmatically
project navigator (Xcode), Creating an Xcode Project
projects
creating, Creating an Xcode Project
target settings in, For the More Curious: The Application Bundle
properties
about, Properties
creating in Interface Builder, Exposing the Properties of ItemCell
type-level, URLComponents
property animators, Property Animators
property lists, Property Lists
property observers, Implementing the Temperature Conversion
PropertyListEncoder class, Codable, Property Lists
protocol keyword, Conforming to a protocol
protocols
about, Conforming to a protocol
Codable, Codable
conforming to, Conforming to a protocol
declaring, Conforming to a protocol
Decodable, Codable
delegate, Conforming to a protocol
Encodable, Codable
Equatable, Downloading the Image Data
informal, VoiceOver
structure of, Conforming to a protocol
UIAccessibility, VoiceOver
UICollectionViewDataSource, Collection View Data Source
UICollectionViewDelegate, Downloading the Image Data
UIImagePickerControllerDelegate, Setting the image picker’s
delegate, Saving the image
UINavigationControllerDelegate, Saving the image
UITableViewDataSource, UITableViewController, Implementing data
source methods, Creating and retrieving UITableViewCells, Deleting rows, Moving rows

--- Page 840 ---
UITableViewDelegate, UITableViewController
UITextFieldDelegate, Conforming to a protocol, Dismissing by pressing the
Return key
provisioning profiles, For the More Curious: Running an Application on a Device
pseudolanguage, Preparing for localization
public access level, Creating a Custom Control
Q
Quartz, For the More Curious: Retina Display (see Core Graphics)query items, Formatting URLs and requests
Quick Help (Xcode), Inferring types
R
Range type, Loops and String Interpolation
rawValue (enums), Enumerations and raw values
region settings, Internationalization and Localization
relationships
inverse, Relationships
to-many, Relationships
to-one, Relationships
reordering controls, Moving rows
resignFirstResponder() method, Dismissing the keyboard, Dismissing by pressing the
Return key
resources
about, Application Icons, For the More Curious: The Application Bundle
Asset Catalog, Application Icons
responders (see first responders)Result type, Passing the Photos Around
Retina display, For the More Curious: Retina Display
reuseIdentifier (UITableViewCell), Reusing UITableViewCells
reverse() method, Instance methods
root view controller (UINavigationController), UINavigationController
rootViewController property (UIWindow), Setting the Initial View Controller
rows (UITableView)
adding, Adding rows
deleting, Deleting rows
moving, Moving rows
S
safe area
about, Adding constraints in Interface Builder
accessing programmatically, Layout guides
layout guide, Layout guides
margins and, Creating the MoodSelectionViewController
sandbox, application, Application Sandbox, For the More Curious: The Application Bundle
scene states, Scene States and Transitions, For the More Curious: Scene State Transitions
scene(_:willConnectTo:options:) method, Giving the controller access to the store
SceneDelegate class, Giving the controller access to the store
sceneDidBecomeActive(_:) method, For the More Curious: Scene State Transitions
scenes, Giving the controller access to the store, Scene States and Transitions

--- Page 841 ---
sceneWillEnterForeground(_:) method, For the More Curious: Scene State Transitions
sceneWillResignActive(_:) method, For the More Curious: Scene State Transitions
sections (UITableView), Implementing data source methods
segues
about, Segues
embed, Handling the embed segue
selectors
about, Interpreting console messages
unrecognized, Interpreting console messages
sender argument, Caveman debugging
setEditing(_:animated:) method, Editing mode
sets, Set type, Types in Swift, Collection types
settings (see preferences)shorthand argument names, Creating the MoodSelectionViewController
simulator
Accessibility Inspector, Testing VoiceOver
enabling Dark Mode, Adapting to Dark Mode
rotating, Modifying traits for a specific size class
running applications on, Running on the simulator
sandbox location, Saving the Items
saving images to, Presenting the image picker modally
viewing application bundle in, For the More Curious: The Application
Bundle
size classes, Size Classes
size inspector (Xcode), Views and Frames
sort descriptors (NSFetchRequest), Fetch requests and predicates
sort(by:) method, Closures
sourceType property (UIImagePickerController), Taking Pictures and
UIImagePickerController
stack traces, interpreting, Interpreting console messages
stack views
about, Stack Views
configuring programmatically, Creating a Custom Control
distributing contents, Implicit constraints
nested, Nested stack views
startAnimation() method, Basic animations
states, scene, Scene States and Transitions, For the More Curious: Scene State Transitions
static keyword, URLComponents
static methods, Types in Swift
strings, String type
about, Types in Swift
internationalizing, NSLocalizedString and strings tables
interpolation, Loops and String Interpolation
isEmpty property, Properties
literal, Literals and subscripting
strings tables, NSLocalizedString and strings tables
subscripting
arrays, Literals and subscripting

--- Page 842 ---
dictionaries, Subscripting dictionaries
subviews, The View Hierarchy, Accessing subviews
superview property, Views and Frames
suspended state, Scene States and Transitions
Swift
about, The Swift Language
closures, Closures
documentation for, Exploring Apple’s Swift Documentation
enumerations, Types in Swift, Enumerations and the Switch Statement
loops, Loops and String Interpolation
optional types in, Optionals
string interpolation, Loops and String Interpolation
structures, Types in Swift
switch statements, Enumerations and the Switch Statement
types, Types in Swift, Using Standard Types
switch statements, Enumerations and the Switch Statement
symbolic breakpoints, Stepping through code
T
tab bar controllers (see UITabBarController class)tab bar items, Tab bar items
table view cells (see UITableViewCell class)table view controllers (see UITableViewController class)table views (see UITableView class)tables (database), Entities
tableView(_:cellForRowAt:) method, Implementing data source methods, Creating and
retrieving UITableViewCells
tableView(_:commit:forRowAt:) method, Deleting rows
tableView(_:moveRowAt:to:) method, Moving rows
tableView(_:numberOfRowsInSection:) method, Implementing data source methods
target-action pairs
about, Defining action methods, Design Patterns
creating programmatically, Programmatic Controls
targets, build settings for, For the More Curious: The Application Bundle
text
(see also Auto Layout, labels)
changing preferred size, Dynamic Type
customizing appearance, Customizing the labels, Text Editing
customizing size, Customizing the labels
dynamic styling of, Dynamic Type
input, Text Input and Delegation
textFieldShouldReturn(_:) method, Dismissing by pressing the Return key
threads, The Main Thread
throws keyword, Error Handling
timing functions, Timing functions
tint
about, Using custom dynamic colors
setting programmatically, Adding the Highlight View

--- Page 843 ---
setting via interface files, Using custom dynamic colors
tmp directory, Application Sandbox
to-many relationships, Relationships
to-one relationships, Relationships
toolbars
adding buttons to, Adding a Camera Button
adding to UI, Adding a Camera Button
topViewController property (UINavigationController), UINavigationController
touch events, Event handling basics
trait collections, Adapting to Dark Mode
traps, Literals and subscripting
try keyword, Error Handling
tuples, Loops and String Interpolation
types
Array, Types in Swift, Collection types
Bool, Types in Swift, Number and Boolean types
CGPoint, Views and Frames
CGRect, Views and Frames
CGSize, Views and Frames
Character, Types in Swift
codable, Codable
Dictionary, Types in Swift, Collection types
Double, Types in Swift, Number and Boolean types
Float, Types in Swift, Number and Boolean types
Float80, Number and Boolean types
generic, Passing the Photos Around
hashable, Collection types
initializers, Initializers
instances of, Initializers
Int, Types in Swift, Number and Boolean types
Locale, Formatters
Range, Loops and String Interpolation
Result, Passing the Photos Around
Set, Types in Swift, Collection types
specifying, Specifying types
String, Types in Swift
type inference, Inferring types
UIControl.Event, Programmatic Controls
UITableViewCellStyle, UITableViewCells
U

--- Page 844 ---
UI thread, The Main Thread
UIAccessibility protocol, VoiceOver
UIActivityIndicatorView class, Creating a Custom UICollectionViewCell
UIAlertAction class, Alert Controllers
UIAlertController class, Alert Controllers
UIBarButtonItem class, UINavigationBar
UICollectionViewCell class, Creating a Custom UICollectionViewCell
UICollectionViewDataSource protocol, Collection View Data Source
UICollectionViewDelegate protocol, Downloading the Image Data
UICollectionViewFlowLayout class, Collection Views
UICollectionViewLayout class, Customizing the Layout
UIColor class, Views and Frames
UIControl class, subclassing, Creating a Custom Control
UIControl.Event type
.editingChanged, Programmatic Controls
.touchDown, Programmatic Controls
.touchUpInside, Programmatic Controls
.valueChanged, Programmatic Controls, Relaying actions
about, Programmatic Controls
UIGestureRecognizer class, subclasses, Dismissing the keyboard
UIImage class (see images, UIImageView class)UIImagePickerController class
instantiating, Taking Pictures and UIImagePickerController
presenting, Presenting the image picker modally
UIImagePickerControllerDelegate protocol, Setting the image picker’s delegate,
Saving the image
UIImageView class, Displaying Images and UIImageView
UIKit framework, Views and Frames
UINavigationBar class, UINavigationController, Navigating with UINavigationController
UINavigationController class
(see also view controllers)
about, UINavigationController
adding view controllers to, Appearing and Disappearing Views
instantiating, UINavigationController
managing view controller stack, UINavigationController
root view controller, UINavigationController
in storyboards, Segues
topViewController property, UINavigationController
UINavigationBar class and, UINavigationBar
UITabBarController vs, Navigation Controllers
view, UINavigationController
viewControllers property, UINavigationController
viewWillAppear(_:), Appearing and Disappearing Views
viewWillDisappear(_:), Appearing and Disappearing Views
UINavigationControllerDelegate protocol, Saving the image
UINavigationItem class, UINavigationBar
UIScene class, Scene States and Transitions
UIScene.didActivateNotification, Saving the Items
UIScene.didDisconnectNotification, Saving the Items
UIScene.didEnterBackgroundNotification, Saving the Items
UIScene.willConnectNotification, Saving the Items

--- Page 845 ---
UIScene.willDeactivateNotification, Saving the Items
UIScene.willEnterForegroundNotification, Saving the Items
UIStackView class, Using UIStackView
UIStoryboardSegue class, Segues
UITabBarController class
implementing, Tab Bar Controllers
UINavigationController vs, Navigation Controllers
view, Tab Bar Controllers
UITabBarItem class, Tab bar items
UITableView class
(see also UITableViewCell class, UITableViewController class)
about, UITableView and UITableViewController
adding rows, Adding rows
dataSource property, UITableViewController
delegation, UITableViewController
deleting rows, Deleting rows
editing mode, Editing mode, Subclassing UITableViewCell, Adding buttons to the
navigation bar
editing property, Editing mode
footer view, Editing mode
header view, Editing mode
moving rows, Moving rows
populating, UITableView’s Data Source
sections, Implementing data source methods
tableView(_:cellForRowAt:), Implementing data source methods,
Creating and retrieving UITableViewCells
tableView(_:numberOfRowsInSection:), Implementing data
source methods
view, Subclassing UITableViewController
UITableView.automaticDimension constant, Dynamic Cell Heights
UITableViewCell class
(see also cells)
about, UITableViewCells, Subclassing UITableViewCell
accessory view, UITableViewCells
cell styles, UITableViewCells
contentView, UITableViewCells
detailTextLabel property, UITableViewCells
imageView, UITableViewCells
retrieving instances of, Creating and retrieving UITableViewCells
reuseIdentifier property, Reusing UITableViewCells

--- Page 846 ---
reusing instances of, Reusing UITableViewCells
subclassing, Subclassing UITableViewCell
textLabel property, UITableViewCells
UITableViewCell.EditingStyle.delete, Deleting rows
UITableViewCellStyle type, UITableViewCells
UITableViewController class
(see also UITableView class)
about, UITableViewController
adding rows, Adding rows
data source methods, Implementing data source methods
dataSource property, UITableView’s Data Source
deleting rows, Deleting rows
editing property, Editing mode
moving rows, Moving rows
returning cells, Creating and retrieving UITableViewCells
subclassing, Subclassing UITableViewController
UITableViewDataSource protocol, UITableViewController, Implementing data source
methods, Creating and retrieving UITableViewCells, Deleting rows, Moving rows
UITableViewDelegate protocol, UITableViewController
UITapGestureRecognizer class, Dismissing the keyboard
UITextField class
configuring, Text Editing
as first responder, Event handling basics
keyboard and, Dismissing the Keyboard
UITextFieldDelegate protocol, Conforming to a protocol, Dismissing by pressing the
Return key
UIToolbar class, UINavigationBar
(see also toolbars)
UITraitCollection class, Adapting to Dark Mode
UIView class
(see also UIViewController class, views)
about, View Basics
animation documentation, Controlling Animations
frame property, Views and Frames
layoutMargins property, Margins
layoutMarginsGuide property, Margins
safeAreaLayoutGuide property, Layout guides
superview, Views and Frames
translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints property,
Programmatic Constraints
UIViewController class
(see also UIView class, view controllers)
init(coder:), Interacting with View Controllers and Their Views

--- Page 847 ---
init(nibName:bundle:), Interacting with View Controllers and Their Views
loadView, Creating a View Programmatically
loadView(), Interacting with View Controllers and Their Views
loadView() method, The View of a View Controller
navigationItem property, UINavigationBar
present(_:animated:completion:) method, Alert Controllers
tabBarItem property, Tab bar items
view, The View of a View Controller, Interacting with View Controllers and Their Views
viewDidAppear(_:), Interacting with View Controllers and Their Views
viewDidDisappear(_:), Interacting with View Controllers and Their Views
viewDidLoad(), Accessing subviews
viewWillAppear(_:), Accessing subviews
viewWillDisappear(_:), Interacting with View Controllers and Their Views
UIViewPropertyAnimator class, Property Animators
UIWindow class
about, The View Hierarchy
rootViewController, Setting the Initial View Controller
unattached state, Scene States and Transitions
universally unique identifiers (UUIDs), Creating and Using Keys
unrecognized selector error, Interpreting console messages
url(forResource:withExtension:) method, For the More Curious: Bundle’s Role in
Internationalization
URLComponents class, URLComponents
URLRequest class, Sending the Request, For the More Curious: HTTP
URLs, Formatting URLs and requests
urls(for:in:) method, Constructing a file URL
URLSession class, Sending the Request
URLSessionDataTask class, URLSession, The Main Thread
URLSessionDownloadTask class, URLSession
URLSessionTask class, Sending the Request, For the More Curious: HTTP
URLSessionUploadTask class, URLSession
user interface
(see also Auto Layout, views)
drill-down, Navigation Controllers
keyboard, Dismissing the Keyboard
scenes, Giving the controller access to the store, Scene States and Transitions
window scenes, Giving the controller access to the store
user settings (see preferences)UserDefaults class, Application Sandbox
UUID class, Creating and Using Keys
V
var keyword, Using Standard Types
variables, Creating the Model Layer, Using Standard Types
(see also instance variables (see outlets, properties), properties)
view (UIViewController), Interacting with View Controllers and Their Views
view controllers

--- Page 848 ---
(see also UIViewController class, views)
allowing access to image store, Giving View Controllers Access to the
Image Store
container view controllers, Creating a custom container view controller
initial, Setting the Initial View Controller
interacting with, Interacting with View Controllers and Their Views
lazy loading of views, The View of a View Controller, Loaded and Appearing
Views, Interacting with View Controllers and Their Views
modal, Presenting the image picker modally
modal presentation, Presenting View Controllers
navigating between, Segues
presentation styles, Presentation Styles
presenting modally in code, Alert Controllers
root, UINavigationController
segues, Segues
stack, UINavigationController
tab bar controllers and, Tab Bar Controllers
view hierarchy and, The View of a View Controller
view hierarchy
about, The View Hierarchy
configuring programmatically, Creating a Custom Control
view property (UIViewController), The View of a View Controller
viewControllers (UINavigationController), UINavigationController
viewDidAppear(_:) method, Interacting with View Controllers and Their Views
viewDidDisappear(_:) method, Interacting with View Controllers and Their Views
viewDidLoad() method, Views and Frames, Accessing subviews
views
(see also Auto Layout, touch events, UIView class, view controllers)
about, View Basics
animating, Controlling Animations
appearing/disappearing, Appearing and Disappearing Views
autoresizing masks, Programmatic Constraints
container views, A brief introduction to Auto Layout
content compression resistance priorities, Content compression
resistance priorities
content hugging priorities, Content hugging priorities
creating programmatically (see programmatic views)
drawing to screen, The View Hierarchy
hierarchy, The View Hierarchy

--- Page 849 ---
layers and, The View Hierarchy
layout guides, Layout guides
lazy loading, The View of a View Controller, Loaded and Appearing Views
margins, Margins
misplaced, Misplaced views
in Model-View-Controller, Model-View-Controller
presenting modally, Alert Controllers, Presenting the image picker modally
removing from storyboard, Programmatic Views
rendering, The View Hierarchy
resizing, Displaying Images and UIImageView
scroll, Displaying the Grid
size and position of, Views and Frames
stack views (see stack views)
subviews, The View Hierarchy
viewWillAppear(_:) method, Accessing subviews, Appearing and Disappearing Views
viewWillDisappear(_:) method, Interacting with View Controllers and Their Views,
Appearing and Disappearing Views
VoiceOver, VoiceOver, Testing VoiceOver
W
web services
about, Web Services
HTTP request specifications and, For the More Curious: HTTP
with JSON data, JSON Data
requesting data from, Building the URL
URLSession class and, Sending the Request
where clauses, Passing the Photos Around
write(to:options:) method (Data), Persisting the Items
X
.xcassets (Asset Catalog), Application Icons
.xcdatamodeld (data model file), Modeling entities
Xcode
(see also debugging tools, Interface Builder, projects, simulator)
Asset Catalog, Application Icons
attributes inspector, Customizing the labels
Auto Layout (see Auto Layout)
breakpoint navigator, Setting breakpoints
connections inspector, Summary of connections
creating projects, Creating an Xcode Project

--- Page 850 ---
debug area, Stepping through code
debug bar, Stepping through code
documentation, Controlling Animations
editor area, Creating an Xcode Project, Interface Builder
file inspector, Localization
identity inspector, Loaded and Appearing Views
inspector area, Summary of connections
issue navigator, Building the Finished Application
library, Creating view objects
navigator area, Creating an Xcode Project
navigators, Creating an Xcode Project
opening a second editor pane, Hooking Up the Content
organizing files with // MARK:, // MARK:
playgrounds, Using Standard Types
project navigator, Creating an Xcode Project
Quick Help, Inferring types
schemes, Running on the simulator
size inspector, Views and Frames
source editor jump bar, For the More Curious: Navigating Implementation
Files
versions, Creating an Xcode Project
workspace, Creating an Xcode Project
XLIFF data type, For the More Curious: Importing and Exporting as XLIFF

--- Page 851 ---
                      
             
 
              
 
            
           
                                     
 
              At Big 
Nerd Ranch, we 
create elegant, 

--- Page 852 ---
              
authentically 
useful solutions 
through 
              best-in-
class development 
and training. 
            
           
             
 
              
 
            
           
                          
 
              CLIENT 
SOLUTIONS 
            
              
 
              Big Nerd Ranch 
designs, develops and 
deploys applications for 
              clients of all sizes
—from small start-ups to 
large corporations. 
              Our in-house 
engineering and design 
teams possess expertise in 
              iOS, Android and 
full-stack web application 
development. 
            
                         
             
 
              
                          
 
              TEAM 
TRAINING 
            
              

--- Page 853 ---
 
            
           
 
              For companies 
with capable engineering 
teams, 
              Big Nerd Ranch 
can provide on-site 
corporate training in 
              iOS, Android, 
Front-End Web, Back-End 
Web, macOS and Design. 
            
                           
 
                Of the top 25 
apps in the U.S., 19 are 
built by companies 
                that brought in 
Big Nerd Ranch to train 
their developers. 
            
           
             
 
              
                          
 
              CODING 
BOOTCAMPS 
            
              
 
              Big Nerd Ranch 
offers intensive app 
development 
              and design retreats 
for individuals. 

--- Page 854 ---
 
            
           
              Lodging, food and 
course materials are 
included, 
              and we’ll even 
pick you up at the airport! 
            
              
 
              These courses are 
not for the faint of heart. 
              You will learn new 
skills in iOS, Android, 
Front-End Web, 
              Back-End Web, 
macOS or Design in days
—not weeks. 
            
           
                          
 
              www.bignerdranch.com 
            
           
         

--- Page 855 ---
                      
             
 
              
 
            
           
                                       

--- Page 856 ---
 
                 BIG NERD RANCH 
                    
 
                CODING BOOTCAMPS 
            
           
             
 
              Big Nerd Ranch bootcamps cover a lot of ground in just days. 
              With our retreat-style training, we’ll subject you 
              to the most intensive app development course you can imagine, 
              and when you finish, you’ll be part of an elite corps: 
              the few, the proud, the nerds. 
            
             
 
              Our distraction-free training gives you the opportunity to master 
new skills 
              in an intensive environment—no meetings, no phone calls, just 
learning. 
            
                         
             
 
              
 
            
           
                          
 
                Big Nerd Ranch’s training was 
unlike any other class I’ve 
                had. I learned skills that make 
me exceptionally more 
                valuable, giving me a leg up on 
the competition. Since my 
                first Big Nerd Ranch class, I’ve 
written software used in 
                The White House, held positions 
at AT&T and Disney—and 
                ultimately landed at Apple. 
            
  

--- Page 857 ---
                         
 
              —Josh Paul, Alumnus 
            
                         
             
 
              We offer classes in iOS, Android, Front-End Web, Back-End 
Web, macOS and Design. 
              Use code BNRGUIDE100 
              for $100 off a bootcamp of your choice. 
            
                         
                          
 
              www.bignerdranch.com 
            
           
         