--- Page 1 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 2 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 3 ---
 


--- Page 4 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 5 ---
 
Ultimate SwiftUI
Handbook for iOS
Developers
 
 
A complete Guide to native app development
for iOS, macOS, watchOS, tvOS, and visionOS
 
 
Dúóng Đình Báo (James) Thăng
 
 
www.orangeava.com

--- Page 6 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 7 ---
Copyright © 2023 Orange Education Pvt Ltd, AVA™
 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the
prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief
quotations embedded in critical articles or reviews.
 
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the
accuracy of the information presented. However, the information contained
in this book is sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the
author nor Orange Education Pvt Ltd or its dealers and distributors, will be
held liable for any damages caused or alleged to have been caused directly
or indirectly by this book.
 
Orange Education Pvt Ltd has endeavored to provide trademark information
about all of the companies and products mentioned in this book by the
appropriate use of capital. However, Orange Education Pvt Ltd cannot
guarantee the accuracy of this information.
 
First published: October 2023
 
Published by: Orange Education Pvt Ltd, AVA™
 
Address: 9, Daryaganj, Delhi, 110002
 

--- Page 8 ---
ISBN: 978-93-88590-93-8
 
www.orangeava.com

--- Page 9 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 10 ---
Dedicated to
 
My beloved parents:
 
Dúóng Kim Húóng
 
Lê Thi Thu Hà

--- Page 11 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 12 ---
About the Author
 
Dúóng Đình Báo (James) Thăng's journey through the tech world is a
testament to the idea that anyone can follow their passion and acquire
new skills. While his educational background lies in Finance and
Economics, he felt a compelling drive to explore the dynamic realm of
app development. The potential of it is that anyone in this modern
world now has a smartphone with them and spends most of their daily
time on it. With dedication and self-education, he transitioned into a
seasoned iOS developer and then a professional one, accumulating over
3 years of valuable industry experience.
 
His proficiency extends to both UIKit and SwiftUI, enabling him to create
intuitive and user-friendly applications. He has successfully conceptualized,
developed, and launched eight distinctive applications. These projects span
a wide spectrum of domains, includingfinance, augmented reality, gaming,
educational technology, and point-of-sale systems. Each of these apps has
made a lasting positive impact, benefiting thousands of users.
 
As the author of this SwiftUI book, he has had the privilege of delving even
further into this cutting-edge framework. This book not only reflects his
passion for SwiftUI but also his commitment to helping others unlock their
full potential. Through comprehensive insights and practical guidance, he
aims to empower both aspiring and experienced developers to harness the
power of SwiftUI and navigate the ever-evolving landscape of iOS
development.
 

--- Page 13 ---
His motivation derives from an unwavering passion for innovation. He is
deeply committed to crafting apps that not only meet but exceed user
expectations, pushing the boundaries of what is possible in the iOS
ecosystem. This journey has taught him that self-education is a powerful
tool, and he is eager to inspire and empower others to embark on their
learning journeys and achieve their aspirations in the ever-evolving world
of iOS development through this book.

--- Page 14 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 15 ---
About the Reviewers
 
Catalin Patrascu is an experienced iOS Engineer and Mobile
Technologist with over 13 years of experience developing mobile
applications for various startups and mid-size companies as a
freelancer.
 
Since the first iPhone was released, he has been developing iOS apps,
transitioning from Windows development to mobile.
 
While Catalin has always been a goal-oriented, data-driven developer, in
recent years he has shifted his focus towards building maintainable apps
that are both robust and scalable. He has developed a keen interest in
prioritizing the testability of the code and has become an expert in system
design, refactoring, and automated testing.
 
He is now a content creator who shares insights on building maintainable
iOS apps through system design, refactoring, and automated testing.
 
Nilesh Jha has over 8 years of experience in Software industries and
has been using iOS frameworks since 2014. Nilesh currently works for
a Consulting firm in London and also creates videos on YouTube under
the channel App Developer. When he's not working on technology and
the weather is nice, he likes to go near sea beaches.

--- Page 16 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 17 ---
Acknowledgement
 
I would like to express my gratitude to a few people who have provided me
withcontinuous and ongoing support throughoutthe writing of this book.
First and foremost, I would like to thank my parents for their continuous
encouragement in writing the book — I could never have completed this
book without their support.
 
I gratefully acknowledge Mr. Catalin Patrascu for his kind technical support
for this book and Miss Sonali for her support from the very first chapter.
Special thanks to Paul Hudson and his online blog, Hacking with Swift.
 
I extend my gratitude to the team at Orange Education for being supportive
enough to provide meample time to write and refine this book.

--- Page 18 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 19 ---
Preface
 
This book is your comprehensive guide to iOSSwiftUI app development in
a rapidly evolving landscape. From the foundational principles of Swift
programming to advanced topics like networking, data persistence, and data
visualization, this book equips you with the skills needed to create robust
and engaging iOS applications.
 
With each chapter, you'll delve deeper into the world of app development,
gaining practical insights and hands-on experience. In the opening chapters,
we explore Swift programming language and SwiftUI, Apple's
revolutionary framework for building user interfaces.
 
Then, we venture into essential aspects like networking, data persistence,
and data visualization, providing you with the tools to create feature-rich
and responsive apps. Whether you're an aspiring app developer or a
seasoned coder looking to enhance your skill set, this book offers a
structured pathway to success. Our aim is not just to teach you how to write
code but to empower you to build innovative and user-centric apps that
make a difference. Join us on this exciting journey, and let's create
outstanding iOS applications together.
 
Chapter 1: In the opening chapter titled "Introduction to Swift
Programming," readers will embark on a journey into the world of
Swift, the powerful programming language for iOS, macOS, watchOS,
and tvOS development.
 

--- Page 20 ---
By the end of this chapter, readers will have gained a solid understanding of
the key concepts and tools they'll need to start their journey into Swift
programming, setting a strong foundation for the chapters that follow.
 
Chapter 2: In this chapter, we will learn about the Layout concept and
ideas in SwiftUI and understand how to break out complex UI into
small and reusable pieces.
 
By the end of Chapter 2, readers will have gained a solid grasp of SwiftUI's
core concepts and tools. They'll be equipped to create user interfaces with
SwiftUI, laying the groundwork for more advanced UI development
covered in subsequent chapters.
 
Chapter 3: will seamlessly continue from Chapter 2. This chapter
focuses on the intricate details of how SwiftUI handles the layout of
views and provides readers with a comprehensive understanding of the
layout system.
 
By the end of Chapter 3, readers will have gained a deep understanding of
how SwiftUI handles layout decisions, along with practical knowledge of
fundamental View Modifiers, the coordinate system, positioning versus
alignment, and life cycle methods. This knowledge will empower them to
create complex and responsive user interfaces in their iOS apps.
 
Chapter 4: State and Property Wrapper are like the backbone of
SwiftUI. They allow developers to manage the data that powers their
app's user interface in a clean and efficient way. We will learn through
these concepts in this chapter, and along the way, we will combine all of

--- Page 21 ---
the previous knowledge to build a very familiar App from scratch: The
Calculator.
 
Chapter 5: "Design Patterns with MVVM," is a pivotal chapter, as it
delves into the world of software design patterns and specifically
focuses on the MVVM (Model-View-View Model) pattern within the
context of iOS development. This chapter equips readers with the
knowledge and tools to create well-structured and maintainable iOS
applications.
 
Chapter 6: In this chapter, we will be looking at commonly found
elements and UI designs in a modern mobile application.
Theyhavemultiple screens with different user stories. The tab bar and
navigation bar are two important elements of modern user interface
design. We will see how they work and recreate them in SwiftUI. Later,
we will learn about compositional layout and how to make a modern
complex layout like the Instagram or Spotify app.
 
Chapter 7: "Networking with SwiftUI – Part 1" is a critical chapter of
the book, as it explores the essential topic of networking within the
context of SwiftUI and iOS app development. In this chapter, readers
will gain valuable insights into how to communicate with remote
servers, retrieve data, and integrate it into their SwiftUI applications.
 
Chapter 8: "Networking with SwiftUI – Part 2," is a continuation of
your exploration into networking concepts within SwiftUI and iOS app
development. In this chapter, you will go through the development of a
real-world application, providing practical insights into working with
external APIs, handling authentication with OAuth 2.0, and integrating
UIKit components into SwiftUI.

--- Page 22 ---
 
Chapter 9: In this chapter, we will learn about local storage, its
meaning, and the purpose of using it.
 
Local storage is a crucial aspect of iOS app development, enabling the
storage and retrieval of user-specific data within an application. In SwiftUI
development, there are various techniques and frameworks available for
local storage implementation, including UserDefaults, CoreData, and File
Manager. Each of these options offers distinct features and capabilities to
handle different types of data.
 
Chapter 10: With iOS 16, Apple introduced their solution built in
SwiftUI to make charts. This framework works seamlessly combining
SwiftUI with the declarative syntax. And this year, it even received
more updates with iOS 17.
 
In this chapter, we will explore Swift Charts and recreate some of the most
commonly used charts ranging from bar charts, line charts, pie charts to
donut charts. During the process, we will make a simple application of
expense tracking, which will visualize the spending data in different kinds
of charts.

--- Page 23 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 24 ---
Downloading the code
bundles and colored images
 
Please follow the link to download the
Code Bundles of the book:
 
https://github.com/OrangeAVA/Ultimate-SwiftUI-Handbook-for-iOS-
Developers
 
The code bundles and images of the book are also hosted on
https://rebrand.ly/9b4056
 
In case there’s an update to the code, it will be updated on the existing
GitHub repository.
 
Errata
 
We take immense pride in our work at Orange Education Pvt Ltd and
follow best practices to ensure the accuracy of our content to provide an
indulging reading experience to our subscribers. Our readers are our
mirrors, and we use their inputs to reflect and improve upon human errors,

--- Page 25 ---
if any, that may have occurred during the publishing processes involved. To
let us maintain the quality and help us reach out to any readers who might
be having difficulties due to any unforeseen errors, please write to us at :
 
errata@orangeava.com
 
Your support, suggestions, and feedback are highly appreciated.
 

--- Page 26 ---
DID YOU KNOW
 
Did you know that Orange Education Pvt Ltd offers eBook versions of
every book published, with PDF and ePub files available? You can upgrade
to the eBook version at www.orangeava.com and as a print book customer,
you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us at:
info@orangeava.com for more details.
 
At www.orangeava.com, you can also read a collection of free technical
articles, sign up for a range of free newsletters, and receive exclusive
discounts and offers on AVA™ Books and eBooks.
 
PIRACY
 
If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the
internet, we would be grateful if you would provide us with the location
address or website name. Please contact us at info@orangeava.com with a
link to the material.
 
ARE YOU INTERESTED IN AUTHORING WITH US?
 
If there is a topic that you have expertise in, and you are interested in either
writing or contributing to a book, please write to us at
business@orangeava.com. We are on a journey to help developers and tech
professionals to gain insights on the present technological advancements
and innovations happening across the globe and build a community that

--- Page 27 ---
believes Knowledge is best acquired by sharing and learning with others.
Please reach out to us to learn what our audience demands and how you can
be part of this educational reform. We also welcome ideas from tech experts
and help them build learning and development content for their domains.
 
REVIEWS
 
Please leave a review. Once you have read and used this book, why not
leave a review on the site that you purchased it from? Potential readers can
then see and use your unbiased opinion to make purchase decisions. We at
Orange Education would love to know what you think about our products,
and our authors can learn from your feedback. Thank you!
 
For more information about Orange Education, please visit
www.orangeava.com.

--- Page 28 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 29 ---
Table of Contents
 
1. Swift Language
Introduction
Structure
Downloading Xcode
Defining variable
Optional Type and nil
Common ways to unwrap Optional Type
Forced Unwrapping
Optional Chaining
Logical operators
Conditional statements
Collection Type: Array
Collection type - Dictionary
Function
Scope
Struct
Class and Class vs Struct

--- Page 30 ---
 
2. Introduction to View in SwiftUI
Introduction
Structure
Fundamental view
View in SwiftUI
View Modifier
Conclusion
 
3. Implementing Layout in SwiftUI
Introduction
Structure
Layout in SwiftUI
Positioning View in SwiftUI
Alignment View in SwiftUI
Lifecycle methods in SwiftUI
Conclusion
 
4. State, Binding, Property Wrapper, and Property Observer
Introduction

--- Page 31 ---
Structure
Layout the Calculator
Making it Interactive
State
State versus Binding
Property Wrapper
Property Observer
Conclusion
 
5. Design Patterns with MVVM
Introduction
Structure
Design Pattern
Design Pattern in iOS development
Architecture patterns
Design patterns
MVVM Pattern
Implementing MVVM Pattern into the Calculator App (1)
ObservableObject and @StateObject
Implementing MVVM Pattern into the Calculator App (2)

--- Page 32 ---
Conclusion
 
6. Tab Bar, Navigation, and Compositional Layout
Introduction
Structure
Tab bar
Navigation in iOS development
NavigationView and NavigationLink
Navigation stack
Compositional layout
Load image
LazyVGrid and LazyHGrid
Conclusion
 
7. Networking with SwiftUI - Part 1
Introduction
Structure
Networking
RESTful APIs
JSON

--- Page 33 ---
URLSession
Making our first API call
JSONDecoder and Decodable
Completion block, Enumeration, and threads
Main Thread
Background Thread
Asynchronous Programming with Async Await
Conclusion
 
8. Networking with SwiftUI - Part 2
Introduction
Structure
Laying out the project
OAuth 2.0
Setting up Unsplash APIs
Authorization with OAuth 2.0
Presenting a website inside our app with WebKit
POST request and GET request
Singleton design pattern
Completing the project

--- Page 34 ---
Downloading images from URL using URLSession
Conclusion
 
9. Local Storage with UserDefaults, CoreData, and File Manager
Introduction
Structure
Persistency with Local Storage
UserDefaults
Introduction to CoreData
Setting up CoreData in SwiftUI
Read and write data with CoreData in SwiftUI
Storing images inside users’ phones with File Manager
Conclusion
 
10. Construct Beautiful Charts with Swift Charts
Introduction
Structure
Introduction to Swift Charts
Swift Charts foundations
Setting up the project

--- Page 35 ---
Creating a Bar chart
Creating a Line chart
Creating a Pie chart
Creating a Donut chart
Conclusion
 
iOS 17 Appendix
Reference
 
Index

--- Page 36 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 37 ---
CHAPTER 1
 
Swift Language

--- Page 38 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 39 ---
 
Introduction
 
Swift is a powerful and modern programming language that was introduced
by Apple in 2014. It has quickly gained popularity among developers due to
its simplicity, safety, and performance. Swift is designed to be easy to learn
and use, even for those who have never coded before, yet it is also a
language that can be used to develop complex applications for iOS, macOS,
watchOS, and tvOS. With its concise syntax and advanced features, such as
optionals and closures, Swift is a versatile language that can be used for a
wide range of applications. In this era of mobile and desktop computing,
Swift is a language that every programmer should consider learning to stay
competitive in the industry.

--- Page 40 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 41 ---
 
Structure
 
In this chapter, the following topics will be covered:
 
 
Setting up Xcode
 
Variable and constant
 
Type and Optional Type in Swift
 
Common ways to unwrap Optional Type
 
Logical operators
 
Conditional statements
 
Array vs dictionary
 

--- Page 42 ---
Scope and function
 
Struct vs class

--- Page 43 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 44 ---
 
Downloading Xcode
 
On your Mac, go to the AppStore => Search for Xcode => Install it.
Depending on your Wi-Fi, this will take around one to a couple of hours.
When you are done and ready, let’s take a quick tour of it.
 
Xcode 14.2 is used at the moment of writing this book. Now, let’s make our
first Programming Project: “Hello World”.
 
Launch Xcode from your Mac, and then on the top left, select File => New
=> Project:
 

--- Page 45 ---
 
Figure 1.1: Launching Xcode
 
In this book, we will only be using the App category for iOS, and most iOS
developments will choose this Option to start a New Project. While there are
other things to explore, they are just templates with pre-setups. The option
App will provide a clean New one to start. Now, click Next.
 

--- Page 46 ---
 
Figure 1.2: Setting of project metadata
 
 
Here we will be setting the Project important metadata. The Name of this
Project which will be Hello World. The Team here is the Developer Team.
Now if you want to ship App to AppStore then you will need to buy yearly
Subscription which will be $99 for Individual and $199 for Corporation. But
if you just doing it for your own in the Personal Computer then just register
your team with your personal Apple ID. One of the best advice here is just
keep building and learning until you are fully ready then consider buying a
real Developer Program.
 

--- Page 47 ---
Next is the Organization Identifier, which has to be a Unique String
(Sentence). As you can see, the Organization Identifier and the Product
Name will be used to generate the Bundle Identifier of the Project. The
purpose of the Bundle Identifier is to uniquely identify one Project from
many others App on the AppStore. The common practice here is to use the
Reverse of your own Website Domain. If you don’t have one, then we
suggest this format: com.your_name.your_birthday.your_app_name.
Anyway, make sure it is Unique.
 
For the Interface, make sure to select SwiftUI. Storyboard is for UIKit
development, which won’t be covered in this Book. The Programming
language is Swift, and also, uncheck Core Data and Tests options. Those are
not needed right now.
 
Then, hit Next to choose where you want to Save this Project. We will Save
it on the Desktop for now. Let’s see what we got for the first Project:
 

--- Page 48 ---
 
Figure 1.3: Development Environment
 
Here is our Project on Xcode, and we can clearly categorize them into four
sections. Let’s go one by one from left to right:
 
 
Within the Red Rectangle Section is our File Management. We will mostly
spend time create New Files and Navigate between the File System here.
There also more important functionalities on this Tab like: Searching
through Project, Information about Memory Usage, Perform Testing and
Location of debuggers.
 

--- Page 49 ---
Within the Yellow Rectangle will be our Coding Space. As you can see the
File named Content View been selected from the left. This is the Code inside
it and we will be writing Swift Code here.
 
Next inside the Blue Area is our Live Preview which is only available for
SwiftUI projects. Here will appear exactly what is written from the code
from the Blue Rectangle. There are an Image of a globe and a text “Hello
World”. And as we code and modify, the Live Preview will change
automatically to reflect what it is look like on real device. And it is also
interactive too. Actions will work like button click or the logic of the App.
Pretty great as this is one of the game changers compare to the older ways.
 
Now we have the Green one on the right side. It is like a quick, convenient
interface Toolbox. Like where you select font, color, alignment on Words or
brusher and effects on Photoshop.
 
You may also notice there is a small Purple down there at the bottom-right
corner of the Blue section. Well, that button will open up another Area which
is the Debug Area. But more on it later when we are making projects. Now
let’s learn some Swift first.

--- Page 50 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 51 ---
 
Defining variable
 
In a programming language, a variable is a storage location in a computer’s
memory that has been given a name and a data type, and it can be used to
store a value of that data type. The value of a variable can change during the
execution of a program, which makes it a useful tool for storing data that can
be manipulated and used to solve problems. Variables are an essential part of
programming and are used in almost every program that is written.
 
Here's an abstract example: think about a Variable like a box that has enough
space to contain something. You store the value by assigning it to the
Variable with the = syntax. The value can be a Number or a text message
that will be stored inside that box. Then, later whenever that value is needed,
you can always open the Box to take it out and use it.
 
Open Xcode to the Playground, and let’s declare some variables.
 
File => New => Playground => choose the MacOS tab with the blank
option. This is just a convenient way to write plain code and see what
happens:
 

--- Page 52 ---
 
Figure 1.4: Variable versus Constant
 
We declare three variables here: greeting, myName, and myAge. You can
see their inside value on the left side. First, let’s distinguish between a
variable and a constant. Both are used to store value, but as the name
implies, a variable is a value that is expected to change, like myAge here
because I am getting older and older. But my name does not change over
time, so it should be a Constant. As you will see later, it is totally fine when
we try to change myAge, but it is an error when we try to change myName.
We use var to declare a Variable and let to declare a constant. Now, you may
ask, then why we don’t just use var all the time for everything? Well, the
answer is performance optimization. It’s generally a good idea to use
constants whenever possible because they can help to prevent accidental
changes to important values that could affect the behavior of a program.

--- Page 53 ---
Constants also make it easier to understand the code because the values they
represent are clearly marked as being fixed.
 
Also, one thing to remember is that we use // to write a comment in our
Swift Code. A comment is a piece of text in a code file that is not executed
as part of the program. Comments are used to explain/clarify the code, or to
add notes or suggestions for other developers/or your future self who may be
reading/rereading the code.
 
Now let’s shift our focus to the part after the variable / constant name, where
we see :String and :Int. These are Type Annotation used to specify the type
of a variable or constant. They can be very useful for providing clarity and
for catching type-related errors at compile time. The code in the
aforementioned example can be interpreted as follows: we want to create
two variables, greeting and myName, which will be of type String (for Text),
and 1 constant, myAge, which will be of type Int (for a whole number).
 
It's generally a good idea to use type annotations whenever the type of a
variable or constant is not immediately obvious from the context, or the
value being assigned. However, it's important to keep in mind that type
annotations are not required in Swift, and, in many cases, the type can be
inferred from the value being assigned.
 
If you are completely new to programming, you will be confused here about
Type: What is it and what does it mean?
 
In Swift, a Type is a classification of values that determines what operations
can be performed on those values. Every value in Swift has a type, which is
specified when the value is created. For example, the string literal "Hello,

--- Page 54 ---
playground" is a value of type String, the integer literal 26 is a value of type
Int, and the floating-point literal pi 3.14159 is a value of type Double.
 
In Swift, there are two main categories of types as follows:
 
 
Nominal types: It include user-defined types such as classes (class),
structures (struct), enumerations (enum), and protocols (protocol).
 
Structural types: It include all other types, such as the built-in types like
Integer (Int), floating number (Double), true false value (Bool), and for
text (String), as well as compound types like tuples and optional types.
 
We will soon see and use all of these in later chapters.
 
Each Type in Swift defines a set of characteristics that determine how values
of that type can be used. For example, the String type defines methods and
properties for working with strings, the Int type defines methods and
properties for working with integers, and so on.
 
Types are an important concept in Swift because they help to ensure that
values are used correctly and safely in your code. They also enable the Swift
compiler to optimize the performance of your code by generating efficient
machine code for the different types of values.
 

--- Page 55 ---
Swift is a type-safe language, which means the language helps you to be
clear about the types of values your code can work with. If part of your code
requires a String, type safety prevents you from passing it an Int by mistake.
Likewise, type safety prevents you from accidentally passing an optional
String to a piece of code that requires a non-optional String. Type safety
helps you catch and fix errors as early as possible in the development
process:
 
 
Figure 1.5: Swift is Type strict
 
We try to change myAge to “Jack”, and Xcode auto notify us with a very
descriptive error that it cannot assign a String to a type Int variable. Here is
one of the most effective shortcuts to remember: on your Mac, hold the
Option key + right click on the variable name => you will be able to check
which Type it is supposed to be: myAge should be an Int here.

--- Page 56 ---
 
Some people find it difficult and not convenient with Type-Safe Language.
However, it makes our code predictable, less Buggy, and better compile
time. Type-safe languages help prevent type errors, which are errors that
occur when a value has a different type than what is expected. These errors
can be difficult to spot and can lead to unexpected behavior in a program. By
ensuring that all values have the correct type, type-safe languages can help
make code more predictable and easier to debug. Additionally, type-safety
can help improve the performance of a program, as the compiler can
optimize code more effectively when it knows the types of variables at
compile time. Finally, type-safety can also make it easier to reason about
code, as it can help ensure that values are used consistently and in ways that
are compatible with their intended purpose.

--- Page 57 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 58 ---
 
Optional Type and nil
 
In Swift, there is also one value that any variable/constant can be: nil. Nil
here means nothing, an unknown value, or the absence of value. Why can a
variable be in this state? For various reasons such as wrong decoding,
missing data, or because we purposely want it to be because we don’t have
the value of it yet when we declare it.
 
An optional is a type that can either hold a value or hold nil, indicating that
the value is absent. Optionals are used to represent values that may be absent
or unknown. We can have an optional Int, which can be Int or nil, option
String, or of any other type. Optionals are denoted using a ? after the type
name:
 
 
Figure 1.6: Unwrapping
 

--- Page 59 ---
To use the value of an Optional, we need to unwrap it. There are some ways
but here we are using the if let closure. Again, Swift is type-safe language,
so we cannot have a nil value when it is supposed to use/receive an Integer.
 
Now, let’s look at some common ways to unwrap optional types in Swift.

--- Page 60 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 61 ---
 
Common ways to unwrap Optional Type
 
In Swift, there are several ways to unwrap optional types, depending on the
situation and your preference for handling potential nil values. Here are the
most common ways to unwrap optionals:

--- Page 62 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 63 ---
 
Forced Unwrapping
 
This method is denoted by adding an exclamation mark “!” after the optional
variable or property. It forcefully unwraps the optional, assuming that it has
a non-nil value:
 
 
Figure 1.7: Force unwrapping
 
However, if the optional is nil at runtime, it will cause a runtime crash (a
"fatal error: unexpectedly found nil while unwrapping an Optional" error).
Because of it, this is not a recommended way in practice.
 
Optional Binding with if let:
 
Using the if let construct, you can conditionally unwrap an optional and
assign its non-nil value to a new variable within the scope of the if block.
This method avoids crashes and allows you to handle the case where the
optional might be nil:
 

--- Page 64 ---
 
Figure 1.8: Optional binding with if-let
 
Optional Binding with guard let:
 
Similar to if let, guard let is used to conditionally unwrap an optional and
assign its non-nil value to a new variable. It is usually used within functions
to exit early if the optional is nil, making the rest of the function safe to use
with the unwrapped value:
 
 
Figure 1.9: Optional binding with guard-let
 

--- Page 65 ---
Nil Coalescing Operator ??
 
The nil coalescing operator provides a way to provide a default value when
an optional is nil. It unwraps the optional if it has a value, or returns the
default value specified on the right-hand side if the optional is nil:
 
 
Figure 1.10: nil coalescing operator

--- Page 66 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 67 ---
 
Optional Chaining
 
Optional chaining is a way to call methods, access properties, or call
subscripts on an optional that might be nil. If the optional is nil, the entire
expression evaluates to nil without causing a runtime crash:
 
 
Figure 1.11: Optional chaining
 
We will learn about Struct later in this chapter. Each of these methods has its
use cases, and the choice of which one to use depends on the scenario and
how you want to handle potential nil values.
 
Optionals are a powerful feature of Swift and are used extensively in the
language, particularly when working with optional values or when handling
errors.

--- Page 68 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 69 ---
 
Logical operators
 
In the Swift programming language, operators are special symbols or
characters that perform specific operations on one or more values and return
a result.
 
Swift supports a variety of operators, including arithmetic operators,
comparison operators, logical operators, assignment operators, range
operators, and more.
 
Here are some examples of common operators in Swift:
 
 
Arithmetic operators: + (addition), - (subtraction), * (multiplication), /
(division)
 
Comparison operators: == (equal to), != (not equal to), > (greater than),
< (less than), >= (greater than or equal to), <= (less than or equal to)
 
Logical operators: && (and), || (or), ! (not, opposite)
 
Assignment operators: = (assign a value to a variable or constant), +=
(add and assign), -= (subtract and assign), *= (multiply and assign), /=

--- Page 70 ---
(divide and assign)
 
Range operators: ..< (half-open range), ... (closed range)
 
 
Figure 1.12: Swift operators
 
Operators in Swift can be used in expressions and can be combined with
other operators with Logical Operators to create more complex expressions.
Because SwiftUI is a declarative programming style, we will be using a lot
of operators when developing using it.

--- Page 71 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 72 ---
 
Conditional statements
 
Sometimes, it is useful to execute different sections of code based on certain
conditions. This can include running additional code when an error occurs or
displaying a message when a value becomes too high or low or when it’s
true or false. To achieve this, you can make certain parts of your code
conditional.
 
In Swift, there are two ways to add conditional branching to your code: the if
statement and the switch statement. The if statement is generally used for
evaluating simple conditions with a limited number of possible outcomes,
while the switch statement is better for more complex conditions with
multiple potential combinations and can be helpful in cases where pattern
matching can aid in selecting the appropriate code branch to execute. The
best practice is to consider using switch statement when there are more than
three different states.
 
Here is an example, both will have the same result:
 

--- Page 73 ---
 
Figure 1.13: if else vs switch case
 
Sometimes, what we want is not just one condition alone. This is where the
use case of Logical Operators comes in: && means and, || mean or, ! means
the opposite of it. These will become very handy in coding later, especially
when we want a different appearance when some conditions are satisfied.
 
Here are the examples:
 

--- Page 74 ---
 
Figure 1.14: Example of conditions
 
Now, there is one important concept to note here: The Ternary Condition
Operator.
 
The ternary conditional operator is a special operator with three parts, which
takes the form: question ? answer1 : answer2.
 
It is a shorthand way to write an if statement that returns a value. Both the
following codes are the same:
 

--- Page 75 ---
 
Figure 1.15: Ternary condition operator
 
Because of the way SwiftUI code work, we will be purposely using a lot of
ternary conditional operator. So, it is better to get used to it.

--- Page 76 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 77 ---
 
Collection Type: Array
 
There will be times when we find ourselves needing a collection of related
data, not just a single one. For example, 7 days of the week or all 30 days of
the month. This is why we need Collection Types in every Programming
Language. In Swift, there are several different types of collections, including
array, dictionary, and set. We will talk about Array and Dictionary since they
are commonly used.
 
Definition: An array is an ordered list of values. The same value can
appear in an array multiple times at different positions. All of the
elements inside it must be of the same Type. You can use an array to
store a list of items, such as strings, numbers, or even other arrays.
 
Here's an example of how you can create an array in Swift:
 
 
Figure 1.16: Create an array
 

--- Page 78 ---
When dealing with collection types, the actions that are frequently used
include accessing, modifying, and iterating through all values. Let’s explore
those now for an Array.
 
Remember that an array is an ordered list, and we can access the value we
need by its index. Each Element of an Array will have an index representing
its current position, and the starting index will always be 0:
 
 
Figure 1.17: Array visualization
 
It’s such a famous concept that we programmers have a joke that we start
counting from 0, not 1. We access an array value by the syntax:
ArrayName[index]. And if we want to change its inside value, we just use
the assign operator: ArrayName[index] = newValue. We also use count – 1
to access the last index: .count is a property available with all Collection

--- Page 79 ---
Types and will return the length of it. We substract 1 because Array index
starts from 0.
 
We use .append() above to add more items to the end of an Array. There are
other modifications such as adding more items or removing item(s) from an
Array. All are available inside Swift Language, and you will easily find them
with just a simple search on Google.
 
One more thing to note here is that if we want to modify or change the value
of an Array, we must declare it as a Variable with var syntax.
 
When using Collection Types, most of the time, there will always be one that
we want to iterate through every Element of it. In Programming, we can do
this with the help of Loop.
 
A loop is a control flow construct that allows a block of code to be executed
repeatedly. There are several types of loops in Swift, including for loops,
while loops, and repeat loops.
 
Here is an example of using a for loop to iterate through our weekdays
Array:
 

--- Page 80 ---
 
Figure 1.18: For loop
 
There are two ways to use a for loop here. One is where we only need the
value, and the other is where we also need its index position. And we can get
both returned to us by .enumerated(). These two ways are the most use cases,
so, keep that in your mind. Now, let’s move on to discuss our next Collection
Type: Dictionary.

--- Page 81 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 82 ---
 
Collection type - Dictionary
 
Definition: The first thing to imply here is that, unlike an Array, a
Dictionary is an unordered list. This means the value we store in them
will not be in the same order each time we retrieve them.
 
Each element of a Dictionary will be a key-value pair. Each value is
associated with a unique key, which acts as an identifier for that value within
the dictionary. You use a dictionary when you need to look up values based
on their identifier, in much the same way that a real-world dictionary is used
to look up the definition for a particular word. Dictionaries are a powerful
tool for storing data, and they’re particularly useful when you need to look
up values quickly:
 
 
Figure 1.19: Dictionary visualization

--- Page 83 ---
 
Here's an example of how to create a dictionary in Swift:
 
 
Figure 1.20: Dictionary example
 
In this example, the dictionary is a collection of names and their
corresponding favorite fruits. The keys are the names (Anna, Brian, and
Craig), which are of type String, and the values are the favorite fruits
("Apple", "Banana", and "Coconut"), which are also String.
 
We can then access and check the inside value using a specific key. If it is
does not exist yet, like in my case, then Swift will return nil. Later, there are
commonly used actions, just like in an Array, including adding, updating,
and removing value. Now to iterate through a Dictionary, we can use the
same syntax with a for loop, just like we have already done with an Array.
However, because a Dictionary is an unordered list, every time we run the
loop, the order of each element will be different. And instead of an index to
find where the value is located, Dictionary will have a key to do that.

--- Page 84 ---
 
There are several key differences between Array and Dictionary that can
influence when you might choose to use one over the other. Here are some
factors to consider:
 
 
Access time: Arrays are index-based, so you can access elements in an
array quickly by their position in the array. Dictionaries, on the other
hand, are key-based, so you access values by looking up the key. In
general, it's faster to look up a value in a dictionary than it is to search
through an array for a particular value.
 
Ordering: Arrays maintain the order of their elements, so if you need to
preserve the order of your items, an array might be a better choice.
Dictionaries, on the other hand, do not maintain the order of their key-value
pairs.
 
Uniqueness: Arrays can contain multiple copies of the same value, but
dictionary keys must be unique. If you need to ensure that there are no
duplicate values in your collection, a dictionary might be a better choice.
 
Overall, you should choose an array when you need an ordered collection of
values that may contain duplicates, or when you need to store values of
different types. You should choose a dictionary when you need to look up
values quickly using a unique key, or when you need to ensure that there are
no duplicate keys in your collection.
 

--- Page 85 ---
There is one more Collection Type in Swift: Set. We won’t be covering it
here, but if you have time, take a look at it. It has some very interesting and
special characteristics.
 
And well, that’s quite a whole lot of knowledge. So, take some rest before
we jump into one of the most important building block Concept of
Programming: Function.

--- Page 86 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 87 ---
 
Function
 
So far, we have discussed ways of storing Data. In App Development and
Programming itself, almost everything we do can be simplified into either
Storing Data or Processing Data.
 
Data can be created and stored in a variety of formats, such as variables,
arrays, dictionaries, databases, or in some kind of complicated Data
Structure. Programmers use different Data Structures to store data efficiently
and retrieve it quickly. There is no such perfect solution, each has pros and
cons. And being able to choose the suitable one for the specific circumstance
is a crucial skill of a good programmer.
 
Processing data is another crucial aspect of programming. After being
created or stored, Data then is often processed to make it more useful or to
perform some action. Common operations include sorting, searching,
filtering, and transforming data. This step is the main purpose of Function.
 
Definition: In programming, a function is a block of code that performs
a specific task. Functions are often used to encapsulate a specific piece
of functionality, making it easier to understand and maintain large and
complex codebases.
 
We have already seen and used some of Swift’s built-in functions previously,
such as append(), which receives an Element and performs the action to add
it at the end position of an Array.

--- Page 88 ---
 
When coding, just like with variables, we will frequently make our own
function. We give a function a name that identifies what it does, and this
name is used to call the function to perform its task when needed. Functions
can take one or more inputs (also called parameters or arguments) and return
one or more outputs (or return values).
 
Here’s an example of a function that can append two elements at the same
time:
 
 
Figure 1.21: define and call a function
 
Again, because Swift is a type-safe language, when declaring two input
parameters (element1 and element2) for this function, we have to specify
which type they are.
 
A function can return one or more outputs (or return values) after its
execution. We do this by using the return keyword:
 

--- Page 89 ---
 
Figure 1.22: Using return keywords with function
 
Many newcomers have some confusion about the return concept. So here are
two examples of adding two value functions: one with return and another
without. In both cases, the action of a + b is being executed. The difference
depends on whether we want to save/store the result for later usage: result1
will have a value, and result2 will not. Because after execution, things will
be lost unless we return and store them. Also, do notice the syntax of
add2ValueWithReturn, after the closing ):
 
-> Int. This means that this function will return an Int value. Just like
parameters, a return value must have a specific Type when we define a
function.
 
Anything after the return keyword won’t be executed. Because of this
characteristic, when combined with the if-else condition, things become very
neat and flexible.

--- Page 90 ---
 
Another benefit of using functions is that they allow you to organize your
code into logical, reusable blocks. You can use functions to group together
related code and then call that function whenever you need to perform that
specific task. This is the DRY principle (Don't repeat yourself), which is a
software development principle that states that similar or identical code
should be refactored into a single function or class, rather than duplicated.
This can make your code more readable, maintainable, and testable.
 
Functions can also be nested, meaning a function can call another function
within it to create more complex logic. In the preceding example, append() is
also a function being called inside our custom one.
 
In Swift, functions are first-class citizens, which means they can be treated
like any other value, such as an Integer or a String. This means that functions
can be assigned to variables, passed as arguments to other functions, and
returned as the output of a function. This allows for powerful functional
programming constructs, such as higher-order functions and closures.
 
Bear in mind that it will be difficult to grasp this Concept even for
experienced programming. The important part to take away here is that Swift
function can be used just like a variable.
 
Here is an example:
 

--- Page 91 ---
 
Figure 1.23: use function as a parameter of another function
 
In this example, the doSomething function takes two arguments as follows:
 
 
a function fn that takes an Int and returns an Int
 
an Int x
 
When we call doSomething(fn: double, x: 10), we pass the double function
as the argument for fn and 10 as the argument for x. Inside the doSomething
function, we call the fn function with the argument x and assign the result to
a variable result. Finally, we return the result.
 

--- Page 92 ---
Once again, this is a hard-to-grasp concept and will require a lot of practice
in coding. So, for now, let’s focus on the question: Why are we doing this?
What are the benefits we have when function are first-class citizens? It’s
always best to understand the Purpose before jumping into learning and
doing.
 
There are several benefits of using functions as first-class citizens in a
programming language, such as the ability to pass functions as arguments to
other functions. Some of the key benefits include:
 
 
Code Reusability: You can write a function that takes other functions as
arguments, and use that function in multiple places in your code,
making your code more reusable.
 
Code Composability: You can write small, simple functions that do one
thing well, and then compose them together to create more complex
functionality. This allows for a more modular and maintainable
codebase.
 
Abstraction: By passing functions as arguments, you can abstract away the
implementation details of a certain piece of functionality, making it easier to
reason about and understand.
 
Declarative Programming: By expressing computation in terms of
function composition, it allows you to focus on what you want to
accomplish rather than how to accomplish it, making your code more
readable and maintainable.

--- Page 93 ---
 
Functional Programming: The ability to pass functions as arguments is
a key feature of functional programming, which is a programming
paradigm that emphasizes immutability, pure functions, and function
composition. Functional programming can make your code more
predictable, easier to test, and less prone to errors.
 
These are just a few examples of the benefits of using functions as first-class
citizens in a programming language. It can be a powerful tool for writing
clean, maintainable, and reusable code.
 
Now, remember earlier when we introduced SwiftUI, that it is a Declarative
framework. To be able to achieve it, Functional Programming is the crucial
part. We will see it all over the place when we do SwiftUI coding. However,
there is one more Concept.
 
Closure: In Swift, a closure is a self-contained block of functionality that
can be passed around and used in your code. A function is also a closure
in Swift. Closures can be defined using the { } syntax and can capture
variables from the surrounding context:
 
 

--- Page 94 ---
Figure 1.24: Use closure as a parameter of another function
 
We redo the same example using a closure. With it, we don’t have to
predefine the double function. In Swift, closure comes with many syntactic
sugars, and things can get pretty complex. Here is still the same code:
 
 
Figure 1.25: Syntactic sugar for closure
 
This will be also hard to grasp and will take a lot of practice. But don’t
worry about those shortcuts if they confuse you, those two are the same. The
most important thing is readability, which is a priority for us programmers.
Over time, every programmer will learn that code is written to be read by
ourselves or our peer programmers in the future. So, don’t confuse your
future self and write clear, easy-to-read code, and add comments for better
understanding. No one blames you for a couple of more lines. Now, let’s
understand the benefits that closure brings.
 
Closures have several benefits in Swift programming as follows:
 
 
Conciseness: Closures allow you to write concise, expressive code that is
easy to read and understand. They can also help to reduce the amount of
boilerplate code you need to write.

--- Page 95 ---
 
Flexibility: Closures can be passed around as arguments, making it easy to
write code that can be reused in multiple places. This allows for more
flexible and modular code.
 
Abstraction: Closures can help to abstract away complex logic and make
your code more readable. You can use closures to encapsulate a specific
piece of functionality and then pass it around your codebase, making it easy
to understand what the code is doing.
 
Asynchronous programming: Closures are commonly used in
asynchronous programming, such as in completion handlers and
callbacks. Closures can be used to pass code that will be executed when
an asynchronous task completes, making it easy to handle the results of
the task.
 
Higher-Order Function: Closures can be used in higher-order functions
like map, filter, reduce, and so on, which makes the code more readable,
shorter and easy to understand.
 
Memory management: Closure capture list allows you to control the
memory management of closure by specifying the relationship between
the closure and the objects it references.
 
Well, this section sure has a lot to capture, and we are sure it will always be a
great place to come back to later. This is because SwiftUI is a Declarative
framework based on Functional Programming. We talked about Function

--- Page 96 ---
and their importance. We used them to encapsulate a specific piece of
functionality, making it easier to understand and maintain.
 
In Swift, functions are first-class citizens, which means they can be treated
like any other value of a variable. A function can be a parameter of another
function and can be passed around just like a Variable. Closure, in short, can
be thought of as an anonymous function. A block of code being passed
around without needing to be predefined. Let’s talk about a related Concept
to Function and Variable: Scope.

--- Page 97 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 98 ---
 
Scope
 
In programming, scope refers to the parts of the code where a variable,
function, or other identifier is accessible. The scope of an identifier
determines where it can be used and accessed.
 
In Swift, there are two main types of scope: global scope and local scope.
 
 
Global scope: Identifiers defined at the global level, outside of any
function or class, have global scope. These identifiers can be accessed
from anywhere in the code.
 
Local scope: Identifiers defined inside a function or class have local
scope. These identifiers can only be accessed within the function or class
where they are defined.
 
It’s important to understand the scope of an identifier because it can have an
impact on the way your code behaves and can also help you to avoid naming
conflicts and other issues that can arise when multiple identifiers have the
same name.
 
Figure 1.26 gives us an example of scope in Swift:
 

--- Page 99 ---
 
Figure 1.26: Scope in Swift
 
In this example, globalVariable is defined at the global level, outside of any
function or class, and therefore has global scope. It can be accessed from
anywhere in the code. localVariable is defined inside the someFunction()
function and therefore has local scope. It can only be accessed within the
function where it is defined.
 
When we try to access localVariable outside of the someFunction() function,
we get an error because the variable is not defined in that scope.
 
Additionally, Swift has block-level scope, which means that identifiers
defined inside a block of code, such as a loop or an if statement, have a
scope that is limited to that block:
 
 

--- Page 100 ---
Figure 1.27: Outside of scope
 
In this example, blockVariable is defined inside the if statement block and
can only be accessed within that block. Once the if statement is completed,
the variable will not be available in the outer scope.
 
Simple but bringing many benefits to programming include:
 
 
Organization: Scope helps to organize your code by keeping related
identifiers together and separate from other identifiers that may have the
same name. This makes it easier to understand and maintain your code.
 
Clarity: By controlling the scope of identifiers, you can make your code
more readable and clearer. This makes it easier to identify the purpose and
use of each identifier, and can help to prevent naming conflicts and other
issues.
 
Reusability: By controlling the scope of identifiers, you can make your code
more reusable. For example, by keeping the scope of a variable or function
local, you can make it specific to a particular use case, and reuse it in other
parts of the code.
 
Memory Management: Block-level scope helps to manage the memory
usage of the variable. Once the block is completed, the variable will be
deallocated and the memory will be freed.

--- Page 101 ---
 
Modularity: By controlling the scope of identifiers, you can make your code
more modular. For example, by keeping the scope of a variable or function
internal, you can make it accessible only within the module it is defined, and
not outside of it, making the code more secure.
 
Encapsulation: By controlling the scope of identifiers, you can use
encapsulation to hide implementation details and protect the internal state of
an object, making it more robust and less prone to errors.
 
The best practice here is to always avoid using global scope. Declare things
at the scope level that is needed only. It sounds simple, and it really is. Just
remember this whenever writing new code, all the benefits will come, from
Better Performance to clarity and cleanliness of the codebase.
 
The scope of an identifier can also be controlled by the access level (public,
internal, fileprivate, private) of the identifier, which defines the parts of the
code where it can be accessed. We will cover all of these in the next section
when we will discuss it.

--- Page 102 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 103 ---
 
Struct
 
Struct is an important concept of Swift Language and will be a crucial part
when developing in SwiftUI. As a result of this, this section will require a lot
of focus from you, readers.
 
Structures/Struct and later classes/class are general-purpose, flexible
constructs that become the building blocks of our program’s code. We define
properties and methods to add functionality to our structures and classes
using the same syntax we use to define constants, variables, and functions.
 
Previously, we have created a lot of variables to store Data. However, here is
a case to think about: What if we want Data to store all the needed
information about a Student? This includes their name, age, height, weight,
all scores of the semester, and so on. Of course, we can create separate
variables for each metric, but it will be hard to track them later. As a result,
general-purpose Data Structures like Struct exist to store related data for us
to freely customize. We will talk about struct first and then class later, and
discuss their main differences.
 
Think about struct like our own customized type. Unlike Int, where we have
to input an Integer, with struct, we declare what will be needed and package
them in one place for later usage.
 
Here, we declare a Student struct as shown in Figure 1.28:
 

--- Page 104 ---
 
Figure 1.28: Define and use Struct
 
We define a Student struct starting with the keyword struct. Inside it, we
declare its properties, such as id, name, isMale, age, and scores. Then, later,
we create studentJohn, which is an Instance of struct Student. Let’s go
through all these terms one by one.
 
Instance: an instance refers to a specific occurrence of a class or struct. It is
an object created at runtime from a class or struct definition, with its own
unique set of data and behavior. The properties and methods defined in the
class or struct are available to be used by the instance. Instances are created
using the initializer method of the class or struct.
 
For better visualization, think of a struct or class as a Blueprint from which
you create objects. Here, a Car or Student struct/class is a blueprint that
describes what it will have or need. Then, from it, we can create specific
object/instances like studentJohn or studentJames, or an Audi card, Nissan
car, and Volvo car (Figure 1.29).

--- Page 105 ---
 
 
Figure 1.29: Struct / Class vs Instance / Object
 
Properties associate values with a particular class or struct. Also, we can
make them variables and constants. Again, avoid variable when it is
unnecessary. We can get access to Instance properties using the “.” syntax:
 
 
Figure 1.30: Accessing instance’s properties
 
Here, we access and change the age of John because it is a variable.
However, we can’t change isMale because we declare it as a constant.
 

--- Page 106 ---
Just like value, we can also associate specific functions with a particular
class or struct. When this happens, we call those functions methods:
 
 
Figure 1.31: Usage of mutating keyword
 
Here, we define two functions, singASong and increaseAge, and call them
with a . keyword. Note the difference here is the appearance of mutating
syntax. Both functions are using their property, but when we want to change
the properties of the Instance: age here, we have to mark the function
increaseAge with the perquisite keyword mutating.
 
Now, remember from the previous section where we mentioned the five
keywords: open, public, internal, fileprivate, private with accessing level.

--- Page 107 ---
Let’s have some discussion about them here.
 
In the Swift programming language, there are five levels of access control as
follows:
 
 
Open: The least restrictive access level, which allows entities to be sub
classed and overridden within the current module and also in other modules
that import the module where the entity is defined. This access level is
typically used for public interfaces that need to be accessible outside the
defining module.
 
Public: Similar to Open, but it doesn't allow entities to be sub classed or
overridden outside the module where they are defined. However, entities
marked as public can still be accessed from other modules.
 
Internal: The default access level if none is specified. Entities with internal
access are accessible within the module where they are defined but not
outside of it.
 
Fileprivate: Entities marked with fileprivate are accessible only within the
same Swift source file where they are defined. This is useful for restricting
access to implementation details that should not be exposed outside the file.
 
Private: The most restrictive access level, which limits access to the
enclosing declaration (class, struct, or extension). Entities marked as private
can only be accessed within the scope of the enclosing declaration.

--- Page 108 ---
 
By default, classes, structs, enums, and members are considered internal,
unless explicitly specified otherwise.
 
Now, Accessible from the same module means that the class, struct, enum,
or member can be accessed from any source file within the same module in
which it is defined, but not from outside of that module.
 
In Swift, a module is a single unit of code distribution, such as a framework
or application bundle, which can be imported by another module using the
import keyword. It defines a namespace, and all the entities (types,
functions, variables, and so on) defined within a module are scoped to that
module.
 
For example, if you have an internal struct called MyStruct defined in a
framework called MyFramework, other parts of MyFramework can access
MyStruct. However, if you have another module that imports
MyFramework, it won't be able to access MyStruct.
 
In summary:
 
 
open: The most permissive access level in Swift, allowing entities to be
subclassed and overridden both within the current module and other
importing modules.
 

--- Page 109 ---
public: Access level allowing entities to be accessed from other modules but
not subclassed or overridden outside the defining module.
 
internal: The default access level, enabling entities to be accessible within
the same module but not from outside modules.
 
fileprivate: Restricts access to entities within the same Swift source file.
 
private: The most restrictive access level, limiting access to the enclosing
declaration (class, struct, or extension).
 
Enumeration: enum is a very interesting concept that can be used very
effectively with switch cases. We will talk and code about them in a later
chapter.
 
Next, for the end of this chapter, we will briefly go through Class and
discuss their main difference with struct. Class and OOP (Object Oriented
Programming) are very important concepts in programming.

--- Page 110 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 111 ---
 
Class and Class vs Struct
 
Class is also a general-purpose, flexible construct and the blueprint for the
Instance/Object. Let’s make a Student with Class, similar to the above
example:
 
 
Figure 1.32: Define and use Class in Swift
 

--- Page 112 ---
Here, we define StudentClass as a Blueprint of a Student, and just like
studentJohn in the previous example, we can now create studentEmma with
the same syntax, and everything looks just the same from the outside. Before
we go into detail, let’s point out two differences compared with the Struct
declare syntax:
 
 
Initialization: now both class and struct also require initialization. It is a
method/function that is used to set up or prepare an object for use. “init”
special keyword in Swift so we don’t need the func keyword, but it is a
function. Inside it we declare the required parameters for this class. Now
inside a class or struct, the keyword self refers to the Instance/Object of it.
So, inside the init function on the left side follow the yellow arrow we are
referring to its properties and assign it (“=”) with the value on the right side
follow the green one we are the parameters of the function. Later, we create
studentEmma the init function will be call to set up all required data. The
data will flow with the way of the three yellow arrows. So, the question you
may ask here is why don’t we write this init when we define Student Struct
on previous Examples. The answer is that in Swift, struct comes with a
prebuilt init for use so we don’t have to rewrite it, quite convenient. And yes,
if you want to write it yourself then you absolutely can.
 
Noticing that we don’t need the keyword mutating for the increateAge
function anymore. The functionality of these two are the same and both will
increase the age. But the reason behind this is also one the main difference
between Class and Struct. In Swift, Struct is immutable and Class is
mutable. By this we mean whenever we change a property of an Instance of
Struct, the old Instance will be destroyed and the new one will be created in
replacement. On the opposite, the Instance of the Class is still the same when
their properties value changed.
 
Here are some of the key differences between structs and classes in Swift:

--- Page 113 ---
 
 
Value vs Reference Types: Structs are value types, which means that
when they are assigned to a variable or constant, a copy of the struct is
made. Classes, on the other hand, are reference types, which means that
when they are assigned to a variable or constant, a reference to the
original class is stored.
 
Mutability: By default, structs properties are considered to be immutable,
while class properties are mutable.
 
Inheritance: Structs do not have inheritance and cannot be subclassed,
whereas classes can be subclassed and inherit from other classes.
 
Initializers: Structs automatically get a memberwise initializer for initializing
their properties, whereas classes do not. Classes require you to write your
own initializer for initializing their properties.
 
Deinitializer: Classes have deinitializer method, but structs do not.
 
Reference Counting: Classes use reference counting to manage memory,
whereas structs do not.
 
Efficiency: Accessing properties of structs is generally faster than accessing
properties of classes because of the value type nature.

--- Page 114 ---
 
Now, this is a must-have question in every iOS interview. So, it is a
suggestion to all readers to take more time and research/dive deeper on this
topic. In general, structs are best used for simple data structures that do not
need inheritance or complex behavior, while classes are more appropriate for
complex data structures that need inheritance and advanced behavior.
 
Well, that’s a lot for this chapter. I hope this will be a great resource to come
back to not only when you are reading this book but also later in
development.
 
If you want to dive deeper into the Swift Language, then we highly suggest
starting with Apple’s Swift Language Book, Which is available for free at:
https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/. You can also download it to your iPhone /
iPad through the Book App.
 
In the next chapter, we will discover the most fundamental building block of
SwiftUI: View.

--- Page 115 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 116 ---
CHAPTER 2
 
Introduction to View in SwiftUI

--- Page 117 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 118 ---
 
Introduction
 
In this chapter, we will learn about the Layout concept and ideas in SwiftUI
and understand how to break out complex UI into small and reusable
pieces. By the end of this Chapter, readers are expected to be comfortable
when facing a new Scene or UI Element. Let’s get started.
 
The magic sentence here to remember is: Building layout in SwiftUI is like
Lego Blocks. We build each piece and assemble it.

--- Page 119 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 120 ---
 
Structure
 
In this chapter, the following topics will be covered:
 
 
Fundamental views in SwiftUI
 
Container views: VStack, HStack and ZStack
 
Build a simple layout from SwiftUI components
 
What is the view and protocol in SwiftUI?
 
Introducing View Modifier and View Builder

--- Page 121 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 122 ---
 
Fundamental view
 
Let’s start with a simple example. Let’s say we want to create a Renting
Card Component, which will have the following layout:
 
 
Figure 2.1: The card layout
 
This is the design we want, but where to get started? And how do we tackle
any design layout in SwiftUI? Well, once again, think about it like Lego
blocks. A big complex layout is a combination of many small pieces. To
have a big piece, let’s build each small piece:
 
 

--- Page 123 ---
Figure 2.2: Behind the screen of the card
 
Here, with the colors highlighted for better visualization, we can see how
each small component is placed to form the final Design. Two red and
yellow texts are placed vertically inside the green area. The orange image
and blue circle are placed on top of each other. And those three green and
blue areas are placed horizontally with each other.
 
This can be easily achieved with the help of the three most common and
basic built-in View in SwiftUI: VStack, HStack, and ZStack.
 
These are three stack views in SwiftUI that are used to arrange views in a
vertical, horizontal, and overlapping manner, respectively:
 
VStack (vertical stack) arranges views vertically, one after the other:
 

--- Page 124 ---
 
Figure 2.3: Vertical stack
 
HStack (horizontal stack) arranges views horizontally, side by side:
 

--- Page 125 ---
 
Figure 2.4: Horizontal stack
 
ZStack (z-axis stack) arranges views on top of each other, with the last
view added being on top of the stack:
 

--- Page 126 ---
 
Figure 2.5: Z-axis stack
 
With this new knowledge, let’s open up XCode and build this renting card:
 

--- Page 127 ---
 
Figure 2.6: New project
 
This is how every new project initially appears when it is created. Now, we
clearly understand what is going on here. There is a VStack containing an
Image and a Text: “Hello, World!”. And that’s everything for now, and it is
reflected in the live preview on the right side. And just like with VStack,
Image and Text are built-in views for convenient usage in SwiftUI. Image is
used for loading and displaying an image, and text is used to display a string.
 

--- Page 128 ---
Now, you may wonder how we knew about this. What about other built-in
view and their usage? Well, see that plus button inside the red circle, you can
click on it and explore more. Select the first tab, and there you have a list of
all common built-in views with detailed documentation from Apple. There
are also examples and detailed explanations. With SwiftUI, Apple has done a
great job providing detailed documentation. So, explore and read around
because there are many powerful components like Button, Date Picker,
Color Picker, and those are the power of SwiftUI.
 
 
Figure 2.7: SwiftUI documentation interface for views
 

--- Page 129 ---
One more point to note here is that while developing an app or
programming, there will be times when we want to build some feature but
don’t know where to start. Well, just Google it or ask on Stack Overflow. For
example, instead of an Image, how about displaying a video? Well, just ask,
and there will be an answer.
 
Now, let’s build our renting card:
 
 
Figure 2.8: The card
 
We will start with the right green area, which contains two texts vertically.
 

--- Page 130 ---
 
Figure 2.9: The green area of the card
 
Notice that we use .font(), .fontWeight(), and .padding(). These are called
view modifiers. We will explain them in detail later, but think of them like
features added to views. Here, we want the two texts to have different fonts,
and the smaller one to be bold. The padding modifier is to give additional
horizontal spacing, which is the green space on the left and right of the red
text in the picture above.
 
Then, let’s tackle the left side, which contains an image sitting on top of a
blue circle.
 

--- Page 131 ---
 
Figure 2.10: The blue area of the card
 
As we are already aware that SwiftUI is a Declarative programming, you can
clearly see here that the code is very descriptive and self-explainable. We
have a ZStack with a Circle and an Image, and the order of placement is in
the direction of the red arrow, so the Image will stand on top of a circle.
 
Circle is a Shape, which is a special type of View. There are many
convenient built-in Shapes in SwiftUI, such as Circle, Rectangle,
RoundedRectangle, Capsule, Ellipse, etc. These have many use cases to
create modern style design.
 
Image is used to load and represent an Image in SwiftUI. Here, we are
loading a system Image named house and presenting it. Now, Apple has
provided developers with a collection of vector icons that are very neat.
App developers use a lot of icons in their apps. So, to see what is
available to use, go to the App Store and download the SF Symbols App:
 

--- Page 132 ---
 
Figure 2.11: SF Symbol
 
Here are all the great icons with professional designs for you to use, and
Apple’s Developers have used them all in their apps. So, users are already
familiar with them and their meanings.
 
Now, let’s get back to our renting card. We have built the left and the right
sides, and placing them horizontally is the purpose of HStack:
 

--- Page 133 ---
 
Figure 2.12: The card component’s code
 
Here, the .background modifier is added to the outside HStack to achieve a
bounding border outside of it. We are using the RoundedRectangle shape
with the .stroke modifier. You can also make another ZStack and place the
RoundedRectangle behind the HStack, but it is unnecessary, and the
.background modifier comes in handy in this simple case where we just need
another background layer.
 
Remember, in the previous chapter, we mentioned that SwiftUI is functional
programming. And sitting at the core of the concept is to break into small
reusable components. Let’s do it here.

--- Page 134 ---
 
 
Figure 2.13: Making multiple instances of the card
 
Here, we extract and make a CardComponent that represents the view of
each card. Then, we can make a view with three cards vertically align easily.
This is the power of SwiftUI and functional programming. However, I guess
you might ask how those three renting cards have different information
about different houses. We have already discussed struct and its properties.
Let’s exact the variable information of each card and make their properties.
You can find them with the yellow arrows:
 

--- Page 135 ---
 
Figure 2.14: Generalize the card
 
We have extracted and made three properties that will be the input of
CardComponent: symbolName, title, and subTitle. And with this, we have
three different marketing cards for Home, Cars, and Bikes.
 
Once again, what we were doing here is the core feature of SwiftUI and
functional programming. The primary goal is to make the code easier to

--- Page 136 ---
understand, maintain, and reason about by breaking down complex problems
into smaller, composable, reusable, and predictable parts. Here,
CardComponent is such a great example of this. Inside it, you will find all
the required properties and later methods. They are all wrapped into a
component and ready to use anywhere in the project.
 
Before we continue, we find it better to pause here and try to understand
more about the definition of the important concepts in SwiftUI: What is a
view in SwiftUI? And what is a view modifier?

--- Page 137 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 138 ---
 
View in SwiftUI
 
In SwiftUI, a view is a struct that represents a visual element on the screen.
It can be used to display text, images, and other content, and can be
combined with other views to create more complex user interfaces. View
also has the ability to handle user interactions and respond to changes in the
data it displays. The View protocol is one of the core building blocks of the
SwiftUI framework.
 
Every view in SwiftUI must conform to the View protocol. The protocol
defines a single requirement, a body property, which returns the underlying
view's content. The body property is a closure that returns a single view,
which can be a combination of other views, arranged using various layouts
and stack views.
 
In SwiftUI, a protocol is a blueprint of methods, properties, and other
requirements that suit a particular task or piece of functionality. It allows you
to declare what an object or struct should do, but not how it should do it,
giving the implementer the flexibility to implement the protocol in their own
way. SwiftUI uses protocols extensively to define the behavior and
appearance of its views.
 
For example, View is a protocol in SwiftUI that defines the basic structure
and behavior of all views in the framework. We can create custom views by
creating a struct that conforms to the View protocol and implements the
body property. You can also use various built-in views, such as Text, Image,
Button, and many more, to create your user interface.
 

--- Page 139 ---
However, let’s think about it this way in this situation: protocol comes with
constraints and gains. By adopting a Protocol, there are things that we have
to follow in order to gain unique functionalities.
 
Now, let’s Option + Right Click on the view keyword to see more detailed
information.
 
Remember, this is a very handy Shortcut, and you should use it whenever
some keyword may look unfamiliar to you in Xcode:
 

--- Page 140 ---
 
Figure 2.15: View protocol definition
 
View here is a protocol. As we have already mentioned, when something
conforms to a protocol, it gains something in exchange for some constraints.
Here, with view, it requires a body computed property; that’s a constraint.
So, what do we gain, you make ask? In the first chapter, we already

--- Page 141 ---
discussed in detail about struct, and there is no way a struct alone can
represent content layout on the screen. And this is our gain when adapting
the view protocol. Believe it or not, all the heavy lifting is done behind the
screen by the view protocol; all we need to do is to have a body property.
 
In Swift, the syntax of conforming to a protocol is the same as inheriting
from a class. Therefore, many beginners mistake between those two.
 
The similarity in syntax, especially with the colon :, can cause confusion, but
it's important to remember the distinction between the two concepts as
follows:
 
 
Conforming to a protocol means that a class, struct, or enumeration adopts
the protocol's requirements, allowing it to provide implementations for those
requirements.
 
Inheriting from a class means creating a subclass that inherits properties and
methods from a superclass, enabling code reuse and extension of
functionality.
 
SwiftUI uses functional programming concepts to build user interfaces,
where views are treated as functions of their state, and the UI updates
automatically when the state changes. Now, state is another very important
concept, and we will discuss it in detail in the next chapter. Let’s look back
at our renting card example to see a view as a function in SwiftUI:
 

--- Page 142 ---
 
Figure 2.16: SwiftUI is functional programming
 
Look at the CardComponent here; does it look familiar to you? It looks just
like when the function is called! Now, let’s look at those curly braces; they
look familiar, isn’t it? Remember when we talked about function and
closure? A closure is a block of code wrapped inside curly braces and can be
passed around or become the parameters of other function. And here it is,
kind of hard to wrap your head around this concept, even for another
programmer when they first encounter SwiftUI. Because of the way closure

--- Page 143 ---
is being used here and their frequent appearance. So, I believe now you
totally get it when they say that SwiftUI is a Declarative framework.
 
Now, to further prove it to you and anyone who may think that, well,
CardComponent here is the init of a struct, so you can’t say that it is a
function. Let’s make it become a function!
 
 
Figure 2.17: View Builder
 
It has exactly the same behavior, but this time we are using a function to
make CardComponent View. There are two things that I want to talk about in

--- Page 144 ---
the highlighted area above. @ViewBuilder is a Property Wrapper in SwiftUI.
Property Wrapper is a special concept, and we will explain it in detail in the
next chapter with State in SwiftUI.
 
Here, @ViewBuilder is a type of attribute that is used to annotate a closure
or function that returns a view to enable it to be used as a view builder. A
view builder is a mechanism for building views by composing smaller views
into a larger view. By marking a closure or function with @ViewBuilder,
you can pass it as an argument to another view and use it to build the body
of the view dynamically. That is exactly what happened here with our
CardComponentFunction function.
 
Next is the part -> some View, as we already know that after -> specifies the
return type of a function, which here is some view. It means, just like what it
read here: the CardComponentFunction will return some kind of view. The
some keyword allows us to return any type that conforms to view without
having to specify the exact type, making the code more flexible and generic.
Here, it can be any kind of View: ZStack, VStack, Text, or Image. Anything
that conforms to the view protocol. Now, looking back at the body property
of our struct, we also notice that its type is also some view, which means
whatever is inside it has to be a View. A struct that conforms to the view
protocol must return a view, which is in its body property. What kind of
view? It can be any view. Next, we will talk about things inside the green
area that can be added to a view: View Modifier.

--- Page 145 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 146 ---
 
View Modifier
 
In SwiftUI, a View Modifier is a type that defines a change to the
appearance or behavior of a view. View Modifiers are used to apply styles,
transformations, and other effects to a view.
 
They are composable, meaning that you can chain multiple modifiers
together to create complex user interfaces. A modifier can also be applied to
a view or another view modifier, producing a different version of the original
value. This means two things: modifiers can be chained one after another
like the aforementioned example of .font() and .fontWeight(). And the order
matters and, depending on the circumstance, will produce different behavior
with different orders.
 
Again, SwiftUI is a Declarative framework, and you may guess that View
Modifier is also a function behind the screen. Whenever there is something
unclear, let’s use our shortcut on Xcode to read their documentation. Let’s
examine the .frame() modifier (Figure 2.18):
 

--- Page 147 ---
 
Figure 2.18: Frame modifier definition
 

--- Page 148 ---
With the Option + Right Click shortcut, we can view the definition of the
.frame() modifier. As you can see, it is a function that takes three parameters:
width and height are optional, and alignment has a default value to be center.
And it returns some views.
 
This is exactly what every View Modifier does, and it is important to note
here. The View Modifier is executed and returns a new and modified version
of the view. The original view remains unchanged, and the modified view is
used in place of the original view when it's rendered.
 
In this example, the Text view is modified using two view modifiers: frame()
and .border. The frame view modifier sets the frame size of the text on the
screen, and the .border view modifier sets the color of the border to gray:
 


--- Page 149 ---
 
Figure 2.19: How view modifier works (1)
 
Now, let’s reverse the order of these two View Modifiers; it will result in a
completely different outcome:
 
 
Figure 2.20: How view modifier works (2)
 
It is because in the first scenario, we get a text with a width of 200 and a
height of 30 first. Then, we set the border of it. Now, in the second scenario,

--- Page 150 ---
we set the border of the text first and then set the frame of the text with the
border to be 200 by 30. So, now you can see why their order matters.
 
SwiftUI View Modifiers are very powerful tools because they can be
chained together in different orders and combinations. There are many built-
in ones, just like Views, so you can go and explore them yourself:
 
 
Figure 2.21: SwiftUI documentation interface for View Modifiers
 

--- Page 151 ---
Tap the Plus button and then navigate to the second tab to learn more about
them and what is available for you to use.

--- Page 152 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 153 ---
 
Conclusion
 
In conclusion, implementing layout in SwiftUI is an essential aspect of
creating visually appealing and functional user interfaces. With the wide
range of layout tools and techniques provided by SwiftUI, developers have
the ability to create dynamic and responsive layouts that adapt to different
screen sizes and orientations.
 
We have learned about fundament views, including VStack, HStack, and
ZStack and how views are arranged and determine their size behind the
screen. Once again, we have proved that SwiftUI is functional
programming. We have also learned about common view modifiers like
.font and .frame, and the key thing is their order matters. We will learn more
useful view modifiers in the next chapter. In the meantime, you can browse
and explore all the Views and Views Modifiers that SwiftUI provides using
the Xcode shortcut mentioned earlier.
 
Whether you are building a simple prototype or a complex application,
understanding the fundamentals of layout in SwiftUI will enable you to
create interfaces that are both intuitive and engaging for your users. By
leveraging the power of SwiftUI's layout system, developers can focus on
creating meaningful user experiences and delivering high-quality
applications.
 
Well, that’s just a lot of theory to wrap your head around. So, take some
time to rest, and we will come back in the next chapter where we will talk
about how layouts work in SwiftUI.

--- Page 154 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 155 ---
CHAPTER 3
 
Implementing Layout in SwiftUI

--- Page 156 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 157 ---
 
Introduction
 
SwiftUI is a powerful, intuitive, and declarative framework for building
user interfaces in iOS, macOS, watchOS, and tvOS applications. One of the
core features of SwiftUI is its layout system, which enables developers to
easily define the structure and appearance of their app's user interface.
 
The most important aspect of building a great user interface is
implementing an effective layout. SwiftUI provides a variety of layout tools
and techniques that allow developers to create complex and dynamic
layouts with ease. In this chapter, we will explore the fundamentals of
implementing layout in SwiftUI, including the use of stacks, frames, and
alignment guides. Whether you are a seasoned SwiftUI developer or just
getting started, this topic will provide you with the knowledge and skills
you need to create beautiful and responsive user interfaces in your
applications.

--- Page 158 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 159 ---
 
Structure
 
In this chapter, the following topics will be covered:
 
 
How SwiftUI chooses to layout a View
 
Common Fundamental View Modifiers of SwiftUI
 
The coordinate system behind every iOS App development
 
Positioning vs Alignment
 
Life cycle methods in iOS development

--- Page 160 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 161 ---
 
Layout in SwiftUI
 
In SwiftUI, the layout is performed using a declarative approach. We build
our user interface by composing views and containers that define how they
should be arranged on the screen.
 
The main layout containers in SwiftUI are as follows:
 
 
VStack: A vertical stack container that arranges views vertically, one after
the other, in a top-to-bottom order.
 
HStack: A horizontal stack container that arranges views horizontally, side
by side, in a left-to-right order.
 
ZStack: A stack container that arranges views in a back-to-front order,
allowing you to overlap and layer views.
 
List or ScrollView: A container that creates a scrollable list of views,
each represented by a row.
 
Each view in the layout can be customized to determine its size, position,
and behavior. To do this, you use various layout options such as fixed sizes,

--- Page 162 ---
flexible proportions, or manual frames. You can also apply alignment and
padding to control the placement of the views within the container.
 
There are three steps when determining the size of a View as follows:
 
 
A parent view proposes a size for its child
 
A child then chooses its own size, and the parent must respect those choices
 
The parents then place the child inside it coordinates space somehow
 
This allows us to create a very complicated Layout where every view
decides how and when it’s getting resized without the Parent having to get
involved.
 
Let’s go through some examples to get a better understanding of the
preceding three steps:
 

--- Page 163 ---
 
Figure 3.1: Size of TextView
 
Here, we have a text, then passing through the .background() modifier,
which then gives us the result on the right side. The question here is how
much space is in the TextView view? The answer is it is the exact space of
its child. We have already learned about view modifiers and know that they
transform a view passed into them into a new view because they are
function.
 
In SwiftUI, there is a layout-neutral View that decides their size by asking its
child. Here, the TextView will have the whole iPhone Screen Size available
for it, but it will go and ask its children how much space it should take. Now,

--- Page 164 ---
it will go and ask the .background() modifier first: How much size do you
want? Again, here, the .background() modifier is also layout-neutral. So, it
will then ask its inside child, the text, how much space it needs. The Text
View in SwiftUI only needs enough space to display its content, which gives
us the final result. The preceding three steps functioned as follows: the
TextView had all the iPhone Screen available, and it then asked its child for
the space. The Text only needs enough space for its content, so it proposes
back to the Parent: the TextView. Then, the TextView layout its Contents
inside the iPhone Screen, and by default, it will be center-aligned.
 
Now, let’s add another modifier, .padding(45):
 
 
Figure 3.2: Size of TextView with padding(45)

--- Page 165 ---
 
With the same flow, the TextView asks the .background() modifier =>, and
the .background() asks the padding() modifier. Here comes its features:
whatever space its child asks for will be adding more 45 pixels in all
directions => .padding() modifier then ask Text View. With this example, we
hope it helps further prove to you that the order of View Modifiers matters.
Because of this, and with many Views and View Modifiers, there is a lot of
room for creativity Layout in SwiftUI.
 
An important thing to note here is that there are Views that will ask only for
their required space, like Text(), but there are Views that will try to take as
many spaces as possible, like Color() or Spacer(). It is their default
characteristics, and it’s better to know for your future usage.
 
Here, we wrap the above Text into a ZStack with Color.orange behind the
Text View. As we can see, the color orange area will try to expand as much
as possible. There are white spaces on top and bottom and those are safe
areas. It is a layout guide for the user interface, representing the area of the
screen that is not obscured by the device's notch, the home indicator, or other
system-level elements that might be present on the device's screen.
 
The safe area helps developers ensure that the important content in their user
interface is not covered by these elements and is always visible to the user.
When designing an interface for iOS devices, it's recommended to layout
your content within the safe area to ensure that it's visible and usable on all
devices, including those with notches, home indicators, or other system-level
elements:
 

--- Page 166 ---
 
Figure 3.3: Safe area space
 
If you want to omit the Safe Area, for example, here, if we just want the
background of the App to be completely orange, then in SwiftUI, we have a
modifier .ignoreSafeArea() to use. We can also choose to ignore the top or
bottom side separately with it. Uncomment the modifier to see things
change.
 
Of course, anyone who stops here will ask: What if I don’t want that
behavior? What if I want Text to have as many spaces as possible and Color
to only have 100 × 100-pixel space?
 

--- Page 167 ---
No worries because SwiftUI also provides several layout modifiers that
allow you to change the layout behavior of views. These include:
 
 
.frame: Changes the size and position of a view by specifying its origin and
size.
 
.padding: Adds padding to a view, which creates space between the view and
its container.
 
.offset: Changes the position of a view by specifying a horizontal and/or
vertical offset.
 
.zIndex: Specifies the front-to-back order of overlapping views in a ZStack.
 
.overlay: Adds one or more views on top of a view, creating an overlapping
effect.
 
Just like VStack, HStack, and ZStack are the most basic and frequently used
Views, these are the most commonly used view modifiers. Let’s take a look
into .frame() first.
 
Now we will switch the order of the text and color inside the ZStack and use
the .frame() modifier to help us achieve our custom behavior:

--- Page 168 ---
 
 
Figure 3.4: Frame Modifier
 
With the help of the .frame() modifier, we can easily achieve what we want.
There are two different .frame() view modifiers in SwiftUI, and both are
very handy depending on what you want:
 
 
.frame(width: _, height: _, alignment: _): Changes the size and position
of a view by specifying its origin and size.
 

--- Page 169 ---
.frame(minWidth: _, idealWidth: _, maxWidth: _, minHeight: _,
idealHeight: _, maxHeight: _, alignment: _): can also guess when
reading the parameters. With this modifier, you can specify the
minimum, maximum and idea values for width and height. This
modified is for responsive layout with different Screen sizes.
 
Both of them can also be used to achieve the same result as above. To have a
text or a view to propose covering as much space as it can, we can specify
the maxWidth and maxHeight to be infinity. Or in Swift, you can get the size
of the device with: UIScreen.main.bounds.size.
 
Overall, SwiftUI's layout system provides a high level of abstraction and
makes it easy to create beautiful and responsive user interfaces. You can use
a combination of containers, views, and layout modifiers to create complex
and dynamic designs that adapt to different screen sizes and orientations.

--- Page 170 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 171 ---
 
Positioning View in SwiftUI
 
As you have already seen previously, we used .frame() with params width
and height to input numbers, which are also called pixels. But what exactly
is the logic behind it? How do we know which numbers we want? Or better,
what if we want our Text to be positioned at the top-left corner instead of in
the center of the Screen?
 
In iOS development, we used the coordinate system to define the positions
inside the Screen. You may find this familiar because it comes from
Mathematics when we want to identify the position of a point in 2D space.
The difference here is that the y-axis starts at the top and goes downward
with positive values:
 

--- Page 172 ---
 
Figure 3.5: The Coordinate system
 
By definition, the top-left corner of each Screen will be point (0, 0). The X-
axis goes to the right, and the Y-axis to the bottom for a positive value. Of
course, the negative value is totally fine here and is usually used to achieve a
beautiful custom layout like Carousel style or horizontal scroll bar.
 
One thing I want to point out here is that there are different iPhone models,
and as you can guess, each of them has a different width and height. So,
things will look and behave somewhat differently. A button that is out of
reach on a small device like the iPhone SE is a common bug that almost
every iOS developer has experienced. Make sure you double-check on every

--- Page 173 ---
different device size before release. Here is one of the reference links for
different iPhone device sizes: https://yesviz.com/iphones.php
 
Back to the figure, we can see that there are two sets of things we need to
know in order to position a view inside a screen. First, we need the width
and height of our rectangle view. Second is the position point (x, y), which
will be the start location.
 
In iOS development, every view, no matter what shape it takes - circle,
hexagon, ellipse, line, arrow, curve line, and so on - always has an outside
frame for layout, which will always be a rectangle. And that outside
rectangle frame will always be used to do the layout.
 
The width and height parameters from .frame() modifier are for specifying
the width and height of the rectangle frame of the view. That’s the first
element. But how about the second? How to specify the origin point? This is
where the .position() modifier comes into play:
 

--- Page 174 ---
 
Figure 3.6: Position View Modifier (1)
 
Here, with the help of .position() modifier, we can place the center of our
Text View at point (100, 100). Now, here is a very great question you could
ask: What if, instead of the center, we want it top-left or bottom-right point
to be placed at position (100, 100)? It’s even greater because we already
know that the Text View is dynamically adjusted with its inside content.
 
Of course, we can set its size with .frame() modifier and then add half of the
frame size to our .position() modifier:
 

--- Page 175 ---
 
Figure 3.7: Position View Modifier (2)
 
Now the top-left corner of our “Hello World” is exactly at point (100, 100).
Here, we now see the last parameter of the .frame() modifier, alignment,
comes into play. The default alignment state of almost every view in SwiftUI
is center. However, the alignment parameter helps us to change the position
inside its frame space. We will discuss in detail about alignment in the next
section. However, what if we don’t want to set a fixed frame to our text and
let it expand freely?
 
The things we need here are the width and height of our text view, no matter
how long its content is. There is a very powerful container View in SwiftUI
that helps us to achieve this: Geometry Reader.

--- Page 176 ---
 
Geometry Reader is a container view in SwiftUI that allows you to
dynamically adjust the size and position of its child views based on its own
size. This means that you can use Geometry Reader to create custom layouts
that are responsive to changes in the size and orientation of the device or
parent view.
 
Here's how you can use GeometryReader in your SwiftUI code:
 
 
Figure 3.8: Geometry Reader (1)
 
This view will return a flexible preferred size to its parent layout:
 

--- Page 177 ---
 
Figure 3.9: Geometry Reader (2)
 
Here is a simple example where, with the help of Geometry Reader, we will
always have a red square with a size exactly one-third of its parent, which in
this case is the whole screen size.
 
The geometry object passed to the closure is a GeometryProxy object, which
provides information about the size and position of the Geometry Reader in
its coordinate space. You can use the properties and methods of this object to
set the size and position of its child views. We then use the .frame() modifier
to specify its frame as one-third of the width of the parent.

--- Page 178 ---
 
You can play around with it and add more padding outside, and you will see
the size of the red square change responsively.
 
Geometry Reader is a powerful tool that allows you to create custom and
flexible layouts in SwiftUI. It's especially useful when you need to create
layouts that respond to changes in the size and orientation of the device or
parent view.
 
Now, here with the help of its combination with our knowledge in SwiftUI
so far, we can position our Text View at point (100, 100) without having to
preset its frame.
 
Here is how it is done:
 

--- Page 179 ---
 
Figure 3.10: Geometry Reader (3)
 
Geometry Reader will let us know the size in the parent coordinate space.
Here, we use it with our .background(). Follow the yellow arrow direction;
remember that the background is layout neutral, so it will go and ask its
child how much space it needs. Here, we get our desired behavior to get the
size of our text view dynamically.
 
We get our size here, but we can’t use it to set our text view position. Why?
Because of scope in the programming language. We already discussed it in
Chapter 1, Swift Language. In case you have forgotten, scope refers to the
region of code where a variable, constant, function, or other identifier is

--- Page 180 ---
accessible. The scope of an identifier is determined by its location in the
code and the curly braces that enclose it. Identifiers declared outside of any
function or class have global scope and can be accessed from anywhere in
the program, while identifiers declared within a function or other block of
code have local scope and can only be accessed from within that block.
 
Here, our size is local scope; therefore, we cannot use it as input for our
.position() modifier. To help us achieve this, two new important things that
help us to position our top-left corner at point (100, 100). These are two
important concepts that you will be introduced to now and will delve deeper
into in the next chapter: State and lifecycle methods.
 
Knowing the Scope, you may have guessed that the solution here is to make
global variables and then assign our needed width and height value to them.
This is exactly what we do here: we declare two variables outside at global
scope and then assign the value we have inside the scope of Geometry
Reader to them. You may ask: Why not write the assignment actions right
inside after we get the geometry proxy? Well, you can try it, but Xcode will
give you this error:
 
 
Figure 3.11: SwiftUI Error\
 

--- Page 181 ---
This is a very common mistake for newcomers, one that even confuses
experienced programmers when they first jump into SwiftUI. They always
wonder why some code is not allowed inside the scope of views when, from
their extinct through years of programming, everything seems totally fine.
It’s intuitive, and it is common to make variable assignments inside of the
function’s body. However, SwiftUI View with body requirements is special.
That's because, in the body, SwiftUI builds views and only views. And the
assignment actions here, or maybe the print(…), are functions that return
Void (not return anything): signature is “()”, as reported in this error alert.
Once again, these are very common mistakes that I myself have made a lot
because assigning values to variables and printing to see what is happening
is very frequently used by us programmers.
 
So, we cannot assign our wanted values here this way. You already see our
solution is to use the .onAppear { } life circle method. I will give detailed
explanations about the life circle at the end of this chapter. Here, the purpose
of this method is to add an action to perform before this view appears on the
Screen. Let’s go back to Figure 3.10 and follow the directions of those
orange arrows:
 

--- Page 182 ---
 
Figure 3.12: onAppear and logic flow
 
We get our wanted values and assign them back to global variables when the
green background appears. Then we use those values to position our “Hello
World” in the top left corner at point (100, 100).
 
Inside the green area, notice that our two global variables look different from
the normal one because we have added the syntax @State before them. Try
to remove it, and you will see the position of our text is different. And it is
not because the width and height here are both zero; their values have
already changed, but the problem is that the .position() modifier is called
before both of the values are zero. And we already know that in Swift, Struct

--- Page 183 ---
is Immutable. For now, the keyword @State here tells SwiftUI that
whenever these variable’s values change, destroy the old ones and make a
new one with the new values. Now, our Hello World is positioned in the top-
left corner at point (100, 100). We will go deeply into State in the next
chapter.
 
With all this, we have successfully done our custom positioning in two
different ways. And through this, you have been introduced to some of the
core and fundamental knowledge in SwiftUI. Feel free to reread and do
some more research on these topics, as we will soon use them a lot and they
are irreplaceable when developing Apps with SwiftUI.
 
Another point that needs to be emphasized from this is that there are many
different creative ways to achieve the same result. SwiftUI provides us with
a variety of toolboxes that can be mixed and matched in many ways. So,
open your mind and try to think outside of the box, knowing what tools
(Views, View Modifier) you can use.
 
There are two ways of positioning a view: absolute way with .position()
modifier and relative way with .offset() modifier. We have already learned
about .position(), now let’s talk about .offset().
 
In SwiftUI, the .offset() modifier is used to move a view from its original
position by a specified distance in the horizontal and/or vertical direction.
 
The .offset() modifier takes a CGSize/(x, y) value, which represents the
distance to move the view. Positive values move the view to the right and
down, while negative values move the view to the left and up. For example,

--- Page 184 ---
to move a view 100 points to the right and 100 points down, you can use the
following code:
 
 
Figure 3.13: Offset View Modifier (1)
 
The important thing to note here is that when we offset some View from
their original locations, the original values don’t change even though the
View rendering somewhere else. Let’s switch the positions between our two
modifiers, background and offset, to see the interesting part:
 

--- Page 185 ---
 
Figure 3.14: Offset View Modifier (2)
 
When we use the offset modifier like this, we are changing the location of
where a View should be rendered/placed without changing its underlying
original locations. That’s why we see the background is applied at the center
of our screen. Once again, with this example, I want to emphasize that the
order of the View Modifier matters a lot.
 
Not only are they useful for layout and placement, but both the .offset() and
.position() modifiers are also used a lot for animations, transitions, or Drag
and Drop Gesture. We will soon explore them all in upcoming chapters.
 

--- Page 186 ---
Some of the others frequently used are .padding(), .zIndex(), and .overlay().
By default, the value input to padding will be transformed to space adding to
all four directions. However, if you want, you can specify your needed,
whether it is for each direction solely or for vertical/horizontal:
 
 
Figure 3.15: Multiple ways of using padding
 
The .zIndex() changes the front-to-back order of overlapping views in a
ZStack. You may wonder why we need it when we can place them in order

--- Page 187 ---
inside the ZStack. It’s because when users perform actions, the order of our
components will change in reactions. So, this modifier is a way to achieve it
with code.
 
The .overlay() is the opposite of the .background(). It allows you to add
additional views on top of an existing view. The overlay modifier can be
used to add visual effects, additional content, or even interactive elements to
a view. Of course, you can totally use ZStack, but .overlay() and
.background() are much more convenient. Also, remember that you can
chain them repeatedly; two or three overlay one after each other is totally
fine with SwiftUI.
 
Now that we have known about the coordinate system and the logic behind
positioning/placement Views, the last crucial topic I want to talk about in
this chapter is Alignment.

--- Page 188 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 189 ---
 
Alignment View in SwiftUI
 
Alignment in SwiftUI refers to the way views are positioned and aligned
within a container view or a layout.
 
Here is the difference between positioning and alignment: positioning is
when we place our view at the place of the parent or global coordinator
locations, whereas alignment is about aligning the content of the views
within a frame container of itself.
 
There are a variety of alignment options available in SwiftUI, including:
 
 
Leading: This aligns the view to the leading edge of its parent view or
layout, which is typically the left edge in a left-to-right language
environment.
 
Trailing: This aligns the view to the trailing edge of its parent view or layout,
which is typically the right edge in a left-to-right language environment.
 
Top: This aligns the view to the top edge of its parent view or layout.
 
Bottom: This aligns the view to the bottom edge of its parent view or layout.

--- Page 190 ---
 
Center: This centers the view horizontally and vertically within its parent
view or layout.
 
FirstTextBaseline and LastTextBaseline: These are used to align text
within a container view or layout.
 
There also options for corners alignment with: Top Leading, Top Trailing,
Bottom Leading and Bottom Trailing.
 
Here for a better visualization:
 

--- Page 191 ---
 
Figure 3.16: Multiple cases of alignment
 
Here, we set a constant frame for each Text and then use the last parameter
of the .frame() modifier to align its text content inside of its frame container.
And you can see the different results.
 
Again, this is one of the basics that is easy to miss, including me. For a very
long time, I found it strange that the alignment does not work as expected.
Whether I try to change it to leading, trailing, or bottom, nothing seems to
change. It is because alignment is within itself, and for Text, if we do not set
the width and height frame, it will take just exactly what it needs.

--- Page 192 ---
 
So, the alignment inside will always be the same no matter each side because
it only has the space of its content. Whenever you find alignment doesn’t
work, try using .background() modifier to see how much space it has
available.
 
In SwiftUI, there are other ways of setting an Alignment. The first one you
already know is by using the .frame() modifier. Another one comes with
SwiftUI container views like VStack, HStack, or ZStack:
 
 

--- Page 193 ---
Figure 3.17: Alignment inside HStack (1)
 
In this example, we use the alignment available with the HStack to bottom-
align all of its children. You can see they are all near the bottom of the
yellow area, but the overall isn’t so correct. It is because they each have
different font sizes. If all the text has the same font, then you will have a
beautiful alignment result. I intentionally did this to introduce a very handy
case alignment for this situation: FirstTextBaseline and LastTextBaseline.
Both work the same, the difference is whether the baseline will follow the
first or the last item among the children views.
 
Now everything looks correct:
 

--- Page 194 ---
 
Figure 3.18: Alignment inside HStack (2)
 
That is the basics of Alignment in SwiftUI. There is also more advanced
knowledge on this, where you want to align two completely separated views.
In such situations, we will have to make a custom Alignment on our own.
Hopefully, we will see an example in later chapters.
 
With this, we conclude the end of this chapter where you have learned and
understood the concept behind SwiftUI layout: the coordinator system. You
have also learned about frequently used view modifiers like .frame(),
.padding(), .positioning(), offset(), and so on, along with the Geometry

--- Page 195 ---
Reader container. You now know how to position a View and the difference
between positioning and alignment.
 
Over the last two chapters, we have gained enough knowledge about
SwiftUI Views and View Modifiers. We have also made a lot of basic
beautiful designs. However, we are still missing one of the most important
things of the app: reactive. If it is just for presentation or information, then
that is the original characteristic of a Website, though things have changed a
lot since then. Since the beginning, mobile Apps were not for that, they are
for reactions and interactions with users. So, making the layout is the first
part, and the next important part is to make it interactive. In SwiftUI, we
achieve this with the help of State. It is a crucial fundamental concept for
every iOS SwiftUI developer. The next chapter is very important and
requires a lot of focus. So, take a deep rest, and I will see you soon.
 
As promised, there will be a bonus section in this chapter talking about
lifecycle methods. This is also a very important concept to understand. Now,
let’s learn about it.

--- Page 196 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 197 ---
 
Lifecycle methods in SwiftUI
 
The life cycle of a view in SwiftUI refers to the sequence of events that
occur from the moment a view is created, through its updates and layout
changes, until it is eventually removed from the screen.
 
The SwiftUI framework provides a number of methods that allow you to
respond to various stages of the view's lifecycle, and these methods are
collectively referred to as the lifecycle methods.
 
In SwiftUI, every view has a defined lifecycle that consists of the following
stages:
 
 
Creation: When the view is first created, SwiftUI calls the init() method to
create the view and set its initial state.
 
Configuration: After the view is created, SwiftUI configures it by setting its
properties and passing any necessary data.
 
Update: If the view's state changes, SwiftUI will update the view and call the
updateUIView(_:context:) method to apply any necessary changes.
 

--- Page 198 ---
Layout: After the view has been updated, SwiftUI will layout the view by
calling the layoutSubviews() method.
 
Display: Finally, the view is displayed on the screen.
 
SwiftUI provides a number of methods that allow you to respond to various
stages of the view's lifecycle, and these methods are collectively referred to
as the lifecycle methods. The most commonly used lifecycle methods in
SwiftUI are as follows:
 
 
init(): This method is called when the view is first created, and it is used to
set up the initial state of the view.
 
onAppear(): This method is called when the view is about to be displayed on
the screen. You can use this method to perform any necessary setup or data
loading.
 
onDisappear(): This method is called when the view is about to be removed
from the screen. You can use this method to clean up any resources or
perform any necessary teardown.
 
onReceive(_:): This method is used to handle changes to any observed
objects or publishers. You can use this method to update the view's state or
perform any necessary side effects.
 

--- Page 199 ---
By leveraging these lifecycle methods, you can create views that respond
dynamically to changes in the app's state, providing a more seamless and
responsive user experience:
 
 
Figure 3.19: Lifecycle in SwiftUI
 
Remember this example; we leverage the power of the .onAppear() life
circle to get the values we wanted. We have to do it this way at the
Appearance State because we do not have the values at the initialization.
However, it won’t affect the user because .onAppear() gets called before the
view is displayed.

--- Page 200 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 201 ---
 
Conclusion
 
Overall, the use of lifecycle methods in SwiftUI is an important tool for
developers to create more dynamic and responsive views, improve
performance, and create more modular and maintainable code. You will
soon see all of these life cycle methods in later chapters.

--- Page 202 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 203 ---
CHAPTER 4
 
State, Binding, Property Wrapper, and Property Observer

--- Page 204 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 205 ---
 
Introduction
 
Have you ever used an app that responds quickly to your every tap, swipe,
or scroll? Have you ever wondered how developers manage all of that
dynamic content? It is because developers have followed proper appliances,
best practices, and design principles. And it is no exception with modern UI
frameworks like SwiftUI. In this chapter, we will discover how to make
interactive applications in SwiftUI. And this is where the concepts of State
and Property Wrapper come into play.
 
State and Property Wrapper are like the backbone of SwiftUI. They allow
developers to manage the data that powers their app's user interface in a
clean and efficient way. We will learn about these concepts in this chapter,
and along the way, we will combine all of the previous knowledge to build
a very familiar App from scratch: The Calculator.
 
We will also discuss another topic related to variables: Computed Property

--- Page 206 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 207 ---
 
Structure
 
In this chapter, the following topics will be covered:
 
 
State in SwiftUI
 
Binding and its differences to State
 
Property Wrapper
 
Property Observer
 
Layout and build the Calculator App

--- Page 208 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 209 ---
 
Layout the Calculator
 
Let’s begin by using all that we have learned and try to replicate the look of
the following Calculator App. Spend some time trying to think about it
before reading the next page:
 

--- Page 211 ---
 
Figure 4.1: The Calculator Layout
 
Remember what we emphasized on the layout in SwiftUI? Think about it
like Lego bricks. Try to break it into small easy-to-make pieces. Once again,
you can take a break here and try making it all by yourself. There can be
many ways of doing this calculator layout. Here are our suggestions: We will
break it into six columns:
 

--- Page 213 ---
 
Figure 4.2: The Calculator Layout breaking down
 
Great! So now we know that we will have a VStack with six columns, let’s
break it down further into each one:
 
 
Figure 4.3: The Calculator Layout column breaking down
 
Each column, except the first and the last one, will have four same buttons,
which we will use HStack in SwiftUI. For each button, it will have a
descriptive symbol and a circular background. You can guess it; that’s for the
ZStack or the .background() modifier. However, we will use ZStack this
time so that we will have all three common containers in SwiftUI: ZStack,
VStack, and HStack in this project. So, this will be our smallest component.
 
Now, without further ado, let’s open up Xcode and make our own calculator.
We will start by making the number 9 button:
 

--- Page 214 ---
 
Figure 4.4: Button Layout
 
In the previous lesson, we already used a rounded rectangle for our renting
card. Conveniently, in SwiftUI, a Circle is also one of those already-to-use
shapes. Also, ZStack and Circle will automatically try to have as much space
as possible. But no worries, we already know that these can be overwritten
by the .frame() modifier.
 
Now, let’s separate our button layout into a Struct and make our columns
with HStack, containing four buttons:
 

--- Page 215 ---
 
Figure 4.5: Column layout
 
And here we have our column looking beautiful just like the design. Please
note that on iOS, there are light mode and dark mode. Depending on the
node, the layout’s color will look different; for example, the background
color of the screen will be white in light mode and black in dark mode. For
our Calculator App, the design looks the same for both light mode and dark
mode, so we will force it to always be in dark mode using the
.preferredColorScheme() modifier.
 

--- Page 216 ---
Next, let’s make our button reusable by extracting those different inputs into
properties. We can clearly see that the text and the background color will be
different from button to button. The text color will also be different and so
will the width of the frame. Take a look at the zero (0) button from the
design:
 
 
Figure 4.6: Calculator button Struct

--- Page 217 ---
 
With this on our hand, let's make our first column:
 
 
Figure 4.7: Calculator column layout
 
Now, what’s next? You already know that our design has five columns that
look kind of the same. So first, let’s copy this five times. Everything is like
Lego blocks! The power of SwiftUI really shines here:
 

--- Page 218 ---
 
Figure 4.8: Calculator design layout
 
Now everything starts to look into place. There are two missing things: the
zero button at the bottom to take the place of twice the other one, and the
result calculation label at the top.
 
Let’s start with the zero button first. Remember that we already created a
width property for our button. So, now we need to modify it for our zero
button. Instead of 80 by default, the correct value here will be 180 (80 * 2 +
20 for the spacing between two buttons). However, we are not finished yet
because back to the design, the background shape of the zero button is not a
circle. Conveniently, just like Circle() and RoundedRectangle(), SwiftUI
also has this shape built in, and it is called Capsule(). We will use an if-else

--- Page 219 ---
statement to check when to use a circle or capsule shape as the background
based on the incoming width and height values:
 


--- Page 220 ---
 
Figure 4.9: Capsule or Circle background
 
After this, here is what our zero-button layout will look like:
 
 
Figure 4.10: Zero button layout
 
Now, let’s add the result label to finalize the design:
 

--- Page 221 ---
 
Figure 4.11: Calculator App final layout
 
It is just a simple Text view with a large font size. Remember to set the max
width parameter of the frame modifier to infinity so that it covers as much
space as possible, not just enough for its content. Then, align it to the left
trailing side and add horizontal padding for a good look.
 
We can see there is a new highlighted container: the Spacer(). Without it, all
six of our columns will be at the center of the screen. However, following
the design, we want them to be bottom aligned. One of the solutions here is

--- Page 222 ---
to add another seven columns: the Spacer() column at the top. You may
wonder why is it working this way?
 
It is because, by definition, a Spacer is a flexible space that expands along
the major axis of its containing stack layout, or on both axes if not contained
in a stack. Here, because it is inside a VStack, it will try to take as much
space as possible in the vertical direction, which will then push all six other
columns to the bottom side.

--- Page 223 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 224 ---
 
Making it Interactive
 
Now that we are done with the layout, let’s go to the long-awaited interesting
part: making our App interactable. Right now, you can click everywhere
inside our app and nothing will happen. It is because our app now is just big
lifeless View with no interaction. For that, we will need a Button component.
Remember the shortcut to find View and View Modifier in Xcode: click the
plus button on the top right corner, go to the first tab, and search for button.
It will be at the top of the list:
 
 
Figure 4.12: Add button
 

--- Page 225 ---
As you drag and drop it into our VStack, you will see the default style button
appear on the live preview. The action code that we want to execute will be
written inside the next block of the closure. However, this version of the
button is not what we want because here we can only specify the text string.
We want a more flexible version so that we can use our custom layout
button. So, start typing Button in Xcode and select the Button(action:label:)
option, and then click Enter two times:
 
 
Figure 4.13: Add our custom button
 
With this version out, our button is now working. The first closure is for the
action, and the second closure is for the button layout. Try running it on a
simulator and open the debugger tab when clicking on the seven button. You
will see the number seven being printed. Now, let’s go and change all of our
buttons into this format and make them clickable.

--- Page 226 ---
 
Instead of printing out value on the debugger, let’s move a step closer to our
final goal by changing the result text label to the button label every time
each button is tapped. Well then, let’s make the result label text become a
global variable and reassign its value every time each button gets tapped:
 
 
Figure 4.14: Assigning Text
 
Unfortunately, it is now working as we expected. The reason Xcode gives us
here is that Struct is immutable in Swift language. Recall from the first
chapter, Introducing to Swift Language, you may think that the solution here
is to add the keyword mutating before our textResult variable declaration.

--- Page 227 ---
However, it still will not work because mutating is for functions only. So,
what is the right solution here?
 
You may have already guessed, as it is in the title of this chapter. This is
where we use State of SwiftUI. By adding the @State keyword before our
variable declaration, everything is fixed. Now, try running the app and
tapping the buttons; you will see our text result label changing. Our app is
now interactive and reactive!
 
 
Figure 4.15: Adding State
 

--- Page 228 ---
Magically, isn’t it? Let’s pause the process of making the Calculator App
here because State is one of the most important concepts introduced with
SwiftUI. So, we will go deep dive to understand it before coming back.

--- Page 229 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 230 ---
 
State
 
In SwiftUI, State is a fundamental concept that allows us to manage and
update data that drives the user interface of our app. Essentially, State is the
data that defines how a particular view or UI element should look and
behave at any given moment.
 
@State is a property wrapper in SwiftUI that allows you to store
mutable values in a view. It automatically causes the view to re-render
whenever the state value changes. This ensures that the view always
reflects the current state of the app. @State is used to manage local
state within a single view and should not be used to store app-level
state.
 
In the preceding example, we marked textResult as @State, so that when its
value changed, our CalculatorView view would be re-rendered to reflect the
latest data. So, behind the scenes, it is not that the value zero gets changed
to seven. Instead, the entire view, including the six columns with the zero
label, gets destroyed and replaced. SwiftUI makes a new view, now
knowing that the value of textResult is seven, but not zero.
 
You may stop here and wonder if this is so overkill, needing to replace
everything just because a text changes from zero to seven. But believe it or
not, this is the way of Declarative Programming. The compiler will layout
the views based on its State properties. Whenever those properties change, a
new view is created for replacement. As opposed to Imperative
Programming, which will need the developers to specify the order of
operations and how the program should interact with data at each step of the

--- Page 231 ---
process. Behind the scenes, SwiftUI is doing a lot of heavy lifting to make
all this happen smoothly and efficiently. Also, one thing to note is all Views
in SwiftUI are Struct, and in Swift, Struct is very cheap and memory-
efficient.
 
It is important to note that @State is designed for local state specific to a
single view. Also, @State is used for simple data structures like String, Int,
or Boolean. For more complicated data structures and logic related to
multiple views, there are other property wrappers to solve them, such as
@ObservedObject, @EnvironmentObject, and @Binding. We will learn
about @Binding next and discover about others in the future chapters.
 
One mistake many newcomers make when they first know about @State is
to use it everywhere possible. Some automatically mark every new property
with @State. However, you should avoid using @State in situations where
the value doesn't change over time. For instance, if you're displaying a static
label that never changes, you don't need to use @State, as this is a bad
practice and will affect performance.
 
You should be able to distinguish and know when to use State and when
not. We want to mark a property with @State only when we know its value
will change over time in the future, and those changes need to be reflected
in the App’s user interface.
 
In summary, use @State in SwiftUI when you need to manage and update
data that changes over time and affects the user interface of a single view.
Avoid using State for static data or when you need to share data between
multiple views.

--- Page 232 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 233 ---
 
State versus Binding
 
Besides knowing when to mark a property as State or not, there is another
commonly mismatching concept here between State and Binding.
 
In SwiftUI, @Binding is a property wrapper that allows us to create a two-
way connection between a property in one view and a property in another
view. By using a Binding, we can pass data between views in a way that
allows both views to modify the same underlying data.
 
When we create a Binding, we define a getter and a setter method that allow
us to read and write the value of the underlying data. The getter method
returns the current value of the data, while the setter method updates the
value of the data and notifies any observers of the change.
 
Bindings are particularly useful when we want to pass data between two
views, where one view is responsible for modifying the data, and the other
view is responsible for displaying the data. For example, let’s go back to our
Calculator App and this time separate the columns with “7, 8, 9, x” into a
separate view called TestColumns. We are doing this just for this example,
so you don’t have to change the code if you don’t want to:
 

--- Page 234 ---
 
Figure 4.16: Adding State
 
Here, Xcode gives us the error because it cannot find the textResult property
within its scope. Based on all the previous experiences, there may be
something you come up with to solve this problem:
 

--- Page 235 ---
 
Figure 4.17: The Binding Problem
 
Because of the error, we must declare a textResult property as a required
input to our TestColumns view. We just learned about State; in this situation,
clearly, textResult is a changing overtime value. So, we have to mark it with
the @State property wrapper so that SwiftUI knows to re-render all the
views whenever the value gets modified.
 

--- Page 236 ---
The flow of all the red arrows is the expected way of data flowing.
Everything looks great, let’s build and see the result. And yeah, you may
guess it, nothing is working. The text is still zero no matter how many times
we pressed the seven button. Try it on the Simulator to confirm it yourself.
But what is wrong here? The logic behind it is correct, and yes, State will re-
render the view. The real problem here is that the two textResult properties
of TestColumns and CalculatorView are not the same ones. When we use
@State here, SwiftUI will create a copy of the input as its value:
 
 
Figure 4.18: The Binding Problem (2)
 

--- Page 237 ---
Here is what exactly happened in this case. Because the two properties are
not the same, only the first arrow direction was working here. To fix this
problem and make SwiftUI understand that we want those two properties to
be only one, our solution here is to use the @Binding property wrapper:
 
 
Figure 4.19: The Binding Problem (3)
 
Now, that’s all the data flow is working in the directions of those green
arrows as we expected. Notice there are two different changes here: we

--- Page 238 ---
replace the @State with @Binding, and there is a prefix “$” symbol before
the textResult input. This is because we can create a Binding by using the
“$” prefix on a State variable, which creates a reference to the State variable
that can be passed to another view. With this, our calculator is back to
functioning again.
 
In summary, Binding is a powerful feature in SwiftUI that allows us to create
a two-way connection between views, enabling us to pass data between them
and keep them in sync. By using Binding, we can create more dynamic and
interactive user interfaces and write more modular and reusable code.
 
Before we move on to the next section, let’s discuss the concept that is used
to build @State and @Binding: Property Wrapper in Swift language.

--- Page 239 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 240 ---
 
Property Wrapper
 
In Swift, a property wrapper is a way to encapsulate a piece of behavior or
functionality and apply it to a property. Property wrappers are a new feature
introduced in Swift 5.1. They are similar to computed properties, but they
allow you to encapsulate more complex behavior and reuse it across
multiple properties.
 
A property wrapper is defined as a struct that has a wrappedValue property,
which is the property that will be wrapped. You can use the property
wrapper by placing the “@” symbol before the property's name. Whenever
you see the “@” symbol, it means there is a property wrapper in Swift.
Each will bring up different functionalities to our properties, and if you
want, you can totally make your own custom property wrapper. However,
the scope of this is far beyond the scope of this book.
 
To understand more deeply about this concept and all other things related to
property in Swift language, we suggest you take some time and read
through the Property section in the Apple Swift Documentation. Here is the
link: https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/documentation/the-swift-
programming-language/properties/.
 
In summary, a property wrapper is a way to add additional functionality or
behavior to a property without having to write that functionality yourself
every time you use the property. This makes our code more readable,
maintainable, and reusable, which explains the magical behavior we have
just by adding @State or @Binding just before property declaration. These

--- Page 241 ---
keywords add more functionality to our properties in an easier, shorter, and
more convenient way.
 
Now, let’s go back to our project and finish it by adding arithmetic
computation so that we can use our app as a real calculator. During that, we
will learn more about an advanced topic related to property: Property
Observer.

--- Page 242 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 243 ---
 
Property Observer
 
In Swift, a property observer is a way to observe and respond to changes in a
property's value. Property observers can be added to stored properties and
are called every time a property's value is set.
 
There are two types of property observers: willSet and didSet.
 
The willSet observer is called just before a property's value is about to be
set. This observer provides you with the opportunity to take some action
before the new value is set. You can access the new value using the
newValue keyword.
 
The didSet observer is called immediately after a property's value has been
set. This observer provides you with the opportunity to take some action
after the new value has been set. You can access the old value using the
oldValue keyword.
 
Here's an example of how to use property observers:
 

--- Page 244 ---
 
Figure 4.20: Property Observer
 
In this example, we defined a class, MyClass, with a property, myProperty,
that has both willSet and didSet observers. When we create an instance of
MyClass and set myProperty to World, the willSet observer is called first,
followed by the didSet observer. The output in the console shows the
messages printed by the property observers.
 
In conclusion, a property observer is a way to observe and respond to
changes in a property's value over time. This might sound familiar if you
remember the part where we talked about lifecycle methods in the previous
chapter. It is the same logic, but this time it is for the life of properties
instead of views. In every programming language, the moment when
something changes is very important. We usually try to perform or capture
something at that moment, which is why lifecycle methods and property
observers are very strong tools. Every programmer uses them frequently.

--- Page 245 ---
 
Now, let’s get back to our calculator and finish the logic. Before this, you
can try opening your own default calculator on your phone and play with it
sometimes. When you are ready, let’s analyze the problems we are facing.
Take a look and dissect this mathematics operation:
 
 
Figure 4.21: Analyze and dissect math operation
 
There is clearly a pattern here, and recognizing it is the most important part
of programming. Most of the time, the hardest part is from the problem to
breaking it down into small pattern. The coding parts are not a burden when
you have done it quite a few times.
 
Here, we will have to store the first and second numbers and the
mathematical operation between them. Then, that information is enough to
make a calculation. Besides our textResult for display, we will need three

--- Page 246 ---
more variables: firstNumber, secondNumber, and operation. Remember that
we definitely know these values will change, so they must be marked with
@State. For the operation, we will use String and later use an if-else
statement to check the difference. As for firstNumber and secondNumber,
we will use Double because we will perform the math on them later:
 
 
Figure 4.22: Analyze and dissect math operation
 
We will have ten number actions, from button 0 to button 9, and seven
operations. We have highlighted them in the green area for number actions
and the orange area for operation actions:
 

--- Page 248 ---
 
Figure 4.23: Number actions and operation actions
 
Why do we need to separate them? As you will soon see, the code logic
behind those two types is similar. Let’s tackle the easier part: the number of
actions first. When you tap on any of those numbers, what do you expect?
That the tapped number should be displayed on our textResult label, right?
That’s the first step before anything can happen. This is also the time when
we want to store user input into the firstNumber property.
 
Now, the code for each numeric button will look kind of like this:
 
 
Figure 4.24: Number action

--- Page 249 ---
 
We set textResult and our firstNumber here. Let’s pause here and try to
apply what we just learned about Property Observer to make an
improvement here. Why this is one of the best places to use Property
Observer? Because there is a relationship between these two actions here.
Whenever we change the value of our firstNumber, the textResult label is
expected to change to reflect it. In this case, willSet or didSet is the same,
but we choose to use willSet:
 
 
Figure 4.25: Property observer for firstNumber
 

--- Page 250 ---
In this stage, we have a relationship that follows the green arrow’s
directions. Whenever the value of our firstNumber changes, we will use that
new value and assign it to our textResult text as a String. This will then
automatically reflect in our app interface because textResult is marked with
@State. The logic with the secondNumber property is the same as with
firstNumber. However, the interesting part is with the operation, where we
will use both willSet and didSet observers in a different way. Let’s modify
these two properties into property observers:
 

--- Page 251 ---
 
Figure 4.26: All our calculator properties
 

--- Page 252 ---
We will write two new functions, which will be executed when willSet and
didSet of the operation occur. We will use willSet for “+, -, x, ÷” operations
and didSet for “=, AC, +/-, %” operations. Why do we need this separation?
It is because those “+, -, x, ÷” symbols can have the behavior of “=” too. Try
this operation: “1 + 2 - 3”, you will see when the second operation minus is
tapped, the textResult label will show the result of the previous operation, “1
+ 2”. Because of this behavior, we will use both didSet and willSet
observers. Here is the logic of them:
 
 

--- Page 253 ---
Figure 4.27: didSet operation
 
Remember, with didSet, we are passing in the old value of it. So, like in the
previously demonstrated example when we hit the minus operation, then the
old value here will be the plus operation. And here, we will perform the
action “1 + 2 = 3”, then we set our second number to zero and save the result
value to the firstNumber.
 
You may question why we assign the secondNumber value before the
firstNumber value. Well, it is because these two properties also have
property observers that will change the textResult label to their new value.
So, if we set our secondNumber later, then our textResult will always be
zero, which is not correct.
 
Before you can try chaining arithmetic operations, for example, like “((1 +2
– 3 + 5) x 6) : 4” and see the results one after another, we must change the
assigning logic when tapping the numerical number. Right now, we only
assign it to the firstNumber. Let’s change it to:
 

--- Page 254 ---
 

--- Page 255 ---
Figure 4.28: Tap button logic
 
Here, we perform two logic checks. First, we check the current value of the
operation to determine which property will be assigned. If it is the default
state, “AC”, then we know to assign it to the firstNumber; every other case
will fall to the secondNumber because right now we have an operation to
perform.
 
Secondly, we check if the assigned property’s value is zero or not, if it is, we
then assign it the value of the button. If not, then just like writing a whole
large number, we have to multiply the old value by ten and then add to it our
button’s value.
 
With all this, everything is ready so you can now try performing some
chained arithmetic operations.
 
Now if you are ready, then let’s tackle all those left operations: “AC, +/-, %”.
We will use the willSet observer, which will use newValue as an input. Here,
we will pass and use both the old value and the new value of the operation:
 

--- Page 256 ---
 
Figure 4.29: Operation willSet observer logic
 
As you can see, we also reuse our previous function and make a call on an
old value of the operation before we apply the functionality of the
operation’s new value. This will make sure our behavior is correct and align
with user logic.
 
With this, now you can build and experience the Calculator App. Maybe it is
your first functional App, and praise yourself for it.

--- Page 257 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 258 ---
 
Conclusion
 
Let’s recap what we have learned in this chapter. We learned how to use
@State. It automatically causes the view to re-render whenever the state
value changes. This ensures that the view always reflects the current state of
the app.
 
However, there is a problem when a view wants to modify data from
another view. This is when we need @Binding. It is a property wrapper that
allows us to create a two-way connection between a property in one view
and a property in another view. By using a Binding, we can pass data
between views in a way that allows both views to modify the same
underlying data.
 
During this chapter, we have been able to make our first functional app: The
Calculator. Through building this, we have strengthened and applied all the
previous knowledge. We also learned a new concept about the life cycle but
with variables: Property Observer. We can now interfere and take action in
two states of a variable: willSet when its value is about to change, and
didSet when the value just changed We then leveraged this characteristic to
build and make our Calculator App work correctly.
 
In the next chapter, we will learn about design patterns on iOS, specifically
the MVVM pattern, which works beautifully with SwiftUI. During that, we
will go back and refactor this Calculator App to make it more refined and
architecturally.

--- Page 259 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 260 ---
CHAPTER 5
 
Design Patterns with MVVM

--- Page 261 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 262 ---
 
Introduction
 
In history, developers saw the same problem repeatedly, and as a result,
they standardized how to handle these kinds of problems and occurrences,
which led to the development of the Design Patterns. They are an elegant
and simple solution to repetitive problems in the software industry and
generalize the ways to handle these problems. This is where Designs
Pattern comes into play.
 
In the last chapter, we built our first app: the calculator. Though it is great,
throughout your career, you will have a chance to work on a lot of projects.
For a long time, there existed a critical problem because everyone is
different and has their own unique coding style, and software engineering is
a team-oriented job. For it to work, it is best for everyone to find a way to
work effectively as a team with other people. This is also another benefit of
having knowledge about design patterns.

--- Page 263 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 264 ---
 
Structure
 
In this chapter, the following topics will be covered:
 
 
Design patterns introduction
 
Common design patterns and architecture patterns in iOS development
 
Benefit and purpose of applying Design Pattern
 
Common iOS design patterns
 
MVVM pattern introduction
 
Applying MVVM to our Calculator
 
@StateObject and @ObservedObject property wrapper

--- Page 265 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 266 ---
 
Design Pattern
 
In software engineering, a design pattern is a general reusable solution to a
commonly occurring problem in software design. It is a proven solution to a
specific problem that can be adapted and applied in different contexts.
 
Design patterns help to solve complex software development problems by
providing tried and tested solutions. They make it easier to communicate
about software design and architecture within a team, improve code
readability, and simplify the maintenance and evolution of software
systems.
 
Here are some reasons why we need design patterns in programming:
 
 
Reusability: Design patterns provide reusable solutions to commonly
occurring problems in software development, making it easier to solve
similar problems in the future.
 
Scalability: Design patterns enable software systems to be more scalable by
providing a structured approach to software design and architecture.
 
Maintainability: Design patterns help to improve the maintainability of
software systems by making code more modular and easier to understand.

--- Page 267 ---
 
Testability: Design patterns make it easier to write testable code. This
means that developers can more easily test the application's functionality
and catch errors before they become a problem.
 
Code quality: Design patterns help to improve the overall quality of
code by providing best practices and guidelines for software design.
 
Collaboration: Design patterns facilitate collaboration and communication
among team members by providing a common vocabulary for discussing
software design and architecture.
 
Efficiency: By using design patterns, developers can write code more
efficiently. This means that they can spend less time on repetitive tasks and
more time on creating new functionality.
 
Faster development time: By using established design patterns,
developers can focus on the specific needs of their application, rather
than spending time designing and building new solutions from scratch.
 
Now all of this is not a problem if you are coding alone for your personal
project or some kind of future unicorn. You can freely choose how to code
just so you can understand it later. However, it is not when you have to
work in a team with other people. Or even more, another person in the far
future will come and work on your code base when you are long gone from
the project.
 

--- Page 268 ---
Because of this fact, design pattern comes to exist. They are a set of best
practices and guidelines that help software engineers solve complex
problems more efficiently, improve the quality of their code, and simplify
the maintenance and evolution of software systems.
 
They also enable software engineers to solve complex problems more
efficiently and provide a common language for communication and
collaboration within a team.

--- Page 269 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 270 ---
 
Design Pattern in iOS development
 
There are several architecture patterns and design patterns that iOS
developers commonly used to build robust and scalable applications. Here
are a few of the most common ones:

--- Page 271 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 272 ---
 
Architecture patterns
 
 
MVC (Model-View-Controller): This is a widely used design pattern
that separates an application's data, user interface, and control logic
into three distinct components. It allows developers to keep their code
organized and maintainable while improving the overall user
experience.
 
MVVM (Model-View-ViewModel): This is gaining popularity among
iOS developers in recent years. It separates the user interface (View)
from the business logic and data (ViewModel), allowing for better
maintainability and testability. MVVM also allows for easier data
binding and provides a more streamlined way to handle user input.
 
MVP (Model-View-Presenter) is a design pattern in iOS app development
that divides the application into three components: Model, View, and
Presenter. The Model handles data and business logic, the View displays the
UI and captures user input, and the Presenter acts as the mediator between
them. MVP promotes testability, code organization, and maintenance by
separating concerns and facilitating clear interactions between components.
The Model represents the data, the View handles the UI, and the Presenter
orchestrates communication between them, resulting in a more modular and
manageable iOS app architecture.
 
VIPER: This is a design pattern used in iOS development to improve
code modularity, testability, and maintainability. It consists of five
components: View, Interactor, Presenter, Entity, and Router. The View

--- Page 273 ---
handles UI display and user interactions, while the Interactor manages
the app's business logic and data. The Presenter acts as a bridge
between the View and Interactor, handling user input and data
updates. The Entity represents the app's data model, and the Router
handles navigation between different screens. VIPER promotes the
separation of concerns, making it easier to understand, modify, and test
iOS apps.
 
Clean Architecture: This is a software design principle that emphasizes
a clear separation of concerns and dependencies in order to create
robust and maintainable systems. It consists of distinct layers,
including the Domain, Application, Interface, and Infrastructure
layers, each with specific responsibilities. The Domain layer contains
the core business logic, the Application layer coordinates use cases, the
Interface layer handles the user interface, and the Infrastructure layer
manages external dependencies. By adhering to Clean Architecture,
developers can achieve code that is modular, testable, and adaptable to
change, resulting in more scalable and maintainable iOS applications.

--- Page 274 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 275 ---
 
Design patterns
 
 
Delegate: The delegate pattern is used extensively in iOS development to
enable one object to communicate with another object. It is commonly used
in UIKit classes, such as UITableView and UICollectionView, to provide
custom behavior for specific events.
 
Singleton: The singleton pattern is used to ensure that a particular class has
only one instance, allowing for centralized control over resources and data.
 
Observer: The observer pattern is used to notify interested objects of
changes to a specific object. It is commonly used in iOS development to
implement event-driven programming, such as in notifications and user
interface updates.
 
As you may guess, in this chapter, we will focus on the MVVM architecture
pattern, as it is a modern one with strength and works seamlessly with
SwiftUI. Let’s dive deep into this pattern to see what it brings to the table.
Along the way, we will be making changes to the calculator app that we
built in the last chapter. We will adapt the MVVM pattern into it to see the
difference it brings.

--- Page 276 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 277 ---
 
MVVM Pattern
 
MVVM stands for Model View and View Model. These are the three
different separated functionalities that this pattern suggests us to follow.
 
In the MVVM pattern, each component - Model, View, and View Model -
has a specific responsibility in the application as follows:
 
 
Model: The Model is responsible for managing the data and business logic
of the application. It is where the data is stored and manipulated, and it
defines the rules and operations related to that data. In an iOS application,
the Model can include classes that represent the database or network
service, or it can simply be a collection of data structures and algorithms
that perform operations on that data.
 
View: The View is responsible for displaying the UI elements and user
interface of the application. It contains all the visual components of the
application, including buttons, text fields, labels, and other elements. The
View is passive, meaning it does not contain any business logic or data
manipulation. Instead, it simply displays the data provided by the View
Model and forwards any user input back to the View Model for processing.
 
View Model: The View Model is the mediator between the Model and
the View. It is responsible for exposing the data from the Model to the
View, and for handling any user interactions from the View and

--- Page 278 ---
updating the Model accordingly. The ViewModel also contains the
business logic of the application, such as rules for validating user input
and performing calculations. It acts as a bridge between the Model and
the View, allowing them to remain separate and decoupled.
 
Here is a better visualization of the relationship in the MVVM pattern:
 
 
Figure 5.1: MVVM Pattern Visualization
 
The main advantage of using the MVVM pattern is that it helps to separate
concerns and make the code more modular and testable. By isolating the UI
logic in the view model, it becomes easier to write unit tests for the code
and also to reuse the code in different parts of the application.
 
To use MVVM in an iOS app, developers typically create separate classes
for the model, view, and view model, and then connect them using bindings
or other mechanisms for communication between the components.
 
There are also many third-party libraries and frameworks available that
provide additional support for implementing the MVVM pattern in iOS
development, such as ReactiveCocoa, RxSwift for UIKit as a third-party

--- Page 279 ---
library, and Combine, recently announced by Apple as a native framework
solution.
 
In conclusion, the Model represents the data and business logic of the
application, the View represents the UI elements, and the View Model acts
as a mediator between the model and the view. The view model exposes
data from the model to the view, and it also handles user interactions from
the view and updates the model accordingly.
 
In the previous chapters, we have made some components: the renting card
and the calculator app. However, all of the codes are in one place, with the
UI component and its logic in the same file. In the next section, we will
come back to our calculator and make some changes to it. You can see we
will separate and architect our codebase into three separated layers
according to the MVVM pattern.
 
The best way to learn anything is to get your hands dirty. Now, let’s get
back to the calculator app.

--- Page 280 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 281 ---
 
Implementing MVVM Pattern into the Calculator App (1)
 
Now, let’s restructure our code base:
 
 
Figure 5.2: Restructuring codebase following MVVM pattern (1)
 
To start, left-click on our app folder and select Create New Group to make a
new folder. We will create three new folders according to the three layers of
MVVM: Model, View, and View Model. Then, drag all the view files into
the View Folder. This is a preference of choice to separate them into three

--- Page 282 ---
different folders. Some may combine them in the same folder for different
modules, pages, or user story. For our application, structuring them into
three separate folders makes it cleaner and easier to navigate:
 
 
Figure 5.3: Restructuring codebase following MVVM pattern (2)
 
Now, let’s refactor our code to follow the MVVM pattern. We will work on
creating and separating the Model layer first, and then the View Model layer
later.
 
The Model is responsible for managing the data and business logic of the
application. It is where the data is stored and manipulated, and it defines the

--- Page 283 ---
rules and operations related to that data. So, where is the part of the Model in
our Calculator app?
 
Remember when we laid out the buttons inside each HStack? Here’s the
code:
 
 
Figure 5.4: Extracting Model (1)
 
Once again, we come back to our ‘7’ button. Remember, the Model is where
we store data of the View, which is the button here. What input parameters
does it need?
 

--- Page 284 ---
 
Figure 5.5: Extracting Model (2)
 
It seems that all of our buttons need three information: the text number it
represents, the color of the text, and its background color. Now, let’s make
our model. We will call it ButtonInfoModel, short for information about the
button:
 

--- Page 286 ---
 
Figure 5.6: Create Model (1)
 
We will choose a plain Swift file for this:
 
 
Figure 5.7: Create Model (2)
 

--- Page 287 ---
Then, click Next, and enter our file name, which is ButtonInforModel. Make
sure the Targets is checked:
 
 
Figure 5.8: Create Model (3)
 
Let’s write the code to make our model. We will use Struct for this purpose
to define the sketch of each button:
 

--- Page 288 ---
 
Figure 5.9: Button Model
 
Here, we have our button model, and because we also need the value as
Double for arithmetic calculations, we create a computed property number to
automatically transform our textNumber String into a Double value that’s
ready to use.
 
We also make our button model adapt to the Identifiable protocol. Just in
case you don’t remember, a protocol comes with constraints and gains. Just
like the View protocol requires us to have a body, this Identifiable protocol

--- Page 289 ---
requires us to have an id property, and it has to be unique for every instance,
which is why we use UUID here. In case you don’t know yet, UUID stands
for Universal Unique Identifier. As the name suggests, when we create a new
UUID, it is guaranteed to be unique. Now, what is the gain here for
Identifiable? It provides a stable notion of identity to a class or a value type
that adopts it. Every button we have created from this model will be unique
and can be identified from each other. But why do we need this
characteristic? It is very useful in SwiftUI, as some structures require their
input data to be uniquely identifiable from each other. For example, here is
the ForEach building block that we will soon use to replace the redundant
copy-paste button four times for each HStack.
 
Also, remember we separated all the buttons into two types: numeric and
operation. So, in this model, we need a Boolean variable to clarify them.
 
Let’s look back to see the structure of our app’s button:
 

--- Page 291 ---
 
Figure 5.10: Buttons structure
 
Except for the first textResult label, we have five HStacks, four of which
contain four buttons, and the last contains three buttons. So, we will need a
two-dimensional array to represent the data for these buttons. It means that
we will have five arrays, each representing the data for one row HStack of
buttons. These five arrays will be inside one large array that represents all
the button data that this calculator needs.
 
Here is the data for our buttons:
 
 
Figure 5.11: Buttons data
 

--- Page 292 ---
Take a look at this; it will be the data of our fifteen buttons. And you will be
surprised by how short and simple our code will look. Previously, here is
how the code for the first button’s row looks :
 
 
Figure 5.12: First button’s row before refactoring
 
As you can see, the code is redundant. We copy and paste the button four
times, and the differences have all been abstracted to the buttonData from
our model. One of the principles in programming is DRY, which stands for
don’t repeat yourself. Let’s apply it now in this example. Here is the same
code that leverage the characteristic of the ForEach container:
 

--- Page 293 ---
 
Figure 5.13: First button’s row after refactoring
 
Way shorter, right? The ForEach container in SwiftUI will integrate through
every item of data that we pass in, and with that data, we then use it to make
our button. So, we only have to write the button code once. In this example,
we iterate through the first-row data, because all of them are operation
buttons, so their action is to set back the operation property’s value with their
text String. Now imagine it will be all the data; that’s just another ForEach.
How short could it be? Let’s find out:
 

--- Page 294 ---
 
Figure 5.14: All buttons layout after refactoring
 
Here is all the code for your calculator buttons! How short is that compared
to the previous solution? The first ForEach will be for taking out each row’s
data. Then, we use that data to lay out the button. If it is a numeric button,
then we either assign a new value from the number property to the
firstNumber or secondNumber based on logical conditions. And finally, in
the label, we add another condition for our special zero button.
 
And here it is. We have cut down a hundred lines of code in our View. If you
are new to programming, it will take you some time to familiarize yourself

--- Page 295 ---
with this. However, iterating through an array of data and presenting/making
a layout from it is very normal for us developers.
 
The benefits of extracting the Model layer can be seen here: shortening the
code (more than a hundred lines), applying the DRY principle, and
separating the data layer from the view layer.
 
For this reason, our codebase will be more scalable. If you want to look at
and change the data of the buttons, for example, the symbol “x” to “*”, then
the place to go to is the Model. But if you want to change how it looks, for
example, from a circle shape to a triangle shape, then go to the View. With
this separation of concern, everything is now easier because things are in
order.
 
Before we move to the next and final layer, the ViewModel, there are some
new required property wrappers and protocols you need to know. Let’s get
familiar with them.

--- Page 296 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 297 ---
 
ObservableObject and @StateObject
 
In SwiftUI, an ObservableObject is a protocol that defines an object that can
be observed by SwiftUI Views. When an object conforms to the
ObservableObject protocol, it can notify any views that depend on it when
its state changes.
 
Sound familiar, isn’t it? Remember when we first learned about @State;
whenever its value changes, SwiftUI will automatically refresh to present its
newest value. The main difference here is that @State is used inside the
scope of a view, whereas the ObservableObject protocol makes it possible
for SwiftUI views to listen for changes from an outside object. This is
exactly what we want and what makes the ViewModel possible.
 
The ViewModel is another layer; it is the mediator between the Model and
the View. It is responsible for exposing the data from the Model to the View
and for handling any user interactions from the View, updating the Model
accordingly. It also contains the business logic of the application, such as
rules for validating user input and performing calculations. It acts as a bridge
between the Model and the View, allowing them to remain separate and
decoupled.
 
To create an observable object, you can define a class that conforms to the
ObservableObject protocol and then use the @Published property wrapper to
mark any properties that should trigger updates when their values change.
For example:
 

--- Page 298 ---
 
Figure 5.15: ViewModel example (1)
 
In this example, MyViewModel is an observable object with a single
@Published property called count. When the value of the count changes, any
SwiftUI views dependent on MyModel will be notified and updated
automatically.
 
You can then use this observable object in your SwiftUI views by declaring a
property that holds an instance of the object and using the @ObservedObject
property wrapper to indicate that the view should be updated when the
observable object changes. For example:
 
 
Figure 5.16: ViewModel example (2)

--- Page 299 ---
 
In this example, MyView declares an @StateObject property called a model
that holds an instance of MyViewModel. As the value of model.count
changes, the view will be updated automatically to show the new value.
With this, you can now have a glimpse of how the ViewModel interacts with
SwiftUI views.
 
Just like the Model layer, completely defined and separated from the views,
the ViewModel is another layer outside that acts as a bridge between the
View and the Model. It contains the business logic of the application. If you
don’t remember, then back in our calculator app, here is how we handle the
business logic:
 
 

--- Page 300 ---
Figure 5.17: Calculator business logic (1)
 
Here, we have a total of four properties to store values that will be reflected
in views when they are modified. Additionally, we have two helper functions
for changes in the operations value:
 

--- Page 301 ---
 
Figure 5.18: Calculator business logic (2)
 

--- Page 302 ---
All of this logic will then be transferred to the ViewModel. Also, remember
that ViewModel is the layer between Model and View, which means our
button’s model will remain inside the ViewModel, not View anymore.
 
With this knowledge in mind, let’s come back to our app and finish
implementing the MVVM pattern.

--- Page 303 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 304 ---
 
Implementing MVVM Pattern into the Calculator App (2)
 
Unlike View and Model, we will use a Class for ViewModel, as you have
already seen in the previous example.
 
While it is technically possible to define a ViewModel as a struct, it is often
preferable to define it as a class for a few reasons:
 
 
Reference Semantics: A class has reference semantics, which means that
when you pass a reference to a class instance, you are passing a
reference to the same instance in memory. This makes it easier to share
and update the ViewModel state across multiple views and avoid data
duplication. In contrast, a struct has value semantics, which means that
when you pass a struct instance, you are passing a copy of the struct's
value.
 
Identity: Because classes have reference semantics, they have a unique
identity that can be used to track and manage ViewModel instances. This can
be useful when working with frameworks that require objects to be
identified by reference, such as Core Data.
 
Mutability: Classes can be mutated after they are created, which means that
ViewModel instances can be updated and changed as needed. In contrast,
structs are immutable by default, which means that any changes to a struct
must be made by creating a new instance.

--- Page 305 ---
 
Property observers: Classes allow for property observers like didSet
and willSet which can be used to observe changes to ViewModel
properties and trigger any necessary updates to the view. We used both
of them in our calculator.
 
ObservableObject protocol can only be used for class.
 
Overall, while it's technically possible to define a ViewModel as a struct,
using a class can often provide more flexibility and control over the
ViewModel's behavior and state management in SwiftUI.
 
Now, let’s define our ViewModel, make a new file, and call it
CalculatorViewModel inside the ViewModel folder:
 
 
Figure 5.19: Create Calculator View Model

--- Page 306 ---
 
Here, we define a class CalculatorViewModel and conform to the
ObservableObject protocol. To begin, let's move all of the app Model into it.
In this case, it is the data of our buttons:
 
 
Figure 5.20: Transferring Model place to ViewModel (1)
 
Cut and paste it here. Notice that we have made a change to accessing level
control here. Instead, if private, we now use private(set). The difference is
that with private(set), this data can be read and get outside its scope, but it
cannot be modified outside of its defined scope, which is the
CalculatorViewModel here.
 
Xcode will give a warning error back in the CalculatorView because it
cannot find the buttonData anymore. So, let’s create our ViewModel inside

--- Page 307 ---
the view:
 
 
Figure 5.21: Transferring Model place to ViewModel (2)
 
We initialize an instance of CalculatorViewModel here and call it
viewModel. Then, we can get our buttonData from the ViewModel for use in
our view here. Build and run it, and everything will work smoothly!
 
Next, let’s tackle the business logic and move these to our view model.
Similar to the button model data, let’s move all of our logical properties and
functions there:
 

--- Page 308 ---
 
Figure 5.22: Transferring logic to ViewModel (1)
 
Instead of using the @State, which works only inside one view, we replaced
all of it with the @Published property wrapper:
 

--- Page 309 ---
 
Figure 5.23: Transferring logic to ViewModel (2)
 
Similarly, with our function, we added private to make them safer because
these two functions are not being used outside of our ViewModel. With this,
we will have a lot of errors back in the CalculatorView because Xcode

--- Page 310 ---
cannot find these properties and functions. Just like with the buttonData, go
back and add viewModel reference before them, so that Xcode knows to go
and get these data in the ViewModel:
 
 
Figure 5.24: Transferring logic to ViewModel (3)
 
Compile now, and everything will run very successfully. However, it isn’t
working! Our button is clicked, but the textResult value is not updated. What
have we done wrong here? It is because we forgot to mark our view model
with @StateObject:
 

--- Page 311 ---
 
Figure 5.25: @StateObject
 
See if you catch this error. However, in order for @Published to work and
notify the view model, the view model has to be marked with @StateObject.
 
Now, build it, and our calculator is back to working perfectly! And with this,
we have successfully extracted the ViewModel layer. The MVVM pattern is
now completed in our project. We can now see three separate layers inside
the three folders of our project.
 
 
The Model layer defined the required data of each button:
ButtonInforModel.
 
The ViewModel layer contains all of the calculation logic of the app:
CalculatorViewModel.
 
The View layer displays the calculation screen: CalculatorView.
 
You can also see that the ViewModel is acting as the bridge here to transfer
data from the Model to the View.

--- Page 312 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 313 ---
 
Conclusion
 
In this chapter, we have learned about design patterns and their purposes in
programming. We also have an introduction to all the common design
patterns in iOS development.
 
Then, we dug deep into the MVVM pattern because it allows the separation
of concerns that fits right in with SwiftUI.
 
The model represents the app's data and business logic. It is responsible for
managing the data and providing it to the view model. The view is
responsible for displaying the data and providing user interaction. The view
model acts as an intermediary between the view and the model. It is
responsible for processing user input and providing data to the view.
 
After learning all the behind concepts, we applied them to successfully
refactor our calculator app to follow the MVVM design pattern.
 
In the next chapter, we will learn more complicated View building blocks of
SwiftUI, which you may have seen in a lot of famous commercial Apps.
The power of SwiftUI will become even better.

--- Page 314 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 315 ---
CHAPTER 6
 
Tab Bar, Navigation, and Compositional Layout

--- Page 316 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 317 ---
 
Introduction
 
In this chapter, we will be looking at commonly found elements and UI
designs in a modern mobile application. They have multiple screens with
different user stories. The tab bar and navigation bar are two important
elements of modern user interface design. We will see how they work and
recreate them in SwiftUI. Later, we will learn about compositional layout
and how to make a modern complex layout like the Instagram or Spotify
app.

--- Page 318 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 319 ---
 
Structure
 
In this chapter, the following topics will be covered:
 
 
Tab bar introduction
 
Making tab bar in SwiftUI
 
Navigation in mobile app development
 
Navigation View and Navigation Stack
 
Modern application layout with the compositional layout in SwiftUI
 
Load images inside our project
 
LazyVGrid and LazyHGrid

--- Page 320 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 321 ---
 
Tab bar
 
Tab bar is a user interface component that is commonly used in mobile
applications to provide navigation between different sections or views within
an app. It is typically located at the bottom of the screen and consists of a
horizontal bar with tabs that the user can tap to switch between different
sections:
 
 
A tab bar is a graphical user interface element that is commonly found in
mobile applications and websites.
 
It typically appears at the bottom of the screen and contains a series of tabs
that represent different sections or views within the app or website.
 
Tab bars are often used to provide quick and easy navigation between
different parts of an app or website, allowing users to switch between tasks
or views with just a tap.
 
Each tab in a tab bar usually has a unique icon and label, which helps users
to quickly identify and select the desired tab.
 
Tab bars are often customizable, allowing users to rearrange the tabs, add
new tabs, or remove tabs that are not frequently used.

--- Page 322 ---
 
While tab bars are commonly used in mobile applications, they can also be
found in desktop applications and websites.
 
The use of tab bars can help to improve the user experience by providing a
clear and consistent navigation system that is easy to use and understand.
 
However, it is important to use tab bars appropriately and not overwhelm
users with too many tabs or options, as this can lead to confusion and
frustration.
 
Here’s an example from the LinkedIn app:
 

--- Page 324 ---
 
Figure 6.1: Tab bar
 
Each tab usually represents a distinct feature or category within the app and
may display a corresponding icon or text label to help the user identify the
purpose of the tab. The LinkedIn app has five tab bars, each with its separate
functionalities. Users can easily navigate between them with one single tap.
 
Tab bar is a popular layout component for mobile apps because they provide
an easy-to-use and visually appealing way for users to navigate through an
app. They allow users to quickly switch between different sections without
having to navigate through a complex hierarchy of menus or screens, making
it easier to find the information or feature they need.
 
Now, open up Xcode, and let’s make a tab bar:
 

--- Page 325 ---
 
Figure 6.2: Layout Tab bar with SwiftUI
 
How easy it is! If you have built this in UIKit, then this is incomparable.
There are two conditions here as follows:
 
 
We have the TabView container which is wrapping all of our tab views.
 

--- Page 326 ---
Each view must has conformed to the .tabItem() modifier for that view to
become a tab view. In this modifier, we can specify its displaying image and
text. Try to change the Image icon and text to look just like the Linked In
app.
 
Here, we use Text(“First tab”) just for demonstration, but it can be any
SwiftUI view. In a real project, we will make a separate file for each tab
view, lay them out there, and then set up the tab bar here. How convenient
and clean it is!
 
There are two other useful things related to the tab bar:
 

--- Page 327 ---
 
Figure 6.3: Tab bar frequently used features
 
The first thing is to select the default tab view that will appear first when the
user launches the app. The TabView container has the selection parameter
for this, which requires a binding input. For each tab view here, we use the
.tag() modifier. It is used to differentiate among certain selectable views, like
possible values of a Picker or the tabs of a TabView. Then, we use a State
variable to inform SwiftUI that the first tab to be selected has the tag “1”.
 

--- Page 328 ---
The second thing that is frequently seen is the badge to alert something new
related to that tab view. SwiftUI has a built-in .badge() modifier for this
functionality. Just input an Int number, and you get this out of the box.
 
And that’s almost everything you’ll ever need with the Tab bar. Very short
code is needed, and everything is easy to read and grasp. This is why we iOS
developers are in love with SwiftUI so much.
 
Tab bars are often used in conjunction with other navigation components
like a navigation bar or a menu to provide a complete navigation experience.
These are fundamental in almost every large app. Let’s learn about
navigation and how it can be implemented in SwiftUI.

--- Page 329 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 330 ---
 
Navigation in iOS development
 
Navigation in iOS development refers to the process of allowing users to
move between different screens or views within an app. It is the core
mechanism used to manage the hierarchy of views in an app and enables
users to seamlessly move between different sections of an app. Here are
some key aspects of iOS navigation:
 
 
Navigation is a fundamental aspect of the iOS user experience, allowing
users to move between different screens and views within an app.
 
The iOS navigation system includes several key elements, including the
navigation bar, tab bar, and various types of controls and gestures.
 
The navigation bar is a thin strip that appears at the top of the screen and
typically contains a title, or a back button.
 
The navigation bar can also be customized to include additional buttons or
controls, depending on the needs of the app.
 
In addition to the navigation bar, iOS also includes a tab bar, which appears
at the bottom of the screen and allows users to switch between different
sections or views within the app.

--- Page 331 ---
 
The tab bar is commonly used for primary navigation, while the navigation
bar is used for more contextual navigation, such as moving up and down a
hierarchical structure or drilling down into submenus.
 
iOS navigation also includes various gestures and controls, such as swiping
to go back or forward, pinching to zoom, and tapping to select.
 
Effective navigation design in iOS is critical to creating a seamless user
experience, and involves careful consideration of factors such as hierarchy,
context, and user goals.
 
Navigation in iOS should be intuitive and easy to understand, with clear
labels and visual cues that guide the user through the app or website.
 
Here is the Storyboard visualization of it:
 

--- Page 332 ---
 
Figure 6.4: Navigation in iOS development
 
In UIKit, navigation is typically achieved through a navigation controller,
which provides a stack-based approach to managing views. The navigation
controller maintains a stack of view controllers, with the topmost view
controller being the one currently displayed on the screen. Users can
navigate forward and backward through the stack using buttons, gestures, or
other UI elements.
 

--- Page 333 ---
The navigation controller also provides a navigation bar at the top of the
screen, which typically contains a title and a back button. This bar can be
customized to include additional buttons or elements, such as a search bar or
a segmented control.
 
In SwiftUI, navigation works similarly to iOS development with UIKit.
SwiftUI provides a NavigationView component that allows you to create a
hierarchy of views and navigate between them.

--- Page 334 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 335 ---
 
NavigationView and NavigationLink
 
The NavigationView is a container view provided by SwiftUI that allows
you to create a hierarchical navigation interface. It provides a navigation bar
at the top of the view hierarchy that displays a title and, optionally, buttons
for navigating back to the previous view or performing other actions.
 
In SwiftUI, the NavigationView component creates a navigation stack to
manage the navigation flow between views. Each view pushed onto the
navigation stack is displayed with a navigation bar at the top, and a back
button is automatically added to allow the user to navigate back to the
previous view.
 
Here's an example of how to use the NavigationView in SwiftUI:
 

--- Page 336 ---
 
Figure 6.5: Navigation View in SwiftUI
 
In this example, we create a NavigationView that contains a List view with
four items. The NavigationView automatically adds a navigation bar with
the title My List at the top of the screen. If we push another view on the
stack, a back button will be automatically added to the navigation bar to
allow the user to return to this view.
 
You can customize the navigation bar by adding buttons or other view
elements to it. You can also customize the appearance of the navigation bar
using the .navigationBarColor() and .navigationBarTitleDisplayMode()
modifiers.

--- Page 337 ---
 
To navigate to a new view, you can use the NavigationLink component. This
component creates a clickable button that will push the destination view onto
the navigation stack when tapped. You can also use the
NavigationLink(destination:, label:) initializer to create programmatic
navigation.
 
Let’s make our list link and navigate to other views:
 
 
Figure 6.6: Embed Navigation Link (1)
 

--- Page 338 ---
In this example, we use a NavigationView to define possible paths from this
view forward. When the user taps the highlighted text, a new view is pushed
onto the stack using the NavigationLink component. The next view displays
a simple text view with a custom navigation bar title:
 
 
Figure 6.7: Embed Navigation Link (2)
 
We have the back button right out of the box. Clicking it will return you to
our list view.
 

--- Page 339 ---
Another common feature we often see with the NavigationView is the
navigation bar button. To add a button to the navigation bar in SwiftUI, you
can use the .navigationBarItems() modifier on the NavigationView. This
modifier allows you to add one or more navigation bar items to either the left
or right side of the navigation bar.
 
Here's an example of how to add Settings and Remove buttons to the left and
right sides of the navigation bar:
 
 
Figure 6.8: Navigation Bar Button (1)
 
In this example, we add two buttons as the leading and trailing navigation
bar items using the navigationBarItems modifier. The action closure is called

--- Page 340 ---
when the button is tapped. We also use the systemName property to specify
the system image for the button.
 
You can also add multiple navigation bar items by passing an array of views
to the navigationBarItems modifier. For example, you can add a Trash button
and an Add button to the right side of the navigation bar as follows:
 
 
Figure 6.9: Navigation Bar Button (2)
 
In this case, we use an HStack to display the two buttons side by side in the
navigation bar. Although NavigationView and NavigationLink are great

--- Page 341 ---
together, they still have some flaws. Because of this, iOS 16 introduced a
better solution for managing navigation in SwiftUI: Navigation Stack.

--- Page 342 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 343 ---
 
Navigation stack
 
NavigationView is a widely used component in iOS development. When
SwiftUI was initially introduced, it included a view called NavigationView
that allowed developers to create navigation-based user interfaces. However,
with the release of iOS 16, Apple has deprecated the old NavigationView
and introduced a new view called NavigationStack that can present a stack
of views. This new view enables developers to build data-driven navigation.
 
In our example, replace NavigationView with NavigationStack, and
everything will work fine:
 


--- Page 344 ---
 
Figure 6.10: Introduce NavigationStack (1)
 
Let’s do some cleaning on this code:
 
 
Figure 6.11: Introduce NavigationStack (2)
 
But for now, everything is still the same. With iOS 16, NavigationStack
introduces a new modifier called .navigationDestination() that associates a
destination view with a presented data type. The same piece of code in our
example can be rewritten as follows:
 

--- Page 345 ---
 
Figure 6.12: NavigationStack navigate views
 
NavigationLinks are still used to present a list of data and implement
navigation in SwiftUI. The difference is that each NavigationLink is now
associated with a value. Additionally, we use the new
.navigationDestination() modifier to capture the value change. When a user
selects a specific link, the .navigationDestination() modifier presents the
corresponding destination view for navigation links that present data of type
Color.
 
When testing the app in the preview, it will function just as it did before.
However, the internal implementation now utilizes the new
.navigationDestination() modifier.
 

--- Page 346 ---
An important thing to note is that you are allowed to define more than one
.navigationDestination() modifier for handling different types of navigation
links.
 
Unlike the previous NavigationView, the new NavigationStack makes it
simple to keep track of the navigation state. The NavigationStack view has
an alternative initialization method that accepts a path parameter, which is
bound to the navigation state for the stack.
 
If you want to store or manage the navigation state, you can create a state
variable. Here is an example:
 
 

--- Page 347 ---
Figure 6.13: NavigationStack manages view hierarchy
 
We introduced a state variable called path, which is an array of String used
to store the navigation state. When initializing NavigationStack, we pass its
binding for managing the stack. The value of the path variable is
automatically updated when the navigation stack's state changes.
 
We also change our navigationBarTitle to see what’s inside our path. As you
can see, at the root here, our path is empty, so its count is equal to zero, and
it is an empty string. This always happens when you are at the root view. So,
we add a Back to Root button here that, when tapped, will remove and
empty our path.
 
Now, navigate to the First Item and see how our path information changes:
 

--- Page 348 ---
 
Figure 6.14: Inside NavigationStack’s path
 
As you can see, our path now has one item, which is our first item being
added in. Now both the back button and Back to Root will work the same.
We will change our path information to one text view here. We will now add
another button inside each item’s view to navigate to the fifth view:
 

--- Page 349 ---
 
Figure 6.15: Adding the Fifth View
 
We will check the condition to add the fifth view button. Let’s hit it and see
what is inside our path now:
 

--- Page 350 ---
 
Figure 6.16: Path information at the Fifth View
 
As you can see, our path now has two values: “First item” and “Fifth item”.
Now, if you hit back, then you will be at the first item view. However, if you
hit Back to Root, then you will return to the main list with four items.
 
We can direct the navigation stack to return to the root level by resetting the
value of the path variable.
 

--- Page 351 ---
The new NavigationStack, introduced in iOS 16, makes it simple for
developers to construct data-driven navigation user interfaces. If your app
doesn't require support for older versions of iOS, you can utilize this new
component to manage deep linking and intricate user flows.

--- Page 352 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 353 ---
 
Compositional layout
 
 
Compositional layout is a powerful layout system that can be used in app
development to create highly customized, dynamic layouts for iOS apps,
including those built using SwiftUI.
 
In SwiftUI, compositional layout can be implemented using the new
LazyVGrid and LazyHGrid views, which allow developers to define
layouts using a declarative, data-driven approach.
 
These views can be configured with a wide range of properties and
behaviors, including size, spacing, alignment, scrolling direction, and more.
 
Compositional layout in SwiftUI also supports a variety of different layout
types, including grids, lists, and custom layouts that can be tailored to
specific use cases.
 
With compositional layout in SwiftUI, developers have more control over
the look and feel of their app and can create layouts that adapt to different
device sizes and orientations.
 
Compositional layout in SwiftUI also includes powerful features such as
section headers and footers, supplementary views, and decoration views,

--- Page 354 ---
which allow developers to add additional content and visual elements to
their layouts.
 
SwiftUI's declarative syntax makes it easy to build complex, nested layouts
using compositional layout, with changes to the underlying data
automatically reflected in the layout.
 
While compositional layout in SwiftUI can be more complex and require
more setup than simpler layout systems, it offers a high degree of flexibility
and customization that can lead to more engaging and dynamic app
experiences.
 
Compositional layout is just one of many powerful tools available to app
developers for creating rich, interactive user interfaces in SwiftUI, and can
be used in conjunction with other SwiftUI features and technologies to
create truly unique and innovative apps.
 
Here’s an example from the Instagram app:
 

--- Page 355 ---
 

--- Page 356 ---
Figure 6.17: Compositional layout in the Instagram app
 
Now, let’s return to Xcode and make this compositional layout. As you can
see in this design, there will be three columns of infinity-scrolling images.

--- Page 357 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 358 ---
 
Load image
 
For this example, we will load a sample image from inside our project. In the
next chapter, when learning about Networking, we will learn how to load
images online from a URL:
 
 
Figure 6.18: Add sample Image to our project
 
Navigate to Assets in our project hierarchy, and then drag and drop your
sample image here. With this, we are ready to use the LandscapeImage

--- Page 359 ---
inside our project. To display an Image inside the project, we will be using
the Image container view:
 
 
Figure 6.19: Displaying Image
 
Here, the landscape image fully covers our screen. This is because in
SwiftUI, with the Image() container alone, it will render the original size of
the input image on the screen.
 
To deal with this issue, there are two view modifiers always being used with
the Image container: .resizable() and .aspectRatio():
 

--- Page 360 ---
 
Figure 6.20: Resizing Image
 
With this, our image looks great and preserves its original appearance. Now,
you may look back at the way we were doing the Calculator app layout in
the previous chapter to recreate Instagram’s layout. Although it will work by
combining VStack, HStack, and ForEach containers, there is a better
solution for this modern design: LazyVGrid or LazyHGrid.

--- Page 361 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 362 ---
 
LazyVGrid and LazyHGrid
 
LazyVGrid and LazyHGrid are views in iOS development that allow
you to arrange views in a grid layout vertically and horizontally. It is a
part of the SwiftUI framework and was introduced in iOS 14.
 
LazyVGrid and LazyHGrid both allow you to arrange views in a grid
layout, but they differ in their orientation.
 
The main difference between these two views is their axis of arrangement.
While LazyVGrid arranges views in vertical columns, LazyHGrid arranges
views in horizontal rows. This means that the columns parameter in
LazyVGrid corresponds to the number of columns in the grid, while the
rows parameter in LazyHGrid corresponds to the number of rows.
 
Both can be used to replace each other, so it depends on each developer’s
preference. In this Instagram example, we will be using LazyVGrid.
 
The LazyVGrid view is similar to the VGrid view, but with one key
difference: LazyVGrid is designed to handle large amounts of data more
efficiently. Instead of creating all the views at once, it creates them on-
demand as the user scrolls through the grid. This helps to conserve memory
and improve performance.
 
To use LazyVGrid:

--- Page 363 ---
 
 
Firstly, we need to define the layout of the grid by specifying the number of
columns and the spacing between them.
 
After that, we can then provide a collection of data to the view, which will
be used to create the individual views in the grid.
 
For the Instagram layout, we will need three equal columns of images. Let’s
do this:
 


--- Page 364 ---
 
Figure 6.21: LazyVGrid
 
We create a columns property, which will be our view columns data. It is an
array of GridItem. Because we want three equal columns, which is why we
have three GridItems here.
 
In SwiftUI, a GridItem is a view that represents a single item in a grid
layout. It's used in conjunction with the LazyVGrid or LazyHGrid container
views to arrange views in a grid-like fashion.
 
A GridItem can be configured with properties such as spacing, alignment,
and size. In this example, we use .flexible() to create a grid item that can
expand to fill the available space, giving us three equal columns.
 
The spacing parameter is for the space between each column, and later, we
can specify the space between each row with the spacing parameter that
comes from the LazyVGrid itself. Thus, we have our Instagram
compositional layout.
 
Furthermore, you can specify the width and height of a grid item by using
the .fixed() parameter. For example, here we will set the first columns to be
fixed at 100 pixels:
 

--- Page 365 ---
 
Figure 6.22: Fixed size column in LazyVGrid
 
In addition to .fixed() and .flexible(), you can also use .adaptive() to create a
grid item that adjusts its size based on the available space. Try playing
around with these different cases to see how they are used.
 
Let’s revert back and do a final add-on to make our example look like
Instagram. We are adding ScrollView for vertical scroll if there are more
pictures and using NavigationStack to add navigation title:
 

--- Page 366 ---
 
Figure 6.23: Instagram layout with LazyVGrid
 
Now, you may look back and argue that the image in our prototype is square.
No worries, because we can easily achieve this on the .aspectRatio()
modifier:
 

--- Page 367 ---
 
Figure 6.24: Instagram layout with LazyVGrid completed
 
The first option parameter of the .aspectRatio() modifier allows us to specify
the width-to-height ratio of our image. If not specified, then the original ratio
will be preserved. Here, because we want a square image, the width-to-
height ratio will be “1”.
 
In summary, both LazyVGrid and LazyHGrid are powerful tools for creating
efficient and flexible grid layouts in SwiftUI, which are commonly seen in
modern applications.

--- Page 368 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 369 ---
 
Conclusion
 
In this chapter, we have learned about commonly used elements in modern
applications, including Tab bar, Navigation, and Compositional layout.
 
All of these are essential components for building great user interfaces in
SwiftUI:
 
 
Tab bar provides an easy-to-use and intuitive way for users to navigate
between different sections of an app.
 
Navigation helps users to move between different screens and contexts,
while also enabling a clear and hierarchical organization of content.
 
Compositional layout provides a powerful and flexible way to arrange and
display complex collections of views in a way that is optimized for
performance and adaptability.
 
By leveraging these tools in SwiftUI, developers can create highly
customizable and engaging user experiences that are tailored to the unique
needs of their app and its users.
 

--- Page 370 ---
In the next chapter, we will learn about networking to connect and retrieve
data online. Then, we will learn how to implement it in iOS development
with SwiftUI. Get some rest and stay excited for the next chapter.

--- Page 371 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 372 ---
CHAPTER 7
 
Networking with SwiftUI - Part 1

--- Page 373 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 374 ---
 
Introduction
 
Networking is a critical aspect of iOS app development as it allows apps to
communicate with remote servers, retrieve data, and provide users with up-
to-date information. Whether you're building a social media app, an e-
commerce platform, or a news aggregator, networking is an essential tool
that enables your app to interact with the world.
 
In today's fast-paced and interconnected world, users expect apps to work
seamlessly and deliver content quickly. This is where networking comes
into play, allowing apps to communicate with servers in the background,
retrieve data on demand, and provide users with a smooth and responsive
experience.
 
In this context, understanding how to implement networking in your iOS
app is a key skill for any iOS developer. We will be exploring this topic in
both this and the next chapter.

--- Page 375 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 376 ---
 
Structure
 
In this chapter, the following topics will be covered:
 
 
Networking in programming
 
RESTful API and JSON format
 
URLSession and Decodable in Swift
 
Building an app to get the latest price of Bitcoin
 
Enumeration in Swift language
 
Difference between main thread and background thread
 
Asynchronous programming and its importance in iOS app development
 

--- Page 377 ---
Completion block vs async/await

--- Page 378 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 379 ---
 
Networking
 
Networking in programming is the process of allowing computer programs
to communicate with each other over a network. Networking enables
programs to exchange data, messages, or commands between different
devices, such as computers, smartphones, and servers. Networking is a vital
component of modern software applications, enabling features such as
online multiplayer games, real-time collaboration tools, and social media
platforms.
 
Here are some important key points:
 
 
APIs and protocols: Developers use application programming
interfaces (APIs) and protocols to define the rules for how information
should be exchanged between programs. Some common networking
protocols include HTTP, TCP/IP, and FTP.
 
Built-in libraries and frameworks: Programming languages provide
built-in networking libraries or frameworks that simplify the process of
implementing networking functionality in a program. In Swift and iOS
programming, we will be using URLSession.
 
Socket programming: Socket programming is a low-level networking
technique that allows for direct communication between two computers
or devices. Socket programming is commonly used for building

--- Page 380 ---
networked games, real-time collaboration tools, and other applications
that require fast and efficient communication.
 
Network security: Network security is a critical consideration in
networking programming, as programs must be able to exchange
information securely and protect against unauthorized access.
Developers may use encryption, authentication, and other techniques to
ensure the security of networked applications. The most common one is
HTTPS. HTTPS, short for Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure, is a
secure communication protocol widely used on the internet. It ensures
that data exchanged between a web browser and a website is encrypted,
safeguarding sensitive information such as passwords, financial
transactions, and personal data from unauthorized access.
 
Networking is a fundamental aspect of programming that enables programs
to connect and communicate with other systems. This can be a whole
subject and a special domain inside programming.
 
For the scope of this book, we will only focus on the first two key points:
using native iOS framework to communicate with servers through APIs.
 
Socket programming is very interesting and can be used to build live chat
apps, live tracking stock, or crypto apps. So, if you have the time, we highly
recommend you do some deep research on this topic.

--- Page 381 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 382 ---
 
RESTful APIs
 
API calls, or Application Programming Interface calls, are a way for iOS
applications to interact with web services and retrieve data. The most
commonly observed in mobile development is RESTful APIs.
 
RESTful API is an architectural style for building web-based APIs, where
REST stands for Representational State Transfer. It is a standard that defines
a set of constraints for creating web services that are scalable, flexible, and
maintainable:
 
 
Figure 7.1: REST API

--- Page 383 ---
 
Think about RESTful or any format of API like a standardized rule of
communication between two systems. Commonly, we divide them as client
and server. The client is the user interface who will use the information, for
example, a mobile app or website. On the other hand, the server is a place of
secure storage, for example, a cloud server.
 
Mobile app developers often use RESTful APIs to build web-based services
that can be accessed by their mobile apps. RESTful APIs provide a
standardized and scalable way to exchange data between the app and the
server. Some key benefits of using RESTful APIs in mobile app
development include:
 
 
Scalability: RESTful APIs are designed to be scalable, allowing them to
handle large numbers of requests from multiple clients. This is especially
important in mobile app development, where apps can be used by millions of
users at the same time.
 
Flexibility: RESTful APIs allow developers to exchange data in a wide
range of formats, including JSON, XML, and plain text. This flexibility
allows developers to choose the best format for their app's requirements.
 
Simplified Development: Using RESTful APIs can simplify the
development process for mobile apps, as developers can use pre-built
APIs instead of building their own data storage and retrieval
mechanisms.
 

--- Page 384 ---
Consistency: RESTful APIs provide a standardized way to communicate
between the client and server, ensuring consistency across different
platforms and devices.
 
Security: RESTful APIs provide built-in security features, such as
authentication and encryption, ensuring that the data exchanged between the
client and server is secure.
 
When building a mobile app that uses RESTful APIs, developers typically
use libraries such as Alamofire or URLSession to make HTTP requests and
manage network connections.
 
URLSession is a built-in library provided by Apple, whereas Alamofire
is a third-party library developed by the open-source community, built
on top of URLSession.
 
Both provide a simplified interface for working with RESTful APIs, making
it easier for developers to build fast, efficient, and secure mobile apps that
can communicate with web-based services.
 
Here are some differences between the two:
 
 
Complexity: URLSession is a low-level library that provides a lot of control
over the network request process. This can make it more complex to use than
Alamofire, which is designed to provide a simplified interface for making
network requests.

--- Page 385 ---
 
Customization: Because URLSession is a low-level library, it provides a lot
of customization options for things like caching, authentication, and
background tasks. This makes it more flexible than Alamofire, which
provides a simpler interface with fewer customization options.
 
Learning curve: Because URLSession is a built-in library, it can be
easier for developers to learn since it is already included in the iOS
SDK. Alamofire, on the other hand, has a steeper learning curve since it
is a third-party library.
 
Support: Because URLSession is a built-in library, it is more likely to
receive updates and bug fixes from Apple. Alamofire, on the other hand,
relies on the open-source community for support and maintenance.
 
Application size: Alamofire is a third-party library means that
importing it will increase the size of the application compared to already
existed native solutions like URLSession.
 
Overall, both URLSession and Alamofire have their strengths and
weaknesses, and which one to use will depend on the specific needs of your
project. If you need a lot of customization and control over the network
request process, URLSession may be a better choice. On the other hand, if
you need a simpler interface and faster development, Alamofire may be a
better choice.
 
In this book for networking, we will be using URLSession as it is a native
built-in solution provided by Apple. However, first, let’s take a look at the

--- Page 386 ---
most frequently seen format of data in networking: JSON.

--- Page 387 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 388 ---
 
JSON
 
JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) is a lightweight data-interchange
format that is commonly used for transmitting data between a server
and a web or mobile client.
 
JSON is a text-based format that consists of key-value pairs, where keys are
strings and values can be strings, numbers, objects, arrays, or Boolean
values. JSON is often used to represent complex data structures, such as lists
of objects or nested objects.
 
Here is an example of a simple JSON object:
 

--- Page 389 ---
 
Figure 7.2: JSON format
 
In this example, the object has three key-value pairs: "name", "age", and
"city". The "name" key has a string value of "John", the "age" key has a
numeric value of 30, and the "city" key has a string value of "New York".
 
JSON is widely used in web and mobile development because it is easy to
read and write, can be parsed by most programming languages, and is
supported by most modern web and mobile APIs. It is also a more
lightweight and efficient alternative to other data interchange formats, such
as XML.

--- Page 390 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 391 ---
 
URLSession
 
URLSession is a class in the Foundation framework of iOS, macOS,
tvOS, and watchOS, which provides an interface for making network
requests.
 
The name URLSession comes from the fact that it is used to manage
sessions for loading data from URLs. This includes downloading data,
uploading data, and even streaming media.
 
The URLSession class is designed to be a powerful and flexible tool for
making network requests. It supports many different types of requests,
including HTTP and HTTPS, and provides features like caching,
authentication, and background tasks.
 
Three types of URLSession tasks that can be used to make network requests
are as follows:
 
 
URLSessionDataTask: This task retrieves data from the server as a Data
object. We will be using this to call APIs.
 
URLSessionUploadTask: This task uploads data to the server, such as a file
or binary data.

--- Page 392 ---
 
URLSessionDownloadTask: This task downloads data from the server and
saves it to a file.
 
In addition to these tasks, URLSession also supports background tasks,
which allow apps to continue downloading or uploading data even when the
app is not actively running.
 
Overall, URLSession is a powerful and flexible tool for making network
requests in iOS apps. Whether you're building a simple app that retrieves
data from a web API, or a complex app that handles large file uploads,
URLSession provides the necessary features to get the job done.
 
Now, let’s make our first API call to retrieve the latest price of Bitcoin.

--- Page 393 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 394 ---
 
Making our first API call
 
We will create a simple app with a button to request the live price of Bitcoin,
one of the hottest assets currently:
 

--- Page 395 ---
 
Figure 7.3: Bitcoin live price app

--- Page 396 ---
 
For this demo app, we will use the free, open-to-public API by
https://coindesk.com to get the latest price of Bitcoin. Here is the URL link:
https://api.coindesk.com/v1/bpi/currentprice.json.
 
We will make a get request to this URL and get the live price of Bitcoin.
Now, copy this link, paste it to your browser, and press Enter:
 
 
Figure 7.4: API response as JSON (1)
 
As you can see, with this URL link, we will get back Bitcoin data. A close
look and you will be able to find its price. The data is in a JSON format,
which can be hard to look at, so we will use a Chrome Extension JSONVue
for better visualization:
 

--- Page 397 ---
 
Figure 7.5: API response as JSON (2)
 
Everything now looks organized, which will help us a lot later when we
write this API’s model.
 
However, this is on the web. Now, let’s open Xcode and make a call to this
URL to get back this Bitcoin information within our app. Here is how we are
doing it with URLSession:
 

--- Page 398 ---
 
Figure 7.6: Fetch API to JSON with URLSession
 
First, we use the URL class to create a URL object from the URL string.
Next, we use this URL object to create a URLRequest object. We then use
URLSession's dataTask method to make the GET request, passing in the
URLRequest object.
 
Inside the .dataTask closure, we check if there is data returned from the
server. Then, we use the built-in method from JSONSerialization to decode
the returned data into JSON format. If it is successful, then we will print out
the JSON object:
 

--- Page 399 ---
 
Figure 7.7: Bitcoin price app layout
 
Here, we just have a simple VStack with a Text display of our return
information and a button to fetch data. Let’s press that button to make an
API call:
 

--- Page 400 ---
 
Figure 7.8: Successful get data from the app
 
Open up the debugger and you will see the previous data has successfully
fetched into our project as a JSON object. However, iOS developers don’t
use JSON directly inside our app. Instead, we will create a Model from
Struct to represent its data and then access and use its information.

--- Page 401 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 402 ---
 
JSONDecoder and Decodable
 
Creating a model and decoding the JSON response into that model instead of
using the raw JSON data directly provides several benefits as follows:
 
 
Type safety: By defining a model, we can ensure that the JSON response
is mapped to a structured, typed object that we can work with in our
code. This helps us avoid errors that might occur if we were working
directly with unstructured JSON data.
 
Readability and maintainability: Having a structured model makes the
code more readable and easier to understand. If we were working with
raw JSON data directly, the code could quickly become difficult to
follow, especially with more complex responses.
 
Ease of use: Once we have decoded the JSON response into a model, we
can use it easily in our code, without having to worry about parsing the
JSON data ourselves. This can save us time and effort, especially for
larger or more complex responses.
 
In summary, creating a Model and decoding the JSON response into that
model provides a more structured, type-safe, readable, maintainable, and
compatible way of working with the response data.
 

--- Page 403 ---
Now to write our Bitcoin data model correctly, let’s come back to our
browser:
 
 
Figure 7.9: Analyze the JSON object to write model
 
Here, the extension becomes very handy. If you look closely, you will notice
that the two pieces of data we need are highlighted in green: the price and
the main currency, which is USD. These two pieces of information are stored
as key-value pair with code and rate as the two keys. They are then nested
inside an object with key USD. It then is one of the nested values of the bpi
key.
 
Let’s rewrite them into our model using Struct:
 

--- Page 404 ---
 
Figure 7.10: Our Bitcoin data models
 
We will create three models, each representing a layer of the JSON data
object. The BitcoinData model has the bpi key to the BPI model, which then

--- Page 405 ---
has the USD key. Its value is the USDRate model, which has two pieces of
information attached to rate and code keys. One common mistake here is a
typo error in the key; for example, instead of rate, we might mistakenly type
rates, which will cause all of the decoding processes to fail.
 
It is important to note that now all of our models must adopt the Decodable
protocol.
 
Decodable is a protocol in Swift that enables us to decode data from a
serialized format, such as JSON or XML, into a structured object. It is a
part of the Swift Standard Library and is often used to parse data
returned from a web API.
 
The Decodable protocol provides a set of requirements that must be
implemented by a type for it to be decoded from a serialized format.
Specifically, the type must be able to decode itself from a Decoder object,
which provides the decoding context for the type.
 
To use Decodable, we define a struct or a class that conforms to the protocol,
and we specify the properties of the type that we want to decode from the
serialized format. We can then use the JSONDecoder class in Swift to
decode the serialized data into our type.
 
Now, let’s use this knowledge to fetch data, decode it to our models, and use
it to display the current Bitcoin price in our app whenever the user taps the
button.
 

--- Page 406 ---
There are two ways of doing this: the old way using a completion block and
the new way using Swift Concurrency (async – await). We will be going
through both of them in this example.

--- Page 407 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 408 ---
 
Completion block, Enumeration, and threads
 
Firstly, here is how we rewrite our fetchData function using the completion
block:
 
 
Figure 7.11: Fetch data using completion block (1)
 
We have replaced JSONSerialization with JSONDecoder. Instead of
decoding the received data to JSON format, we now try to decode it as our
BitcoinData model.
 

--- Page 409 ---
The second thing we have highlighted here is the use of another collection
data in Swift: Enumeration.
 
In Swift, an enum (short for “enumeration”) is a custom data type that
defines a group of related values. Enumeration provides a way to define a
finite set of possible values, each of which is a separate member of the
enumeration.
 
In this example, we define an enum called NetworkError that represents the
different errors that can occur during a network call. Each error is defined as
a separate member of the enumeration using the case keyword.
 
Our enum conforms to the Error protocol. The NetworkError enum defines a
set of error cases that could occur when making a network request, including
invalid URL and request failure. We can add other cases in the future, such
as authentication error, server error, and unknown error.
 
This can make it easier to handle errors in a more structured and organized
way in our code. We are using a different type of error in our function with
the help of the completion block.
 
Finally, the last thing you see here is that we have wrapped all of our
completions inside the DispatchQueue.main.asycn closure. This block will
make sure that our data will be received on the main thread. Why is that? It
is because, by default, URLSession will be executed in a background thread.
So, what are the differences between these two?
 

--- Page 410 ---
In iOS development, there are two primary types of threads: the main thread
(also known as the UI thread or the main queue) and the background threads
(also referred to as concurrent queues). These threads serve different
purposes and have specific characteristics. Let's explore the differences
between them.

--- Page 411 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 412 ---
 
Main Thread
 
 
The main thread is the primary thread in an iOS application and is
responsible for handling user interface (UI) updates, event handling, and
user interactions.
 
It executes the app's main run loop, which processes UI events like touch
events, animations, and user input.
 
All UI-related operations, such as updating views, handling touch events,
and performing animations, should be executed on the main thread.
 
It is crucial to keep the main thread responsive and free from heavy or time-
consuming tasks to provide a smooth user experience.
 
Blocking the main thread with long-running operations can result in an
unresponsive UI, leading to a poor user experience and potentially
triggering watchdog timers that terminate the app.

--- Page 413 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 414 ---
 
Background Thread
 
 
Background threads are used to perform time-consuming or resource-
intensive tasks without blocking the main thread.
 
They can be created explicitly using Grand Central Dispatch (GCD) or by
utilizing operation queues.
 
Background threads are typically used for tasks such as network requests,
file I/O, complex calculations, or any operation that might take a significant
amount of time.
 
By offloading these tasks to background threads, the main thread remains
free to handle user interactions and keep the UI responsive.
 
Background threads can execute concurrently, enabling multiple tasks to be
performed simultaneously.
 
It's important to note that UI-related operations should not be performed
directly on background threads. If UI updates are required after completing a
background task, they should be dispatched back to the main thread to
ensure thread-safety and proper UI handling.
 

--- Page 415 ---
In summary, the main thread is responsible for handling UI updates and user
interactions, while background threads are used for executing time-
consuming tasks off the main thread to keep the UI responsive. Here, you
may have guessed it; URLSession, by default, runs on a background thread
because who knows how long it might take. So, when our tasks are finished,
we need to bring those data to the main thread to update the UI to display the
Bitcoin price. That’s the job of the DispatchQueue.main.asycn closure.
 
By properly managing thread usage, you can ensure a smooth user
experience and prevent the UI from becoming unresponsive:
 
 
Figure 7.12: Fetch data using completion block (2)
 
This function differs from the other functions we have written.
 

--- Page 416 ---
In this line of code, we define the completion block that will be called once
the fetchData function completes its work. Let's break it down:
 
 
completion: is the name of the parameter that we're defining. We're using the
name completion here, but you can choose any valid parameter name you
like.
 
@escaping is a keyword that tells the compiler that this parameter is an
escaping closure. An escaping closure is one that's called after the
function that defines it has returned. In this case, we're passing a
closure as a parameter to fetchData, and we want to be able to call that
closure later on, after fetchData has finished its work. If we are doing a
network request, the response can take some time and the operation
becomes asynchronous, that's why we need an escaping closure here.
 
(Result<BitcoinData, Error>) -> Void is the closure type that we're
defining. This closure takes one parameter of type Result< BitcoinData,
Error>, which is a Swift type that represents either a success case
(containing a value of type BitcoinData which is our data model) or a
failure case (containing an error of type Error). The closure doesn't
return anything, so its return type is Void.
 
Overall, this line of code defines a completion block parameter for the
fetchData function that takes a result value (either a success case containing
Bitcoin price data or a failure case containing an error) and doesn't return
anything:
 

--- Page 417 ---
 
Figure 7.13: Fetch data using completion block (3)
 
Now, inside our function, we will use the completion(.success()) and
completion(.failure()) to pass the data received from this fetchData function.
In this example, if data is successfully decoded into BitcoinData, then it will
be a success. Otherwise, depending on the cases with the help of the
NetworkError enum, we will return different error cases.
 
The @escaping keyword indicates that this closure will be called later, after
the fetchData function has returned. All of this means that when we are
successful (the yellow area), we will call a function here using our just-
decoded data model BitcoinData. If there’s a failure (the orange area),
another function will also be called having the specific error.
 

--- Page 418 ---
Now, let’s make a call to this new function:
 
 
Figure 7.14: Fetch data using completion block (4)
 
In our view, we call the fetchData function when the button is pressed,
passing in a closure that updates the responseData state variable with the two
values we need: the bitcoin price and its mark currency, which is USD, if the
request succeeds, or prints an error message if it fails.
 
This approach helps to keep the networking logic separate from the view
logic and makes it easier to reuse the fetchData function in other parts of the

--- Page 419 ---
app.
 
Now, hit the button, and you should see the live price of Bitcoin in USD. At
this point, it just climbed back above 27,000 USD. Install it on your device,
and you will have an app just to check the live price of Bitcoin.
 
In summary:
 
 
Enumeration is a powerful feature of Swift and can be used to represent
a wide range of data types, from simple value types to more complex
objects with associated values and methods. They are often used to
define a fixed set of values for a specific purpose, such as days of the
week or error codes.
 
A completion block (or closure) is a way to pass a block of code as a
parameter to a method or function. The block of code is executed once the
method or function has completed its task. Completion blocks are often used
in asynchronous operations to notify the caller when the operation has
finished and provide the result or any errors that occurred during the
operation.
 
In iOS development, completion blocks are commonly used in networking
and data retrieval operations. For example, when making a network request,
you can pass a completion block to the request method to be executed when
the request is completed. The completion block might take parameters, such
as the response data or an error, depending on the outcome of the request.
 

--- Page 420 ---
Looking great, right? But it is just when things are simple. When things get
complicated, a problem that arises with completion blocks is known as
“callback hell” or “pyramid of doom”. This occurs when you have multiple
asynchronous tasks that depend on each other, and you end up with a series
of nested completion blocks that can be difficult to read and maintain.
 
Here's an example of what callback hell can look like:
 
 
Figure 7.15: Callback hell problem

--- Page 421 ---
 
We have four completion functions, each waiting for the previous one to
execute. As you can see, this code is difficult to read and understand, and it
can be hard to debug and maintain. Too many “{ }” blocks here; hence, it
has another name called the pyramid of doom. With large and complicated
apps, it is common to have multiple actions line up like this.
 
One solution to this problem is to use the async/await pattern, which was
introduced in Swift 5.5.

--- Page 422 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 423 ---
 
Asynchronous Programming with Async Await
 
Async/await is a new feature introduced in Swift 5.5 that allows for writing
asynchronous code in a more declarative, synchronous, readable, and
intuitive way.
 
Here are some key points of it:
 
 
A declarative way to write asynchronous code that is more readable,
maintainable, and less error-prone than traditional completion block patterns.
 
Allows you to write asynchronous code in a synchronous style by using
async and await keywords.
 
async marks a function as asynchronous, meaning that it may have to
wait for some other tasks to complete before continuing.
 
await is used to wait for the completion of a long-running task, such as a
network request or a database query, without blocking the thread.
 
Makes use of Swift's Result type, which allows you to handle errors more
straightforwardly.

--- Page 424 ---
 
Compared to completion blocks, async/await makes code easier to read,
understand, and maintain by reducing nesting and eliminating the need for a
lot of boilerplate code.
 
Easier to reason about concurrency and parallelism in your code, by making
it clear which tasks are running concurrently and which tasks are dependent
on other tasks.
 
Backward compatibility: – iOS 13, Xcode 13.2, macOS 10.15, watchOS 6,
and tvOS 13. This backward compatibility applies only to Swift language
features; you cannot use any APIs built using those language features, like
the new URLSession APIs that use async - await (for that, you still require
iOS 15.0).
 
Using async/await will help us eliminate the need for nested blocks, and we
can read them line by line just like a normal block of code.
 
Here is how the code from the preceding example looks like with
async/await:
 


--- Page 425 ---
 
Figure 7.16: Async await solution for callback hell
 
As you can see, this code is much easier to read and understand than the
completion block version, and it is less error-prone and easier to maintain.
 
The await keyword is used to wait for each asynchronous task to complete,
and the guard statement is used to handle errors and exit early if necessary.
 
Now, let’s come back to our Bitcoin live price app and use this knowledge to
rewrite the fetchData function into async/await version:
 

--- Page 426 ---
 
Figure 7.17: Async/await vs. Completion block function definition
 
In this version, we're using the new async/await syntax to make the API call.
We've defined the fetchDataAsync function as an async function that returns
a BitcoinData object or throws an error.
 
Inside the fetchDataAsync function, we use await to wait for the data to be
fetched from the server, and then we decode the JSON response into a
BitcoinData object.

--- Page 427 ---
 
If there is an error, we will use the throw keyword to return it. Side by side
you can compare the difference between the two functions.
 
In the BitcoinPriceView, we call the fetchDataAsync function inside a Task
block, which allows us to use await to wait for the function to complete. If
the function succeeds, we update the responseData state variable with the
current Bitcoin’s price. If it fails, we print an error message:
 
 
Figure 7.18: Async await vs. Completion block execution
 

--- Page 428 ---
Using async/await can make asynchronous programming in Swift more
concise and easier to read, as it eliminates the need for completion handlers
and makes the code look more like synchronous code. However, it's
important to note that async - await for making API calls in URLSession is
only available in iOS 15 and later, so it may not be available on all devices.
 
Until now, you have heard about asynchronous a lot of time, and you just
learned about two different ways to implement it in iOS development:
async/await and completion block. But what exactly is asynchronous
programming?
 
Asynchronous programming allows certain tasks to be executed on a
separate thread or queue, while the main thread continues to execute other
tasks or update the user interface.
 
It is because in iOS app development, all the UI-related elements are on the
main thread. And if there are long-awaited tasks, it will cause the app to
become unresponsive and freeze. This is the worst outcome in App
development.
 
Asynchronous programming is essential for iOS development because it
allows applications to continue responding to user input and updating
the user interface while certain tasks, such as loading data from a
remote server, are being executed in the background.
 
Completion blocks or delegate methods are commonly used in iOS
development to implement asynchronous programming. Recent
technologies like async/await in Swift 5.5 provide a more readable and
intuitive way to write asynchronous code.

--- Page 429 ---
 
In conclusion, properly handling asynchronous code is an essential skill for
iOS developers to ensure their applications are responsive and user-friendly.

--- Page 430 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 431 ---
 
Conclusion
 
Networking is a crucial part of iOS app development. It allows apps to
connect with remote servers, retrieve data, and provide users with real-time
information.
 
In this chapter, we learned about RESTful API and the JSON format, which
are essential concepts that developers must understand when implementing
networking in iOS app development. Then, we implement our first API call
using the URLSession framework. During this, we got to know about
Decodable and Enumeration in Swift.
 
Next, we built an app to get the latest price of Bitcoin that demonstrates
how these concepts can be applied in practice.
 
Finally, we learned about Asynchronous programming. It is critical to
ensure that apps remain responsive while network requests are being
processed. Completion blocks and async/await are two common approaches
for handling asynchronous code, each with its benefits and drawbacks.
 
Overall, mastering networking and asynchronous programming is essential
for developing high-quality, responsive, and user-friendly iOS apps.
 
In the next chapter, we will deep dive into more complicated topics in
Networking, including Authentication and different types of HTTP

--- Page 432 ---
requests. Along the way, we will build another real-world application
integrated with a public API service.

--- Page 433 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 434 ---
CHAPTER 8
 
Networking with SwiftUI - Part 2

--- Page 435 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 436 ---
 
Introduction
 
In the previous chapter, we have learned that Networking is a critical aspect
of iOS app development.
 
In today's fast-paced and interconnected world, users expect apps to work
seamlessly and deliver content quickly. This is where networking comes in,
allowing apps to communicate with servers in the background, retrieve data
on demand, and provide users with a smooth and responsive experience.
 
In this chapter, we will continue exploring deeper in this topic with the
newest used technologies to build a real-world application.

--- Page 437 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 438 ---
 
Structure
 
In this chapter, the following topics will be covered:
 
 
Build a real-world application with provided APIs
 
Setting up real-world API service with Unsplash
 
Modern application authorization process with OAuth 2.0
 
Using WebKit to present a website inside the app
 
Using UIKit views in SwiftUI
 
GET request vs. POST request
 
Singleton design pattern
 

--- Page 439 ---
Download and load i-mages from a URL using URLSession

--- Page 440 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 441 ---
 
Laying out the project
 
We will be making a simple application that displays photos, similar to
Instagram. Users can interact with the like or unlike actions:
 

--- Page 442 ---
 
Figure 8.1: Gallery App
 

--- Page 443 ---
Here is the final layout of the app. Let’s break it down into Lego bricks.
Before continuing with the solution, try it for yourself and see if you can do
it:
 
 

--- Page 444 ---
Figure 8.2: Gallery App breaking down
 
In this app, we will have a list of vertically scrollable items. Each item will
include:
 
 
An image
 
A title for this image
 
A like/unlike button, depending on whether the current user has liked this
image or not
 
A label displaying the total likes this image has received
 
Now, let’s open up Xcode and do some coding.
 
Remember from Chapter 6, Tab Bar, Navigation, and Compositional Layout,
we learned how to add an outside image to our project. Let’s see if you can
remember how to do it by adding a “landscape” image to our project and
displaying it on the home screen:
 

--- Page 445 ---
 
Figure 8.3: Making the Item View (1)
 
If you forgot how to do this, take a look back at Chapter 6. Now, we will
resize it, set the width-to-height ratio to 4:3, and with a corner radius of 16:
 

--- Page 446 ---
 
Figure 8.4: Making the Item View (2)
 
Great, now let’s finish this view by adding the title, the like button, and the
number of likes label. We will hardcode all of the values at this stage:
 

--- Page 447 ---
 
Figure 8.5: Making the Item View (3)
 
Awesome, now let’s finish this layout by adding it to a vertical scroll view
with a navigation title:
 

--- Page 448 ---
 
Figure 8.6: Making the Home View
 
All of this you have already learned from previous chapters. We are using a
NavigationStack to display the navigation title. Then, a vertical scroll view
with a LazyVGrid layout. Inside it is a ForEach block; for now, we will be
looping and creating 21 rows, each will be our just-created ItemView. If any
of this seems confusing to you, make sure to go back and check the previous
chapters when we talked about them in detail.
 
We are finishing the layout of the app. Next, we will integrate this layout
with real APIs. For this project, we are going to use the APIs provided by
https://unsplash.com/. If you didn’t know about them, Unsplash is a photo
discovery platform for free-to-use, high-definition photos. They also provide

--- Page 449 ---
API services for developers making applications:
https://unsplash.com/documentation.
 
But before jumping into it, let’s first learn about OAuth 2.0, which is
commonly adopted by many modern services APIs in the industry for
authentication and authorization, including Unsplash.

--- Page 450 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 451 ---
 
OAuth 2.0
 
OAuth 2.0 (Open Authorization 2.0) is an open standard protocol that
allows users to grant limited access to their resources on one website or
application to another website or application, without sharing their
credentials (such as passwords) directly. It is widely used for authentication
and authorization in modern web and mobile applications.
 
It provides a framework for secure third-party access to user data stored on
different services, such as social media platforms, online banking systems,
or cloud storage providers. It enables users to grant permission to third-
party applications to access their resources on these services on their behalf.
This delegation of access is typically referred to as OAuth authorization.
 
The basic flow of OAuth 2.0 involves three primary entities: the user
(resource owner), the application or service requesting access (client), and
the service that hosts the user's resources (resource server). There is also an
optional component called the authorization server, which handles the
authentication and authorization process.
 
Here’s a step-by-step high-level overview of the OAuth 2.0 flow:
 
 
The client application requests authorization from the user to access
specific resources on the resource server.

--- Page 452 ---
 
The user is redirected to the authorization server, where they are prompted
to authenticate and authorize the client's request.
 
If the user grants authorization, the authorization server issues an access
token to the client.
 
The client uses the access token to make authenticated requests to the
resource server on behalf of the user.
 
The resource server validates the access token and grants access to the
requested resources if the token is valid.
 
OAuth 2.0 provides a flexible and secure framework for enabling delegated
access to resources. It has become a popular standard for authentication and
authorization in various scenarios, promoting interoperability and security
in modern web and mobile applications.
 
Here are additional resources for further reading on OAuth 2.0:
 
https://auth0.com/docs/authenticate/protocols/oauth
 
https://auth0.com/intro-to-iam/what-is-oauth-2

--- Page 453 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 454 ---
 
Setting up Unsplash APIs
 
Unlike the Coindesk public API that we have used in Chapter 7, Networking
with SwiftUI – Part 1, most API services will require us to sign up for a
developer account to use them. Usually, there will be a free quota for
developers to test and develop applications. When these applications are
shipped to production, there will be a monthly payment depending on the
service providers.
 
For our project, we need to create a developer account and will be using the
free quota option to develop this project. On your browser, head on to
https://unsplash.com/documentation. Click register to a new account if you
haven’t created an Unsplash account before:
 

--- Page 455 ---
 
Figure 8.7: Register Unsplash developer account
 
You will now be redirected to a form for sign-up. Fill in all the required
information. After successfully creating a new account, head to
https://unsplash.com/oauth/applications:
 

--- Page 456 ---
 
Figure 8.8: Set up our Unsplash project (1)
 
Here is the dashboard where you will manage all your Unsplash projects. We
have already created a demo project here with a quota limited to 50 requests
per hour. Click New Application to create your own:
 

--- Page 457 ---
 
Figure 8.9: Set up our Unsplash project (2)
 
Choose your name and create your application. When you are finished, it
will redirect you to the project’s home page:
 

--- Page 458 ---
 
Figure 8.10: Set up our Unsplash project (3)
 
Take some time and read through all this if you want, as we have already
gone through all the necessary documentation at
https://unsplash.com/documentation. Scroll to the bottom, and you will find
all the required information for our project, including the Access key, the
Secret key, and the Redirect URI:
 

--- Page 459 ---
 
Figure 8.11: Set up our Unsplash project (4)
 
Save all this information because soon we will make use of them for our
project:
 


--- Page 460 ---
 
Figure 8.12: Set up our Unsplash project (5)
 
Make sure to check everything and then click Save. Once the setup is
complete, we are ready to make API calls following the Unsplash
documentation.
 
Now, let’s get back to our project and get started with authorization
following OAuth 2.0. Meanwhile, we will learn how to present a website
within our app.

--- Page 461 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 462 ---
 
Authorization with OAuth 2.0
 
As we have discussed OAuth 2.0 earlier, our project is the client and
Unsplash is the resource owner. We need to redirect the users of our project
to the authorization server for them to do the authorization. If our users grant
authorization, the authorization server will issue an access token to the
client, which is our application/project here.
 
Now, with the right access token, our app can truly interact with the
Unsplash resource server through its APIs to retrieve data or perform
actions, such as like or unlike an image.
 
Once again, let’s recall our Coindesk public API example from Chapter 7.
Unfortunately, the majority of modern production API isn’t working in this
manner because of security issues and server spamming. They need some
kind of authorization and verification, and OAuth 2.0 is the widely adopted
modern solution.
 
Here is the authorization workflow for Unsplash:
https://unsplash.com/documentation/user-authentication-workflow.
 
Take some time and read carefully through this well-written documentation.
There are a total of four steps, and for the first task, which is the exchange
for the access token, we will be looking into the first three steps. We will use
the last step note when we making API calls with the Unsplash server:
 

--- Page 463 ---
 

--- Page 464 ---
Figure 8.13: Exchange access token steps
 
The access token is the final thing we want to get, and if we do this process
correctly, we will obtain it by the end of Step 3, highlighted in the green
area. Another important point to note here is that access tokens usually have
an expiration time. When that time has passed, the access token will be
useless, and as an application, we need to validate it and consider whether or
not to request a new one. In this case for Unsplash, the access token does not
expire, so we are good to go.
 
Starting with Step 1, let’s analyze its requirements:
 
 
Figure 8.14: Exchange access token step 1
 

--- Page 465 ---
Basically, this step requires us to form a URL and present it to the users for
them to authorize through a login screen. We will use WebView to present
this URL inside our app.
 
Usually, a URL can be divided into two parts: the base URL and its
following query parameters. A base URL is an unchanged/constant part.
 
A query parameter, also known as a query string parameter, is a component
of a URL that is used to pass specific information to a web server. It consists
of a key-value pair appended to the end of a URL after a question mark (?)
and separated by an ampersand (&) if multiple parameters are presented.
 
Here's an example URL with query parameters:
 
 
Figure 8.15: Example of URL with query parameters
 
In this example, the URL points to a search page on the base URL
https://example.com/search, and it includes two query parameters: query and
limit. The values of the parameters are oauth and 10, respectively.
 

--- Page 466 ---
So, the requirement of Step 1 is clear now. The final URL that we need to
match will look like this:
 
 
Figure 8.16: Final URL format from step 1
 
The base URL is https://unsplash.com/oauth/authorize. Next, before adding
the query parameters, we must add a ?. Then, we have four query parameters
with the following key-value pairs:
 
 
client_id, which is our project Access key – we have saved it
 
redirect_uri”, which is our project Redirect URI – we have saved it
 
response_type, which must have the related value code according to step
1
 
scope”, which you can further read detail for all of them. In our project, we
will be using the value public+write_like because remember we have the
feature for like/unlike the photo
 
Let’s come back to our project on Xcode and write the code to form this first
authorization URL.

--- Page 467 ---
 
We have learned about the MVVM design pattern in Chapter 5, Design
Pattern and MVVM Model. The code will be divided into Model, View
Model, and View. Each has its own responsibility. Now, you may think the
code for making API calls should be inside the View Model, which is correct
for small apps. However, in medium or large apps, one API can be called
and reused from multiple different screens. Hence, if we put it into a View
Model, then we would have to rewrite it every time a new screen needs it.
 
Because of this problem, we created a new type of class to handle the API
calls. Whenever a screen needs to make an API call, we will initialize that
class inside the View Model of it. We will classify this type of class as
Manager inside our folder system, although some developers might call it
“Service”:
 
 
Figure 8.17: Create APIs Manager to manage APIs call
 

--- Page 468 ---
Here, we have created a new class, APIsManager, to control all the logic of
API calls. For better control of data, we have made a Constant struct to store
all the necessary data. Replace accessKey, secretKey, and redirect_uri with
your app’s data. The baseURL and grant_type will be used later. For now,
let’s finish Step 1 by matching the authorization URL correctly; the function
returnAuthorizationURL will do this job here.
 
An important thing to note here is that, as a general rule of security, tokens
and keys should not be embedded into the code, they should be either
encrypted or retrieved from a server at launch time. Otherwise, if you attach
a debugger or have a jailbroken phone, you can snip all these values and
then make requests on behalf of the client. However, this is a more advanced
talk and goes beyond the scope of app development. Therefore, for the sake
of the book and simplicity, we will store them here.
 
With this authorization URL, the next step is to present it as a Web View
inside our app for our users performing authorization. We will use WebKit to
do this.

--- Page 469 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 470 ---
 
Presenting a website inside our app with WebKit
 
There are many situations when we want to present a WebView that loads a
website inside an app, whether it is to present additional information or
make some interactions. Luckily for us iOS developers, Apple has provided
not one, but two convenient built-in ways.
 
In iOS app development, both the WebKit and SafariServices frameworks
provide functionalities related to web browsing and displaying web content.
However, they serve different purposes and have distinct use cases.
 
WebKit:
 
 
The WebKit framework is a powerful and flexible framework that allows
you to embed web content within your app's user interface. It provides the
WKWebView class, which is a modern, high-performance web view for
displaying web content.
 
With WebKit, you have more control over the web view's behavior,
appearance, and interaction. You can customize various aspects such as
navigation, error handling, cookies, JavaScript interaction, and more.
 
WebKit is suitable for scenarios where you need fine-grained control
over web content, such as displaying complex web applications,

--- Page 471 ---
implementing custom browser functionality, or integrating web content
seamlessly with your app's UI.
 
SafariServices:
 
 
The SafariServices framework provides a pre-built UI component called
SFSafariViewController. It's a full-screen web view that provides a
consistent and familiar browsing experience, similar to Safari.
 
SFSafariViewController is designed to quickly present web content
without the need for extensive customization or control. It offers
features like URL navigation, back/forward navigation, sharing options,
and support for Safari features such as Reader Mode and Safari
AutoFill.
 
SafariServices is suitable for scenarios where you want to provide a
standard, Safari-like browsing experience within your app, such as
displaying web pages for reading articles, accessing external resources,
or allowing users to authenticate with a web service.
 
In summary, if you require a high level of customization and control over
web content, you should choose WebKit and use the WKWebView class. On
the other hand, if you want a quick and consistent web browsing experience
within your app, you can opt for SafariServices and use the
SFSafariViewController class. The choice depends on the specific
requirements and desired user experience for your app.
 

--- Page 472 ---
For our project, we will be using WebKit for more customization because
later we will have to listen to callback data returned to us through the
redirect_uri in Step 3.
 
Now at this point in time, both solutions using WebKit and SafariServices
are still not natively for SwiftUI. Both of them come from the UIKit world,
and we will use UIViewRepresentable to bridge them to a SwiftUI View:
 
 
Figure 8.18: Present a website in the app with WebKit
 
With WebKit, we will use WKWebView to present a website. It’s pretty
straightforward: we initialize a WKWebView with configuration. Then, from

--- Page 473 ---
the URL, we create a URLRequest and call the .load() function, passing the
request to the WKWebView. That’s all the code does here.
 
You may have some confusion here because of UIViewRepresentable. Learn
more about how to present a custom view here:
 
https://www.hackingwithswift.com/quick-start/swiftui/how-to-wrap-a-
custom-uiview-for-swiftui
 
https://www.appcoda.com/swiftui-wkwebview/
 
We have now successfully presented a Google search page inside our app,
and it is totally interactive. You can do some Google searched here, just like
in the browser.
 
Now, replace the Google domain with our authorization URL:
 

--- Page 474 ---
 
Figure 8.19: Finish step 1 of exchange access token
 
And wow, we now have a free authentication screen for users to log in or
sign up.
 
Let’s read through the next two steps to clearly understand the requirements:
 

--- Page 475 ---
 
Figure 8.20: Exchange access token steps 2 and 3
 
What this means in Step 2 is that after the user has successfully logged in,
there will be an authorization code: code sent back to us through the
redirect_uri. This code is what we want and is the only information currently
missing from Step 3 to make a final API call and retrieve the access token.
 

--- Page 476 ---
Remember we mentioned earlier that the reason we chose to use WebKit is
because WKWebView has a built-in delegate function to capture the redirect
URL. By conforming to the WKNavigationDelegate, we can listen to the
return URL and extract the return code in Step 2. Here is how it works:
 
 
Figure 8.21: Exchange access token step 2 (1)
 
Here we are using the coordinator pattern to replicate the delegate pattern in
UIKit. You can read more about this in this article:
https://www.hackingwithswift.com/books/ios-swiftui/using-coordinators-to-
manage-swiftui-view-controllers.
 

--- Page 477 ---
So basically, the .didFinish() delegate function of WKWebView here allows
us to enter the state when the URLRequest is finished. We then look to the
current presented URL of the web view. Then, we extract the URL
components from it and filter through all of them to find the one we need,
the one with the key named code, as described in the documentation.
 
Now, try to log in or sign up for authentication through the simulator to see
what happens behind the screen:
 
 
Figure 8.22: Exchange access token step 2 (2)
 
We print all three variables: url, component, and code here. This is a URL,
and it has its query parameters. In Step 2, after successful authorization, we

--- Page 478 ---
will be redirected to this URL inside our app. The thing we need is the code
that is missing for Step 3, which is returned inside this URL as a query
parameter with the key named code.
 
With this code in hand, step 2 is completed. Next, in Step 3, we will be
making a POST request to the Unsplash server.

--- Page 479 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 480 ---
 
POST request and GET request
 
In Chapter 7, Networking with SwiftUI – Part 1, we were introduced to
RESTful APIs. In the context of RESTful APIs, there are many HTTP
methods used to interact with resources, with POST and GET being the most
common among them. They have different purposes and behaviors as
follows:
 
GET request:
 
 
The GET request is used to retrieve or fetch data from a server. It is a safe
and idempotent operation, meaning it should not have any side effects on the
server and can be repeated multiple times without changing the state of the
server or the resource.
 
In a GET request, the parameters or data are appended to the URL as query
parameters, typically separated by the ? character. For example, GET /users?
id=123.
 
GET requests are commonly used for fetching data, searching resources,
or accessing specific endpoints that provide read-only operations.
 
POST request:

--- Page 481 ---
 
 
The POST request is used to submit or send data to the server to create a
new resource or trigger a non-idempotent action. It may modify the server's
state or trigger some server-side operations based on the submitted data.
 
In a POST request, the data is sent in the body of the request, typically
formatted as JSON or form data. The data is not visible in the URL.
 
POST requests are commonly used for creating new resources,
submitting forms, uploading files, or triggering actions that cause
changes on the server.
 
There are other methods that you may have come across, such as PUT,
PATCH, or DELETE, but GET and POST are the most frequently used.
 
In summary, the main difference between GET and POST requests in a
RESTful API is their purpose and the way data are transmitted. GET
requests are used for retrieving data, while POST requests are used for
submitting data and triggering actions. GET requests have their parameters
in the URL, while POST requests have their data in the request body. It's
important to use the appropriate HTTP method based on the intended
operation to ensure adherence to RESTful principles and best practices.
 
Up to this point, all of the API calls that we have made are all GET requests.
Now with Step 3 and the final step to exchange for the access token, we will
make a POST request with the help of URLSession. The syntax will look a
little bit different than before.

--- Page 482 ---
 
Back to our APIsManager, let’s write the code to make our POST request:
 
 

--- Page 483 ---
Figure 8.23: POST request for step 3
 
Just as we discussed, there is a difference between the query parameters of a
GET and a POST request. For a GET request, we can straightforward match
a string with the base URL. However, for a POST request, its query
parameters are passed in the request body. This is what the codes in the two
new green areas are doing. By default, every time you create a new
URLRequest, it is a GET request. So, to change this to a POST request, we
reset it with the request.httpMethod to POST. If you want to perform other
HTTP methods, such as DELETE, then you will have to change it here.
 
Now we will decode the response with JSONDecoder. Here is another
challenge to see if you remember what we have learned. Go back to the
documentation and try to write the AuthResponse model to decode it:
 
 
Figure 8.24: AuthResponse solution
 

--- Page 484 ---
You have learned about Decodable in the last chapter. In Swift, the
Decodable protocol is used for decoding (parsing) JSON or other data
representations into native Swift objects. There is also a counterpart way
when you want to encode (serialize) native Swift objects into an external
representation, such as JSON or binary data. That’s when you need the
Encodable protocol. Because they are relatable, Swift comes up with a
convenient Codable protocol that is a combination of both Decodable and
Encodable. So that developers can just adopt one instead of remembering
when to use which of the two.
 
Here, we will adopt the Codable protocol, although you can just use
Decodable.
 
Now, let’s go back to the AuthorizationView and call the just written
exchangeToken function:
 


--- Page 485 ---
 
Figure 8.25: Successfully exchange access token
 
Now, we have successfully exchanged the access token. With this token, we
can now use it to call all the APIs of Unsplash and complete our project.
 
However, there is a problem occurring at this point with this code where we
save our token. Naturally, you may think that we can create a variable name
accessToken inside the APIsManager and save it there like this:
 


--- Page 486 ---
 
Figure 8.26: Saving data problem (1)
 
Often, newcomers make this mistake because they forget the difference
between a Class and an Object. We have discussed this in Chapter 1 about
Swift programming language. In summary, a class is like a blueprint or a
template, while an object is a concrete instance created based on that
blueprint. The class defines the structure and behavior, and the object
represents a specific realization of that structure with its data and behavior.
 
Now, take a look back at our code from the AuthorizationView:
 

--- Page 487 ---
 
Figure 8.27: Saving data problem (2)
 

--- Page 488 ---
We have created two different objects from the class APIsManager. Now, if
we try to save the access token, then which one of the two objects will have
the right access token? You may have guessed it based on the color, but only
the green object will hold our recently retrieved access token. The red object
doesn’t have it, and any future object will not too.
 
Now this is a problem because later we will write more functions to call
different APIs inside the APIsManager, and this will be used in other
screens. Based on your knowledge about class, then you might think about
creating a global class, and since a class is a reference type when pass assign
them, they will be the same one. This will work here, but what if someone
doesn’t know about it and accidentally makes a new instance?
 
Again, this is a very common problem, and one of the solutions to this is to
use the Singleton design pattern.

--- Page 489 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 490 ---
 
Singleton design pattern
 
The Singleton pattern is a creational design pattern that restricts the
instantiation of a class to a single object. It ensures that there is only one
instance of a class created and provides a global point of access to that
instance.
 
In software development, the Singleton pattern is commonly used when we
want to have a single, shared instance of a class that can be accessed from
different parts of an application. This can be useful in scenarios where
having multiple instances of a class could cause issues, such as when
managing resources, controlling access to a shared database, or coordinating
actions in a system.
 
To implement the Singleton pattern, the class typically provides a static
method or property to access the instance, and the constructor of the class is
made private or protected to prevent direct instantiation. The class also keeps
track of whether an instance has already been created and returns the
existing instance if it exists or creates a new one if it doesn't.
 
Here's how we will implement Singleton to our APIsManager:
 

--- Page 491 ---
 
Figure 8.28: Singleton implementation
 
Now, the APIsManager class has a static property shared, which represents
the single and only instance of the class. The shared property is declared as
static let, which means it's lazily initialized and guarantees a single instance
throughout the app.
 
The private init() method ensures that the class cannot be directly
instantiated from outside the class, preventing the creation of multiple
instances. Other methods and properties can be added to the class as needed.
 
To use the Singleton in your iOS app, you can access it using
APIsManager.shared:
 

--- Page 492 ---
 
Figure 8.29: Access properties and methods from Singleton
 

--- Page 493 ---
By using APIsManager.shared, you can access the shared instance of the
class from anywhere in your app. Both of these now refer to one instance:
the shared instance, so both of them now will have the same access token.
 
It's important to note that the Singleton pattern is not without controversy, as
it can introduce a global state and make code harder to test and maintain.
Therefore, it should be used judiciously and only when it provides a clear
benefit for the specific use case.

--- Page 494 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 495 ---
 
Completing the project
 
After successfully exchanging for the access token, we can now show the
HomeView that we made at the beginning:
 
 
Figure 8.30: Present the HomeView after successful authorization and
have access token
 

--- Page 496 ---
Remember we use the completion handler here and return a Boolean value
indicating whether we have successfully exchanged the access token or not.
If it is a success, then we can confidently present the HomeView.
 
Inside our WebView, we defined a @Binding value isSuccessAuthorized,
which binds with the value from the AuthorizationView. If we successfully
receive the access token, then we will set that binding value to true to notify
the AuthorizationView. And in the AuthorizationView, if
isSuccessAuthorized is true, we will present our HomeView. If it is not, then
it will still be the AuthorizationView.
 
From what you have learned, you may think about using a ZStack and
checking for an if-else condition. This is totally doable, but this is a very
common situation where we want to display a new screen based on some
conditions. Because of this, SwiftUI has a convenient built-in modifier for
this: .fullScreenCover(), which receives a binding Boolean and will display
the inside view with a full-screen cover.
 
So now, after the user grants us the authorization, we can save the received
access token and redirect them to the HomeView. The only thing left is to
call APIs to get real image data back following the Unsplash. And we
already have the access token stored inside our global Singleton instance.
 
We will be using three APIs for this project as follows:
 
 
Get a list of photos: https://unsplash.com/documentation#list-photos
 

--- Page 497 ---
Like a photo: https://unsplash.com/documentation#like-a-photo
 
Unlike a photo: https://unsplash.com/documentation#unlike-a-photo
 
Here is another challenge for you, based on what you have learned in this
chapter. Try reading the documentation to understand the requirements of
each API. Then, write the codes to implement them inside the class
APIsManager.
 
Take some time, maybe some days, to try to figure it out. If you can do this
by yourself, then a huge round of applause because this is kind of advance.
 
Now, let’s jump to the solution. First, with the git list photo API:
 

--- Page 498 ---
 
Figure 8.31: Implementation fetch list photos API
 
With this new API, a new base URL and query parameter key values are
required. So, we add them to our Constant struct. Because this is a GET
request, we can do string matching to create a final URL. You already
learned all of this in the last chapter; the difference here is in the orange area.
Now, this is the fourth step of the authorization flow, if you remember it.
 

--- Page 499 ---
 
Figure 8.32: Required access token for all API requests
 
That’s what the new line of code you see here is doing. It embedded the
access token into the HTTP Authorization header.
 
And if we successfully retrieve our data, we want to create a model and
decode it from the data. In this API, what we have back is an array. Here is
the model for it, along with the custom enumeration to present different
types of errors:
 

--- Page 501 ---
 
Figure 8.33: Image data model and error enumeration
 
Instead of using default data, we will replace them will real data fetched
back from the API. Once again, we will implement the MVVM design
pattern we learned from Chapter 6, Tab bar, Navigation, and Compositional
Layout. Here is the ViewModel:
 

--- Page 502 ---
 
Figure 8.34: HomeView view model
 
We create a function, fetchPost, that will use the new API to fetch twenty
photos back as an array of ImageDataModel. We will call this function when
the view model is initialized and then save the result to the @Published
variable named imageData. The final step is getting back to the HomeView
and ItemView and replacing the default data with this real data:

--- Page 503 ---
 
 
Figure 8.35: Refactor the ItemView with real model data
 

--- Page 504 ---
Here, the ItemView will receive a model ImageDataModel that has all the
required data. We will replace all the default information with the real
information from the model, except for the image here. It is because what we
get back is the image URL, not the data of the image itself. Because of this,
we will first have to go to that address to download the image data. We will
learn how to do this in the next section. Now, let’s go back to the HomeView
and apply our just-created view model to it:
 
 
Figure 8.36: Refactor the HomeView with real model data
 

--- Page 505 ---
We are now using the real fetched data from the view model. As you can see
from the right side of the simulator, except for the image, all the data are
now real and live.
 
Another thing we want to point out here is the live preview is usually used to
view the UI only. There are still a lot of things not working correctly on it, so
you still need to build to the simulator and real device to test and see the real
result. In this example, we will rebuild the app in the real simulator and
reauthenticate it to see the real result.
 
Finally, let’s learn how to load the real image to our app from a URL using
URLSession.

--- Page 506 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 507 ---
 
Downloading images from URL using URLSession
 
Just like a normal API, calling to get image data is just another GET request.
But instead of decoding it to our custom model, we will return the received
data directly:
 
 
Figure 8.37: Define the download image data function using URLSession
 
Inside the APIsManager, we will add another function for downloading an
image from a URL. Now, back to the ItemView, we will use this new
function when the view appears:
 

--- Page 508 ---
 
Figure 8.38: Calling download image data function using URLSession
 

--- Page 509 ---
If our function succeeds, we will have the image data back. There is the
built-in initializer from UIKit to transform the data into an image:
UIImage(data: ). We will make this image an optional state variable. Inside
our view, after unwrapping it, we can use another initializer of the image that
receives a UIImage as its parameter: Image(uiImage: ).
 
Now, let’s rebuild the app using the simulator; you should see the real
images:
 

--- Page 511 ---
 
Figure 8.39: Successfully load images
 
With this, you almost have a real application on your hands. It certainly
works but is not perfect yet. There are some remaining issues as follows:
 
 
The scroll is cluttering because the images are not cache
 
If you are offline, then you cannot use this app
 
We will tackle all of these in the next chapter.

--- Page 512 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 513 ---
 
Conclusion
 
In this chapter, we have built a real application with API services from
Unsplash. During this process, we learned about OAuth 2.0 for
authentication in modern applications, different HTTP methods, and
distinguishing between GET requests and POST requests. We encountered a
problem with the share access token and solved it using the Singleton
design pattern. We also learned how to present a website inside our project
using WebKit and how to download images using URLSession.
 
There are still some remaining problems, so we will learn how to solve
them in the next chapter, where we will learn how to use local storage for
persistence and how to leverage third-party libraries inside our project for
better performance.

--- Page 514 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 515 ---
CHAPTER 9
 
Local Storage with UserDefaults, CoreData, and File Manager

--- Page 516 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 517 ---
 
Introduction
 
In the last two chapters, we have learned about Networking and how to
build a beautiful application. Although the app is not working perfectly yet,
there are still observed issues in it.
 
In this chapter, we will discuss local storage - what it means and the
purpose of using it.
 
Local storage is a crucial aspect of iOS app development, enabling the
storage and retrieval of user-specific data within an application. In SwiftUI
development, various techniques and frameworks are available for local
storage implementation, including UserDefaults, CoreData, and File
Manager. Each of these options offers distinct features and capabilities to
handle different types of data.
 
We will explore these three local storage options in the context of iOS
SwiftUI development, discussing their benefits, use cases, and
implementation techniques. By understanding these approaches, developers
can efficiently manage local data storage in their applications, providing
seamless user experiences and improved data management capabilities.
 
In this way, we will make our app adapt to local storage so that users can
use it even though they do not have access to the internet.

--- Page 518 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 519 ---
 
Structure
 
In this chapter, the following topics will be covered:
 
 
Persistence with Local storage
 
Store simple values with UserDefaults
 
Core Data in iOS app development
 
A basic set of operators of a database system design CRUD
 
Set up and use CoreData in real-world application
 
How to store images on the device with File Manager
 
Load image from device to use inside the application

--- Page 520 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 521 ---
 
Persistency with Local Storage
 
In the context of programming, persistency refers to the ability of data to
persist or be retained beyond the lifetime of a program or a system. It is the
concept of storing data in a permanent or semi-permanent manner, allowing
it to be retrieved and used later, even after the program or system has been
terminated or restarted.
 
Persistence is essential when you need to preserve and access data across
different program executions or when the data needs to be available to other
parts of the system or other systems entirely. Without persistence, data
would be lost once the program terminates, making it difficult to build
applications that require data storage or data retrieval.
 
In the context of iOS app development, persistency refers to the techniques
and mechanisms used to store and retrieve data in iOS applications. iOS
provides several options for persisting data, and the choice depends on the
specific requirements and characteristics of your app.
 
 
UserDefaults: UserDefaults is a simple and lightweight way to store small
amounts of data such as user preferences, settings, or small configuration
values. It uses a key-value pair approach and saves data in property list
files. UserDefaults is commonly used for storing user preferences or
application state.
 

--- Page 522 ---
Core Data: Core Data is a powerful framework provided by Apple for
managing complex data models and object graphs. It allows you to
define entities and relationships and provides features like data
validation, querying, and versioning. Core Data can store data in
various persistent stores, including an SQLite database, XML files, or
in-memory stores.
 
Realm (MongoDB): Realm is a popular third-party mobile database
solution that can be used for persisting data in iOS app development. It
is a cross-platform database engine that provides an object-oriented
interface to store and retrieve data.
 
SQLite: SQLite is a lightweight, embedded relational database engine that
is widely used in iOS app development. It provides a SQL-based interface
for storing and retrieving structured data. SQLite databases can be accessed
directly using SQLite API or through ORM libraries like FMDB or GRDB.
 
File System: iOS apps can store data directly in the file system. You can
use various file formats, such as plain text files, XML, JSON, or binary
files, to store structured or unstructured data. This approach is suitable
for scenarios where you need fine-grained control over the data
organization or when dealing with large files.
 
Network-based storage: Sometimes, rather than storing data locally on
the device, you might choose to persist data on a remote server or
cloud-based storage. This approach is often used for applications that
require data synchronization across multiple devices or for scenarios
where data needs to be shared between users.
 

--- Page 523 ---
It's worth noting that iOS provides frameworks and APIs for handling
different types of data persistency, and you can combine multiple
approaches depending on your app's requirements. For example, you might
use UserDefaults for storing user preferences, Core Data for managing a
local database, and network-based storage for synchronizing data with a
server.
 
When selecting a persistence mechanism for your iOS app, consider factors
like the complexity of your data model, performance requirements,
scalability, security, and ease of use. Apple's documentation and developer
resources provide detailed guidance on using each of these persistence
options in iOS app development.
 
In this chapter, we will learn and use UserDefaults, Core Data, and File
System to level up our application. You can spend more time and conduct
further research on other local storage topics. Remember that each topic
comes with pros and cons. There is no such grand master key, and the
choice of which one to use depends on different situations.
 
First, let’s learn about the simplest and the most overly used one:
UserDefaults.

--- Page 524 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 525 ---
 
UserDefaults
 
UserDefaults is a simple and lightweight persistence mechanism
provided by Apple in iOS app development. It allows you to store small
amounts of data, such as user preferences, settings, or small
configuration values. UserDefaults uses a key-value pair approach to
store data, and it saves the data in property list files.
 
In the last chapter, you have learned about Singleton, remember it? Well,
UserDefaults in iOS is implemented as a singleton. A singleton is a design
pattern that restricts the instantiation of a class to a single object. In the case
of UserDefaults, it ensures that there is only one instance of UserDefaults
throughout the app.
 
By designating UserDefaults as a singleton, Apple provides a shared
instance of UserDefaults that can be accessed from anywhere within the app
without the need to create a new instance. This shared instance provides a
convenient way to access and manage user preferences and app settings.
 
To access the shared instance of UserDefaults, you typically use the standard
UserDefaults class methods. For example:
 

--- Page 526 ---
 
Figure 9.1: Store and retrieve the value with User default
 
The .standard property of the UserDefaults class refers to the shared
instance. By using UserDefaults.standard, you can access and modify the
stored preferences throughout your app.
 
It's important to note that while UserDefaults is implemented as a singleton,
it does not mean that it cannot be subclasses or extended. You can create
your own custom subclasses of UserDefaults if you need to add additional
functionality or encapsulate specific behavior.
 
However, for most use cases, accessing the shared instance of UserDefaults
through the .standard property is sufficient and recommended. It provides a
simple and standardized way to store and retrieve small amounts of app-
specific data.
 
Now, let's make a simple demo to learn about persistency with UserDefaults:
 

--- Page 527 ---
 
Figure 9.2: UserDefaults example: number game
 
We created a simple app that increases or decreases the selected number.
After playing and increasing the number to 6, if we swipe up, close the app,
and reopen it, then our number resets to its first default state of 0:
 

--- Page 528 ---
 
Figure 9.3: Number is reset back to 0 every time the app is reopened
 
Certainly, some kinds of applications prefer this behavior, but most of them
do not. Think about it: What if, in a shopping app, you have added some
clothes to your cart but decided not to purchase them yet? Sometime later,
you return and see your cart is empty. Now you have to remember what you
selected and search for them again. How annoying is that! This is not
accepted in any shopping apps. Or how about a game? After hours of
playing hard, you are now at level 25. But the next day when you come
back, you are reset to level 1.
 

--- Page 529 ---
Some data need to be remembered. Now, there are two main ways of doing
this: database and local storage. When we talk about the database, it means
we send the data to be stored somewhere else (a server or cloud), and then
when we need that data, we will request it through APIs. You can do your
own research and learn more about this topic. The most commonly used
services in recent years are Firebase and AWS.
 
Local storage, as explained, is storing that data on the device itself.
 
Let’s make this app remember the last number using UserDefaults:
 
 
Figure 9.4: Using UserDefault to remember the number

--- Page 530 ---
 
After increasing or decreasing the number, we then set its value to the key
storedNumber. Then every time the app is opened, we will check and
retrieve that value to use. As simple as that!
 
Another optimization here, since we are programmers who follow the DRY
principle, we will make a new storeNumber function and reuse it:
 

--- Page 531 ---
 
Figure 9.5: Make a storeNumber to reuse when we need its functionality
 
Here are the pros and cons of using UserDefaults:
 

--- Page 532 ---
Pros:
 
 
Simplicity: UserDefaults is straightforward to use. It provides a simple API
to set and retrieve values using keys, making it easy to store and retrieve
data without much complexity.
 
Lightweight: UserDefaults is designed for storing small amounts of data. It
is efficient and does not require additional setup or external dependencies. It
is suitable for storing simple preferences or small data sets without
introducing unnecessary overhead.
 
Convenience: UserDefaults is accessible throughout the app's lifecycle and
can be accessed from any part of the app. This makes it convenient for
accessing frequently used settings or preferences from different view
controllers or components within your app.
 
Integration with Interface Builder: UserDefaults can be directly
integrated with Interface Builder, allowing you to bind user interface
elements directly to UserDefaults keys. This enables seamless
synchronization between user interface elements and stored preferences.
 
Persistence across app launches: Data stored using UserDefaults persists
even after the app is terminated or restarted. This means that the stored
data will be available the next time the app is launched, providing a
seamless experience for users.
 

--- Page 533 ---
Cons:
 
 
Limited data size and complexity: UserDefaults is not suitable for
storing large amounts of data or complex data structures. It is primarily
designed for simple values such as strings, numbers, booleans, and small
collections. Storing large data sets in UserDefaults may lead to
performance issues or memory constraints.
 
Lack of data encryption: UserDefaults does not provide built-in
encryption for stored data. If you need to store sensitive or secure
information, such as passwords or personal data, it is recommended to
use other encryption mechanisms or consider using more secure
persistence options like Keychain.
 
Lack of querying and indexing: UserDefaults does not provide querying
or indexing capabilities. It does not support complex searches or sorting
based on specific criteria. If you require advanced querying or sorting
operations, you may need to consider other persistence options like Core
Data or SQLite.
 
Limited data sharing between apps: UserDefaults data is scoped to the
specific app where it is stored. It cannot be easily shared with other apps
or shared across different devices. If you need to share data between
apps or devices, other inter-app communication or synchronization
mechanisms need to be implemented.
 
UserDefaults is best suited for storing simple preferences or settings that
are used across your app. It is not intended for managing large data sets

--- Page 534 ---
or complex data relationships. If your app requires more advanced data
management, querying capabilities, or data synchronization, you may
need to consider other persistence options such as Core Data, SQLite, or
Realm.
 
Let’s now go back to the app we built from the Unsplash APIs in the last
chapter and start using UserDefaults. Again, every technology has its pros
and cons. Based on what you have learned above, what do you think is a
suitable place for using UserDefaults?
 
Think about it, UserDefaults is suitable for lightweight data only. And what
is the piece of data that is better to be stored locally inside our application?
Remember, not everything has to be stored locally, only the necessary
things.
 
In case you forgot, the “access token” used in our APIs doesn’t have an
expiration time. This means that when we get the first one, we can use it
forever. Therefore, it will be a waste of time and resources if we call the
exchange API every time the app is started. Instead, the better solution here
is to store the access token in local storage using UserDefaults the first time
we get it. The “access token” is a simple string, so it is lightweight and fits
every pros condition of UserDefaults. Then, for all the remaining time, we
will try to retrieve and use the “access token” from the local storage. Only
when we can’t find it and fail to use it, then we will call the exchange
“access token” API again. By doing this, we will save a significant amount
of resources, which is money for our application.
 
Let’s open up the project and make this optimization. Let’s first go to the
APIsManager file where we have all of the APIs logic:
 

--- Page 535 ---
 
Figure 9.6: Using UserDefaults to store access token (1)
 
Instead of an empty string, we will make it optional and retrieve the value
from UserDefaults using the key access_token. It is optional because the
.string method from UserDefaults will return an optional string. This is
because it may or may not find it in the memory. In the preceding .integer of
UserDefaults, we don’t need to use optional because if it cannot find the
value, the .integer method will return 0. Again, you can hold the Option key
on your keyboard to read more about these built-in methods.
 
In Swift, where functions or computed properties have one line only, you can
omit the return keyword. Here, we prefer to keep it there for better self-
explanation.
 
This is the step for retrieving the value, but we still need to save it
somewhere. We do this when we receive the access token from our API.
This logic is in the same file:
 

--- Page 536 ---
 
Figure 9.7: Using UserDefaults to store access token (2)
 
Instead of assigning it directly after successfully obtaining it from the API,
we will store the access token in UserDefaults at this step. Then, whenever
we need to use this, for example, in the fetch20Images function, we will
unwrap to use the access token stored in UserDefaults:
 

--- Page 537 ---
 
Figure 9.8: Using UserDefaults to store access token (3)
 
In this step, we return a new failure completion error called failedToGet
AccessToken. With this, we can retry to call the API for “access token” just
in case we cannot find it from UserDefaults.
 
And that’s the last thing that needs to change is in the AuthorizationView:
 

--- Page 538 ---
 
Figure 9.9: Using UserDefaults to store access token (4)
 
As mentioned earlier, since the “access token” does not expire, we do not
need to recall the get access token API. It would be a waste of resources.
Instead, we will set our isSuccessAuthorized equal to whether the

--- Page 539 ---
accessToken string variable in the APIsManager has a value or not. If it
doesn’t have a value, then isSuccessAuthorized is false, and we will present
the WebView to go to all the steps to get the “access token”. However, if we
already have the value, which is from UserDefaults in this case, then we go
straight to the HomeView. So, from now on, after the first time, every
subsequent time the user will go straight to the HomeView.
 
Now, you have successfully implemented the first local storage and made an
improvement in the application.
 
Next, let’s fix the cluttering behavior that occurs while scrolling. This
happens because we tried to download the image and load it into the image
of ItemView every time it appears. Since this is a scroll view, the onAppear
will be triggered repeatedly every time a cell is in the displaying area. This is
also unnecessary and inefficient because we only need to download and
display the image once.
 
In the old UIKit, the most common life cycle is viewDidLoad, which will be
called only once when that view is initialized, not every time it appears. This
made it a perfect place to handle APIs. Unfortunately, SwiftUI’s view does
not come with this life cycle. However, we can easily recreate it with the
help of a state value:
 

--- Page 540 ---
 
Figure 9.10: Implement view is loading lifecycle in SwiftUI
 
We make a new Boolean variable named isLoad and set it to false initially.
Then, when the view appears, we will check if isLoad is false, and then call
the API and set it to true. This will prevent recalling the API every time the
view appears again because of the scrolling action.
 
It is very simple and handy. Now, build and run the application again and try
to scroll up and down, you will notice that the cluttering behavior has
disappeared. This is an improvement in both user experience and application
performance.
 

--- Page 541 ---
Now, let’s touch on the last thing, which is the main purpose of using local
storage in mobile development: how to handle offline mode. The internet is
a necessity in today’s life, with some even considering it along with survival
things like food and water. However, there will be many situations when you
do not have access to the internet, such as in airplane mode or in some rural
areas. What if users are bored and mess around with their phones and open
our application for entertainment or accident?
 
In such instances, this will happen:
 

--- Page 543 ---
 
Figure 9.11: Application state when there is no internet
 
Because there is no internet, all the API calls will fail, resulting in an empty
blank application. To use the application, users should have access to the
internet. If that is the case, then we developers can handle a no-internet case
with a UI to inform users about it. For our application, it would be great if
we could display previous images for users to view again when they are in
offline mode. This will make us truly stand out and reach more customers.
 
Again, you can already guess that the solution for this is to use local storage.
However, this time, we have to store our ImageDataModel, which is a
complex data structure. And to do this, we will learn about Apple’s provided
solution, CoreData, and how to implement it in SwiftUI.

--- Page 544 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 545 ---
 
Introduction to CoreData
 
Core Data is a framework provided by Apple that allows developers to
manage the model layer objects in an application. It provides object graph
management, persistence, and query functionality. Here are some of the
pros and cons of using Core Data:
 
Pros:
 
 
Object-Relational Mapping: Core Data provides an abstraction layer
that allows you to work with objects in your code, while it handles the
underlying data storage and retrieval. It simplifies the process of
mapping objects to a persistent store, such as an SQLite database.
 
Relationships and Data Modeling: Core Data allows you to define
complex relationships between entities, including one-to-one, one-to-
many, and many-to-many relationships. It also supports inheritance
and can handle complex data models.
 
Caching and Performance: Core Data includes an object cache that can
improve performance by reducing the need to fetch data from the
persistent store. It also supports various performance optimizations,
such as faulting and batching fetch requests.
 

--- Page 546 ---
Undo and Redo: Core Data provides built-in support for undo and redo
functionality, allowing users to revert changes or redo previous actions.
 
Cons:
 
 
Learning curve: Core Data has a steep learning curve, especially for
developers who are new to the framework. It has a complex API and
can be challenging to understand and use correctly.
 
Complexity of migration: If you need to make changes to your data
model after your app has been released, Core Data migration can be a
complex process. It requires careful planning and handling of data
migration scenarios.
 
Platform limitations: Core Data is primarily designed for Apple
platforms (iOS, macOS, watchOS, and tvOS) and may not be the best
choice if you're developing a cross-platform application.
 
CoreData, as well as many topics in this book alone, is a huge domain
and cannot be covered in a book, let alone a section of one chapter. So,
based on the generational ideas above, we encourage you to conduct
further research and exploration on your own besides what is discussed
in this chapter.
 
Luckily, for us, both CoreData and SwiftUI are solutions from Apple, and
they have learned a lot from the past when CoreData was used with UIKit.

--- Page 547 ---
With SwiftUI, the integration with CoreData works seamlessly with a very
declarative syntax.
 
Before jumping to implementation, let’s get familiar with the basic
operators used in a database system. Previously, we learned how to save
and retrieve data from UserDefaults, which are two different actions.
However, a real-world database system, whether it’s online or offline, is
much more complex than that. There must be more actions that can be
performed, and the most fundamental operations are called CRUD.
 
CRUD is an acronym that stands for Create, Read, Update, and Delete.
It is a set of basic operations commonly used in programming and
database systems to manage and manipulate data. CRUD represents
the fundamental actions that can be performed on data stored in a
database or any other persistent storage.
 
Here's a breakdown of each operation:
 
 
Create (C): This operation involves creating or adding new data to a
system. It typically corresponds to an INSERT operation in a database,
where new records are added to a table or collection.
 
Read (R): This operation involves retrieving or reading existing data
from a system. It corresponds to a SELECT operation in a database,
allowing you to fetch records or data from a specific table or collection.
 

--- Page 548 ---
Update (U): This operation involves modifying or updating existing
data in a system. It corresponds to an UPDATE operation in a
database, enabling you to change the values of specific fields within a
record.
 
Delete (D): This operation involves removing or deleting data from a
system. It corresponds to a DELETE operation in a database, allowing
you to remove specific records or data from a table or collection.
 
These four operations collectively cover the essential functionalities needed
to perform data manipulation in various programming contexts. They form
the basis for most data-driven applications and are widely used in web
development, software development, and database management.
 
Similar to UserDefaults, we will only use two basic operators for our app
with CoreData: create and read. However, you can do more to manipulate
the database for your application features. We highly suggest that you
conduct further research and continue exploring this topic after reading this
book.

--- Page 549 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 550 ---
 
Setting up CoreData in SwiftUI
 
Now, let’s get back to our application. Before we can use CoreData to create
or read data, we need to do some setup first. Just like before, we created an
APIsManager to manage all the issues related to APIs. With CoreData, we
will create a DataController file that manages our database:
 
 
Figure 9.12: Defining CoreData controller
 
Firstly, we need to import CoreData. Then, we will mark this class as
ObservableObject, just like we did with our view model. You might ask why
we do this. It’s because later, we will initialize our controller as a
StateObject and leverage the power of Environment Object; this database
will be shared and live updated between all views within the application.
Inside this class, we’ll add a single property of type NSPersistentContainer,

--- Page 551 ---
which is the Core Data type responsible for loading a data model and giving
us access to the data inside.
 
The code instructs Core Data to utilize the ImageModelCoreData, which is
our local version of the ImageDataModel. However, it does not exist yet, and
we will define this next. Here, it doesn't load the model itself yet; it simply
prepares Core Data to load it by defining the properties and attributes as
previously specified.
 
To load the data model, we need to invoke the loadPersistentStores() method
on our container. This instructs CoreData to access the saved data based on
the data model defined in ImageModelCoreData. However, it doesn't load all
the data into memory simultaneously to avoid unnecessary resource
consumption. Nevertheless, Core Data gains visibility into all the available
information.
 
There is a possibility that loading the saved data encounters errors, such as
data corruption. In such cases, there isn't much that can be done other than
displaying an error message to the user and hoping that relaunching the app
resolves the issue.
 
In any case, we'll create a small initializer for the DataController class that
immediately loads our stored data. If any problems arise—which are
unlikely but not impossible—we'll output a message to the Xcode debug log.
 
The DataController is now complete, and the final step is to create an
instance of it and pass it into the SwiftUI environment. You might already be
familiar with the @Environment feature in SwiftUI, which not only allows

--- Page 552 ---
us to dismiss views but also stores other valuable data such as the time zone
and user interface appearance.
 
In the context of Core Data, since most apps typically work with a single
Core Data store at a time, instead of each view trying to create its own store
individually, we create it once when the app starts and store it within the
SwiftUI environment. This way, every other part of our app can access and
utilize the same store.
 
To achieve this, navigate to the root view of the application and add the
following property to the struct:
 
 
Figure 9.13: Injecting CoreData controller as an environment object
 
Here, we have used the concept of Environment Object to inject the context
of Core Data into the environment key called managedObejctedContext.

--- Page 553 ---
This special key is used for type NSPersistentStoreContainer, which is the
context of the container defined in the DataController.
 
The NSPersistentStoreContainer handles loading the actual saved data on the
user's device. Now, you'll be introduced to the second crucial component of
Core Data: managed object contexts. These contexts represent the live
version of your data. When you load objects and make changes to them,
those changes exist only in memory until you explicitly save them back to
the persistent store.
 
The purpose of the view context is to allow us to work with all our data in
memory, which is much faster than constantly reading from and writing to
the disk. When we are ready, we still need to write the changes to the
persistent store if we want them to persist for the next run of our app.
However, we also have the option to discard changes if we do not wish to
keep them.
 
So, we already have the container and the context. The last setup required is
to define the CoreData version of our ImageDataModel, which will store the
definitions of the entities and attributes that we want to use:
 

--- Page 554 ---
 
Figure 9.14: Create CoreData model
 
We will create a new folder and call it CoreDataModel to separate it from
the Model folder that contains all the models used inside our application
before. Create a new file, but this time, for CoreData, you need the specific
type of file named Data Model. Search for it under the iOS category then
click Next. Make sure that you named it the same as the string named used
in the DataController. Here, we named this file ImageModelCoreData.
 
Here is our new file. Unlike the .swift file before, this data model file Xcode
provides us with an interface to define our entities and their attributes. Now
to be simple for Core Data, an entity will be equal to our model, which is a

--- Page 555 ---
struct, and its attributes are equal to our models’ properties. This is a new
interface you will see after creating it:
 
 
Figure 9.15: CoreData model interface
 
We will use the Add Entity button at the bottom to create a new entity and
then define its attributes. Let’s take a look back at our ImageDataModel to
see what it contains:
 

--- Page 557 ---
 
Figure 9.16: Image model required data
 
We will recreate the same architecture with the same attributes inside our
ImageModelCoreData. Firstly, we observed that there are three models here,
so in correlation, there will be three entities. Click the plus button, and you
will see the new entity is added, then double click on it to rename it. We
created three entities and named them ImageCoreData, UrlsCoreData, and
UserCoreData:
 
 
Figure 9.17: CoreData Entity interface
 

--- Page 558 ---
For each entity, there are three sections here, but we will focus on the first
two: Attributes and Relationships. With the plus button at the end of the
Attribute section, we can define the attributes required for that entity. Then,
we will state the relationship between our three entities by adding a
relationship in the Relationships section for them:
 
 
Figure 9.18: Adding attributes to the entity UserCoreData
 
Click the plus in the Attribute section to add new attributes. Let’s name them
the same as what we used before. Make sure that the type is also the same;
click the dropdown and you will see all the available types for it. The
UrlsCoreData is the same version as UrlsData, so it will have four attributes:
small, regular, full, and thumb, all of which will be of type string. The same
goes for UserCoreData; it will only have one string attribute, which is name.

--- Page 559 ---
 
The interesting thing will happen in the ImageCoreData entity:
 
 
Figure 9.19: Adding attributes to the entity ImageCoreData
 
Here, we have three attributes: id, liked_by_user, and likes, which are string,
Boolean, and integer, respectively. Integer 16 is just a type of integer in
Swift used to store small integers for better memory management.
 
Now to set up the relationship of this with the other two entities, we need to
add two relationships because these two entities will be the children of
ImageCoreData. We will name them url with the destination to be
UrlsCoreData and user with the destination to be UserCoreData. However,
we are not done yet because the relationship has to be set in two ways:
 

--- Page 560 ---
 
Figure 9.20: Finish setting the relationship of UrlsCoreData
 
Now, let’s get back to the UrlsCoreData entity. We need to add a new
relationship to confirm it with what was set up in the ImageCoreData. The
name here will be the same, but the destination will point back to the
ImageCoreData. The same goes for the UserCoreData entity:
 
 

--- Page 561 ---
Figure 9.21: Finish setting relationship of UserCoreData
 
And we are done with the setting up of CoreData in SwiftUI. At this stage,
we have created our Core Data model, loaded it, and prepared it for
integration with SwiftUI. However, two essential aspects remain: reading
data (Read) and writing data (Create, Update, or Delete).
 
You may wonder what the last section of Fetched Properties is about. It is for
sorting the data when it’s returned, but we can do this from the code inside
our views.

--- Page 562 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 563 ---
 
Read and write data with CoreData in SwiftUI
 
To retrieve information from Core Data, we utilize a fetch request. We
specify our desired criteria, such as sorting preferences and any applicable
filters, and Core Data provides us with all the matching data. It is crucial to
ensure that this fetch request remains up to date over time so that our user
interface stays synchronized as students are created or removed.
 
Fortunately, SwiftUI offers a solution for this, and it comes in the form of
another property wrapper. This time, it's called @FetchRequest, and it
requires at least one parameter to define the desired sorting of results. The
@FetchRequest property wrapper has a specific format, so let's proceed by
adding a fetch request for our images.
 
Please add the following property to the HomeView now:
 


--- Page 564 ---
 
Figure 9.22: fetch local data inside the HomeView
 
Here, first, we get our context from the environment and call it context.
Then, we used the @FetchRequest property wrapper to fetch all the data of
type ImageCoreData, which is the entity that resembles our image model
from local storage. Remember we discuss that we can add filters to the
return data. Here, in this example, with the help of sortDescriptors and
predicate, we will be able to filter out all the items where the ID is empty
and sort them in the order of likes. This is convenient because it eliminates
the need to write the functions and perform them after retrieving data. This is
facilitated by the @FetchRequest property wrapper.
 
We then use a state isLoad, so that we call this once when this view is
initialized. This time, we will print out the number of items that we can get
from the local storage. If you build and run this now, you will see that the
number printout is 0. This is because we have never saved anything to our
local storage yet. So yes, with this, we have successfully retrieved and read
all the ImageCoreData entities in our storage, even though we don’t have
any yet.
 
Let’s consider when and where we should save the image data to the local
storage. The answer is right when we have that data, which is in our API call
fetch20Image in the view model. So, after getting data back from the API,
we will do another step than just assigning those data back to the imageData
publisher; this saves those data locally.
 
Inside our view model, add these two functions:
 

--- Page 565 ---
 
Figure 9.23: Create and delete with CoreData
 
Remember that we need a context of type NSManagedObjectContext to be
able to perform any writing actions with Core Data. This is the context that
we passed from the root view through the environment object and is
originally from the container inside the DataController.
 
For the save function, since the API returns an array of ImageDataModel, we
will use the for each block to go through every item, each creating a new
parallel ImageCoreData entity and saving it to the local storage. The

--- Page 566 ---
important thing here is that for any entity in our code, we need to initialize it
with the context. Then, the rest of the code is for mapping property values.
Once this is completed, we must use the .save() from the context to confirm
saving this data to local storage. Of course, this can fail, so we can either use
a do try block or an option try.
 
For the delete function, we will be passing the deleted item as a parameter to
the context. And importantly after that, we will need to confirm that action
by calling .save() as well.
 
These are the logic behind performing writing data with CoreData. You
might wonder why we need to write a delete all function here too. This is
because data can be duplicated each time the API is called. So, here, we will
first delete all existing local data, and then save the newly received data to
our local storage. Let’s rewrite our fetchPost function:
 

--- Page 567 ---
 
Figure 9.24: Adding saving and deleting local storage local to the API call
 
After successfully retrieving data, we will first call the function to delete all
local data. Once it is completed, we will save all the newly received data to
local storage. Due to this, our fetch function needs two more parameters: the
context and the old deprecated data. However, we do not have access to
these two from our view model, so we cannot call it in the initializer like
before. Instead, we will call it when our view appears the first time, you
already know how to do this.:
 

--- Page 568 ---
 
Figure 9.25: Calling the API in view appears instead
 
With this, now rebuild the project again and run it twice. You will see the
number 20 printout in the debug console. The first time will still be 0
because there is no data during the first launch.
 
If you turn off your Wi-Fi and 4G now, nothing will be displayed, just as
before. This is because we haven’t done the layout for it yet.
 
To separate the view for online mode, we will create a new view for offline
mode and call it ItemLocalView:
 

--- Page 569 ---
 

--- Page 570 ---
Figure 9.26: Making new View for offline mode
 
Here, we will use the CoreData entity as the model. Since all of the
properties are still the same, we do not need to change much. The main
difference here is that we won’t call the downloadImage API when this view
appears. Even though we already have the image URL, it is not useful here
because we do not have an internet connection; it would fail anyway. In the
next section, we will learn about File Manager and learn how to store the
image data on our phone to solve this problem.
 
An important thing to note here is that instead of making a new
ItemLocalView, we can reuse the old ItemView by writing a function to map
ImageCoreData to ImageDataModel. In programming, we called this by the
name Mapper layer. This will save us from creating a new view for any new
CoreData models. In this example, we will make a new view for better
visualization of the separation between local storage and the normal online
logic.
 
Now, let’s get back to the HomeView and add a condition for displaying
depending on whether the application is online or offline. While there is
actually a frame solution to check this, we do not need it here. We can
simply check if the imageData in our view model is empty, and then we will
present the data from our local storage. This is a more general solution since
it will be the case where we are online but the API call fails because of
server issues:
 

--- Page 571 ---
 
Figure 9.27: Handle contents displaying for both online and offline modes
 
Inside our LazyVStack here, we add an if-else check. If we are in offline
mode, we will retrieve data for the local storage and show them using the
ImageLocalView instead.
 
Rebuild this, run the application on your phone, and then turn off Wi-Fi and
4G, you will now see that we already have the data, but no images:
 

--- Page 573 ---
 
Figure 9.28: Handle contents displaying for both online and offline modes
 
As we have discussed, this is because we have the image URL, but to
download, we need the internet. In this situation, we need to change to
another local storage approach. For images, we will permanently store them
on the user's phone and retrieve them when needed. There is a solution
provided to us by Apple called File Manager.

--- Page 574 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 575 ---
 
Storing images inside users’ phones with File Manager
 
In iOS app development, a File Manager is a component or feature that
allows you to interact with the file system on an iOS device. It enables you
to perform various operations such as browsing, creating, deleting, moving,
and copying files and directories.
 
The File Manager in iOS provides an interface to access both the app's
sandboxed file system and external storage locations, such as iCloud Drive
and third-party cloud storage providers. It allows you to manage files and
directories within your app's designated folders and perform file-related
tasks.
 
In iOS, an app's sandboxed file system refers to the restricted storage
environment in which an application operates. Each iOS app is given its own
isolated file system, or "sandbox," which is separate from the rest of the
device's file system. This means that an app can only access and modify files
within its designated sandbox directory and cannot directly access files from
other apps or the system.
 
The main purpose of sandboxing is to enhance security and protect user data.
By restricting an app's access to its own sandbox, the risk of unauthorized
access or manipulation of sensitive user data is significantly reduced. This
security measure helps prevent malicious apps from tampering with other
apps' data or interfering with the device's operating system.
 

--- Page 576 ---
Some common tasks that can be accomplished using a File Manager in iOS
app development include:
 
 
Browsing: You can navigate through the file system to locate files and
directories within the app's sandbox or external storage locations.
 
Creating and Deleting: You can create new files and directories
programmatically or delete existing ones.
 
Moving and Copying: You can move files and directories from one
location to another within the file system or make copies of files.
 
Reading and Writing: You can read the content of files and write data to
files, allowing you to perform operations such as reading configuration
files or saving user-generated content.
 
Metadata and Attributes: You can access file metadata, such as file size,
creation/modification dates, and file permissions. You can also modify
attributes like file permissions or extended attributes.
 
Sharing: You can utilize the File Manager to share files with other apps or
export them to different locations.
 

--- Page 577 ---
The iOS File Manager APIs provide a set of classes and methods to interact
with the file system, such as FileManager and URL. These APIs allow you
to perform file-related operations and handle file system tasks efficiently
within your iOS app.
 
Overall, the File Manager in iOS app development is a crucial component
that empowers you to manage files and directories, providing users with a
seamless and intuitive file management experience within your app.
 
We will use this to save our photo image to the user's phone and retrieve it
back to use for the offline mode.
 
Because this is a new stand-alone login, we will create a new manager and
call it ImageManager:
 

--- Page 578 ---
 
Figure 9.29: Image Manager to store and load images to the user’s device
 
Just like with UserDefaults previously, we need a unique key for each value
to keep track of where we store data and retrieve it when needed. For File
Manager, we often refer to it as file URL, which is an address inside the
device to store that piece of data.
 
In this newly created manager, we have two functions to save and load our
images. Both require the file URL to save and retrieve data when needed.
The saveImage requires another parameter, which is the data we want to
store. And in the loadImage function, once we successfully get that data, we
can try to turn it into a UIImage and return it. Also, in the saveImage
function, we can add the logic to remove duplicate files in the same address
to remove outdated images.

--- Page 579 ---
 
So, the next question to think is how should we name this URL address so
that we can later know which image belongs to a specific ItemCoreData.
Well, we need something unique for each image, and it better belong to the
ItemCoreData. And this is what the id property is about, a unique ID for
each instance.
 
The final question here is where should we call these two functions? For the
saveImage, the best place to call it is when we get back the image data,
which occurs in the downloadImage from the APIsManager:
 
 
Figure 9.30: Save image data to user’s device
 
Just when we get back data from the APIs along with the image URL, we
save it to the user’s device and then return the data for use. Remember, the

--- Page 580 ---
important thing here is to pass the image ID as a file URL. Now, to load it,
we will perform the same logic from the ItemView to the ItemLocalView.
The difference is this time instead of fetching the image using the image
URL, we will load it from the user’s device using the image ID from the
ImageCoreData model:
 
 
Figure 9.31: Load image data from user device
 
Now, for the moment of truth, rebuild the application and run it on the
Internet. Then, turn off all the Wi-Fi and 4G or any source of the Internet:
 

--- Page 582 ---
 
Figure 9.32: Application when there is no Internet
 
Our application is now functioning in both online and offline modes. And it
works beautifully and seamlessly, thanks to UserDefaults, CoreData, and
File Manager. This is a great achievement for every mobile application.

--- Page 583 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 584 ---
 
Conclusion
 
Local storage is an essential aspect of iOS SwiftUI development, enabling
applications to store and retrieve user-specific data efficiently. In this
chapter, we explored three popular local storage options: UserDefault,
CoreData, and File Manager.
 
UserDefault offers a lightweight key-value store suitable for storing simple
data types. CoreData provides a powerful object-oriented framework for
managing complex data models and relationships. File Manager allows
direct file manipulation for advanced data handling requirements, such as
saving and loading images to user’s device.
 
Throughout this chapter, we have used all this new knowledge to improve
our applications in performance, save resources, and improve user
experience by allowing offline mode.
 
By understanding the strengths and use cases of each option, you can make
informed decisions about which approach best suits your application's
needs. Whether it's a small-scale project or a large-scale application, having
a solid understanding of local storage techniques is vital for providing a
seamless user experience and efficient data management.
 
With the knowledge gained from this chapter, we hope you can confidently
implement local storage solutions in your iOS SwiftUI apps and enhance
the overall functionality and performance of your future applications.

--- Page 585 ---
 
That’s all for this chapter. In the next chapter, we will introduce you to a
new API available from iOS 16: Swift Charts. This is a new declarative
way to build beautiful charts natively. See you there!

--- Page 586 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 587 ---
CHAPTER 10
 
Construct Beautiful Charts with Swift Charts

--- Page 588 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 589 ---
 
Introduction
 
We have reached the final chapter of this book. It has been quite a great
journey, and we hope that you have realized the power of SwiftUI in
developing native iOS applications.
 
In this final chapter, we want to introduce you to a new powerful
framework that has been available lately: Swift Charts. Charts are one of
the most common and widely used forms of data visualization. They have
been used in various applications with multiple use cases. As a developer, it
is crucial and an advantage to be able to draw charts with our applications.
However, creating a custom chart from scratch can be challenging and time-
consuming. Previously, there were many frameworks and third-party
libraries made to solve this problem, but all of them have flaws.
 
With iOS 16, Apple introduced their solution built in SwiftUI to make
charts. This framework works seamlessly combining SwiftUI with the
declarative syntax. Furthermore, in this year, it has even received more
updates with iOS 17.
 
In this chapter, we will explore Swift Charts and recreate some of the most
commonly used charts, ranging from bar charts, line charts, pie charts to
donut charts. During the process, we will make a simple application of
expense tracking, which will visualize the spending data in different kinds
of charts.
 

--- Page 590 ---
Please note that unlike the previous nine chapters, which required iOS16,
this chapter requires you to develop on iOS 17.

--- Page 591 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 592 ---
 
Structure
 
In this chapter, the following topics will be covered:
 
 
Swift Charts
 
Bar Char
 
Line Chart
 
Pie Chart
 
Donut Chart

--- Page 593 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 594 ---
 
Introduction to Swift Charts
 
Swift Charts is an efficient and compact SwiftUI framework that allows you
to convert your data into meaningful visual representations. It was
introduced in WWDC 2022 and is available to use from iOS 16. By utilizing
Swift Charts, you have the ability to construct impactful and adaptable charts
with minimal coding effort. This framework offers various fundamental
elements such as marks, scales, axes, and legends, which can be combined to
create a diverse array of charts driven by data:
 
 
Figure 10.1: Swift Charts examples
 
Swift Charts offer numerous methods to effectively convey patterns and
trends within your data. With this framework, you have the flexibility to
generate an assortment of chart types such as line charts, bar charts, and
scatter plots, as exemplified previously. When constructing a chart using
Swift Charts, it conveniently generates scales and axes that are tailored to
suit your data automatically.

--- Page 595 ---
 
Swift Charts is equipped with localization and accessibility capabilities,
ensuring support for different languages and accessibility requirements.
Additionally, the framework allows you to override default behavior through
the use of chart modifiers, enabling extensive customization of your charts.
For instance, you can enhance the user experience by incorporating
animations into your charts, creating a dynamic and visually engaging
presentation.
 
Now, let’s get to know the fundamentals of Swift Charts.

--- Page 596 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 597 ---
 
Swift Charts foundations
 
Let's take a moment to acquaint ourselves with the fundamental
components of any Swift chart: chart view, marks, properties, modifiers,
and data.
 
 
Chart View: It is the container view for the chart that contains all the
marks inside. It is the same idea as NavigationView that you have
learned in Chapter 6, Tab bar, Navigation, and Compositional Layout.
NavigationView is a container that wraps all the NavigationLink, but,
here, Chart is the container view that wraps all the Marks.
 
Marks: Marks are the graphical elements that represent the data in a chart.
They can take various forms such as points, bars, lines, or wedges in pie
charts. Marks visually convey the information contained in the data.
 
Properties: Properties define the visual characteristics of the chart and its
components. They include attributes like he, sizes, shapes, and styles that
determine how the chart and its marks are displayed.
 
Modifiers: Modifiers are used to customize the behavior and appearance of
the chart. They enable you to override default settings and apply specific
transformations or enhancements to the chart and its elements. Modifiers
can be used to add animations, adjust interactivity, or modify visual aspects.
 

--- Page 598 ---
Data: Data is the core information that drives the chart. It consists of the
values and labels that define the content and structure of the chart.
Typically, data is provided in an organized format, such as arrays or
dictionaries, and is used to populate the marks in the chart.
 
By understanding and manipulating these building blocks—marks,
properties, modifiers, and data—you can create and customize Swift charts
to effectively represent and visualize your data.
 
Let’s talk more about Marks and Properties here since they are quite
interesting. A mark is a graphical element that represents data; for example,
the rectangular bars in a bar chart.
 
Swift charts include the following marks by default:
 
 
BarMark
 
PointMark
 
LineMark
 
AreaMark
 

--- Page 599 ---
RuleMark
 
RectangleMark
 
SectorMark (new in iOS 17)
 
You may have guessed it based on their name. Each mark here is
representative of a different kind of chart. We will soon meet some of them.
Marks are extensive, so you can create a custom mark too.
 
In this chapter, you’ll use properties to provide data and customize their
appearance and interaction with modifiers.
 
Swift Charts support three types of data as follows:
 
 
Quantitative: It represents numerical values, such as temperature, inches of
snowfall, and so on.
 
Nominal: These values are discrete categories or groups, such as a city, the
name of a person, and so on. This data type often becomes the labels.
 

--- Page 600 ---
Temporal: It represents a point or interval in time, such as the duration of a
particular day part.
 
There is more to learn, but this is enough to get started. From here to the
end of this chapter, you will develop and make several kinds of charts.
 
Now, open up Xcode, and let’s get started.

--- Page 601 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 602 ---
 
Setting up the project
 
Just as with all the previous applications, we will adapt the MVVM Model
for this project.
 
Let’s begin with the models.
 
Firstly, we will tackle four different kinds of charts, and to distinguish them,
we will use an enumeration. Here, we create a GraphType enumeration that
has four cases representing four types of charts. We also adapt it to String
and CaseIterable protocols so that we can use them inside the ForEach
container later:
 
 
Figure 10.2: Define different types of charts with custom enumeration

--- Page 603 ---
 
Next, let’s move on to the main model that will be used inside the
application. In this application, we will represent and compare spending for
different months of the year. So, we’ll make a new model and name it
MonthlySpending:
 
 
Figure 10.3: Define the monthly spending model
 
Our model has five properties. Each instance needs a unique ID so that we
can distinguish them and be able to query through. The main information for
each instance will be the date, which represents the period that was taken in
and the total spending cost for that period.
 
The two remaining properties, month and year, are for chart representation
later. These two are computed properties that will extract the month and year
components from the date and return them as a string.

--- Page 604 ---
 
For more convenience later, we will make two extensions to use here:
 
 

--- Page 605 ---
Figure 10.4: Define convenient extensions
 
In Swift, an extension is a language feature that allows you to add new
functionality to an existing class, structure, enumeration, or protocol type. It
provides a way to extend the behavior of a type without modifying its
original implementation. Extensions are particularly useful when you want
to add methods, properties, or initializers to a type that you don't have direct
access to or want to keep the code organized by grouping related
functionality.
 
Here, we create two extensions: one on the swift built-in type Date and
another on an array of our newly created model, MonthlySpending:
[MonthlySpending].
 
The first extension will be used later when we create all of our charts. Since
all of the chart input data will be an array of MonthlySpending, we make an
extension for this type, so that we can conveniently have access to the two
new functions to find the cost of the month and the index of those cost items.
It is because later we will make four different views for four of our charts.
With this extension, we don’t have to repeatedly define them in different
views. You can of course define these two functions inside the view model.
But again, what if another different view model needs one of these
somewhere else? Extensions offer a better and more scalable solution.
 
The second extension on the Date type is for a fast and convenient
initialization of the date. With this new function, we can pass in the numeric
number to initialize the date. Let’s make our view model using sample data
for our application:
 

--- Page 606 ---
 
Figure 10.5: Define our view model with sample data
 
In our view model, we will create two new arrays of data representing
spending in the first six months of 2023 and 2022. This will be used and
visualized in our chart views. Don’t forget to adapt to ObservableObject:
 
Now, let's build the last part, which is our application’s main view:
 

--- Page 607 ---
 
Figure 10.6: Application main view
 
Here, we leverage the power of enumeration and use it to present a Picker,
which will bind to the local state graphType. When it is updated, we will
change the presented chart view. By adopting the CaseIterable previously,
we can loop to all its cases to provide data input for the Picker view here.
 

--- Page 608 ---
We are initializing our view model here and passing it into all four chart
views. Now, let's take a look at them, starting with the most common one:
bar chart.

--- Page 609 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 610 ---
 
Creating a Bar chart
 
It's important to choose the appropriate chart type based on the nature of
your data and the story you want to tell.
 
Bar charts are best used for visualizing and comparing categorical data or
discrete values. They are particularly effective in the following scenarios:
 
 
Comparing data: Bar charts allow you to compare different categories
or groups by representing their values as individual bars. The length or
height of each bar represents the magnitude of the data, making it easy
to visually compare values across different categories.
 
Showing trends over time: Bar charts can be used to display changes in
data over time by representing different periods on the x-axis and the
corresponding values on the y-axis. This allows viewers to observe
trends, identify patterns, and analyze the data's progression.
 
Displaying rankings: Bar charts are useful for displaying rankings or
ordering data based on their values. You can arrange the bars in
descending or ascending order to highlight the highest or lowest values,
enabling quick comparisons and identification of the most significant
factors.
 

--- Page 611 ---
Presenting survey or poll results: Bar charts are commonly used to
present survey data, poll results, or responses to multiple-choice
questions. Each response option is represented by a separate bar,
making it easy to visualize the distribution of responses and identify the
most popular or least popular choices.
 
Comparing performance metrics: Bar charts are effective in comparing
performance metrics for different entities, such as sales figures for
different products or revenue generated by different departments. The
bars allow for a quick visual assessment of the relative performance of
each entity.
 
Visualizing proportions: Bar charts can be used to represent
proportions or percentages of a whole. Each bar represents a category,
and the length or height of the bar corresponds to the proportion or
percentage it represents. This helps viewers understand the relative
contribution of each category to the total.
 
Making charts with Swift Charts APIs is very simple. Here is how it is for
the bar chart:
 

--- Page 612 ---
 
Figure 10.7: Making a bar chart with SwiftUI
 
First, we have to import Charts, which are the new APIs Swift Charts
provided by Apple.
 
Next, remember that everything in Swift Charts must be wrapped inside the
Chart container view to use them.
 
For bar charts, we will use BarMark to visualize our data. Using a ForEach
block looping through all data from this year (2023), we will pass the month
string value as the x-value and the corresponding cost as the y-value.
 

--- Page 613 ---
And as simple as that, we have our clear bar chart data on the right side. It
takes less than 10 lines of code to make such a beautiful bar chart! This used
to be painful with huge configurations back then. However, with SwiftUI,
starting from iOS 16, you can have it right out of the box.
 
Now, let’s add more modifiers to make our chart stand out:
 
 
Figure 10.8: Improve our bar chart with modifiers
 
Available out of the box, we can make our bar chart rounded with the
.cornerRadius() modifier. Similar to how all SwiftUI view has a

--- Page 614 ---
.foreground() modifier, here you can use .foregroundStyle() to distinguish
between different items in the axis. Here, we specify that the style will be
different based on the x-axis value, which is our months.
 
That’s it, and now we have a beautiful bar chart on the right side, looking
much better than the previous default one.
 
Next, let’s see the difference in spending in the first six months between
2022 and 2023. The chart best suited for this comparison is the line chart.

--- Page 615 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 616 ---
 
Creating a Line chart
 
Line charts are best used for visualizing and tracking trends in data over
time. They are particularly effective in the following scenarios:
 
 
Displaying trends: Line charts are ideal for illustrating the change or
progression of a variable over a continuous period. By plotting data
points and connecting them with a line, line charts provide a clear visual
representation of how a value fluctuates, rises, or falls over time.
 
Comparing multiple variables: Line charts allow for the simultaneous
comparison of multiple variables on the same graph. By plotting
multiple lines on a single chart, you can easily compare and contrast the
trends and patterns of different variables.
 
Identifying patterns and cycles: Line charts are effective in identifying
patterns, cycles, and seasonality in data. By examining the peaks,
valleys, or recurring trends in the lines, you can gain insights into the
cyclical nature of the data and make informed predictions or decisions.
 
Analyzing correlations: Line charts can help visualize the correlation
between two variables. By plotting both variables on the same chart,
you can observe how changes in one variable correspond to changes in
the other. Positive correlations show an upward trend, while negative
correlations show a downward trend.

--- Page 617 ---
 
Tracking progress towards a goal: Line charts are useful for tracking
progress towards a specific goal or target over time. By plotting the
actual values against the desired target, you can easily see if the progress
is on track or if adjustments need to be made.
 
Showing continuous data relationships: Line charts are effective for
displaying continuous data, such as temperature, stock prices, or
population growth. The continuous line allows for a smooth
representation of the data points, making it easier to identify trends and
patterns.
 
Line charts are versatile and widely used for visualizing time series data.
Let’s take a look at the difference in spending in the first six months between
2022 and 2023:
 
Top of Form
 
Bottom of Form
 

--- Page 618 ---
 
Figure 10.9: Making line chart with SwiftUI
 
In Swift, it is very convenient when you want to merge two arrays into one;
just use the “+” sign, and you have it. Here, we merge the data of the current
year's spending, 2023, and the last year, 2022.
 
Then, everything is almost the same. We just have to replace BarMark with
LineMark to make a line chart. Also, in the .foregroundStyle() modifier,
instead of distinguishing them in months, we will distinguish them in years
to compare the trend of spending between two years.
 

--- Page 619 ---
It already looks great, but we can make it even better. To visualize the point
of each month, we can use another mark from Swift Charts: PointMark:
 
 
Figure 10.10: Add a Point mark to visualize each month’s data
 
Adding PointMark for each cost will present a point for that data, and here it
is sitting above our line, making a beautiful descriptive chart. Remember to
apply the same .foregroundStyle() as the LineMark.
 
Now, there is still a very interesting modifier to add here:
 

--- Page 620 ---
 
Figure 10.11: Adding annotations for line chart
 
With the .annotation() modifier, we can show the cost of each month in our
line chart, looking just like a professional application, isn’t it?
 
We are able to make this with less than 20 lines of code in Swift Charts.
How powerful is that!
 

--- Page 621 ---
With the new updates in iOS 17, we can now implement a pie chart with
SectorMark. Let’s explore it.

--- Page 622 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 623 ---
 
Creating a Pie chart
 
Pie charts are best used for visualizing the composition or distribution of
categorical data. They are particularly effective in the following scenarios:
 
Showing proportions: Pie charts are ideal for representing the relative
proportions or percentages of different categories within a whole. The
entire pie represents 100% of the data, and each category is represented
by a slice, the size of which corresponds to its proportion or percentage.
 
Comparing categories: Pie charts allow for quick visual comparisons
between categories. By comparing the sizes of the slices, you can easily
identify which categories are larger or smaller in relation to each other.
 
Highlighting dominant categories: Pie charts can effectively highlight
dominant or significant categories. The largest slice in the pie stands out
and draws attention, making it easy to identify the most prominent
category.
 
Presenting simple data sets: Pie charts work best when you have a
relatively small number of categories (typically less than 6 or 7) and
clear proportions. They are especially useful when the data is divided
into a few distinct categories, and you want to show the distribution in a
visually appealing and easily understandable way.
 

--- Page 624 ---
Displaying percentages: Pie charts can be used to show the percentage
contribution of each category to the whole. The slices are often labeled
with the corresponding percentages, allowing viewers to understand the
precise proportion of each category.
 
However, it's worth noting that pie charts have some limitations and can be
less effective in certain situations. For instance:
 
 
They can become cluttered and difficult to interpret when there are too many
categories or when the proportions are similar.
 
It can be challenging to accurately compare the sizes of different slices,
especially when they are close in size.
 
Pie charts do not work well for displaying trends over time or comparing
values between different data sets.
 
Let’s make the pie chart from the current year’s (2023) spending:
 

--- Page 625 ---
 
Figure 10.12: Making a pie chart with SwiftUI
 
Here, first, we will sort our data in descending order because the nature of
the pie chart is usually present in data order.
 
Next, we will use the new SectorMark, making use of two properties: the
angle passing the value, which will be used to draw the chart here (which
will be the monthly cost), and the angularInset to have some space between
each pie, set to a 1-pixel value.
 

--- Page 626 ---
The corner radius and foreground style will be the same as in the previous
chart. Now every chart by default comes with a chart legend, and it is
positioned at the bottom leading side. However, we can modify it too with
the .chartLegend() modifier on the Chart view. Here, we align it to the center
and add some more space to the pie chart.
 
Now, the last one is just a variable of the pie chart, which just adds one more
property. Let’s explore the donut chart.

--- Page 627 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 628 ---
 
Creating a Donut chart
 
A donut chart, also known as a doughnut chart, is a type of circular chart
used to represent data in a visually appealing way. It is similar to a pie chart
but has a hole in the center, creating a "donut" shape. The chart is divided
into segments, where each segment represents a proportion or percentage of
the whole.
 
Donut charts are useful for displaying categorical data with a few distinct
categories and comparing their relative sizes. The outer edge of the chart
represents 100% or the total value, and each segment's size is proportional to
its corresponding value or percentage. The segments are typically labeled to
indicate the category they represent.
 
The central hole in the donut chart can be used for additional information or
to enhance the visual appeal. It can display a summary or a total value
related to the data, or it can be left empty for a more minimalist design.
 
Donut charts are commonly used in business presentations, reports, and
dashboards to convey data in an easily understandable and visually
appealing manner. However, it's important to note that donut charts can
sometimes be less effective than other chart types, such as bar charts or
stacked bar charts, especially when dealing with complex or numerous
categories, as the segments can become difficult to compare accurately:
 

--- Page 629 ---
 
Figure 10.13: Making a donut chart with SwiftUI
 
Inside SectorMark, you can create a new and strange chart simply by adding
another built-in property, innerRadius. Here, we will specify that the ratio of
the empty inner circle is 61 percent. You can make your choice and go with
it. Also, let's increase the spacing between the pie by more than 6 pixels.
 
So now, we are having four different kinds of charts to visualize our
spending data:
 

--- Page 630 ---
 
Figure 10.14: Four kinds of charts in our application
 
With this, we are done with this application. There are four different kinds of
charts, and you can easily switch between them with the picker.
 
Although this is a new framework available only starting from iOS 16, it
completely changes everything, and so off the power of SwiftUI with
declarative programming.

--- Page 631 ---
 
There is still much more to explore, such as other marks like AreaMark,
RuleMark, RectangleMark, and other interesting modifiers to make your
charts stand out.
 
Just like all of the other chapters in this book, everything does not end here,
and there will be more for you to explore. What we are trying to provide is a
basic foundation.

--- Page 632 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 633 ---
 
Conclusion
 
Swift Charts provides a powerful and user-friendly solution for visualizing
data in SwiftUI. With its introduction in WWDC 2022 and availability from
iOS 16, this efficient and compact framework has proven to be a valuable
tool for developers.
 
By offering a wide range of chart types, such as line charts, bar charts, and
scatter plots, Swift Charts allows for the creation of diverse and impactful
visual representations of data. The framework's ability to automatically
generate scales and axes tailored to the data simplifies the chart
construction process, requiring minimal coding effort.
 
In this chapter, we have explored four different charts: bar chart, line chart,
pie chart, and donut chart. During the process, we used four different
marks: BarMark, LineMark, PointMark, and SectorMark. With this, we
have built a beautiful visualization for our cost-tracking application.
However, this framework or any other concepts mentioned in this book are
just the beginning. There is so much more waiting for you to explore on
your own.
 
Overall, Swift Charts empowers developers to effortlessly transform data
into meaningful visualizations, making it a valuable asset in the SwiftUI
ecosystem.

--- Page 634 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 635 ---
iOS 17 Appendix
 
With Swift 5.9 and Xcode 15, we can leverage Macros in Swift. Macros
transform your source code when you compile it, letting you avoid writing
repetitive code by hand.
 
Macros can either be written with a “@” prefix or with a “#” prefix,
depending on where they›re being used. Here are 2 things that can be
done differently:
 
 
Showing Preview with #Preview Macro:
 
From XCode 15, there is a new shorter way to show the live Preview.
 

--- Page 636 ---
 
Figure A.1: New way to show Preview
 
From Xcode 15, developers will be greeted with a welcome enhancement: a
new, more concise syntax for displaying previews #Preview. This
streamlined approach not only makes the code cleaner and easier to read but
also boosts efficiency by reducing the keystrokes needed to achieve the same
result.
 
The best part is that while this new syntax offers convenience and modernity,
the old method still works seamlessly.
 

--- Page 637 ---
This thoughtful compatibility ensures that developers can transition at their
own pace and continue to work with their familiar workflows, all while
having the option to embrace the improved brevity of the new Preview
syntax whenever they're ready.
 
Observable Macro with @Observable Macro:
 
Embracing Observation offers your application a range of advantages,
including:
 
 
Monitoring options and collections of items, a capability that is not available
when employing ObservableObject.
 
Utilizing established data flow tools like @State and @Environment rather
than object-oriented counterparts like @StateObject and
@EnvironmentObject.
 
Ensuring that views respond to alterations in observable properties that are
explicitly read within a view's content, as opposed to tracking changes in any
property of an observable object. This can contribute to enhancing your
app's overall performance.
 
 
To implement Observation in an app that already exists, start by substituting
the ObservableObject in your data model type with the @Observable macro.

--- Page 638 ---
This macro generates code during compilation, which introduces support for
observation of the type.
 
 
Figure A.2: Migrating to the new @Observable macro
 
Next, eliminate the @Published property wrapper from your observable
properties. It's worth noting that Observation doesn't necessitate a property
wrapper to render a property observable. Instead, the property's observability
is determined by its accessibility concerning an observer, such as a view.
 
 
Figure A.3: Removing @Published property wrapper
 
To fully adopt Observation, replace the use of @StateObject with @State in
the View layer after updating our View Model.
 

--- Page 639 ---
 
Figure A.4: Replacing @StateObject with @State
 
Now that the Library no longer conforms to ObservableObject, the code can
change to use @State instead of @StateObject and to add a library to the
environment using the environment(_:) modifier.
 
Just like before, this new syntax offers convenience and reduces boilerplate
code, but the best part is the old method still works seamlessly.

--- Page 640 ---
 
Developers will have time to adapt. Macros are great features but they are
only available from Swift 5.9 with XCode 15, so it will take time to
transition into it.

--- Page 641 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 642 ---
 
Reference
 
https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/documentation/the-swift-
programming-language/macros/
 
https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swiftui/migrating-from-the-
observable-object-protocol-to-the-observable-macro

--- Page 643 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 644 ---
Index
 
Symbols
 
@StateObject 113, 114
 
A
 
API call
making 151, 152, 153, 154
array 14, 15
asynchronous programming
with async 162, 163, 164, 165
with await 162, 163, 164, 165
 
B
 
background thread 157, 158, 159, 160, 161
bar chart

--- Page 645 ---
creating 242, 243, 244
binding
versus state 87, 88, 89, 90
 
C
 
Calculator app
implementing 83, 84, 85
layout 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82
class
about 29
versus struct 30, 31
completion block 156, 161
completion block parameter 159
compositional layout 137, 138
concurrent queues 157
conditional statements 12, 13
CoreData
about 214, 215, 216
cons 214

--- Page 646 ---
pros 214
setting up, in SwiftUI 216, 217, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223
used, for reading data in SwiftUI 223, 224, 225, 226, 227, 228
used, for writing data in SwiftUI 223, 224, 225, 226, 227, 228
Create, Read, Update, and Delete (CRUD) 215
 
D
 
data
reading, with CoreData in SwiftUI 223, 224, 225, 226, 227, 228
writing, with CoreData in SwiftUI 223, 224, 225, 226, 227, 228
Decodable 155, 156
delegate pattern 102
design pattern
about 100, 101
code quality 100
collaboration 100
development time 101
efficiency 100
maintainability 100

--- Page 647 ---
reusability 100
scalability 100
testability 100
design pattern, in iOS development
about 101
architecture pattern 101, 102
design pattern 102
dictionary 16, 17
donut chart
creating 249, 250, 251
doughnut chart 249
 
E
 
enumeration (enum) 156, 160
 
F
 
File Manager
used, for storing images in users' phone 229, 230, 231, 232

--- Page 648 ---
forced unwrapping 9, 10
function
about 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23
benefits 21
fundamental view 34, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42
 
G
 
Gallery app
making 168, 169, 170, 171, 172
GET request 185
versus POST request 186, 187, 188, 189, 190
global scope 23
Grand Central Dispatch (GCD) 157
 
H
 
HomeView
presenting 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197
HStack 35

--- Page 649 ---
Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS) 146
 
I
 
images
downloading, from URL with URLSession 198, 199
loading 138, 139, 140
storing, in users' phone with File Manager 229, 230, 231, 232
iOS development
navigation 126, 127
 
J
 
JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) 149, 150
JSONDecoder 154, 155
 
L
 
LazyHGrid 140, 141, 142, 143, 144

--- Page 650 ---
LazyVGrid 140, 141, 142, 143, 144
line chart
creating 244, 245, 246, 247
scenarios 244, 245
local scope 23
local storage
persistency 202, 203
logical operators
about 11
example 11
 
M
 
main thread 157
Model-View-Controller (MVC) 101
Model-View-ViewModel (MVVM) 101
MVVM Model
project, setting up 238, 239, 240, 241, 242
MVVM Pattern
about 103, 104

--- Page 651 ---
implementing, into Calculator app (1) 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110,
111, 112
implementing, into Calculator app (2) 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120
Model 103
View 103
View Model 103
 
N
 
NavigationLink 128, 129, 130, 131
Navigation stack 131-136
NavigationView 127, 128
networking
about 146, 147
key points 146
nil 8
 
O
 
OAuth authorization 172

--- Page 652 ---
ObservableObject 112, 113
observer pattern 102
Open Authorization 2.0 (OAuth 2.0)
about 172
authorization with 177-180
overview 173
optional chaining 10
optional type
about 8, 9
forced unwrapping 9, 10
optional chaining 10
 
P
 
pie chart
creating 247, 249
limitations 248
scenarios 247, 248
POST request 186
versus GET request 186, 187, 188, 189, 190

--- Page 653 ---
programming
benefits 24, 25
property observer 91-97
property wrapper 90
 
Q
 
query string parameter 178
 
R
 
RESTful API
about 147, 148, 149
benefits 148
 
S
 
SafariServices framework 181
scope

--- Page 654 ---
about 23, 24, 25
global scope 23
local scope 23
singleton pattern 102
Singleton pattern 191, 192
stack views
HStack 35
VStack 35
ZStack 35
state
about 85, 86
versus binding 87, 88, 89, 90
struct 25, 26, 27, 28, 29
versus class 30, 31
Swift Charts
about 236, 237
data types 238
foundation 237
marks 238
Swift programming

--- Page 655 ---
benefits 22
SwiftUI
alignment view 69, 70, 71, 72, 73
CoreData, setting up 216-223
layout 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59
lifecycle methods 73, 74
positioning view 59-68
SwiftUI, layout behavior
.frame 57
.offset 57
.overlay 58
.padding 57
.zIndex 58
SwiftUI, layout container
HStack 54
list 54
ScrollView 54
VStack 54
ZStack 54
SwiftUI view 43, 44, 45, 46, 47

--- Page 656 ---
 
T
 
tab bar 122, 123, 124, 125
threads 157
 
U
 
UI thread 157
Unsplash APIs
setting up 173, 174, 175, 176
Unsplash authorization workflow
reference link 177
URLSession 148, 150
URLSessionDataTask 150
URLSessionDownloadTask 150
URLSessionUploadTask 150
used, for downloading images from URL 198, 199
URLSessionDataTask 150
URLSessionDownloadTask 150

--- Page 657 ---
URLSessionUploadTask 150
UserDefaults
about 204, 205, 206, 208, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 214
cons 208
pros 207
 
V
 
variable
defining 5, 6, 7, 8
View Modifier 47, 48, 49, 50
VStack 35
 
W
 
WebKit
used, for presenting website 180-183
WebKit framework 181
website
presenting, with WebKit 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185

--- Page 658 ---
 
X
 
Xcode
downloading 2, 3, 4, 5
 
Z
 
ZStack 35

--- Page 659 ---
OceanofPDF.com