--- Page 2 ---
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers
to distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks.
Where those designations appear in this book, and the
publisher was aware of a trademark claim, the designations
have been printed with initial capital letters or in all capitals.
The author and publisher have taken care in the preparation
of this book, but make no expressed or implied warranty of
any kind and assume no responsibility for errors or
omissions. No liability is assumed for incidental or
consequential damages in connection with or arising out of
the use of the information or programs contained herein.
The publisher oﬀers excellent discounts on this book when
ordered in quantity for bulk purchases or special sales,
which may include electronic versions and/or custom covers
and content particular to your business, training goals,
marketing focus, and branding interests. For more
information, please contact:
U.S. Corporate and Government Sales 
(800) 382-3419 
corpsales@pearsontechgroup.com
For sales outside the United States, please contact:
International Sales 
international@pearsoned.com
Visit us on the Web: informit.com/aw
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is on ﬁle
Copyright © 2012 Pearson Education, Inc.
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America.
This publication is protected by copyright, and permission
must be obtained from the publisher prior to any prohibited
reproduction, storage in a retrieval system, or transmission
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or likewise. To obtain permission to
use material from this work, please submit a written request

--- Page 3 ---
to Pearson Education, Inc., Permissions Department, One
Lake Street, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey 07458, or you
may fax your request to (201) 236-3290.
ISBN-13: 978-0-32-177418-7
ISBN-10: 0-32-177418-3
Text printed in the United States on recycled paper at R.R.
Donnelley in Crawfordsville, 
Indiana.
First printing, April 2012
Editor-in-Chief 
Mark Taub
Senior Acquisitions Editor 
Trina MacDonald
Managing Editor 
Kristy Hart
Project Editor 
Andy Beaster
Copy Editor 
Barbara Hacha
Indexer 
Tim Wright
Proofreader 
Paula Lowell
Technical Reviewers 
Richard Buckle 
Patrick Burleson 
Andrew Ebling 
Alan Francis 
Rich Wardwell

--- Page 4 ---
Publishing Coordinator 
Olivia Basegio
Book Designer 
Gary Adair
Compositor 
Gloria Schurick
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 5 ---
Developer’s Library
Essential References for Programming
Professionals
Developer’s Library books are designed to provide
practicing programmers with unique, high-quality references
and tutorials on the programming languages and
technologies they use in their daily work.
All books in the Developer’s Library are written by expert
technology practitioners who are especially skilled at
organizing and presenting information in a way that’s useful
for other programmers.
Key titles include some of the best, most widely acclaimed
books within their topic areas:
PHP & MySQL Web Development 
Luke Welling & Laura Thomson 
ISBN 978-0-672-32916-6
MySQL 
Paul DuBois 
ISBN-13: 978-0-672-32938-8
Linux Kernel Development 
Robert Love 
ISBN-13: 978-0-672-32946-3
Python Essential Reference 
David Beazley 
ISBN-13: 978-0-672-32862-6
Programming in Objective-C 
Stephen G. Kochan 
ISBN-13: 978-0-321-56615-7
PostgreSQL 
Korry Douglas 
ISBN-13: 978-0-672-33015-5

--- Page 6 ---
Developer’s Library books are available at most retail and
online bookstores, as well as by subscription from Safari
Books Online at safari.informit.com
Developer’s Library 
informit.com/devlibrary
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 7 ---
This book is for anyone who has ever shipped a bug. You’re 
in great company.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 8 ---
Contents at a Glance
Preface
1 About Software Testing and Unit Testing
2 Techniques for Test-Driven Development
3 How to Write a Unit Test
4 Tools for Testing
5 Test-Driven Development of an iOS App
6 The Data Model
7 Application Logic
8 Networking Code
9 View Controllers
10 Putting It All Together
11 Designing for Test-Driven Development
12 Applying Test-Driven Development to an Existing
Project
13 Beyond Today’s Test-Driven Development
Index
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 9 ---
Table of Contents
Dedication
Preface
Acknowledgments
About the Author
1 About Software Testing and Unit Testing
What Is Software Testing For?
Who Should Test Software?
When Should Software Be Tested?
Examples of Testing Practices
Where Does Unit Testing Fit In?
What Does This Mean for iOS Developers?
2 Techniques for Test-Driven Development
Test First
Red, Green, Refactor
Designing a Test-Driven App
More on Refactoring
Ya Ain’t Gonna Need It
Testing Before, During, and After Coding
3 How to Write a Unit Test
The Requirement
Running Code with Known Input
Seeing Expected Results
Verifying the Results

--- Page 10 ---
Making the Tests More Readable
Organizing Multiple Tests
Refactoring
Summary
4 Tools for Testing
OCUnit with Xcode
Alternatives to OCUnit
Google Toolkit for Mac
GHUnit
CATCH
OCMock
Continuous Integration
Hudson
CruiseControl
Summary
5 Test-Driven Development of an iOS App
Product Goal
Use Cases
Plan of Attack
Getting Started
6 The Data Model
Topics
Questions
People
Connecting Questions to Other Classes
Answers

--- Page 11 ---
7 Application Logic
Plan of Attack
Creating a Question
Building Questions from JSON
8 Networking Code
NSURLConnection Class Design
StackOverflowCommunicator Implementation
Conclusion
9 View Controllers
Class Organization
The View Controller Class
TopicTableDataSource and TopicTableDelegate
Telling the View Controller to Create a New View
Controller
The Question List Data Source
Where Next
10 Putting It All Together
Completing the Application’s Workﬂow
Displaying User Avatars
Finishing Oﬀ and Tidying Up
Ship It!
11 Designing for Test-Driven Development
Design to Interfaces, Not Implementations
Tell, Don’t Ask
Small, Focused Classes and Methods

--- Page 12 ---
Encapsulation
Use Is Better Than Reuse
Testing Concurrent Code
Don’t Be Cleverer Than Necessary
Prefer a Wide, Shallow Inheritance Hierarchy
Conclusion
12 Applying Test-Driven Development to an Existing
Project
The Most Important Test You’ll Write Is the First
Refactoring to Support Testing
Testing to Support Refactoring
Do I Really Need to Write All These Tests?
13 Beyond Today’s Test-Driven Development
Expressing Ranges of Input and Output
Behavior-Driven Development
Automatic Test Case Generation
Automatically Creating Code to Pass Tests
Conclusion
Index
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 13 ---
Preface
My experience of telling other developers about test-driven
development for Objective-C came about almost entirely by
accident. I was scheduled to talk at a conference on a
diﬀerent topic, where a friend of mine was talking on TDD.
His wife had chosen (I assume that’s how it works; I’m no
expert) that weekend to give birth to their twins, so Chuck—
who commissioned the book you now hold in your hands—
asked me if I wouldn’t mind giving that talk, too. Thus began
the path that led ultimately to the year-long project of
creating this book.
It’s usually the case that reality is not nearly as neat as the
stories we tell each other about reality. In fact, I had ﬁrst
encountered unit tests a number of years previously. Before
I was a professional software engineer, I was a tester for a
company whose product was based on GNUstep (the Free
Software Foundation’s version of the Cocoa libraries for
Linux and other operating systems). Unit testing, I knew
then, was a way to show that little bits of a software product
worked properly, so that hopefully, when they were
combined into big bits of software, those big bits would work
properly, too.
I took this knowledge with me to my ﬁrst programming gig,
as software engineer working on the Mac port of a cross-
platform security product. (Another simpliﬁcation—I had, a
few years earlier, taken on a six-week paid project to write a
LISP program. We’ve all done things we’re not proud of.)
While I was working this job, I went on a TDD training
course, run by object-oriented programming conference
stalwart Kevlin Henney, editor of 97 Things Every
Programmer Should Know, among other things. It was here
that I ﬁnally realized that the point of test-driven
development was to make me more conﬁdent about my

--- Page 14 ---
code, and more conﬁdent about changing my code as I
learned more. The time had ﬁnally arrived where I
understood TDD enough that I could start learning from my
own mistakes, make it a regular part of my toolbox, and
work out what worked for me and what didn’t. After a few
years of that, I was in a position where I could say yes to
Chuck’s request to give the talk.
It’s my sincere hope that this book will help you get from
discovering unit testing and test-driven development to
making it a regular part of how you work, and that you get
there in less time than the ﬁve years or so it took me. Plenty
of books have been written about unit testing, including by
the people who wrote the frameworks and designed the
processes. These are good books, but they don’t have
anything speciﬁcally to say to Cocoa Touch developers. By
providing examples in the Objective-C language, using
Xcode and related tools, and working with the Cocoa idioms,
I hope to make the principles behind test-driven
development more accessible and more relevant to iOS
developers.
Ah, yes—the tools. There are plenty of ways to write unit
tests, depending on diﬀerent features in any of a small
hoard of diﬀerent tools and frameworks. Although I’ve
covered some of those diﬀerences here, I decided to focus
almost exclusively on the capabilities Apple supplies in
Xcode and the OCUnit framework. The reason is simply one
of applicability; anyone who’s interested in trying out unit
tests or TDD can get on straight away with just the
knowledge in this book, the standard tools, and a level of
determination. If you ﬁnd aspects of it lacking or frustrating,
you can, of course, investigate the alternatives or even
write your own—just remember to test it!
One thing my long journey to becoming a test-infected
programmer has taught me is that the best way to become
a better software engineers is to talk to other practitioners.

--- Page 15 ---
If you have any comments or suggestions on what you read
here, or on TDD in general, please feel free to ﬁnd me on
Twitter (I’m @iamleeg) and talk about it.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 16 ---
Acknowledgments
It was Isaac Newton who said, “If I have seen a little further
it is by standing on the shoulders of giants,” although he
was (of course!) making use of a metaphor that had been
developed and reﬁned by centuries of writers. Similarly, this
book was not created in a vacuum, and a complete list of
those giants on whom I have stood would begin with Ada,
Countess Lovelace, and end countless pages later. A more
succinct, relevant, and bearable list of acknowledgements
must begin with all of the ﬁne people at Pearson who have
all helped to make this book publishable and available:
Chuck, Trina, and Olivia all kept me in line, and my technical
reviewers—Saul, Tim, Alan, Andrew, two Richards, Simon,
Patrick, and Alexander—all did sterling work in ﬁnding the
errors in the manuscript. If any remain, they are, of course,
my fault. Andy and Barbara turned the scrawls of a
programmer into English prose.
Kent Beck designed the xUnit framework, and without his
insight I would have had nothing to write about. Similarly, I
am indebted to the authors of the Objective-C version of
xUnit, Sente SA. I must mention the developer tools team at
Apple, who have done more than anyone else to put unit
testing onto the radar (if you’ll pardon the pun) of iOS
developers the world over. Kevlin Henney was the person
who, more than anyone else, showed me the value of test-
driven development; thank you for all those bugs that I
didn’t write.
And ﬁnally, Freya has been supportive and understanding of
the strange hours authors tend to put in—if you’re reading
this in print, you’ll probably see a lot more of me now.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 17 ---
About the Author
Graham Lee’s job title is “Smartphone Security Boﬃn,” a
role that requires a good deal of conﬁdence in the code he
produces. His ﬁrst exposure to OCUnit and unit testing came
around six years ago, as test lead on a GNUstep-based
server application. Before iOS became the main focus of his
work, Graham worked on applications for Mac OS X,
NeXTSTEP, and any number of UNIX variants.
This book is the second Graham has written as part of his
scheme to learn loads about computing by trying to ﬁnd
ways to explain it to other people. Other parts of this
dastardly plan include speaking frequently at conferences
across the world, attending developer meetings near to his
home town of Oxford, and volunteering at the Swindon
Museum of Computing.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 18 ---
1. About Software Testing and Unit
Testing
To gain the most beneﬁt from unit testing, you must
understand its purpose and how it can help improve your
software. In this chapter, you learn about the “universe” of
software testing, where unit testing ﬁts into this universe,
and what its beneﬁts and drawbacks are.
What Is Software Testing For?
A common goal of many software projects is to make some
proﬁt for someone. The usual way in which this goal is
realized is directly, by selling the software via the app store
or licensing its use in some other way. Software destined for
in-house use by the developer’s business often makes its
money indirectly by improving the eﬃciency of some
business process, reducing the amount of time paid staﬀ
must spend attending to the process. If the savings in terms
of process eﬃciency is greater than the cost of developing
the software, the project is proﬁtable. Developers of open
source projects often sell support packages or use the
software themselves: In these cases the preceding
argument still applies.
So, economics 101: If the goal of a software project is to
make proﬁt—whether the end product is to be sold to a
customer or used internally—it must provide some value to
the user greater than the cost of the software in order to
meet that goal and be successful. I realize that this is not a
groundbreaking statement, but it has important
ramiﬁcations for software testing.
If testing (also known as Quality Assurance, or QA) is
something we do to support our software projects, it must
support the goal of making a proﬁt. That’s important

--- Page 19 ---
because it automatically sets some constraints on how a
software product must be tested: If the testing will cost so
much that you lose money, it isn’t appropriate to do. But
testing software can show that the product works; that is,
that the product contains the valuable features expected by
your customers. If you can’t demonstrate that value, the
customers may not buy the product.
Notice that the purpose of testing is to show that the
product works, not discover bugs. It’s Quality Assurance, not
Quality Insertion. Finding bugs is usually bad. Why? Because
it costs money to ﬁx bugs, and that’s money that’s being
wasted because you were being paid to write the software
without bugs in in the ﬁrst place. In an ideal world, you
might think that developers just write bug-free software, do
some quick testing to demonstrate there are no bugs, and
then we upload to iTunes Connect and wait for the money to
roll in. But hold on: Working like that might introduce the
same cost problem, in another way. How much longer would
it take you to write software that you knew, before it was
tested, would be 100% free of bugs? How much would that
cost?
It seems, therefore, that appropriate software testing is a
compromise: balancing the level of control needed on
development with the level of checking done to provide
some conﬁdence that the software works without making
the project costs unmanageable. How should you decide
where to make that compromise? It should be based on
reducing the risk associated with shipping the product to an
acceptable level. So the most “risky” components—those
most critical to the software’s operation or those where you
think most bugs might be hiding—should be tested ﬁrst,
then the next most risky, and so on until you’re happy that
the amount of risk remaining is not worth spending more
time and money addressing. The end goal should be that

--- Page 20 ---
the customer can see that the software does what it ought,
and is therefore worth paying for.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 21 ---
Who Should Test Software?
In the early days of software engineering, projects were
managed according to the “waterfall model” (see Figure
1.1).1 In this model, each part of the development process
was performed as a separate “phase,” with the signed-oﬀ
output of one phase being the input for the next. So the
product managers or business analysts would create the
product requirements, and after that was done the
requirements would be handed to designers and architects
to produce a software speciﬁcation. Developers would be
given the speciﬁcation in order to produce code, and the
code would be given to testers to do quality assurance.
Finally the tested software could be released to customers
(usually initially to a select few, known as beta testers).
1. In fact, many software projects, including iOS apps, are still managed this
way. This fact shouldn’t get in the way of your believing that the waterfall
model is an obsolete historical accident.

--- Page 22 ---
Figure 1.1. The phases of development in the
waterfall software project management process.
This approach to software project management imposes a
separation between coders and testers, which turns out to
have both beneﬁts and drawbacks to the actual work of
testing. The beneﬁt is that by separating the duties of
development and testing the code, there are more people
who can ﬁnd bugs. We developers can sometimes get
attached to the code we’ve produced, and it can take a
fresh pair of eyes to point out the ﬂaws. Similarly, if any part
of the requirements or speciﬁcation is ambiguous, a chance
exists that the tester and developer interpret the ambiguity
in diﬀerent ways, which increases the chance that it gets
discovered.

--- Page 23 ---
The main drawback is cost. Table 1.1, reproduced from Code
Complete, 2nd Edition, by Steve McConnell (Microsoft Press,
2004), shows the results of a survey that evaluated the cost
of ﬁxing a bug as a function of the time it lay “dormant” in
the product. The table shows that ﬁxing bugs at the end of a
project is the most expensive way to work, which makes
sense: A tester ﬁnds and reports a bug, which the developer
must then interpret and attempt to locate in the source. If
it’s been a while since the developer worked on that project,
then the developer must review the speciﬁcations and the
code. The bug-ﬁx version of the code must then be
resubmitted for testing to demonstrate that the issue has
been resolved.
Table 1.1. Cost of Fixing Bugs Found at Diﬀerent
Stages of the Software Development Process
Image
Where does this additional cost come from? A signiﬁcant
part is due to the communication between diﬀerent teams:
your developers and testers may use diﬀerent terminology
to describe the same concepts, or even have entirely
diﬀerent mental models for the same features in your app.
Whenever this occurs, you’ll need to spend some time
clearing up the ambiguities or problems this causes.
The table also demonstrates that the cost associated with
ﬁxing bugs at the end of the project depends on how early
the bug was injected: A problem with the requirements can
be patched up at the end only by rewriting a whole feature,
which is a very costly undertaking. This motivates waterfall
practitioners to take a very conservative approach to the
early stages of a project, not signing oﬀ on requirements or
speciﬁcation until they believe that every “i” has been
dotted and every “t” crossed. This state is known as
analysis paralysis, and it increases the project cost.

--- Page 24 ---
Separating the developers and testers in this way also
aﬀects the type of testing that is done, even though there
isn’t any restriction imposed. Because testers will not have
the same level of understanding of the application’s
internals and code as the developers do, they will tend to
stick to “black box” testing that treats the product as an
opaque unit that can be interacted with only externally.
Third-party testers are less likely to adopt “white box”
testing approaches, in which the internal operation of the
code can be inspected and modiﬁed to help in verifying the
code’s behavior.
The kind of test that is usually performed in a black box
approach is a system test, or integration test. That’s a
formal term meaning that the software product has been
taken as a whole (that is, the system is integrated), and
testing is performed on the result. These tests usually follow
a predeﬁned plan, which is the place where the testers earn
their salary: They take the software speciﬁcation and create
a series of test cases, each of which describes the steps
necessary to set up and perform the test, and the expected
result of doing so. Such tests are often performed manually,
especially where the result must be interpreted by the
tester because of reliance on external state, such as a
network service or the current date. Even where such tests
can be automated, they often take a long time to run: The
entire software product and its environment must be
conﬁgured to a known baseline state before each test, and
the individual steps may rely on time-consuming
interactions with a database, ﬁle system, or network
service.
Beta testing, which in some teams is called customer
environment testing, is really a special version of a system
test. What is special about it is that the person doing the
testing probably isn’t a professional software tester. If any
diﬀerences exist between the tester’s system conﬁguration

--- Page 25 ---
or environment and the customer’s, or use cases that users
expect to use and the project team didn’t consider, this will
be discovered in beta testing, and any problems associated
with this diﬀerence can be reported. For small development
teams, particularly those who cannot aﬀord to hire testers, a
beta test oﬀers the ﬁrst chance to try the software in a
variety of usage patterns and environments.
Because the beta test comes just before the product should
ship, dealing with beta feedback sometimes suﬀers as the
project team senses that the end is in sight and can smell
the pizza at the launch party. However, there’s little point in
doing the testing if you’re not willing to ﬁx the problems
that occur.
Developers can also perform their own testing. If you have
ever pressed Build & Debug in Xcode, you have done a type
of white-box testing: You have inspected the internals of
your code to try to ﬁnd out more about whether its behavior
is correct (or more likely, why it isn’t correct). Compiler
warnings, the static analyzer, and Instruments are all
applications that help developers do testing.
The advantages and disadvantages of developer testing
almost exactly oppose those of independent testing: When
developers ﬁnd a problem, it’s usually easier (and cheaper)
for them to ﬁx it because they already have some
understanding of the code and where the bug is likely to be
hiding. In fact, developers can test as they go, so that bugs
are found very soon after they are written. However, if the
bug is that the developer doesn’t understand the
speciﬁcation or the problem domain, this bug will not be
discovered without external help.
Getting the Requirements Right
The most egregious bug I have written (to date, and
I hope ever) in an application fell into the category

--- Page 26 ---
of “developer doesn’t understand requirements.” I
was working on a systems administration tool for
the Mac, and because it ran outside any user
account, it couldn’t look at the user settings to
decide what language to use for logging. It read the
language setting from a ﬁle. The ﬁle looked like this:
LANGUAGE=English
Fairly straightforward. The problem was that some
users of non-English languages were reporting that
the tool was writing log ﬁles in English, so it was
getting the choice of language wrong. I found that
the code for reading this ﬁle was very tightly
coupled to other code in the tool, so set about
breaking dependencies apart and inserting unit
tests to ﬁnd out how the code behaved. Eventually, I
discovered the problem that was occasionally
causing the language check to fail and ﬁxed it. All of
the unit tests pass, so the code works, right?
Actually, wrong: It turned out that I didn’t know the
ﬁle can sometimes look at this:
LANGUAGE=en
Not only did I not know this, but neither did my
testers. In fact it took the application crashing on a
customer’s system to discover this problem, even
though the code was covered by unit tests.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 27 ---
When Should Software Be Tested?
The previous section gave away the answer to the
preceding question to some extent—the earlier a part of the
product can be tested, the cheaper it will be to ﬁnd any
problems that exist. If the parts of the application available
at one stage of the process are known to work well and
reliably, fewer problems will occur with integrating them or
adding to them at later stages than if all the testing is done
at the end. However, it was also shown in that section that
software products are traditionally only tested at the end:
An explicit QA phase follows the development, then the
software is released to beta testers before ﬁnally being
opened up for general release.
Modern approaches to software project management
recognize that this is deﬁcient and aim to continually test all
parts of the product at all times. This is the main diﬀerence
between “agile” projects and traditionally managed
projects. Agile projects are organized in short stints called
iterations (sometimes sprints). At every iteration, the
requirements are reviewed; anything obsolete is dropped
and any changes or necessary additions are made. The
most important requirement is designed, implemented, and
tested in that iteration. At the end of the iteration, the
progress is reviewed and a decision made as to whether to
add the newly developed feature to the product, or add
requirements to make changes in future iterations. Crucially,
because the agile manifesto (http://agilemanifesto.org/)
values “individuals and interactions over processes and
tools,” the customer or a representative is included in all the
important decisions. There’s no need to sweat over
perfecting a lengthy functional speciﬁcation document if you
can just ask the user how the app should work—and to
conﬁrm that the app does indeed work that way.

--- Page 28 ---
In agile projects then, all aspects of the software project are
being tested all the time. The customers are asked at every
implementation what their most important requirements
are, and developers, analysts, and testers all work together
on software that meets those requirements. One framework
for agile software projects called Extreme Programming (or
XP) goes as far as to require that developers unit test their
code and work in pairs, with one “driving” the keyboard
while the other suggests changes, improvements, and
potential pitfalls.
So the real answer is that software should be tested all the
time. You can’t completely remove the chance that users
will use your product in unexpected ways and uncover bugs
you didn’t address internally—not within reasonable time
and budget constraints, anyway. But you can automatically
test the basic stuﬀ yourself, leaving your QA team or beta
testers free to try out the experimental use cases and
attempt to break your app in new and ingenious ways. And
you can ask at every turn whether what you’re about to do
will add something valuable to your product and increase
the likelihood that your customers will be satisﬁed that your
product does what the marketing text said it would.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 29 ---
Examples of Testing Practices
I have already described system testing, where professional
testers take the whole application and methodically go
through the use cases looking for unexpected behavior. This
sort of testing can be automated to some extent with iOS
apps, using the UI Automation instrument that’s part of
Apple’s Instruments proﬁling tool.
System tests do not always need to be generic attempts to
ﬁnd any bug that exists in an application; sometimes the
testers will have some speciﬁc goal in mind. Penetration
testers are looking for security problems by feeding the
application with malformed input, performing steps out of
sequence, or otherwise frustrating the application’s
expectation of its environment. Usability testers watch users
interacting with the application, taking note of anything that
the users get wrong, spend a long time over, or are
confused by. A particular technique in usability testing is A/B
Testing: Diﬀerent users are given diﬀerent versions of the
application and the usages compared statistically. Google is
famous for using this practice in its software, even testing
the eﬀects of diﬀerent shades of color in their interfaces.
Notice that usability testing does not need to be performed
on the complete application: A mock-up in Interface Builder,
Keynote, or even on paper can be used to gauge user
reaction to an app’s interface. The lo-ﬁ version of the
interface might not expose subtleties related to interacting
with a real iPhone, but they’re deﬁnitely much cheaper ways
to get early results.
Developers, particularly on larger teams, submit their
source code for review by peers before it gets integrated
into the product they’re working on. This is a form of white-
box testing; the other developers can see how the code
works, so they can investigate how it responds to certain
conditions and whether all important eventualities are taken

--- Page 30 ---
into account. Code reviews do not always turn up logic
bugs; I’ve found that reviews I have taken part in usually
discover problems adhering to coding style guidelines or
other issues that can be ﬁxed without changing the code’s
behavior. When reviewers are given speciﬁc things to look
for (for example, a checklist of ﬁve or six common errors—
retain count problems often feature in checklists for Mac
and iOS code) they are more likely to ﬁnd bugs in these
areas, though they may not ﬁnd any problems unrelated to
those you asked for.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 31 ---
Where Does Unit Testing Fit In?
Unit testing is another tool that developers can use to test
their own software. You will ﬁnd out more about how unit
tests are designed and written in Chapter 3, “How to Write a
Unit Test,” but for the moment it is suﬃcient to say that unit
tests are small pieces of code that test the behavior of other
code. They set up the preconditions, run the code under
test, and then make assertions about the ﬁnal state. If the
assertions are valid (that is, the conditions tested are
satisﬁed), the test passes. Any deviation from the asserted
state represents a failure, including exceptions that stop the
test from running to completion.2
2. The test framework you use may choose to report assertion failures and
“errors” separately, but that’s okay. The point is that you get to ﬁnd out the
test can’t be completed with a successful outcome.
In this way, unit tests are like miniature versions of the test
cases written by integration testers: They specify the steps
to run the test and the expected result, but they do so in
code. This allows the computer to do the testing, rather
than forcing the developer to step through the process
manually. However, a good test is also good documentation:
It describes the expectations the tester had of how the code
under test would behave. A developer who writes a class for
an application can also write tests to ensure that this class
does what is required. In fact, as you will see in the next
chapter, the developer can also write tests before writing
the class that is being tested.
Unit tests are so named because they test a single “unit” of
source code, which, in the case of object-oriented software,
is usually a class. The terminology comes from the compiler
term “translation unit,” meaning a single ﬁle that is passed
to the compiler. This means that unit tests are naturally
white-box tests, because they take a single class out of the
context of the application and evaluate its behavior

--- Page 32 ---
independently. Whether you choose to treat that class as a
black box, and only interact with it via its public API, is a
personal choice, but the eﬀect is still to interact with a small
portion of the application.
This ﬁne granularity of unit testing makes it possible to get
a very rapid turnaround on problems discovered through
running the unit tests. A developer working on a class is
often working in parallel on that class’s tests, so the code
for that class will be at the front of her mind as she writes
the tests. I have even had cases where I didn’t need to run a
unit test to know that it would fail and how to ﬁx the code,
because I was still thinking about the class that the test was
exercising. Compare this with the situation where a diﬀerent
person tests a use case that the developer might not have
worked on for months. Even though unit testing means that
a developer is writing code that won’t eventually end up in
the application, this cost is oﬀset by the beneﬁt of
discovering and ﬁxing problems before they ever get to the
testers.
Bug-ﬁxing is every project manager’s worst nightmare:
There’s some work to do, the product can’t ship until it’s
done, but you can’t plan for it because you don’t know how
many bugs exist and how long it will take the developers to
ﬁx them. Looking back at Table 1.1, you will see that the
bugs ﬁxed at the end of a project are the most expensive to
ﬁx, and that there is a large variance in the cost of ﬁxing
them. By factoring the time for writing unit tests into your
development estimates, you can ﬁx some of those bugs as
you’re going and reduce the uncertainty over your ship
date.
Unit tests will almost certainly be written by developers
because using a testing framework means writing code,
working with APIs, and expressing low-level logic: exactly
the things that developers are good at. However it’s not
necessary for the same developer to write a class and its

--- Page 33 ---
tests, and there are beneﬁts to separating the two tasks. A
senior developer can specify the API for a class to be
implemented by a junior developer by expressing the
expected behavior as a set of tests. Given these tests, the
junior developer can implement the class by successively
making each test in the set pass.
This interaction can also be reversed. Developers who have
been given a class to use or evaluate but who do not yet
know how it works can write tests to codify their
assumptions about the class and ﬁnd out whether those
assumptions are valid. As they write more tests, they build a
more complete picture of the capabilities and behavior of
the class. However, writing tests for existing code is usually
harder than writing tests and code in parallel. Classes that
make assumptions about their environment may not work in
a test framework without signiﬁcant eﬀort, because
dependencies on surrounding objects must be replaced or
removed. Chapter 11, “Designing for Test-Driven
Development” covers applying unit testing to existing code.
Developers working together can even switch roles very
rapidly: One writes a test that the other codes up the
implementation for; then they swap, and the second
developer writes a test for the ﬁrst. However the
programmers choose to work together is immaterial. In any
case, a unit test or set of unit tests can act as a form of
documentation expressing one developer’s intent to
another.
One key advantage of unit testing is that running the tests
is automated. It may take as long to write a good test as to
write a good plan for a manual test, but a computer can
then run hundreds of unit tests per second. Developers can
keep all the tests they’ve ever used for an application in
their version control systems alongside the application code,
and then run the tests whenever they want. This makes it
very cheap to test for regression bugs: bugs that had been

--- Page 34 ---
ﬁxed but are reintroduced by later development work.
Whenever you change the application, you should be able to
run all the tests in a few seconds to ensure that you didn’t
introduce a regression. You can even have the tests run
automatically whenever you commit source code to your
repository, by a continuous integration system as described
in Chapter 4, “Tools for Testing.”
Repeatable tests do not just warn you about regression
bugs. They also provide a safety net when you want to edit
the source code without any change in behavior—when you
want to refactor the application. The purpose of refactoring
is to tidy up your app’s source or reorganize it in some way
that will be useful in the future, but without introducing any
new functionality, or bugs! If the code you are refactoring is
covered by suﬃcient unit tests, you know that any
diﬀerences in behavior you introduce will be detected. This
means that you can ﬁx up the problems now, rather than
trying to ﬁnd them before (or after) shipping your next
release.
However, unit testing is not a silver bullet. As discussed
earlier, there is no way that developers can meaningfully
test whether they understood the requirements. If the same
person wrote the tests and the code under test, each will
reﬂect the same preconceptions and interpretation of the
problem being solved by the code. You should also
appreciate that no good metrics exist for quantifying the
success of a unit-testing strategy. The only popular
measurements—code coverage and number of passing tests
—can both be changed without aﬀecting the quality of the
software being tested.
Going back to the concept that testing is supposed to
reduce the risk associated with deploying the software to
the customer, it would be really useful to have some
reporting tool that could show how much risk has been
mitigated by the tests that are in place. The software can’t

--- Page 35 ---
really know what risk you place in any particular code, so
the measurements that are available are only
approximations to this risk level.
Counting tests is a very naïve way to measure the
eﬀectiveness of a set of tests. Consider your annual bonus—
if the manager uses the number of passing tests to decide
how much to pay you, you could write a single test and copy
it multiple times. It doesn’t even need to test any of your
application code; a test that veriﬁes the result "1==1" would
add to the count of passing tests in your test suite. And
what is a reasonable number of tests for any application?
Can you come up with a number that all iOS app developers
should aspire to? Probably not—I can’t. Even two developers
each tasked with writing the same application would ﬁnd
diﬀerent problems in diﬀerent parts, and would thus
encounter diﬀerent levels of risk in writing the app.
Measuring code coverage partially addresses the problems
with test counting by measuring the amount of application
code that is being executed when the tests are run. This
now means that developers can’t increase their bonuses by
writing meaningless tests—but they can still just look for
“low-hanging fruit” and add tests for that code. Imagine
increasing code coverage scores by ﬁnding all of the
@synthesize property deﬁnitions in your app and testing that the
getters and setters work. Sure, as we’ll see, these tests do
have value, but they still aren’t the most valuable use of
your time.
In fact, code coverage tools speciﬁcally weigh against
coverage of more complicated code. The deﬁnition of
“complex” here is a speciﬁc one from computer science
called cyclomatic complexity. In a nutshell, the cyclomatic
complexity of a function or method is related to the number
of loops and branches—in other words, the number of
diﬀerent paths through the code.

--- Page 36 ---
Take two methods: -methodOne has twenty lines with no if, switch,
?: expressions or loops (in other words, it is minimally
complex). The other method, -methodTwo:(BOOL)flag has an if
statement with 10 lines of code in each branch. To fully
cover -methodOne only needs one test, but you must write two
tests to fully cover -methodTwo:. Each test exercises the code in
one of the two branches of the if condition. The code
coverage tool will just report how many lines are executed—
the same number, twenty, in each case—so the end result is
that it is harder to improve code coverage of more complex
methods. But it is the complex methods that are likely to
harbor bugs.
Similarly, code coverage tools don’t do well at handling
special cases. If a method takes an object parameter,
whether you test it with an initialized object or with nil, it’s
all the same to the coverage tool. In fact, maybe both tests
are useful; that doesn’t matter as far as code coverage is
concerned. Either one will run the lines of code in the
method, so adding the other doesn’t increase the coverage.
Ultimately, you (and possibly your customers) must decide
how much risk is present in any part of the code, and how
much risk is acceptable in the shipping product. Even if the
test metric tools worked properly, they could not take that
responsibility away from you. Your aim, then, should be to
test while you think the tests are being helpful—and
conversely, to stop testing when you are not getting any
beneﬁt from the tests. When asked the question, “Which
parts of my software should I test?” software engineer and
unit testing expert Kent Beck replied, “Only the bits that you
want to work.”
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 37 ---
What Does This Mean for iOS Developers?
The main advantage that unit testing brings to developers
of iOS apps is that a lot of beneﬁt can be reaped for little
cost. Because many of the hundreds of thousands of apps in
the App Store are produced by micro-ISVs, anything that can
improve the quality of an app without requiring much
investment is a good thing. The tools needed to add unit
tests to an iOS development project are free. In fact, as
described in Chapter 4, the core functionality is available in
the iOS SDK package. You can write and run the tests
yourself, meaning that you do not need to hire a QA
specialist to start getting useful results from unit testing.
Running tests takes very little time, so the only signiﬁcant
cost in adopting unit testing is the time it takes you to
design and write the test cases. In return for this cost, you
get an increased understanding of what your code should do
while you are writing the code. This understanding helps
you to avoid writing bugs in the ﬁrst place, reducing the
uncertainty in your project’s completion time because there
should be fewer show-stoppers found by your beta testers.
Remember that as an iOS app developer, you are not in
control of your application’s release to your customers:
Apple is. If a serious bug makes it all the way into a release
of your app, after you have ﬁxed the bug you have to wait
for Apple to approve the update (assuming they do) before
it makes its way into the App Store and your customers’
phones and iPads. This alone should be worth the cost of
adopting a new testing procedure. Releasing buggy software
is bad enough; being in a position where you can’t rapidly
get a ﬁx out is disastrous.
You will ﬁnd that as you get more comfortable with test-
driven development—writing the tests and the code
together—you get faster at writing code because thinking
about the code’s design and the conditions it will need to

--- Page 38 ---
cope with become second nature. You will soon ﬁnd that
writing test-driven code, including its tests, takes the same
time that writing the code alone used to take, but with the
advantage that you are more conﬁdent about its behavior.
The next chapter will introduce you to the concepts behind
test-driven development: concepts that will be used
throughout the rest of the book.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 39 ---
2. Techniques for Test-Driven
Development
You have seen in Chapter 1, “About Software Testing and
Unit Testing,” that unit tests have a place in the software
development process: You can test your own code and have
the computer automatically run those tests again and again
to ensure that development is progressing in the right
direction. Over the past couple of decades, developers
working with unit testing frameworks—particularly
practitioners of Extreme Programming (XP), a software
engineering methodology invented by Kent Beck, the
creator of the SUnit framework for SmallTalk (the ﬁrst unit
testing framework on any platform, and the progenitor of
Junit for Java and OCUnit for Objective-C)—have reﬁned their
techniques, and created new ways to incorporate unit
testing into software development. This chapter is about
technique—and using unit tests to improve your eﬃciency
as a developer.
Test First
The practice developed by Extreme Programming
aﬁcionados is test-ﬁrst or test-driven development, which is
exactly what it sounds like: Developers are encouraged to
write tests before writing the code that will be tested. This
sounds a little weird, doesn’t it? How can you test
something that doesn’t exist yet?
Designing the tests before building the product is already a
common way of working in manufacturing real-world
products: The tests deﬁne the acceptance criteria of the
product. Unless all the tests pass, the code is not good
enough. Conversely, assuming a comprehensive test suite,
the code is good enough as soon as it passes every test,
and no more work needs to be done on it.

--- Page 40 ---
Writing all the tests before writing any code would suﬀer
some of the same problems that have been found when all
the testing is done after all the code is written. People tend
to be better at dealing with small problems one at a time,
seeing them through to completion before switching context
to deal with a diﬀerent problem. If you were to write all the
tests for an app, then go back through and write all the
code, you would need to address each of the problems in
creating your app twice, with a large gap in between each
go. Remembering what you were thinking about when you
wrote any particular group of tests a few months earlier
would not be an easy task. So test-driven developers do not
write all the tests ﬁrst, but they still don’t write code before
they’ve written the tests that will exercise it.
An additional beneﬁt of working this way is that you get
rapid feedback on when you have added something useful
to your app. Each test pass can give you a little boost of
encouragement to help get the next test written. You don’t
need to wait a month until the next system test to discover
whether your feature works.
The idea behind test-driven development is that it makes
you think about what the code you’re writing needs to do
while you’re designing it. Rather than writing a module or
class that solves a particular problem and then trying to
integrate that class into your app, you think about the
problems that your application has and then write code to
solve those problems. Moreover, you demonstrate that the
code actually does solve those problems, by showing that it
passes the tests that enumerate the requirements. In fact,
writing the tests ﬁrst can even help you discover whether a
problem exists. If you write a test that passes without
creating any code, either your app already deals with the
case identiﬁed by the new test, or the test itself is defective.
The “problems” that an app must solve are not, in the
context of test-driven development, entire features like “the

--- Page 41 ---
user can post favorite recipes to Twitter.” Rather they are
microfeatures: very small pieces of app behavior that
support a little piece of a bigger feature. Taking the “post
favorite recipes to Twitter” example, there could be a
microfeature requiring that a text ﬁeld exists where users
can enter their Twitter username. Another microfeature
would be that the text in that ﬁeld is passed to a Twitter
service object as the user’s name. Yet another requires that
the Twitter username be loaded from NSUserDefaults.
Dozens of microfeatures can each contribute a very small
part to the use case, but all must be present for the feature
to be complete.
A common approach for test-driven working is to write a
single test, then run it to check that it fails, then write the
code that will make the test pass. After this is done, it’s on
to writing the next test. This is a great way to get used to
the idea of test-driven development, because it gets you
into the mindset where you think of every new feature and
bug ﬁx in terms of unit tests. Kent Beck describes this
mindset as “test infection”—the point where you no longer
think, “How do I debug this?” but “How do I write a test for
this?”
Proponents of test-driven development say that they use
the debugger much less frequently than on non–test-driven
projects. Not only can they show that the code does what it
ought using the tests, but the tests make it easier to
understand the code’s behavior without having to step
through in a debugger. Indeed, the main reason to use a
debugger is because you’ve found that some use-case
doesn’t work, but you can’t work out where the problem
occurs. Unit tests already help you track down the problem
by testing separate, small portions of the application code in
isolation, making it easy to pinpoint any failures.
So test-infected developers don’t think, “How can I ﬁnd this
bug?” because they have a tool that can help locate the bug

--- Page 42 ---
much faster than using a debugger. Instead, they think,
“How can I demonstrate that I’ve ﬁxed the bug?” or, “What
needs to be added or changed in my original assumptions?”
As such, test-infected developers know when they’ve done
enough work to ﬁx the problem—and whether they
accidentally broke anything else in the process.
Working in such a way may eventually feel stiﬂing and
ineﬃcient. If you can see that a feature needs a set of
closely related additions, or that ﬁxing a bug means a
couple of modiﬁcations to a method, making these changes
one at a time feels artiﬁcial. Luckily, no one is forcing you to
make changes one test at a time. As long as you’re thinking,
“How do I test this?” you’re probably writing code that can
be tested. So writing a few tests up front before writing the
code that passes them is ﬁne, and so is writing the code
that you think solves the problem and then going back and
adding the tests. Ensure that you do add the tests, though
(and that they do indeed show that the freshly added code
works); they serve to verify that the code behaves as you
expect, and as insurance against introducing a regression in
later development.
Later on, you’ll ﬁnd that because writing the tests helps to
organize your thoughts and identify what code you need to
write, the total time spent in writing test-driven code is not
so diﬀerent than writing code without tests used to take.
The reduced need for debugging time at the end of the
project is a nice additional savings.1
1. Research undertaken by Microsoft in conjunction with IBM
(http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/groups/ese/nagappan_tdd.pdf) found
that although teams that were new to TDD were around 15–35% slower at
implementing features than when “cowboy coding,” the products they
created contained 40–90% fewer bugs—bugs that needed to be ﬁxed after
the project “completed” but before they could ship.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 43 ---
Red, Green, Refactor
It’s all very well saying that you should write the test before
you write the code, but how do you write that test? What
should the test of some nonexistent code look like? Look at
the requirement, and ask yourself, “If I had to use code that
solved this problem, how would I want to use it?” Write the
method call that you think would be the perfect way to get
the result. Provide it with arguments that represent the
input needed to solve the problem, and write a test that
asserts that the correct output is given.
Now you run the test. Why should you run the test (because
we both know it’s going to fail)? In fact, depending on how
you chose to specify the API, it might not even compile
properly. But even a failing test has value: It demonstrates
that there’s something the app needs to do, but doesn’t yet
do. It also speciﬁes what method it would be good to use to
satisfy the requirement. Not only have you described the
requirement in a repeatable, executable form, but you’ve
designed the code you’re going to write to meet that
requirement. Rather than writing the code to solve the
problem and then working out how to call it, you’ve decided
what you want to call, making it more likely that you’ll come
up with a consistent and easy-to-use API. Incidentally,
you’ve also demonstrated that the software doesn’t yet do
what you need it to. When you’re starting a project from
scratch, this will not be a surprise. When working on a
legacy application2 with a complicated codebase, you may
ﬁnd that it’s hard to work out what the software is capable
of, based on visual inspection of the source code. In this
situation, you might write a test expressing a feature you
want to add, only to discover that the code already supports
the feature and that the test passes. You can now move on
and add a test for the next feature you need, until you ﬁnd

--- Page 44 ---
the limit of the legacy code’s capabilities and your tests
begin to fail.
2. I use the same deﬁnition of “legacy code” as Michael Feathers in Working
Eﬀectively with Legacy Code (Prentice Hall, 2004). Legacy code is anything
you’ve inherited—including from yourself—that isn’t yet described by a
comprehensive and up-to-date set of unit tests. In Chapter 11 you will ﬁnd
ways to incorporate unit testing into such projects.
Practitioners of test-driven development refer to this part of
the process—writing a failing test that encapsulates the
desired behavior of the code you have not yet written—as
the red stage, or red bar stage. The reason is that popular
IDEs including Visual Studio and Eclipse (though not, as you
shall see shortly, the newest version of Xcode) display a
large red bar at the top of their unit-testing view when any
test fails. The red bar is an obvious visual indicator that your
code does not yet do everything you need.
Much friendlier than the angry-looking red bar is the
peaceful serenity of the green bar, and this is now your goal
in the second stage of test-driven development. Write the
code to satisfy the failing test or tests that you have just
written. If that means adding a new class or method, go
ahead: You’ve identiﬁed that this API addition makes sense
as part of the app’s design.
At this stage, it doesn’t really matter how you write the code
that implements your new API, as long as it passes the test.
The code needs to be Just Barely Good Enough™ to provide
the needed functionality. Anything “better” than that
doesn’t add to your app’s capabilities and is eﬀort wasted
on code that won’t be used. For example, if you have a
single test for a greeting generator, that it should return
“Hello, Bob!” when the name “Bob” is passed to it, then this
is perfectly suﬃcient:
- (NSString *)greeter: (NSString *)name { 
    return @"Hello, Bob!"; 
}

--- Page 45 ---
Doing anything more complicated right now might be
wasteful. Sure, you might need a more general method
later; on the other hand, you might not. Until you write
another test demonstrating the need for this method to
return diﬀerent strings (for example, returning “Hello, Tim!”
when the parameter is “Tim”), it does everything that you
know it needs to. Congratulations, you have a green bar
(assuming you didn’t break the result of any other test when
you wrote the code for this one); your app is demonstrably
one quantum of awesomeness better than it was.
You might still have concerns about the code you’ve just
written. Perhaps there’s a diﬀerent algorithm that would be
more eﬃcient yet yield the same results, or maybe your
race to get to the green bar looks like more of a kludge than
you’re comfortable with. Pasting code from elsewhere in the
app in order to pass the test—or even pasting part of the
test into the implementation method—is an example of a
“bad code smell” that freshly green apps sometimes give
oﬀ. Code smell is another term invented by Kent Beck and
popularized in Extreme Programming. It refers to code that
may be OK, but there’s deﬁnitely something about it that
doesn’t seem right.3
3. An extensive list of possible code smells was written by Jeﬀ Atwood and
published at http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/2006/05/code-smells.html.
Now you have a chance to “refactor” the application—to
clean it up by changing the implementation without
aﬀecting the app’s behavior. Because you’ve written tests of
the code’s functionality, you’ll be able to see if you do break
something. Tests will start to fail. Of course, you can’t use
the tests to ﬁnd out if you accidentally add some new
unexpected behavior that doesn’t aﬀect anything else, but
this should be a relatively harmless side-eﬀect because
nothing needs to use that behavior. If it did, there’d be a
test for it.

--- Page 46 ---
However, you may not need to refactor as soon as the tests
pass. The main reason for doing it right away is that the
details of the new behavior will still be fresh in your mind, so
if you do want to change anything you won’t have to
familiarize yourself with how the code currently works. But
you might be happy with the code right now. That’s ﬁne;
leave it as it is. If you decide later that it needs refactoring,
the tests will still be there and can still support that
refactoring work. Remember, the worst thing you can do is
waste time on refactoring code that’s ﬁne as it is (see “Ya
Ain’t Gonna Need It” later in the chapter).
So now you’ve gone through the three stages of test-driven
development: You’ve written a failing test (red), got the test
to pass (green), and cleaned up the code without changing
what it does (refactor). Your app is that little bit more
valuable than it was before you started. The microfeature
you just added may not be enough of an improvement to
justify releasing the update to your customers, but your
code should certainly be of release candidate quality
because you can demonstrate that you’ve added something
new that works properly, and that you haven’t broken
anything that already worked. Remember from the previous
chapter that there’s still additional testing to be done. There
could be integration or usability problems, or you and the
tester might disagree on what needed to be added. You can
be conﬁdent that if your tests suﬃciently describe the range
of inputs your app can expect, the likelihood of a logic bug
in the code you’ve just written will be low.
Having gone from red, through green, to refactoring, it’s
time to go back to red. In other words, it’s time to add the
next microfeature—the next small requirement that
represents an improvement to your app. Test-driven
development naturally supports iterative software
engineering, because each small part of the app’s code is
developed to production quality before work on the next

--- Page 47 ---
part is started. Rather than having a dozen features that
have all been started but are all incomplete and unusable,
you should either have a set of completely working use
cases, or one failing case that you’re currently working on.
However, if there’s more than one developer on your team,
you will each be working on a diﬀerent use case, but each of
you will have one problem to solve at a time and a clear
idea of when that solution has been completed.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 48 ---
Designing a Test-Driven App
Having learned about the red-green-refactor technique, you
may be tempted to dive straight into writing the ﬁrst feature
of your app in this test-driven fashion, then incrementally
adding the subsequent features in the same way. The result
would be an app whose architecture and design grow
piecemeal as small components aggregate and stick
themselves to the existing code.
Software engineers can learn a lot by watching physical
engineering take place. Both disciplines aim to build
something beautiful and useful out of limited resources and
in a ﬁnite amount of space. Only one takes the approach
that you can sometimes get away with putting the walls in
ﬁrst then hanging the scaﬀolding oﬀ of them.
An example of an aggregate being used in real-world
engineering is concrete. Find a building site and look at the
concrete; it looks like a uniformly mucky mush. It’s also
slightly caustic. Touch it while you’re working with it and
you’ll get burned. Using test-driven development without an
overall plan of the app’s design will lead to an app that
shares many of the characteristics of concrete. There’ll be
no discernible large-scale structure, so it’ll be hard to see
how each new feature connects to the others. They will end
up as separate chunks, close together but unrelated like the
pebbles in a construction aggregate. You will ﬁnd it hard to
identify commonality and chances to share code when
there’s no clear organization to the application.
So it’s best to head into a test-driven project with at least a
broad idea of the application’s overall structure. You don’t
need a detailed model going all the way down to lists of the
classes and methods that will be implemented. That ﬁne-
grained design does come out of the tests. What you will
need is an idea of what the features are and how they ﬁt
together: where they will make use of common information

--- Page 49 ---
or code, how they communicate with each other, and what
they will need to do so. Again, Extreme Programming has a
name for this concept: It’s called the System Metaphor.
More generally in object-oriented programming it’s known
as the Domain Model: the view of what users are trying to
do, with what services, and to what objects, in your
application.
Armed with this information, you can design your tests so
that they test that your app conforms to the architecture
plan, in addition to testing the behavior. If two components
should share information via a particular class, you can test
for that. If two features can make use of the same method,
you can use the tests to ensure that this happens, too.
When you come to the refactoring stage, you can use the
high-level plan to direct the tidying up, too.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 50 ---
More on Refactoring
How does one refactor code? It’s a big question—indeed it’s
probably open-ended, because I might be happy with code
that you abhor, and vice versa. The only workable
description is something like this:
• Code needs refactoring if it does what you need, but
you don’t like it. That means you may not like the look
of it, or the way it works, or how it’s organized.
Sometimes there isn’t a clear signal for refactoring; the
code just “smells” bad.
• You have ﬁnished refactoring when the code no longer
looks or smells bad.
• The refactoring process turns bad code into code that
isn’t bad.
That description is suﬃciently vague that there’s no recipe
or process you can follow to get refactored code. You might
ﬁnd code easier to read and understand if it follows a
commonly used object-oriented design pattern—a generic
blueprint for code that can be applied in numerous
situations. Patterns found in the Cocoa frameworks and of
general use in Objective-C software are described by Buck
and Yacktman in Cocoa Design Patterns (Addison-Wesley
2009). The canonical reference for language-agnostic design
patterns is Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-
Oriented Software by Gamma, Helm, Johnson, and Vlissides
(Addison-Wesley 1995), commonly known as the “Gang of
Four” book.
Some speciﬁc transformations of code are frequently
employed in refactoring, because they come up in a variety
of situations where code could be made cleaner. For
example, if two classes implement the same method, you
could create a common superclass and push the method
implementation into that class. You could create a protocol

--- Page 51 ---
to describe a method that many classes must provide. The
book Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing Code by
Martin Fowler (Addison-Wesley, 1999) contains a big catalog
of such transformations, though the example code is all in
Java.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 52 ---
Ya Ain’t Gonna Need It
One feature of test-driven development that I’ve mentioned
in passing a few times deserves calling out: If you write
tests that describe what’s needed of your app code, and you
only write code that passes those tests, you will never write
any code that you don’t need. Okay, so maybe the
requirements will change in the future, and the feature
you’re working on right now will become obsolete. But right
now, that feature is needed. The code you’re writing
supports that feature and does nothing else.
Have you ever found that you or a co-worker has written a
very nice class or framework that deals with a problem in a
very generic way, when you only need to handle a restricted
range of cases in your product? I’ve seen this happen on a
number of projects; often the generic code is spun out into
its own project on Github or Google Code as a “service to
the community,” to try to justify the eﬀort that was spent on
developing unneeded code. But then the project takes on a
life of its own, as third-party users discover that the library
isn’t actually so good at handling the cases that weren’t
needed by the original developers and start ﬁling bug
reports and enhancement requests. Soon enough, the
application developers realize that they’ve become
framework developers as they spend more and more eﬀort
on supporting a generic framework, all the while still using a
tiny subset of its capabilities in their own code.
Such gold plating typically comes about when applications
are written from the inside out. You know that you’ll need to
deal with URL requests, for example, so you write a class
that can handle URL requests. However, you don’t yet know
how your application will use URL requests, so you write the
class so that it can deal with any case you think of. When
you come to write the part of the application that actually
needs to use URL requests, you ﬁnd it uses only a subset of

--- Page 53 ---
the cases handled by the class. Perhaps the application
makes only GET requests, and the eﬀort you put into handling
POST requests in the handler class is wasted. But the POST-
handling code is still there, making it harder to read and
understand the parts of the class that you actually use.
Test-driven development encourages building applications
from the outside in. You know that the user needs to do a
certain task, so you write a test that asserts this task can be
done. That requires getting some data from a network
service, so you write a test that asserts the data can be
fetched. That requires use of a URL request, so you write a
test for that use of a URL request. When you implement the
code that passes the test, you need to code only for the use
that you’ve identiﬁed. There’s no generic handler class,
because there’s no demand for it.
Testing Library Code
In the case of URL request handlers, there’s an even
easier way to write less code: ﬁnd some code
somebody else has already written that does it and
use that instead. But should you exhaustively test
that library code before you integrate it into your
app?
No. Remember that unit tests are only one of a
number of tools at your disposal. Unit tests—
particularly used in test-driven development—are
great for testing your own code, including testing
that your classes interact with the library code
correctly. Use integration tests to ﬁnd out whether
the application works. If it doesn’t, but you know
(thanks to your unit tests) that you’re using the
library in the expected way, you know that there’s a
bug in the library.

--- Page 54 ---
You could then write a unit test to exercise the
library bug, as documentation of the code’s failure
to submit as a bug report. Another way in which unit
tests can help with using third-party code is to
explore the code’s API. You can write unit tests that
express how you expect to use somebody else’s
class, and run them to discover whether your
expectations were correct.
Extreme programmers have an acronym to describe gold-
plated generic framework classes: YAGNI, short for Ya Ain’t
Gonna Need It™. Some people surely do need to write
generic classes; indeed, Apple’s Foundation framework is
just a collection of general-purpose objects. However, most
of us are writing iOS applications, not iOS itself, and
applications have a much smaller and more coherent set of
use cases that can be satisﬁed without developing new
generic frameworks. Besides which, you can be sure that
Apple studies the demand and potential application of any
new class or method before adding it to Foundation, which
certainly isn’t an academic exercise in providing a
functionally complete API.
It saves time to avoid writing code when YAGNI—you would
basically be writing code that you don’t use. Worse than
that, unnecessary code might be exploitable by an attacker,
who ﬁnds a way to get your app to run the code. Or you
might decide to use it yourself at some future point in the
app’s development, forgetting that it’s untested code you
haven’t used since it was written. If at this point you ﬁnd a
bug in your app, you’re likely to waste time tracking it down
in the new code you’ve written—of course, the bug wasn’t
present before you wrote this code—not realizing that the
bug actually resides in old code. The reason you haven’t
discovered the bug yet is that you haven’t used this code
before.

--- Page 55 ---
A test-driven app should have no unused code, and no (or
very little) untested code. Because you can be conﬁdent
that all the code works, you should experience few problems
with integrating an existing class or method into a new
feature, and you should have no code in the application
whose only purpose is to be misused or to cause bugs to
manifest themselves. All the code is pulling its weight in
providing a valuable service to your users. If you ﬁnd
yourself thinking during the refactoring stage that there are
some changes you could make to have the code support
more conditions, stop. Why aren’t those conditions tested
for in the test cases? Because those conditions don’t arise in
the app. So don’t waste time adding the support: Ya Ain’t
Gonna Need It.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 56 ---
Testing Before, During, and After Coding
If you’re following the red-green-refactor approach to test-
driven development, you’re running tests before writing any
code, to verify that the test fails. This tells you that the
behavior speciﬁed by the test still needs to be implemented,
and you may get hints from the compiler about what needs
to be done to pass the test—especially in those cases when
the test won’t even build or run correctly because the
necessary application code is missing. You’re also running
tests while you’re building the code, to ensure you don’t
break any existing behavior while working toward that green
bar. You’re also testing after you’ve built the functionality, in
the refactoring stage, to ensure that you don’t break
anything while you’re cleaning up the code. In a ﬁne-grained
way this reﬂects the suggestion from Chapter 1 that
software should be tested at every stage in the process.
Indeed, it can be a good idea to have tests running
automatically during the development life cycle so that
even if you forget to run the tests yourself, it won’t be long
before they get run for you. Some developers have their
tests run every time they build, although when it takes more
than a few seconds to run all the tests this can get in the
way. Some people use continuous integration servers or
buildbots (discussed in Chapter 4, “Tools for Testing”) to run
the tests in the background or even on a diﬀerent computer
whenever they check source into version control or push to
the master repository. In this situation it doesn’t matter if
the tests take minutes to run; you can still work in your IDE
and look out for a notiﬁcation when the tests are completed.
Such notiﬁcations are usually sent by email, but you could
conﬁgure your build system to post a Growl notiﬁcation or
send an iChat message. I have even worked on a team
where the build server was hooked up to a microcontroller,
which changed the lighting between green and red

--- Page 57 ---
depending on the test status. A reviewer of an early draft of
this chapter went one better: He described a workspace
where test failure triggered a ﬂashing police light and siren!
Everybody on the team knew about it when a test failed,
and worked to get the product back into shape.
Another important backstop is to ensure that the tests are
run whenever you prepare a release candidate of your
product. If a test fails at this point, there’s no reason to give
the build to your testers or customers. It’s clear something
is wrong and needs ﬁxing. Your release process should
ideally be ﬁre-and-forget, so you just press a button and
wait for the release build to be constructed. A failing test
should abort the build process. At this point it doesn’t really
matter how long the tests take, because preparing a release
candidate is a relatively infrequent step, and it’s better for it
to be correct than quick. If you have some extra-
complicated tests that take minutes or longer to run, they
can be added at this stage. Admittedly, these tend not to be
true unit tests: The longer tests are usually integration tests
that require environmental setup such as a network
connection to a server. Those situations are important to
test, but are not suitable for inclusion in a unit test suite
because they can fail nondeterministically if the
environment changes.
In general, as long as you don’t feel like you spend longer
waiting for the tests than you do working, you should aim to
have tests run automatically whenever possible. I run my
tests whenever I’m working with them, and additionally
have tests run automatically when I commit code to the
“master” branch in my git repository (the same branch in
subversion and other source control systems is called
“trunk”). The shorter a delay between adding some code
and discovering a failure, the easier it is to ﬁnd the cause.
Not only are there fewer changes to examine, but there’s
more of a chance that you’re still thinking about the code

--- Page 58 ---
relevant to the new failure. That is why you should test as
you go with the red-green-refactor technique: You’re getting
immediate feedback on what needs to happen next, and
how much of it you’ve done so far.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 59 ---
3. How to Write a Unit Test
You’ve now seen what we’re trying to achieve by testing
software, and how test-driven software and unit tests can
help to achieve that. But how exactly is a unit test written?
In this chapter you’ll see a single unit test being built from
ﬁrst principles. You’ll see what the diﬀerent components of a
test are, and how to go from a test or collection of tests to
production code. The code in this chapter is not part of a
project: It just shows the thought process in going from
requirement to tested app code. You do not need to run the
code in this chapter.
The Requirement
Remember, the ﬁrst step in writing a unit test is to identify
what the application needs to do. After I know what I need, I
can decide what code I would like to use to fulﬁll that need.
Using that code will form the body of the test.
For this chapter, the example will be that perennial favorite
of sample-code authors throughout history: the temperature
converter. In this simple version of the app, guaranteed not
to win an Apple Design Award, the user enters a
temperature in Celsius in the text ﬁeld and taps the Go
button on the keyboard to see the temperature in
Fahrenheit displayed below. This user interaction is shown in
Figure 3.1.

--- Page 60 ---
Figure 3.1. Screenshot of the completed Temperature
Converter app.
This gives me plenty of clues about how to design the API.
Because the conversion is going to be triggered from the

--- Page 61 ---
text ﬁeld, I know that it needs to use the UITextFieldDelegate's -
textFieldShouldReturn: method. The design of this method means
that the text ﬁeld—in this case, the ﬁeld containing the
Celsius temperature—is the parameter to the method.
Therefore, the signature of the method I want to use is
- (BOOL)textFieldShouldReturn: (id)celsiusField;
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 62 ---
Running Code with Known Input
An important feature of a unit test is that it should be
repeatable. Whenever it’s run, on whatever computer, it
should pass if the code under test is correct and fail
otherwise. Environmental factors such as the conﬁguration
of the computer on which the tests are running, what else is
running, and external software such as databases or the
contents of the computer’s ﬁle system should not have an
eﬀect on the results of the test. For this example, this
means that the temperature-conversion method cannot be
tested by presenting the user interface and having a tester
type a number in and look for the correct result. Not only
would that fail whenever the tester wasn’t present or made
a mistake, it would take too long to run as part of a build.
Thankfully, this method requires very little setup to run (just
the required celsiusField parameter), so I can conﬁgure a
repeatable case in code. I know that –40°C is the same as –
40°F, so I’m going to test that case. I identiﬁed while
thinking about the method’s API that I just need the text
from the text ﬁeld as input, so rather than conﬁguring a
whole UITextField object, I think I can just create a simple
object that has the same text property. I Ain’t Gonna Need all
the additional complexity that comes with a full view object.
Here’s the fake text ﬁeld class.
@interface FakeTextContainer : NSObject 
@property (nonatomic, copy) NSString *text; 
@end 
 
@implementation FakeTextContainer 
@synthesize text; 
@end
Now I can start to write the test. I know what input I need,
so I can conﬁgure that and pass it to my (as yet unwritten)
method. I’m going to give the test method a very long

--- Page 63 ---
name: In unit tests just as in production code, they’re very
useful to succinctly capture the intention of each method.
@interface TemperatureConversionTests : NSObject 
@end 
 
@implementation TemperatureConversionTests 
 
- (void)testThatMinusFortyCelsiusIsMinusFortyFahrenheit { 
    FakeTextContainer *textField = [[FakeTextContainer alloc] init]; 
    textField.text = @"-40"; 
    [self textFieldShouldReturn: textField]; 
} 
@end
Notice that I’ve assumed that the method I’m writing is
going to be on the same object as the test code, so I can
call it via self. This is almost never the case—you will usually
keep the test code and application code separate. However,
it’s good enough to start testing and building the method. I
can move it into a production class (probably a UIViewController
subclass) later. I don’t need to refactor until I’ve got to the
green bar. But right now I still have the red bar, because this
code won’t even compile without warnings1 until I provide
an implementation of the action method.
1. The implication here is that I have Treat Warnings as Errors enabled. You
should enable this setting if you haven’t already, because it catches a lot of
ambiguities and potential issues with code that can be hard to diagnose at
runtime, such as type conversion problems and missing method declarations.
To do so, search your Xcode target’s Build Settings for the Warnings as Errors
value and set it to Yes.
- (BOOL)textFieldShouldReturn: (id)celsiusField { 
    return YES; 
}
I don’t (yet) need a more capable implementation than that.
In fact, I’ve had to make a decision for something that isn’t
even speciﬁed: Should I return YES or NO? We’ll revisit that
decision later in the chapter.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 64 ---
Seeing Expected Results
Now that I can call my method with input under my control, I
need to inspect what that method does and ensure that the
results are consistent with the app’s requirements. I know
that the result of running the method should be to change
the text of a label, so I need a way to discover what
happens to that label. I can’t pass that label in as a
parameter to the method, because the API contract for the
UITextFieldDelegate method doesn’t allow for it. The object
that provides my temperature conversion method will need
a property for the label so that the method can ﬁnd it.
As with the input text ﬁeld, it looks like the only part of the
label this method will need to deal with is its text property,
so it seems I can reuse the FakeTextContainer class I’ve already
built. The test case now looks like this:
@interface TemperatureConversionTests 
@property (nonatomic, strong) FakeTextContainer *textField; 
@property (nonatomic, strong) FakeTextContainer *fahrenheitLabel; 
- (BOOL)textFieldShouldReturn: (id)celsiusField; 
@end 
 
@implementation TemperatureConversionTests 
 
@synthesize fahrenheitLabel; // a property containing the output label 
 
- (void)testThatMinusFortyCelsiusIsMinusFortyFahrenheit { 
    FakeTextContainer *textField = [[FakeTextContainer alloc] init]; 
    fahrenheitLabel = [[FakeTextContainer alloc] init]; 
    textField.text = @"-40"; 
    [self convertToFahrenheit: textField]; 
} 
@end
The pattern of using special objects to provide the method’s
input and see its output is common to many tests. The
pattern is known as Fake Objects or Mock Objects. This
pattern will be seen throughout the book, but you can see
what it gets us in this test. We’ve created an object we can

--- Page 65 ---
use in place of the real application’s text label; it behaves in
the same way, but we can easily inspect to ﬁnd out whether
the code that uses it is doing the correct thing.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 66 ---
Verifying the Results
I now have a way to see what the outcome of the -
convertToFahrenheit: method is, by looking at what happens to the
fahrenheitLabel property. Now is the time to make use of that
capability. It would not be appropriate to just print out the
result and expect the user to read through, checking that
each line of output matches a list of successful results;
that’s really ineﬃcient and error prone. A key requirement
for unit tests is that they should be self-testing: Each test
should discover whether its postconditions were met and
report on whether it was a success or a failure. The user just
needs to know whether any tests failed, and if so, which
ones. I’ll change the test I’m working on to automatically
discover whether it was successful.
- (void)testThatMinusFortyCelsiusIsMinusFortyFahrenheit { 
    FakeTextContainer *textField = [[FakeTextContainer alloc] init]; 
    textField.text = @"-40"; 
    fahrenheitLabel = [[FakeTextContainer alloc] init]; 
    [self textFieldShouldReturn: textField]; 
    if ([fahrenheitLabel.text isEqualToString: @"-40"]) { 
        NSLog(@"passed: -40C == -40F"); 
    } else { 
        NSLog(@"failed: -40C != -40F"); 
    } 
}
Now the test is complete. It sets up the input conditions for
the method it’s testing, calls that method, then
automatically reports whether the expected postconditions
occur. However, should you run it now, it will fail. The
method doesn’t set the label’s text correctly. A quick change
to the method ﬁxes that:
- (BOOL)textFieldShouldReturn: (id)celsiusField { 
    fahrenheitLabel.text = @"-40"; 
    return YES; 
}

--- Page 67 ---
That may not seem like a good implementation of a
temperature converter, but it does pass the one test. As far
as the speciﬁcation has been described, this method does
everything required of it.
How Many Tests Could a Unit Test Test If a Unit
Test Could Test Tests?
You’ll notice that the -
testThatMinusFortyCelsiusIsMinusFortyFahrenheit method tests only
a single condition. It would be very easy to add
extra tests here—for example, setting diﬀerent
values for the input text ﬁeld and ensuring that each
gets converted to the correct value in the output
label, or testing the Boolean return value that we
have so far been ignoring. That is not a good way to
design a test and I recommend against it.
If any one of the conditions in the test fails, you will
have to spend some time working out which part
failed—more time than would be needed if each test
evaluated only one condition. The worst problem
occurs when results from the beginning of a test are
used later on. In tests designed this way, one failure
can cause a cascade of failures in code that would
work if its preconditions were met, or can hide real
failures in the later part of the test. You either spend
time looking for bugs where they don’t exist, or not
looking for bugs in code where they do.
A well-designed test does just enough work to set
up the preconditions for one scenario, then
evaluates whether the app code works correctly in
that one scenario. Each test should be independent,
and atomic—it can pass or fail, but there are no
intermediate states.

--- Page 68 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 69 ---
Verifying the Results
I now have a way to see what the outcome of the -
convertToFahrenheit: method is, by looking at what happens to the
fahrenheitLabel property. Now is the time to make use of that
capability. It would not be appropriate to just print out the
result and expect the user to read through, checking that
each line of output matches a list of successful results;
that’s really ineﬃcient and error prone. A key requirement
for unit tests is that they should be self-testing: Each test
should discover whether its postconditions were met and
report on whether it was a success or a failure. The user just
needs to know whether any tests failed, and if so, which
ones. I’ll change the test I’m working on to automatically
discover whether it was successful.
- (void)testThatMinusFortyCelsiusIsMinusFortyFahrenheit { 
    FakeTextContainer *textField = [[FakeTextContainer alloc] init]; 
    textField.text = @"-40"; 
    fahrenheitLabel = [[FakeTextContainer alloc] init]; 
    [self textFieldShouldReturn: textField]; 
    if ([fahrenheitLabel.text isEqualToString: @"-40"]) { 
        NSLog(@"passed: -40C == -40F"); 
    } else { 
        NSLog(@"failed: -40C != -40F"); 
    } 
}
Now the test is complete. It sets up the input conditions for
the method it’s testing, calls that method, then
automatically reports whether the expected postconditions
occur. However, should you run it now, it will fail. The
method doesn’t set the label’s text correctly. A quick change
to the method ﬁxes that:
- (BOOL)textFieldShouldReturn: (id)celsiusField { 
    fahrenheitLabel.text = @"-40"; 
    return YES; 
}

--- Page 70 ---
That may not seem like a good implementation of a
temperature converter, but it does pass the one test. As far
as the speciﬁcation has been described, this method does
everything required of it.
How Many Tests Could a Unit Test Test If a Unit
Test Could Test Tests?
You’ll notice that the -
testThatMinusFortyCelsiusIsMinusFortyFahrenheit method tests only
a single condition. It would be very easy to add
extra tests here—for example, setting diﬀerent
values for the input text ﬁeld and ensuring that each
gets converted to the correct value in the output
label, or testing the Boolean return value that we
have so far been ignoring. That is not a good way to
design a test and I recommend against it.
If any one of the conditions in the test fails, you will
have to spend some time working out which part
failed—more time than would be needed if each test
evaluated only one condition. The worst problem
occurs when results from the beginning of a test are
used later on. In tests designed this way, one failure
can cause a cascade of failures in code that would
work if its preconditions were met, or can hide real
failures in the later part of the test. You either spend
time looking for bugs where they don’t exist, or not
looking for bugs in code where they do.
A well-designed test does just enough work to set
up the preconditions for one scenario, then
evaluates whether the app code works correctly in
that one scenario. Each test should be independent,
and atomic—it can pass or fail, but there are no
intermediate states.

--- Page 71 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 72 ---
Organizing Multiple Tests
The test constructed throughout this chapter doesn’t really
do much: It conﬁrms that a temperature converter will
output –40°F when the input is –40°C. But a temperature
converter must do much more than that. It must provide
accurate output across its whole input domain, so there
should be tests with various input conditions. The bounds of
its acceptable input must be deﬁned, and the behavior
when faced with input outside these deﬁnitions must be
speciﬁed. For example, what happens if the input Celsius
temperature would result in a Fahrenheit temperature
outside the range of an NSInteger? What happens when the
input is not a number?
In addition to thorough testing of the temperature converter
component, other components to the application will need
testing. If the user’s input in the Celsius text ﬁeld is
sanitized or interpreted before being passed to the
converter, you would want to test that code, too. Similarly,
you would test code that formats the output from the
converter, and any error-handling behavior in the app.
Each of these conditions should be evaluated by a diﬀerent
test (see the preceding sidebar), which even for a trivial app
like this temperature converter will mean dozens of diﬀerent
test methods. For a “real” application with complicated
functionality and multiple features, there could be a couple
of thousand unit tests. It would clearly be beneﬁcial to have
some organization strategy for unit tests, in the same way
that application code is organized into methods and classes.
In fact, a good way to organize your unit tests is to mirror
the class organization in your app. Each class in the
application has an associated unit test class that tests the
methods of that particular class. So one way to lay out the
tests in this temperature-conversion app would be that
shown in Figure 3.2. Notice that although there may be

--- Page 73 ---
connections indicating dependencies between the
application classes, no such dependencies exist between
the test classes. Being unit tests, each test class relies only
on the particular unit that it is testing. It can use fake and
mock objects like the FakeTextContainer used previously to avoid
dependencies on other classes. Avoiding dependencies on
other code cuts down on spurious or unexpected failures,
because a failure in one test class means that a problem
resides in the one class that it tests. If one test class
depended on more application classes, you would need to
examine more source code to ﬁnd the cause of any one test
failure.
Figure 3.2. Mapping of unit test organization to
organization of application classes.
With multiple test methods on a single class all testing
diﬀerent aspects of the behavior of one application class, it
seems likely that there will be code duplicated across the
tests in a class. Indeed, looking back to the temperature
converter, I can see that I might want to test conversions at
absolute zero (–273.15°C/–459.67°F) and the boiling point of

--- Page 74 ---
water (100°C/212°F) to ensure that the conversion method
works across a wide choice of input values. Each of these
tests will work in the same way: A fake text ﬁeld is set up
with the required input, a fake label to receive the output,
then the conversion method is called. Only the input and
output values need to change.
Unit testing frameworks like OCUnit help you to avoid
duplication in these similar test methods by creating a test
ﬁxture for each class: a common environment in which each
of the tests run. Aspects of the environment that are needed
across multiple tests go into the ﬁxture, and each test is run
in its own copy of the ﬁxture. In this way, each test gets its
own version of the environment that is unaﬀected by the
execution of other tests.2 In OCUnit, a ﬁxture is created by
subclassing SenTestCase and providing two methods: -setUp to
conﬁgure the ﬁxture and -tearDown to clean up after the test
has run. I will change the test I’ve written previously to
make it part of a ﬁxture.
2. Incidentally, this is another reason to require that a test doesn’t rely on the
results of previous tests. Each test gets its own copy of the ﬁxture—a
separate instance of the class, fresh from having run -setUp—and can neither
see the results of nor inﬂuence the execution of other tests, even from the
same class.
- (void)setUp { 
    [super setUp]; 
    textField = [[FakeTextContainer alloc] init]; 
    fahrenheitLabel = [[FakeTextContainer alloc] init]; 
} 
 
- (void)testThatMinusFortyCelsiusIsMinusFortyFahrenheit { 
    textField.text = @"-40"; 
    [self textFieldShouldReturn: textField]; 
    FZAAssertTrue(fahrenheitLabel.text, @"-40", @"In both Celsius and Fahrenheit
-40 is the same temperature"); 
}
Notice that the test now really is minimally brief: The initial
conditions speciﬁc to the test are created, then the method
under test is called, then the postconditions are evaluated.

--- Page 75 ---
All the “plumbing” related to creating the fake objects and
managing their memory is separated out into the ﬁxture
setup and teardown methods. This means that the plumbing
can be reused in a diﬀerent test. In fact, we might want to
add a couple here. First, what about that return value from -
textFieldShouldReturn:? Reading the documentation, that method
should return YES to get the usual text ﬁeld behavior, and
there’s no reason to change that behavior. It happens that
this is already the case, but it’s still good to document the
requirement in the form of a test.
- (void)testThatTextFieldShouldReturnIsTrueForArbitraryInput { 
    textField.text = @"0"; 
    FZAAssertTrue([self textFieldShouldReturn: textField], @"This method should
return YES to get standard textField behaviour"); 
}
Notice that this test automatically gets all the same setup
code as the existing test, so there’s no need to duplicate
that. The test method just needs to do the work speciﬁc to
executing that test. For the sake of completeness, let’s add
another test method that ensures 100°C is converted to
212°F: meaning that the previous, extremely limited
implementation of the -textFieldShouldReturn: method will need
changing.
- (void)testThatOneHundredCelsiusIsTwoOneTwoFahrenheit { 
    textField.text = @"100"; 
    [self textFieldShouldReturn: textField]; 
    STAssertTrue([fahrenheitLabel.text isEqualToString: @"212"], @"100 Celsius is
212 Fahrenheit"); 
} 
 
// ... 
 
- (BOOL)textFieldShouldReturn: (id)celsiusField { 
    double celsius = [[celsiusField text] doubleValue]; 
    double fahrenheit = celsius * (9.0/5.0) + 32.0; 
    fahrenheitLabel.text = [NSString stringWithFormat: @"%.0f", fahrenheit]; 
    return YES; 
}

--- Page 76 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 77 ---
Refactoring
We have a working method now, but it’s implemented on
the same class as the test cases for that method. The
temperature converter and the tests of its behavior are
separate concerns, so should be deﬁned in separate classes.
In fact, dividing the responsibilities between two diﬀerent
classes means we don’t need to ship the test class at all,
which is beneﬁcial because the user doesn’t particularly
need our test code. Because the converter method needs to
use the text ﬁeld and the label from the converter view, it
makes sense to put it into a view controller that will manage
the view.
@interface TemperatureConverterViewController : UIViewController
<UITextFieldDelegate> 
@property (strong) IBOutlet UITextField *celsiusTextField; 
@property (strong) IBOutlet UILabel *fahrenheitLabel; 
@end 
 
@implementation TemperatureConverterViewController 
 
@synthesize celsiusTextField; 
@synthesize fahrenheitLabel; 
 
- (BOOL)textFieldShouldReturn: (id)celsiusField { 
    double celsius = [[celsiusField text] doubleValue]; 
    double fahrenheit = celsius * (9.0/5.0) + 32.0; 
    fahrenheitLabel.text = [NSString stringWithFormat: @"%.0f", fahrenheit]; 
    return YES; 
} 
 
@end
Moving the method from the test class to the new
UIViewController subclass stops the tests from working: They all
call [self textFieldShouldReturn], which no longer exists. The test
class’s -setUp method should conﬁgure an instance of the new
view controller, and the tests need to use that.
@interface TestConverter () 
@property (nonatomic, strong) FakeTextContainer *textField; 

--- Page 78 ---
@property (nonatomic, strong) FakeTextContainer *fahrenheitLabel; 
@property (nonatomic, strong) TemperatureConverterViewController
*converterController; 
@end 
 
@implementation TestConverter 
 
@synthesize textField; 
@synthesize fahrenheitLabel; 
@synthesize converterController; 
 
- (void)setUp { 
    [super setUp]; 
    converterController = [[TemperatureConverterViewController alloc] init]; 
    textField = [[FakeTextContainer alloc] init]; 
    fahrenheitLabel = [[FakeTextContainer alloc] init]; 
    converterController.celsiusTextField = (UITextField *)textField;
    converterController.fahrenheitLabel = (UILabel *)fahrenheitLabel; 
} 
 
- (void)testThatMinusFortyCelsiusIsMinusFortyFahrenheit { 
    textField.text = @"-40"; 
    [converterController textFieldShouldReturn: textField]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects(fahrenheitLabel.text, @"-40", @"In both Celsius and
Fahrenheit -40 is the same temperature"); 
} 
 
- (void)testThatOneHundredCelsiusIsTwoOneTwoFahrenheit { 
    textField.text = @"100"; 
    [converterController textFieldShouldReturn: textField]; 
    STAssertTrue([fahrenheitLabel.text isEqualToString: @"212"], @"100 Celsius is
212 Fahrenheit"); 
} 
- (void)testThatTextFieldShouldReturnIsTrueForArbitraryInput { 
    textField.text = @"0"; 
    STAssertTrue([converterController textFieldShouldReturn: textField], @"This
method should return YES to get standard textField behaviour"); 
} 
 
@end
You could take this refactoring further; for example, the
converter method currently has multiple responsibilities. It
parses text from the Celsius text ﬁeld, converts the parsed
value into Fahrenheit, then converts that back into a string
to display in the Fahrenheit label. These responsibilities

--- Page 79 ---
could be separated into diﬀerent classes. Indeed, the
temperature conversion logic could go into a separate class
from the view manipulation behavior. You can take this
refactoring process as far as you like, until you have a
design you’re happy with. The tests will always be there,
allowing you to ﬁnd out if you make a change that breaks
the application logic.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 80 ---
Summary
So that’s how a unit test is designed and written. Along the
way you’ve seen how a real part of an iOS app—an interface
builder action method—can be tested, how to create fake
objects to stand in for more complicated classes (such as
the UIKit text ﬁeld and label classes I otherwise would have
needed to use), and how tests make it easy to refactor the
design of your app by checking that everything still works
after your changes. In the next chapter you’ll see how to set
up an Xcode project to support unit tests, and how the
OCUnit framework helps you to write more succinct test
cases and get better reports from your test runs.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 81 ---
4. Tools for Testing
Now that you’ve seen what test-driven development can do
for you and have learned how to write test-ﬁrst code, it’s
time to look at the tools available. In this chapter, you’ll
learn more about the OCUnit framework that is bundled with
Apple’s developer tools, and about some alternatives and
their advantages and disadvantages. You’ll also ﬁnd out
about a framework for creating mock objects and
Continuous Integration tools that help you run your tests
automatically.
OCUnit with Xcode
Now that you know how to design a unit test, it’s time to set
up your Xcode project for test-driven development. In this
section, you’ll learn how to use OCUnit, a framework
developed by Sen:Te (hence the assertion macros using the
ST preﬁx). OCUnit has been around since 1998, when Mac
OS X was still a beta operating system distributed under the
code name “Rhapsody.” OCUnit is a straightforward port of
Kent Beck’s SUnit framework to Objective-C.
The main advantage of OCUnit is that Apple has integrated
it into Xcode ever since version 2.1, so OCUnit is the easiest
unit testing framework to start working with and get quick
results. It’s also cross-platform, which is useful if you’re
using Objective-C on platforms other than iOS or the Mac.
Alternative choices to OCUnit are discussed in later sections
of this chapter.
In the previous chapter, I built a single unit test from
scratch, using features from OCUnit to make the test more
readable and to enable code reuse. In this section I’ll
demonstrate how the project that test is part of was set up.

--- Page 82 ---
Start by launching Xcode and creating a new project. At the
project conﬁguration sheet (see Figure 4.1), choose the
project template most suited for your needs. In the case of
the temperature converter app, that’s View-Based
Application. Click Next, and then enter the details of the
project, including your company name and the product
name, such as “Temperature Converter.” For this project,
choose the iPhone device family. Unit tests work in the same
way for iPad and Universal apps (and for Mac OS X apps,
too). Most importantly for conﬁguring the project for test-
driven development, ensure the Include Unit Tests box
(shown in Figure 4.2) is checked. Click Next again, then
choose where to save your project. Xcode asks at this stage
whether you want to create a git repository; see the sidebar
“Conﬁguring a Source Control System” for more information.
Your project will open in Xcode’s main window, looking like
Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.1. Conﬁguring an Xcode project.

--- Page 83 ---
Figure 4.2. Telling Xcode to include unit tests in an
iOS app project.

--- Page 84 ---
Figure 4.3. A new Xcode project, set up to develop an
iOS app with associated unit tests.
Conﬁguring a Source Control System
While you are creating a new project, Xcode will ask
whether you want to set up a local git repository to
provide source control. While source control is not
necessary to work with test-driven development, I
strongly recommend using source control with your
project.
Used in its simplest way, source control can act as
an additional safety net for your development work.
If you’re using test-driven development, you’re
already carefully adding incremental improvements
to your code, rather than plowing ahead without a
plan or a deﬁnition of what it means to be “done.”

--- Page 85 ---
With source control in place, you can take a
snapshot of your project after each increment is
added. If you decide that you don’t need some
speciﬁc behavior after all, it’s easy to go back and
remove it using the source control. Similarly, if you
get lost implementing a particular test case and end
up with a complete mess of your code, you can
quickly revert to the last clean state and pick up
from there.
More complex use cases for source control include
maintaining separate branches of your code relating
to diﬀerent versions of the product, merging
changes between diﬀerent branches, and
integrating work from multiple developers. Those
are beyond the scope of this book. See Pragmatic
Version Control Using Git (Swicegood, Pragmatic
Programmers 2008). Suﬃce it to say that if you are
not yet using source control to manage your
projects, now is a good time to start.
Have a look at the source ﬁles that Xcode provides in the
new project. In addition to the app delegate and view
controller templates, there is a group called Temperature
ConverterTests that contains a single class, called
Temperature_ConverterTests. This is where your ﬁrst tests can go.
Here’s the class interface.
#import <SenTestingKit/SenTestingKit.h> 
 
@interface Temperature_ConverterTests : SenTestCase { 
@private 
 
} 
 
@end
The class imports the headers from the SenTestingKit
framework, which gives you access to the various STAssert*()

--- Page 86 ---
macros, documented in Table 4.1. Notice that rather than
being a subclass of NSObject, this test class is a subclass of
SenTestCase. This is an important part of running unit tests.
OCUnit detects at runtime all classes that are derived from
SenTestCase and instantiates each one as a ﬁxture. If the class
implements the -setUp method for conﬁguring the ﬁxture,
OCUnit automatically runs that before each test; similarly, it
will detect and run the -tearDown method afterward if that
exists.
Table 4.1. The Macros Made Available to Unit Tests by
OCUnit, and the Conditions Needed to Pass the Test
in Each Case


--- Page 87 ---
Note
In each case the mandatory msg parameter is
interpreted as a format string suitable for passing
to +[NSString stringWithFormat:], and the variable-length
argument list is used as the parameters to the
format string.
OCUnit also automatically detects all the unit tests
implemented by each ﬁxture and runs all of them, recording
the number of successes and failures to report once the
tests have run. To have OCUnit discover your test methods,
you must declare them as methods with no return value and
no parameters, with their names starting with the word
“test” in lowercase. This is why the test case deﬁned in the
last chapter was called -(void)
testThatMinusFortyCelsiusIsMinusFortyFahrenheit. Add a very simple test
case to the Temperature_ConverterTests.m implementation now, so
that you can test out OCUnit.

--- Page 88 ---
- (void)testThatOCUnitWorks { 
    STAssertTrue(YES, @"OCUnit should pass this test."); 
}
You do not need to declare this method in the class
interface: OCUnit is going to detect the test method using
the Objective-C runtime library. Run the test by pressing
Cmd-U in Xcode, or select Test from Xcode’s Product menu.
Xcode compiles the application target, then launches the
iOS Simulator to run your tests.
You will probably see a test failure at this point: Apple’s
template unit test ﬁxture includes the following method:
- (void)testExample 
{ 
    STFail(@"Unit tests are not implemented yet in Temperature_ConverterTests"); 
} 
This method isn’t helpful; it gets in the way by giving the
impression that your tests are broken. Remove the -testExample
method and run the test again.
This time, no news is good news: Xcode doesn’t have the
green bar of other IDEs, and the result of all tests passing is
that Xcode doesn’t report any errors. If you want to conﬁrm
that no errors have occurred, you can inspect the detailed
output of the test process, available in Xcode’s Log
navigator (the right-most icon in the navigator bar, or press
Cmd-7). You can also have your unit tests run on an iOS
device, if you have one enabled for development and
attached to your Mac. Click the Scheme drop-down at the
top left of the Xcode project window, and select your device
as the target. Running the tests on a device works in the
same way as running them on the simulator—although it
usually takes a bit longer both to deploy the tests over the
USB cable and then to run them on the slower CPU of the
iOS device.
In order to have something to look at, and because knowing
what a test failure looks like is an important part of test-

--- Page 89 ---
driven development, change the YES in the test you just
wrote to NO, and test the product again. Now you should
see a red error message in the source editor at the line
where the failure occurred; the message includes your
custom text and explains why the assertion failed. If you
click in the sidebar of Xcode’s editor at this line, you can set
a breakpoint at the location where the test fails. Run the
tests again, and Xcode will break into the debugger at the
failing line so you can investigate the failing test in more
detail.
Figure 4.4. A failed unit test in Xcode.
You can make Xcode more vocal about the test results: In
the Behaviors pane of Xcode’s preferences, you can
conﬁgure a custom alert when testing succeeds or fails. This
alert can be a sound or spoken announcement, an image
that appears over the Xcode editor, or an AppleScript of
your own construction. You can even conﬁgure whether
Xcode reacts to a test failure by jumping to the line of code
that contains the failing assertion.

--- Page 90 ---
Warning
Remember to change the failing test back so that
it passes before you carry on building your unit
tests, or you can delete it. Either way, it’s not
needed for the rest of the examples.
Because there will be multiple components to test in your
application, you need to be able to create more test ﬁxtures
—in other words, more SenTestCase subclasses. To add a
new test class, go to the project navigator in Xcode (in the
navigation view’s toolbar, the left-most icon shows the
project navigator; alternatively you can press Cmd-1) and
control-click or right-click the group containing the existing
ﬁxture ﬁles. Select New File from the menu, and then add a
new Objective-C Test Case Class (see Figure 4.5). Name the
class as you like, and make sure you add it to the test case
target but not to the target for your application, as shown in
Figure 4.6. Now when you run the tests by pressing Cmd-U,
the tests in this new class get run in addition to any existing
tests.

--- Page 91 ---
Figure 4.5. Adding a new test ﬁxture to an iOS
project.

--- Page 92 ---
Figure 4.6. Adding the test ﬁxture to the test case
build target.
Notice that some of the unit test templates created by
Xcode include a preprocessor macro to selectively compile
diﬀerent parts of the test ﬁxture:
//  Application unit tests contain unit test code that must be 
    injected into an application to run correctly. 
//  Deﬁne USE_APPLICATION_UNIT_TEST to 0 if the unit test code is 
    designed to be linked into an independent test executable. 
#deﬁne USE_APPLICATION_UNIT_TEST 1 
Xcode’s test procedure injects the test bundle into your app,
so you should ensure that your tests are deﬁned in the
section of the implementation ﬁle marked #if
USE_APPLICATION_UNIT_TEST. Otherwise, the tests will not be compiled
or run. Or remove all the preprocessor statements about
USE_APPLICATION_UNIT_TEST from the ﬁles and all tests in the ﬁxture

--- Page 93 ---
will always be available. The alternative case, which Apple
calls “logic tests,” is suitable for testing library code where
you don’t have a host app in which to inject the tests. Xcode
injects logic tests into its own host process running in the
iOS Simulator.
As you build up the number of tests in your project, it will
take longer to compile and run the tests. If you’ve managed
to get yourself deep into development mode, this can be
distracting. You have to stop working for half a minute or so
every time you want to see the results of your work. If
you’re working on one particular feature, it would be useful
to see results from tests that exercise that feature, but the
rest are just taking time to run while their results are
unlikely to change. In Xcode, you can conﬁgure which tests
get run and which are skipped by editing the build scheme.
Choose Edit Scheme from the Product menu to see the
scheme editor. The editor for the test phase is shown in
Figure 4.7. From here you can enable or disable testing
whole ﬁxtures or individual tests within a ﬁxture.

--- Page 94 ---
Figure 4.7. The Xcode scheme editor conﬁguring
which tests get executed in the test phase.
Don’t forget that those tests you have disabled are not
being run! If you see no failures, it doesn’t mean there
might not be any problems if you’re not running all the
tests. It’s a good idea to duplicate the build scheme in
Xcode’s scheme editor and keep one scheme with all the
tests enabled. Then you can run selected tests while you’re
working and switch back to running all tests every so often
to ensure you haven’t introduced a bug in a test you weren’t
looking at.
One important time when you should run your unit tests is
when you prepare a build. There’s no point trying out your
app when problems can be detected by the unit tests, and
giving such a build to your customers could be disastrous.
One of the build settings you can conﬁgure for your app
target (or at the project level, for all targets in the project) is

--- Page 95 ---
that the tests run automatically after any successful build,
highlighted in Figure 4.8. Enabling this setting means that
even if you forget to run the tests yourself when you
prepare a build, Xcode will have you covered.
Figure 4.8. The build setting to always run tests after
a successful build.
One of the technical reviewers reading an early draft of this
chapter recommended leaving automatic tests oﬀ for Debug
builds so they don’t slow you down when you don’t need
them, but enabling the setting for Release builds so you
deﬁnitely run the tests before submitting a binary to iTunes
Connect.
It’s useful to be able to run tests from the command line,
either in the Terminal application or as part of a shell script.
Indeed, you will need to execute the tests from a script to
make use of a continuous integration system, described in
detail at the end of this chapter.
Xcode includes a command-line tool, xcodebuild, suitable
for using in scripts and Terminal. Unfortunately, you cannot

--- Page 96 ---
just tell it to test your build scheme in a way analogous to
pressing Cmd-U inside the Xcode GUI, so you have to do a
little digging to ﬁnd the command line you must provide.
The ﬁrst step is to ﬁnd out the names of all the targets in
your project. This is done with xcodebuild’s -list option:
heimdall:Temperature Converter leeg$ xcodebuild -list 
Information about project "Temperature Converter": 
    Targets:
        Temperature Converter 
        Temperature ConverterTests 
 
    Build Conﬁgurations: 
        Debug 
        Release 
 
    If no build conﬁguration is speciﬁed "Release" is used.
In this case, there are two targets. Temperature Converter is
my app, and Temperature ConverterTests is the target for
the unit tests. To get Xcode to execute the tests, you need
to build the target. You can do that with this command:
heimdall:Temperature Converter leeg$ xcodebuild -target Temperature\
ConverterTests build
The xcodebuild tool outputs all the commands it runs to
build and execute the test targets, including any test failure
reports. Reading this to ﬁnd out the results would not be a
good way to deal with test failures, so your script can
instead make use of the numeric return value from
xcodebuild, available in the script environment as the $?
variable. If the tests are built correctly and all succeed,
xcodebuild returns 0. Any other number means that the
tests failed, or could not be compiled correctly.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 97 ---
Alternatives to OCUnit
Although OCUnit is perfectly adequate for test-driven
development, and its integration with Xcode has come a
long way since it was ﬁrst bundled in version 2.1 of the IDE,
it isn’t everyone’s cup of tea. Independent developers have
written other testing frameworks for applying TDD to
Objective-C projects, each with its own features.
Google Toolkit for Mac
The Google Toolkit for Mac (GTM) is a grab bag of interesting
and useful utilities for Mac and iOS developers. The iOS unit
testing capabilities described at
http://code.google.com/p/google-toolbox-for-
mac/wiki/iPhoneUnitTesting are just one of its features.
GTM’s testing capabilities extend OCUnit’s features by
providing a collection of extra macros, described in Table
4.2. These macros allow the some test methods to be
shorter and more expressive than they are when written for
OCUnit’s macro set. It also provides a mock object for
verifying that log messages match what you would expect,
and has convenience categories for testing graphics and
image code.
Table 4.2. Test Assertion Macros Provided by GTM’s
Unit Testing Capabilities

--- Page 98 ---
GHUnit
The GHUnit framework, at https://github.com/gabriel/gh-
unit, is designed with OCUnit and Google Toolkit
compatibility in mind. Indeed, it is possible to take test
ﬁxtures written for either framework and use them in
GHUnit without modiﬁcation. GHUnit’s main feature is a

--- Page 99 ---
custom front-end for both Mac and iOS, which provides the
capability to ﬁlter test results based on keywords, and oﬀers
more control over presentation of the test results than
Xcode allows. Originally, running in an application made it
easier to debug unit tests than was possible with OCUnit’s
bundle-based tests, but this is no longer the case. The
GHUnit GUI for iOS is shown in Figure 4.9.

--- Page 100 ---
Figure 4.9. The GHUnit app for iOS running a
project’s unit tests.
To present this GUI, tests are not injected into your own app.
Instead, you create a new application target containing your

--- Page 101 ---
test code, the GHUnit framework which detects and runs
your tests, and a ﬁle called GHUnitIOSTestMain.m, which
conﬁgures the user interface. This means that to run your
tests, rather than choosing the Test option for your app’s
build scheme, you have to build and run the test app target.
Full instructions on using GHUnit are available from the git
project page at the preceding URL.
CATCH
CATCH, short for C++ Adaptive Test Cases in Headers, is the
newest of the unit testing frameworks described here. It can
be downloaded from its github project page at
https://github.com/philsquared/Catch.
CATCH takes a diﬀerent approach from the others, which are
all based on OCUnit. CATCH is implemented in C++, but can
be used from any C, C++, or Objective-C code. As the name
suggests, it is entirely implemented in headers. Rather than
the collection of assertion macros in the OCUnit-style
frameworks, CATCH deﬁnes a protocol containing the setup
and teardown methods, and a couple of macros to mark the
test methods and wrap an expression in an assertion
handler. Any expression, such as an Objective-C method call
or a C comparison, that results in a value can be used in the
REQUIRE() macro. The macro automatically discovers which
parts of the expression are the left side, the right side, and
the operator, so it still provides meaningful failure messages
like the other frameworks.
To use CATCH for your unit tests, you must ensure that the
test ﬁxtures are compiled as Objective-C++ ﬁles. Although
you can implement all your ﬁxtures in Objective-C, the
internals of CATCH are written in C++. To tell Xcode that a
ﬁle is an Objective-C++ ﬁle, name it with the .mm
extension. Fixtures in CATCH do not need to subclass any
particular class like SenTestCase, because the CATCH runner
searches through all classes to ﬁnd test methods. Adopting

--- Page 102 ---
the OcFixture protocol in ﬁxture classes is useful as an
annotation that the class is a test ﬁxture, although this is
not necessary, and all the OcFixture methods are optional.
The temperature converter test from the previous chapter
would look like this if implemented using CATCH:
#import "catch_objc_main.hpp" 
#import "ConverterTests.h" 
 
@interface ConverterTests : NSObject <OcFixture> 
@property (nonatomic, strong) id textField; 
@property (nonatomic, strong) id fahrenheitLabel; 
@end 
 
@implementation ConverterTests 
@synthesize textField; 
@synthesize fahrenheitLabel; 
 
- (void)setUp { 
    textField = [[FakeTextContainer alloc] init]; 
    fahrenheitLabel = [[FakeTextContainer alloc] init]; 
} 
 
OC_TEST_CASE("ConverterTests/minusFortyTest", "Ensure that -40C is converted
to -40F") { 
    [textField setText: @"-40"]; 
    [self convertToFahrenheit: textField]; 
    REQUIRE([[fahrenheitLabel text] isEqualToString: @"-40"]); 
} 
 
@end 
The catch_objc_main.hpp header includes a main() function that lets
you build the tests as a Mac OS X command-line tool (which
could also be run in the iOS Simulator). The API for
discovering and running tests is very simple, so it would be
straightforward to create a custom test runner for iOS.
The OC_TEST_CASE macro deﬁnes the test method that will be
discovered by the runner. The name of the test is not the
method name, which is created by the framework, but a
string that you pass as the ﬁrst parameter to the macro.
That allows you to choose more expressive names. Here I’ve

--- Page 103 ---
included the ﬁxture name in addition to a camelCase
identiﬁer for the test. The description of the test is also
provided as a parameter to the test deﬁnition, rather than
being a parameter of the assertion statement as it is in
OCUnit.
OCMock
In Chapter 3, “How to Write a Unit Test,” I created a very
simple mock object to inspect whether the temperature
conversion method I was writing would set the text property
on a label. Mock objects are crucial to test-driven
development: Without them you could not automatically
test methods that have side-eﬀects.
A side-eﬀect is any result of a method other than its return
value. It’s a good idea to avoid surprising side-eﬀects in
your code, because it’s much easier to understand what
“pure functions”—those whose behavior depends only on
their inputs and don’t have any side-eﬀects—do and to
trace code ﬂow through multiple pure functions. However,
apps and the devices they run on are inherently stateful, so
at some point you need to read or modify app state, such as
the content of a UI object, user defaults, or the ﬁle system.
To test these, you need to provide mock implementations of
the objects that will be aﬀected.
There is no library for mock objects distributed with Xcode.
A long-standing popular choice for Objective-C developers is
OCMock, available from Mulle Kybernetik at
http://www.mulle-kybernetik.com/software/OCMock/.
OCMock is a framework for simple creation of mock objects.
It uses the Objective-C runtime’s introspection capabilities
to automatically create mocks that can stand in for
instances of any other Objective-C class. To use OCMock’s
mock objects in a test case, you create the mocks that must
stand in for other classes and conﬁgure them by telling
them what methods you expect to be called, what the

--- Page 104 ---
parameters should be, and what value should be returned, if
applicable. After the body of the test has been performed,
you tell the mock objects to verify their state. In the
veriﬁcation phase, they will evaluate whether the expected
methods were called (and that nothing else happened) with
the parameters you previously conﬁgured. If not, they raise
a test failure.
The following listing demonstrates the tests from Chapter 3,
rewritten to use the OCMock framework (the method under
test has been elided but would be the same as that shown
in Chapter 3).
#import <OCMock/OCMock.h> 
#import <SenTestingKit/SenTestingKit.h> 
 
@interface TestConverter : SenTestCase { 
} 
/* 
 * Notice that the properties are deﬁned as type 'id', rather than 
 * speciﬁc UIKit classes. This is to avoid undeﬁned selector warnings 
 * when compiling the test cases, as this code will call OCMock methods 
 * on the stand-ins for these properties. 
 */ 
@property (nonatomic, strong) id textField; 
@property (nonatomic, strong) id fahrenheitLabel; 
@end 
 
@implementation TestConverter 
 
@synthesize textField; 
@synthesize fahrenheitLabel; 
 
- (void)setUp { 
    [super setUp]; 
    textField = [OCMockObject mockForClass: [UITextField class]]; 
    fahrenheitLabel = [OCMockObject mockForClass: [UILabel class]]; 
} 
 
- (void)testThatMinusFortyCelsiusIsMinusFortyFahrenheit { 
    [[[textField stub] andReturn: @"-40"] text]; 
    [[fahrenheitLabel expect] setText: @"-40"]; 
    [self convertToFahrenheit: textField]; 
    [fahrenheitLabel verify]; 
    [textField verify]; 

--- Page 105 ---
} 
 
- (void)tearDown { 
    [super tearDown]; 
} 
 
@end 
Both the input text ﬁeld and the output label are set up as
mock objects for the speciﬁc classes that will be used in the
real app. These are no longer the fake text containers
created in Chapter 3. These objects are fully capable of
standing in for any of the functionality oﬀered by the
UITextField and UILabel classes.
The test case method tells the mock objects what should
happen during the test. The mock UITextField is instructed to
return the string @"-40" when its -text method is called.
OCMock arranges this by “swizzling” the method: Calling -
stub replaces the real -[UITextField text] implementation with a
“stub” method that returns the value speciﬁed in the test.
The -expect call on the UILabel mock tells OCMock that a side-
eﬀect of the test is to call the -setText: method on the label,
and that the parameter should be @"-40".
Notice that this capability for mocks to replace methods
with stubs returning supplied values, and to express
expectations about the methods called on a mock, is
independent of the class being mocked. OCMock uses the
Objective-C runtime to discover and replace the mocked
class’s behavior, so although this test demonstrated its use
only with UIKit objects, you can use OCMock with any classes,
including your own custom classes.
There aren’t any assertion macros in the test anymore: The
side-eﬀect result is tested by OCMock using the -verify calls
at the end of the test method, and because the -
convertToFahrenheit: method doesn’t return a value, there is
nothing else to do. In a more complicated test you would
need to call -verify on every mock object to ensure that all

--- Page 106 ---
the expected events have occurred. In this case, OCMock
checks that the text on the label is set correctly, and that
nothing else happens. If the expectations are not met,
OCMock throws an exception describing the problem:
2011-02-01 14:55:25.475 otest[2006:903] *** Terminating app due to uncaught
exception 
'NSInternalInconsistencyException', reason: 'OCMockObject[UILabel]:
unexpected method 
invoked: setText:@"0" 
    expected:     setText:@"-40"' 
Unfortunately, this exception aborts the test runner, so no
other failures get reported. The obvious solution may
appear to be to wrap the call in STAssertNoThrow(), so that OCUnit
handles the exception. This does not work, because the test
runner will still abort. Even wrapping the test method in a
@try/@catch block does not stop OCMock from aborting the test
suite.
Even with this limitation in mind, OCMock provides a very
powerful implementation of mock objects that makes it easy
to replace even complicated classes with mocks suitable for
test-driven development. Alex Vollmer has much more
information about the speciﬁc capabilities of OCMock over
at http://alexvollmer.com/posts/2010/06/28/making-fun-of-
things-with-ocmock/.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 107 ---
Continuous Integration
Continuous Integration tools do not change the way you
write unit tests. They are tools to support test-driven
development by automatically running your tests whenever
you change the code. Continuous Integration servers watch
your source code repository, and when a change is
committed, they check out that change and run the tests.
You could get them to do anything: prepare a build for your
testers, publish the revision message to a website, or post
to a mailing list about the new change. In this section, you
will ﬁnd out about using two popular (and free) Continuous
Integration tools to support your testing.1
1. Continuous Integration itself is a broad topic and this section will only cover
the bare essentials. For a more complete discussion, see the book Continuous
Integration: Improving Software Quality and Reducing Risk, Duvall, Matyas,
and Glover, Addison-Wesley 2007.
Typically, developers do not run the Continuous Integration
server on their own development workstation, but instead it
is deployed on a standalone system. However, when
developing iOS apps this system still needs to be a Mac so
that Xcode and the iOS SDK are available. In addition to not
taking resources away from their own development work,
having continuous integration on a diﬀerent machine helps
to identify dependencies—for example on third-party
frameworks or Interface Builder plug-ins—that must be
satisﬁed to build the app.
“You broke the build”
Continuous Integration servers are particularly
useful for teams of multiple developers. One
programmer working alone on a feature might be
conﬁdent that he has not introduced any
regressions, only to ﬁnd that when he shares his
work with the rest of the team it conﬂicts with

--- Page 108 ---
something another developer has added. In other
words, a problem arises at integration time.
Continuous Integration helps the team discover and
react to this problem quickly. I have also found it
very useful for discovering and reacting rapidly to a
diﬀerent issue: A developer creates a new ﬁle but
doesn’t commit it to the repository along with the
changes that use this ﬁle. The continuous
integration server builds the team’s product and
runs the tests as soon as any developer integrates
new code, providing fast notiﬁcation of any failures.
The tools described in this section can identify which
developers have committed changes since the last
successful build, and send them messages
explaining what has broken.
Some development teams operate a penalty system
for developers who break the build—that is, who
commit changes that cause tests to start failing. The
penalty is usually small and light-hearted: The
developer might have to wear a silly hat until he
ﬁxes the problems or buy the donuts at the next
team meeting. It’s a small incentive to be careful
when coders integrate their work with the team’s.
Hudson
Important note: As this section was being written, the
project team behind Hudson voted to fork the project.
Hudson, available at http://hudson-ci.org, is maintained by
Oracle, Inc., whereas Jenkins, available at http://jenkins-
ci.org, is a community-run project. At time of writing, there
is no functional diﬀerence between the two tools. Here I will
use the name Hudson throughout, though the instructions
should apply to Jenkins, too.

--- Page 109 ---
Hudson is a web application written in Java. In addition to
running builds and collecting the results, it provides a
comprehensive browser-based user interface, including a
dashboard that lets you see summary information on the
“health” of all your projects. Hudson was primarily designed
to work with Java projects, but you can use it to build and
test iPhone apps, too.
Download the Hudson software as a WAR package from
http://hudson-ci.org. In Terminal, navigate to the folder
where you downloaded the ﬁle, and launch Hudson with this
command:2
2. If you want continuous integration via Hudson, CruiseControl, or any other
tool to become part of your regular workﬂow, you will need to arrange for that
tool to run automatically so that even when you reboot your continuous
integration server, the service is still available. A great way to do this is to
create a launch agent: See the Mac OS X manual page for launchd.plist for
more information.
$ java -jar hudson.war
As Hudson starts up it logs a series of status messages,
including the following:
INFO: Completed initialization
When this line appears, Hudson is ready to use. Point your
browser at http://localhost:8080 to see the Hudson
dashboard, shown in Figure 4.10. Now you can create a job
that will run your unit tests.

--- Page 110 ---
Figure 4.10. The default state of the Hudson
dashboard.
Click the New Job item in the menu on the left of Hudson’s
dashboard. Now give your job a name: The name should
give speciﬁc information about the job so that you can
distinguish the jobs in Hudson’s dashboard. If you intend to
have one only job for a project, the project’s name is
suﬃcient; otherwise, including information about which
branch is being built and in what conﬁguration (for example,
Debug, Release, or Deployment) will be useful, too. Choose
Build a Free-Style Software Project, and click OK.
On the next form you conﬁgure the new job. The project
description allows you to provide more information about
the job than would ﬁt in a name of reasonable length. The
important parts to conﬁgure are the source code
management, build triggers, and build steps.

--- Page 111 ---
At time of writing, Hudson supports only a couple of
centralized source code management tools: CVS and
subversion, with plug-ins available for some other version
control systems. If you’re using the git version control
system bundled with Xcode, use the git plug-in on the
Hudson website: http://wiki.hudson-
ci.org/display/HUDSON/Git+Plugin. If you use a diﬀerent tool
that Hudson does not have support for, you will need to
conﬁgure the project without source code management
support. You can create a shell script to check out the
source as a build step. Consult the manual for your source
code management tool of choice to ﬁnd out how to do that.
For your ﬁrst Hudson job, you cannot set up project
dependencies (there is nothing else for it to be dependent
on) so there are three options for triggering builds. From
Hudson’s interface, you can conﬁgure it to poll source
control (if conﬁgured) and build whenever a new commit is
discovered, or you can set up periodic builds. Periodic builds
are useful for projects that provide nightly releases to beta
testers. In each case, the conﬁguration is the same: specify
a range of times at which the poll or build should occur
using the UNIX crontab format. For example, to conﬁgure a
build every 10 minutes, enter
*/10 * * * *
The ﬁnal option you have is not to conﬁgure automatic
builds in Hudson, and to rely on external triggers. The build
can be triggered by manually pressing the build button in
Hudson’s dashboard, or a “post-commit hook” in source
code management tools that support hooks. The post-
commit hook is a good way to integrate Hudson with
unsupported version control systems like git. From your
project’s post-commit hook, you would execute a command
like this:
curl http://your-build-server:8080/job/job-name/build

--- Page 112 ---
After you have conﬁgured the build triggers as desired, add
a build step to run a shell script. This is the script that
Hudson will run when it comes time to build the project. As
a rule, this script should not be very long or complicated.
You do not want build failures to be caused by errors in the
script that invokes the build, only by errors in building the
software and running the tests. If building your application
depends on a lot of logic in the build script, then create the
build script as a ﬁle in your version control system and call
that script from Hudson’s shell script step. In that way you
can track changes to the script’s logic alongside changes to
the app source code. Running unit tests in a target set up by
Xcode requires only a one-line script. Check the name of the
test target in Xcode; it’s usually the name of your app
followed by “Tests,” as in “Temperature ConverterTests”
earlier in this chapter. The script to build and run your tests
from Hudson is:3
3. This script assumes that the Xcode project ﬁle for your app gets checked out
into the top level of Hudson’s workspace for the build. If this is not the case,
you will need to modify the script to cd to the appropriate folder before
running xcodebuild. The WORKSPACE environment variable points to the top-level
folder in Hudson’s workspace, so if your project is in a folder called Source
you would need to cd ${WORKSPACE}/Source.
#!/bin/bash 
 
xcodebuild -conﬁguration Debug -target "Temperature ConverterTests" build
That’s all there is to it. Save your job’s conﬁguration, and
it’s good to go. Rather than waiting for the next scheduled
build, you may want to press the Build Now button to check
that you conﬁgured everything correctly. Hudson saves the
console logs of its builds, so if anything goes wrong you can
inspect the logs for error messages and address the
problem. After your job has been built at least once, its page
on Hudson will show the history and status of the project, as
shown in Figure 4.11. The “weather” icon over the build

--- Page 113 ---
history summarizes the project’s stability: to bring sunshine
into your life, you need a project that rarely fails a test.
Figure 4.11. Hudson’s dashboard showing the status
and stability of a project.
Hudson oﬀers a couple of options for notifying you about
your build status. In Figure 4.11 you will see icons in the
build history box for RSS feeds, allowing you to subscribe to
a list of every build result or just the failed builds.
Additionally, if you conﬁgure an outgoing mail server in
Hudson’s settings, you can set up each job to email
developers about failed builds.
CruiseControl
CruiseControl is not a single continuous integration tool. The
name “CruiseControl” is given by the ThoughtWorks
company to two diﬀerent continuous integration products.4

--- Page 114 ---
CruiseControl.net is designed for developers working with
Microsoft’s platform, so in this section I’ll concen trate on
the cross-platform product written in Ruby, CruiseControl.rb.
You can download the latest version of CruiseControl.rb from
http://cruisecontrolrb.thoughtworks.com/. After you have
done so, navigate to the folder where you downloaded the
tool using Terminal.app, and decompress the package
before changing directory to the folder containing the
unpacked CruiseControl:
4. Matthew Foemmel at ThoughtWorks was one of the pioneers of Continuous
Integration and coined the term along with Martin Fowler in their article
“Continuous Integration”:
http://martinfowler.com/articles/continuousIntegration.html.
$ tar xzf cruisecontrol-1.4.0.tar.gz 
$ cd cruisecontrol-1.4.0 
Now you can add a project to CruiseControl. You do this with
the following command:
$ ./cruise add project-name --source-control git --repository 
http://yourserver/path/to/repository.git
where you should replace the project name and the
contents of the --source-control and --repository arguments with
values applicable to your project. CruiseControl is
compatible with a more modern subset of version control
systems than Hudson: subversion, git, mercurial, and bazaar
are all supported.
Before you can launch CruiseControl, you must tell it how to
run your tests. CruiseControl project conﬁgurations are
stored as Ruby source code in ﬁles named
~/.cruise/projects/project-name/cruise_config.rb. Open this ﬁle in your
favorite text editor and set the project’s build_command variable
to the command needed to run your tests:
Project.conﬁgure do |project| 
  project.build_command = 'xcodebuild -conﬁguration Debug -target
"Temperature\ 

--- Page 115 ---
ConverterTests" build' 
end 
You can conﬁgure other options here, such as the interval at
which CruiseControl polls your version control system (the
default is 30 seconds), and email addresses to notify when
builds fail. After you have set the project up according to
your needs, save cruise_config.rb and launch CruiseControl.
$ ./cruise start
Like Hudson, CruiseControl’s output is exposed via a
browser-based dashboard. Go to http://localhost:3333/ to
see the CruiseControl dashboard (Figure 4.12). The status
and history of each project is listed, and you can click each
build result to see details like the console log and the
commit message that triggered the build. You can subscribe
to an RSS feed for each project to see up-to-date build
results.
Figure 4.12. The CruiseControl.rb dashboard,
showing the status of a project.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 116 ---
Summary
Apple’s developer tools come with powerful and mature
support for test-driven development. As with every aspect
of software development, developers have their own
requirements and preferences, which may not be met by the
built-in tools. Plenty of third-party alternatives and
extensions exist so you can set up an environment suited to
your project and way of working.
Throughout the rest of this book, the examples will focus on
capabilities provided by OCUnit. By all means investigate
the alternatives presented in this chapter; whether you ﬁnd
something that suits you better than OCUnit or not, you’ll be
able to follow the rest of this book without needing to install
any additional tools.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 117 ---
5. Test-Driven Development of an iOS
App
Over the next few chapters, you’ll see an iOS app developed
from initial speciﬁcation to functional product. Of course,
with this book being about test-driven development, the app
will be written in a test-ﬁrst fashion. This chapter deﬁnes the
application’s speciﬁcation and sets out the strategy for
developing the functionality. At the end of this part of the
book, you’ll have a fully working—though by no means full-
featured—app, supported by a suite of unit tests. You’ll also
have seen how the tests help to design and implement the
app code. The full project is available from
https://github.com/iamleeg/BrowseOverﬂow, should you
want to build the app yourself or even extend it.
Product Goal
The app, called BrowseOverﬂow, gives users access to
recent questions about iOS development on the
stackoverﬂow.com website. Users can easily ﬁnd recently
asked questions on relevant topics and see the answers that
visitors to the site have contributed.
StackOverﬂow
I’m not associated with the company behind Stack
Overﬂow: Stack Overﬂow Internet Services, Inc. I
just think that stackoverﬂow.com is a great resource
for iOS developers. It also happens to have a simple
API, making it easy to create a nontrivial demo app
in the limited space available in a book like this, and
the content is made available under a Creative
Commons license. If you have questions about iOS

--- Page 118 ---
app programming or any other coding topic,
stackoverﬂow.com ought to be your ﬁrst port of call.
You can use Stack Overﬂow’s API without registering
for an API key. Your app will be limited in the number
of requests it can make per unit time, so if you
intend to distribute a (test-driven!) app based on
the code here, you should register and get an API
key from http://stackapps.com/.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 119 ---
Use Cases
On launching BrowseOverﬂow, the user sees a list of topics,
shown in Figure 5.1. Each topic represents a tag on Stack
Overﬂow. Questions are tagged to indicate what subjects
they address.

--- Page 120 ---
Figure 5.1. As a stack overﬂow browser, I want to see
a list of topics related to iOS development.
Tapping on a topic in the list loads a list of the 20 most
recently asked questions tagged with that topic, presented

--- Page 121 ---
in chronological order. A sample list is shown in Figure 5.2.
In addition to the titles of the questions, users can see who
asked each question (including an avatar image) and the
question’s score (how many times it has been voted up and
down on the website).

--- Page 122 ---
Figure 5.2. As a stack overﬂow browser, given that I
have tapped on a topic, I want to see a list of
questions that have been asked on that topic.

--- Page 123 ---
Retrieving the list of questions clearly requires a network
connection, and even if the app has a Wi-Fi or 3G data
network available, it’s still possible for the connection to
stackoverﬂow.com to fail. If it does, BrowseOverﬂow should
show a message explaining that current questions are not
available (demonstrated in Figure 5.3).

--- Page 124 ---
Figure 5.3. As a stack overﬂow browser, given that
the app encountered a problem, I want to be told
about it.

--- Page 125 ---
Tapping on a question title in one of the lists of questions
presents a view showing more information about this
question. The full question text is available, along with each
of the answers. The accepted answer (if there is one) is
indicated with a tick and appears directly below the
question. Following this, the other answers are presented in
descending order of score. The name and avatar of the
writer of each answer is presented along with that answer,
as shown in Figure 5.4. As with the question list,
BrowseOverﬂow should display a message explaining that
answers aren’t available if it cannot retrieve the information
from the Stack Overﬂow website.

--- Page 126 ---
Figure 5.4. As a stack overﬂow browser, given that I
have tapped on a question, I want to see answers
people have provided to that question.

--- Page 127 ---
Because the preceding views represent a master-detail
presentation of the information on the website, the overall
ﬂow through the app should use standard iOS navigation
controls, starting from the tag list, navigating through the
question list, to an individual question and its answers.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 128 ---
Plan of Attack
There are numerous approaches to implement an app like
this one. Many developers would develop a single feature at
a time, ensuring that all the functionality behind one button
works completely before moving on to the next button.
Others would work on each view separately, getting all of
the functionality in the topics view working before working
on the questions list view. In each case, it’s common to take
an “outside-in” approach, in which you put the view
together ﬁrst, then enough controller code to allow users to
interact with the view as it is envisaged to behave in the
app, then ﬁnally to ﬂesh out the functionality until the
requirement is fully satisﬁed.
Whichever way you slice the cake, it’s usual in agile
development teams to work on a single story or small
collection of stories for a short period of time (usually known
as an iteration or a sprint), with the aim of providing
satisfactory implementations of those stories at the end of
the sprint. I’m going to take a diﬀerent approach: My goal
here is to show how you can work with test-driven
development on code that uses the various parts of the iOS
APIs. To support that goal, I’m going to develop this app
thematically, starting with the model in Chapters 6 and 7,
then the controllers in Chapters 8 and 9 (BrowseOverﬂow
does not contain any custom views). Finally, in Chapter 10,
I’ll put the classes together to form the complete app.
In this example, the preceding limited and well-deﬁned
speciﬁcation should help to avoid any YAGNI1 that would
normally arise from building an app “from the inside out.” If
I do ﬁnd that things go a little weird along the way, I can
always refactor! That’s one of the beneﬁts of supporting the
code with tests; you can make any changes you want and
get fast feedback on whether anything broke (and if so,
what).

--- Page 129 ---
1. YAGNI is short for “Ya Ain’t Gonna Need It,” a concept introduced in Chapter
2.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 130 ---
Getting Started
It’s time to set up the project to manage the
BrowseOverﬂow application and test case sources. Launch
Xcode and create a new project based on the Master-Detail
Application iOS app template. In the project options, you’ll
want to check the Include Unit Tests box, but you won’t
need Core Data, so leave that option unchecked. This app
will provide only iPhone views, so choose iPhone for the
device family. Choose somewhere to save the project, and
create a local git repository if you want to work with that
version control system.
If you followed along with that paragraph you’ll already
have a working app, although it doesn’t really do much. You
can build and run it, and enjoy your lovingly crafted product:
an empty table as shown in Figure 5.5.

--- Page 131 ---
Figure 5.5. A new project, ready to be turned into
BrowseOverﬂow.app.
Apple’s Template Code

--- Page 132 ---
Now that you’ve created a new project, you’ll see
that there’s a lot of code in it already. The Master-
Detail app target contains a few classes: the app
delegate and the view controllers. The
BrowseOverﬂow app could make use of both of
these classes. Should you go through and create
tests for all that template code?
The answer is no—or not yet, anyway. Because you
haven’t yet gotten around to implementing any of
the app’s behavior, no requirements exist yet for
what that code should do. It can’t possibly be
correct or broken (as long as it compiles); it’s just
there.
When you come to add features to the app, you’ll
ﬁnd that you want to create some behavior in these
classes. That’s the time to write the tests that test
the behavior you want. If you ﬁnd that the template
code already does what you need, that’s great;
there’s nothing to write. If the tests fail, you can edit
the code until it does what you need. There’s an old
hacker maxim that seems appropriate here: “If it
ain’t broke, ﬁx it ’til it is.”
One thing you will need to change is Apple’s test
ﬁxture, which is named BrowseOverﬂowTests by
default. The template code includes a call to STFail(),
which means that the tests automatically fail even
though you haven’t written any bugs yet! You won’t
need that ﬁxture at all, so it’s safe to delete the
BrowseOverflowTests.h and BrowseOverflowTests.m ﬁles from your
project.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 133 ---
6. The Data Model
The ﬁrst thing I want to implement is the model layer, the
objects that represent the information in the
BrowseOverﬂow app. I’ll take another look at the app
description from Chapter 5, “Test-Driven Development of an
iOS App,” this time with a requirements engineering hat on.
Speciﬁcally, I’ll use a technique called domain analysis to
see what classes and objects are required in the app.
In domain analysis, you look at the requirements with a view
to deciding what objects exist in the problem domain and
what their responsibilities are. Nouns in the software
requirements represent either objects or properties of some
object. Verbs represent actions (that is, methods), and the
object and subject of the verb tell you which object calls the
method on which other object.
The idea is that you can identify the classes and interactions
in the problem domain, and then design your software
classes and objects to reﬂect the domain model. Because
the software model is based on the problem domain, it’s
unlikely that you’ll write code that doesn’t or can’t satisfy
the problem conditions. It also has the beneﬁt that it’s
easier for coders to talk to users and other stakeholders
about the software because you’re all using the same
terminology to talk about the same parts of the problem.
An example from a diﬀerent problem domain is an email
application. Email has almost completely replaced postal
mail, in which a sender wrote a message and addressed it to
the reader so that the postal service could determine how to
deliver it to—in the context of a business anyway—the
recipient’s inbox. Having read the message, the recipient
could throw it away or ﬁle it into a labeled folder. It is easy
to see how the various objects—message, address, inbox

--- Page 134 ---
and so on—and verbs—writing, reading, delivering—from
the problem domain found their way into the software.
Topics
Enough talk; let’s look at an example from the
BrowseOverﬂow problem domain. One sentence from
Chapter 5 says:
On launching BrowseOverﬂow, the user sees a list of
topics... Each topic represents a tag on Stack Overﬂow.
Questions are tagged to indicate what subjects they
address.
I shall assume that the user is not part of the software
system (it’s hard to sell an app if the only user is the app
itself). However, the list of topics should be part of the
system. It seems that a ”topic” is an object in the problem
domain. It’s time to write a test to prove that the app
provides a Topic class. In fact, because Topic will be a class in
the app, I’ll create a new TopicTests ﬁxture in the
BrowseOverﬂowTests target (not the app target), and add
the test to that:
@implementation TopicTests 
 
- (void)testThatTopicExists { 
    Topic *newTopic = [[Topic alloc] init]; 
    STAssertNotNil(newTopic, 
        @"should be able to create a Topic instance"); 
} 
 
@end
You can’t run that test; it won’t even compile. That’s
because there isn’t yet a Topic class at all. Add a new NSObject
subclass called Topic to the project. When Xcode asks which
targets to add the new ﬁle to, check both the app target and
the test bundle target. (This is required to work around a
problem with unit test bundles: They don’t link symbols

--- Page 135 ---
from their host apps correctly.) Now the class exists, and
you can tell the test ﬁxture about it:
#import "TopicTests.h" 
#import "Topic.h" 
 
@implementation TopicTests 
 
- (void)testThatTopicExists { 
    Topic *newTopic = [[Topic alloc] init]; 
    STAssertNotNil(newTopic, 
        @"should be able to create a Topic instance"); 
} 
 
@end
Run the test again: That change was suﬃcient to get this
test to pass.
The user needs to see the topics, so the Topic class needs
some property that can represent it in the UI—a textual
name seems appropriate. The list of topics is presented to
the user at launch, so the objects can be created with the
names they’ll have throughout the lifetime of the app. I
would like to be able to do this:
- (void)testThatTopicCanBeNamed { 
    Topic *namedTopic = [[Topic alloc] initWithName: @"iPhone"]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects(namedTopic.name, @"iPhone", 
        @"the Topic should have the name I gave it"); 
}
That won’t compile, because the compiler ﬁnds that Topic
doesn’t have a name property. Add it to the class interface:
@property (readonly) NSString *name;1
1. Notice that we have no requirements describing whether this property
should be atomic or nonatomic, so I have used the default behavior. On the
other hand, there doesn’t appear to be a need to change a Topic’s name after
it’s been created, so it’s appropriate to create a read-only property: The
application doesn’t need the (untested) setter method.
and to the implementation:
@synthesize name;

--- Page 136 ---
Try running the tests again. That last change lets the tests
compile, but the sweet smell of success is still beyond our
grasp. In fact, the test runner crashes. Why?
2011-02-17 16:04:33.463 BrowseOverﬂow[3146:207] -[Topic initWithName:]: 
unrecognized selector sent to instance 0x4e3f980
Add that initializer method to the Topic class.
- (id)initWithName:(NSString *)newName { 
    if ((self = [super init])) { 
        name = [newName copy]; 
    } 
    return self; 
}
Testing Memory Management
The code examples throughout this book rely on
Automatic Reference Counting (ARC), a compiler-
supported memory management technique
introduced with Xcode 4.2 for iOS developers using
the iOS 4 and 5 SDKs. Test-driven development
doesn’t require ARC, so it’s possible to use the
techniques described here with manual memory
management (or garbage collected Objective-C on
the Mac OS X SDK) should you need to.
However, memory management doesn’t really lend
itself to automated testing. The only method
Foundation classes provide to inspect memory-
management code is the reference count, and this is
not trustworthy enough to form the basis of a
repeatable test. Sometimes the Foundation or UIKit
library might want to retain an object; sometimes an
object’s reference count doesn’t change when it’s
released; sometimes something happens on a
diﬀerent thread to change the retain count. Because
of this, asking an object for its reference count or

--- Page 137 ---
using a mock to ﬁnd out when retain or release are
called is not going to lead to repeatable results.
The rules for memory management in an iOS app
are very straightforward, and described by Apple at
http://developer.apple.com/library/ios/#documentati
on/cocoa/conceptual/MemoryMgmt/MemoryMgmt.ht
ml. Following those rules, and testing for problems
using Instruments, are both good ways to ensure
that your objects live for the correct amount of time
in your app.
Now the test succeeds, and BrowseOverﬂow’s topic objects
have a name property that works in the way speciﬁed by
the tests. The one thing we’ve yet to address from the
preceding sentence is that a Topic object should identify a tag
from the stackoverﬂow.com question tags. It happens that a
tag is just another string, so it can be handled in the same
way as the name property. I’ll add another parameter to the
initializer, so the test for the tag looks like this:
- (void)testThatTopicHasATag { 
    Topic *taggedTopic = [[Topic alloc] initWithName: @"iPhone" 
        tag: @"iphone"]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects(taggedTopic.tag, @"iphone", 
        @"Topics need to have tags"); 
}
The procedure to get this test passing is the same as with
the name: Add the property and the new initializer.
This seems like a good time to stand back and look for
opportunities to refactor. Currently, each test uses a
diﬀerent initializer: -init, -initWithName: and -initWithName:tag:. In fact,
if each test used the “full” two-argument initializer, all the
tests would still work and there would be less code in the
Topic class. It doesn’t seem like there’s a need for the -
initWithName: initializer at all. Change the tests so that the
ﬁxture uses only one initializer for Topic:

--- Page 138 ---
@implementation TopicTests 
 
- (void)testThatTopicExists { 
    Topic *newTopic = [[Topic alloc] initWithName: @"iPhone" 
        tag: @"iphone"]; 
    STAssertNotNil(newTopic, 
        @"should be able to create a Topic instance"); 
} 
 
- (void)testThatTopicCanBeNamed { 
    Topic *namedTopic = [[Topic alloc] initWithName: @"iPhone" 
        tag: @"iphone"]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects(namedTopic.name, @"iPhone", 
        @"the Topic should have the name I gave it"); 
} 
 
- (void)testThatTopicHasATag { 
    Topic *taggedTopic = [[Topic alloc] initWithName: @"iPhone" 
        tag: @"iphone"]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects(taggedTopic.tag, @"iphone", 
        @"Topics need to have tags"); 
} 
 
@end
Now that there’s no need for the -initWithName: initializer, you
can delete it from the Topic class.2 The recent changes bring
an interesting observation: It looks like all the tests work
with identical Topic instances. They could all use the same
instance, deﬁned as part of the ﬁxture. In other words, we
could create a single topic instance in -setUp, use it in every
test, and then clean it up in -tearDown. Make that change, and
the test ﬁxture interface will look like this:
2. And indeed you should. Because it’s no longer being tested, you don’t want
users of the Topic class to rely on it working properly in the future.
#import <SenTestingKit/SenTestingKit.h> 
#import <UIKit/UIKit.h> 
 
@class Topic; 
 
@interface TopicTests : SenTestCase { 
    Topic *topic; 
} 

--- Page 139 ---
 
@end
and the implementation like this:
#import "TopicTests.h" 
#import "Topic.h" 
 
@implementation TopicTests 
 
- (void)setUp { 
    topic = [[Topic alloc] initWithName: @"iPhone" tag: @"iphone"]; 
} 
 
- (void)tearDown { 
    topic = nil; 
} 
 
- (void)testThatTopicExists { 
    STAssertNotNil(topic, @"should be able to create a Topic instance"); 
} 
 
- (void)testThatTopicCanBeNamed { 
    STAssertEqualObjects(topic.name, @"iPhone", 
        @"the Topic should have the name I gave it"); 
} 
 
- (void)testThatTopicHasATag { 
    STAssertEqualObjects(topic.tag, @"iphone", 
        @"the Topic should have the tag I gave it"); 
} 
 
@end
In the -tearDown method, the test ﬁxture’s Topic is set to nil so
that the diﬀerent tests each get a fresh instance (in fact,
that’s guaranteed by OCUnit itself; destroying the variable
in -tearDown documents that fact explicitly). There’s one
remaining thing that a Topic needs. Examine this sentence
from the requirements:
Tapping on a topic in the list loads a list of the 20 most
recently asked questions tagged with that topic,
presented in chronological order.

--- Page 140 ---
There should be a way to get from a topic to “a list
of...questions.” Reading on, it appears that questions have a
number of diﬀerent properties associated with them. This
suggests that questions should be represented as a class in
the problem domain, and that this should be reﬂected in the
software domain by having the Topic class provide access to a
list of Questions. The relationship is shown in Figure 6.1 as a
UML3 diagram.
3. UML, the Uniﬁed Modeling Language, is a standardized way to graphically
model object-oriented systems. More information is available at
www.uml.org/.
Figure 6.1. UML diagram showing the relationship
between Topics and Questions.
The topic object needs to do something to give us “a list” of
something. Because we haven’t investigated the
requirements about questions yet, we can’t say anything
about what objects in that list should do. For now, it’s
enough to ensure that Topics can provide a list:
- (void)testForAListOfQuestions { 
    STAssertTrue([[topic recentQuestions] isKindOfClass: 
        [NSArray class]], 
        @"Topics should provide a list of recent questions"); 
}
Of course, that test fails, so implement a new method on
Topic to pass the test (and don’t forget to declare the method
in Topic.h, too).
- (NSArray *)recentQuestions { 
    return [NSArray array]; 
}

--- Page 141 ---
Now the test passes, but it doesn’t seem very satisfying.
The requirements call for a “list of questions,” and all the
code does is provide a list. Not a list of anything, just an
empty list. Before deﬁning the list of questions in more
detail, it will be useful to have a better idea of what a
question is.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 142 ---
Questions
Let’s put the Topic class on one side for the moment, because
we’ve gotten to a point in implementing the app’s
requirements that needs us to think about what’s required
of a question. In fact, we need to do that in order to
complete the implementation of Topic. The ﬁrst thing to
notice is the deﬁnition of a Topic’s list that we used in the last
section. That speciﬁed that the list must be “in chronological
order,” so questions must need a date property that can be
used for sorting. Question is a new class, so create a new
QuestionTests ﬁxture to test it in the BrowseOverﬂowTests
target, and add the ﬁrst test:
@implementation QuestionTests 
 
- (void)testQuestionHasADate { 
    Question *question = [[Question alloc] init]; 
    STAssertTrue([question.date isKindOfClass: [NSDate class]], 
        @"Question needs to provide its date"); 
} 
 
@end
However, this test doesn’t compile because there isn’t a
Question class yet. Here’s the implementation of that class, to
be added to both the app and test case targets. For
brevity’s sake the corresponding header ﬁle has been left
out.
@implementation Question 
 
- (NSDate *)date { 
    return [NSDate date]; 
} 
 
@end
That allows the test to pass, but it looks ﬁshy. The iOS SDK
documentation tells us that +[NSDate date] returns the current
date, but what we want to know is the date the question

--- Page 143 ---
was asked. Evidently the test is wrong. What we really need
is some way for the code that creates a Question object to set
the date at which it was asked. A setter would do the trick,4
so I’ll update the test:
4. As would an initializer parameter, in the same way that the Topic class was
designed. This goes to show that testing doesn’t limit the ways in which you
can implement required behavior.
- (void)testQuestionHasADate { 
    Question *question = [[Question alloc] init]; 
    NSDate *testDate = [NSDate distantPast]; 
    question.date = testDate; 
    STAssertEqualObjects(question.date, testDate, 
        @"Question needs to provide its date"); 
}
A simple read/write property on the Question class is suﬃcient
to pass this test, and can replace the previous
implementation of -date. You may be thinking that this
represents a lot of work just to add a one-line property
declaration to a class; can’t we assume that Apple’s
implementation of @synthesize works properly? The point of the
preceding test is not to show that the property works, but to
demonstrate that the property is needed in the application.
Test-driven development is helping to design the classes in
the app by making us think about how we should fulﬁll the
app’s requirements in code. As a side eﬀect, we get some
safety against breaking things in the future. Should we
decide later that these classes should provide a dynamic or
hand-crafted implementation of the property, this test will
ensure we keep the basic requirement that we can get and
set the value.
What are the other requirements of question objects? Here’s
a relevant quote from the requirements:
[...]in addition to the titles of the questions, users can
see who asked each question (including an avatar
image) and the question’s score (how many times it has
been voted up and down on the website).

--- Page 144 ---
Okay, titles must be easy to do. I’ll move the question
instance that was created in the -testQuestionHasADate test into the
ﬁxture, and add a test that ensures it has a title string.
Similarly with scores, except that a score will be a NSInteger
rather than a string.
#import "Question.h" 
@implementation QuestionTests 
{ 
    Question *question; 
} 
 
- (void)setUp { 
    question = [[Question alloc] init]; 
    question.date = [NSDate distantPast]; 
    question.title = @"Do iPhones also dream of electric sheep?"; 
    question.score = 42; 
} 
 
- (void)tearDown { 
    question = nil; 
} 
 
- (void)testQuestionHasADate { 
    NSDate *testDate = [NSDate distantPast]; 
    question.date = testDate; 
    STAssertEqualObjects(question.date, testDate, 
        @"Question needs to provide its date"); 
} 
 
- (void)testQuestionsKeepScore { 
    STAssertEquals(question.score, 42, 
        @"Questions need a numeric score"); 
} 
- (void)testQuestionHasATitle { 
    STAssertEqualObjects(question.title, 
        @"Do iPhones also dream of electric sheep?", 
        @"Question should know its title"); 
} 
 
@end
As with the date test, getting this test to pass is trivial
because you just need to add a read-write property with the
correct name and type to Question.

--- Page 145 ---
The next stage is to decide what to do with the asker’s
name and image, and this is going to require a little more
thought. On the face of it, it would appear that a Person is a
diﬀerent thing than a Question in the problem domain.
However, the app needs only a couple of properties related
to people: a name and an image. Wouldn’t it be easy just to
add those properties to Question, so we could ask for
question.askerName and question.askerImage? Yes, it would, but read on a
little in the requirements:
The name and avatar of the writer of each answer is
presented along with that answer...
So the app will also need the name and an image of the
Person who provides an answer. I’m jumping ahead a little
here, but it’s obvious that if the code for the asker’s name
and avatar go into Question, we’ll just need to write the same
code again for the class that describes answers later. I could
have added the properties to Question and then refactored
them out to a Person class later, but spotting this association
now lets me shortcut that process. This is an example of
applying the System Metaphor idea introduced in Chapter 2,
“Techniques for Test-Driven Development”; it seems clear
that a Person is a top-level concept in this app so should be
treated as such during development.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 146 ---
People
Unless the artist formerly known as Prince changes career
and becomes an iOS developer, it seems likely that the
name of a Person can be represented as a string. Deciding
what to do about a Person’s avatar needs a little more
thought. There are many ways to represent an image in an
iOS app: a URL that can be used to retrieve the image, the
image data, or a CGImageRef or UIImage that represents the image
directly. Which should the Person class provide?
This is to a large extent a matter of personal preference. My
opinion is that the URL is a good ﬁt here. It means that the
data model is kept comparatively simple, and the logic over
when and how to retrieve image contents is dealt with at
the controller level.
With that decision made, the PersonTests ﬁxture is easy to
design:
@implementation PersonTests 
 
- (void)setUp { 
    person = [[Person alloc] initWithName: @"Graham Lee" 
        avatarLocation: @"http://example.com/avatar.png"]; 
} 
 
- (void)tearDown { 
    person = nil; 
} 
 
- (void)testThatPersonHasTheRightName { 
    STAssertEqualObjects(person.name, @"Graham Lee", 
        @"expecting a person to provide its name"); 
} 
 
- (void)testThatPersonHasAnAvatarURL { 
    NSURL *url = person.avatarURL; 
    STAssertEqualObjects([url absoluteString], 
        @"http://example.com/avatar.png", 
        @"The Person's avatar should be represented by a URL"); 
} 

--- Page 147 ---
 
@end
The Person class itself is two straightforward read-only
properties, along with this code to initialize the properties:
- (id)initWithName:(NSString *)aName avatarLocation:(NSString *)location { 
    if ((self = [super init])) { 
        name = [aName copy]; 
        avatarURL = [[NSURL alloc] initWithString: location]; 
    } 
    return self; 
}
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 148 ---
Connecting Questions to Other Classes
The reason I originally left the Topic alone to start work on
Question was that I needed to see what a Question looked like
before I could say what a list of questions in chronological
order looked like. I didn’t need to go quite as far as I did
with Question before turning back to the interaction with Topic:
It’s just easier for you, my beloved readers, if I don’t keep
changing the subject all over the place. But speaking of
changing the subject, let’s add a new feature to Topic.
So, how would I like to use code that returns an ordered list
of questions, and how should I test that the questions are in
the correct order? Unfortunately, although we’re told that
the list must be “in chronological order,” the requirements
don’t specify in which direction—that is, whether earlier
questions should appear before later questions, or vice
versa. I’ll follow convention oﬀered by the iOS Mail app, and
a number of third-party apps, in putting newer questions
near the top of the list: I should make a note to talk to the
customer about that requirement.5
5. Because the customer is me, I doubt there’ll be an issue. The point I’m
making here is that because test-driven development makes you think about
the app requirements in detail, you uncover problems like this before you get
too far into coding up the objects that implement the problematic
requirements.
Okay, ﬁrst I’ll make sure that I can tell a Topic that it has a
Question and see the list of questions for a Topic. In fact, before
that, I’ll want to check that a Topic to which no questions
have been added actually does contain no questions. Here
are both additions to TopicTests:
- (void)testForInitiallyEmptyQuestionList { 
    STAssertEquals([[topic recentQuestions] count], (NSUInteger)0, 
        @"No questions added yet, count should be zero"); 
} 
 
- (void)testAddingAQuestionToTheList { 
    Question *question = [[Question alloc] init]; 

--- Page 149 ---
    [topic addQuestion: question]; 
    STAssertEquals([[topic recentQuestions] count], (NSUInteger)1, 
        @"Add a question, and the count of questions should go up"); 
}
The casts are necessary in these tests because OCUnit
compares the type of arguments to STAssertEquals() in addition
to their values. Notice that the test to add a question to the
list modiﬁes the topic’s list of questions. Won’t that break
other tests that expect an empty list? No. Remember that
each test is executed in its own instance of the ﬁxture class,
fresh from having run -setUp. The outcome of one test can’t
aﬀect the behavior of another.
Recall the implementation of -[Topic recentQuestions] provided in a
previous section: It always returns an empty list. That
means that the ﬁrst of these two tests already passes (the
empty list has zero members), but the other test does not
pass because there’s no -addQuestion: method yet. Add that
method and somewhere for it to put the questions:
@implementation Topic
{ 
    NSArray *questions; 
} 
// ... 
- (id)initWithName:(NSString *)newName tag: (NSString *)newTag { 
    if ((self = [super init])) { 
        name = [newName copy]; 
        tag = [newTag copy]; 
        questions = [[NSArray alloc] init]; 
    } 
    return self; 
} 
 
- (void)addQuestion: (Question *)question { 
    questions = [questions arrayByAddingObject: question]; 
} 
 
@end
Now the test doesn’t throw an “unrecognized selector”
exception, but it still doesn’t pass. That’s because we still

--- Page 150 ---
need to get the existing -recentQuestions method to return the
list of questions.
- (NSArray *)recentQuestions { 
    return questions; 
}
Any list with zero or one objects is always guaranteed to be
in chronological order. What about a list of two objects?
Let’s try it.
- (void)testQuestionsAreListedChronologically { 
    Question *q1 = [[Question alloc] init]; 
    q1.date = [NSDate distantPast]; 
 
    Question *q2 = [[Question alloc] init]; 
    q2.date = [NSDate distantFuture]; 
 
    [topic addQuestion: q1]; 
    [topic addQuestion: q2]; 
 
    NSArray *questions = [topic recentQuestions]; 
    Question *listedFirst = [questions objectAtIndex: 0]; 
    Question *listedSecond = [questions objectAtIndex: 1]; 
 
    STAssertEqualObjects([listedFirst.date laterDate: 
        listedSecond.date], listedFirst.date, 
        @"The later question should appear ﬁrst in the list"); 
}
The test fails. This is unsurprising, because we didn’t do
anything yet to control the order of the question list. Let’s
change the -recentQuestions method so that it sorts the
questions by date.
- (NSArray *)recentQuestions { 
    return [questions sortedArrayUsingComparator: ^(id obj1, id obj2) { 
        Question *q1 = (Question *)obj1; 
        Question *q2 = (Question *)obj2; 
        return [q2.date compare: q1.date]; 
    }]; 
}
There—that works. (You can convince yourself of that by
writing the complementary test, where the later question is

--- Page 151 ---
added before the earlier question. It should pass.) That’s
nearly everything, but we need to ensure that only the
newest 20 questions are shown:
- (void)testLimitOfTwentyQuestions { 
    Question *q1 = [[Question alloc] init]; 
    for (NSInteger i = 0; i < 25; i++) { 
        [topic addQuestion: q1]; 
    } 
    STAssertTrue([[topic recentQuestions] count] < 21, 
        @"There should never be more than twenty questions"); 
}
That doesn’t work. We can see as many questions as have
ever been added. There are two obvious ways to limit the
number: Either put some logic into -addQuestion: to remove the
twenty-ﬁrst question if too many get added; or return only
the ﬁrst 20 questions in -recentQuestions no matter how many
there really are. The second way is the easiest to get the
test to pass, so let’s try that:
- (NSArray *)recentQuestions { 
    NSArray *sortedQuestions =  [questions sortedArrayUsingComparator: 
    ^(id obj1, id obj2) { 
        Question *q1 = (Question *)obj1; 
        Question *q2 = (Question *)obj2; 
        return = [q2.date compare: q1.date]; 
        } 
    }]; 
    if ([sortedQuestions count] < 21) { 
        return sortedQuestions; 
    } 
    else { 
        return [sortedQuestions subarrayWithRange: NSMakeRange(0, 20)]; 
    } 
}
That does work, but it doesn’t seem very nice to me. The
number of questions stored for any Topic could grow
endlessly, and although the app would only see 20 of them,
the rest would stay around, consuming memory. That’s not a
memory leak, but it is a stale reference problem. Because
this app needs to run in the limited-memory environment of

--- Page 152 ---
an iOS device, it would be good to address this problem
straight away. I’ll refactor the Topic class by reverting the last
change and implementing the other option—namely,
throwing away the earliest question in -addQuestion:. This will
require using the same sorting logic that’s in -recentQuestions, so
my ﬁrst refactoring step is to pull that out into a method
that can be used from both of the other methods.
- (NSArray *)sortQuestionsLatestFirst: (NSArray *)questionList { 
    return [questionList sortedArrayUsingComparator:    ^(id obj1, id obj2) { 
        Question *q1 = (Question *)obj1; 
        Question *q2 = (Question *)obj2; 
        return [q2.date compare: q1.date]; 
    }]; 
} 
 
- (NSArray *)recentQuestions { 
    return [self sortQuestionsLatestFirst: questions]; 
}
Now I can use that method to ﬁnd the earliest question and
discard it if there are too many questions.
- (void)addQuestion: (Question *)question { 
    NSArray *newQuestions = [questions arrayByAddingObject: question]; 
    if ([newQuestions count] > 20) { 
        newQuestions = [self sortQuestionsLatestFirst: newQuestions]; 
        newQuestions = [newQuestions subarrayWithRange: 
            NSMakeRange(0, 20)]; 
    } 
    questions = newQuestions; 
}
Running the (unmodiﬁed) test suite shows that I haven’t
broken anything, so this implementation is just as useful as
the ﬁrst: I just happen to prefer it. Test-driven development
motivates rapid addition of new functionality to your code,
because you are free to make any change you want to your
code and can rapidly get feedback on whether the change
introduced any problems. It still gives you a chance to take
a step back and change things to make them look, perform,
or smell better.

--- Page 153 ---
This last section shows a very powerful beneﬁt of test-driven
development. At the beginning, we had two tests that
worked using a very trivial implementation of the app code.
The implementation was signiﬁcantly modiﬁed, both to
provide new functionality and to clean up the code. In each
case, the tests of the original behavior were still present and
demonstrated that the new changes had not broken existing
code—that no regressions had been introduced by
refactoring or by adding new features.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 154 ---
Answers
There’s not much point in having questions that don’t get
answered (or is there?). The BrowseOverﬂow app calls for
the ability to see the list of answers for any question. Many
of the properties on Answer objects will be very similar to those
already found on other classes, so to save a bit of time and
a few trees, here’s the test ﬁxture for the familiar parts:
@implementation AnswerTests 
 
- (void)setUp { 
    answer = [[Answer alloc] init]; 
    answer.text = @"The answer is 42"; 
    answer.person = [[[Person alloc] initWithName: @"Graham Lee" 
        avatarLocation: @"http://example.com/avatar.png"] autorelease]; 
    answer.score = 42; 
} 
 
- (void)tearDown { 
    answer = nil; 
} 
 
- (void)testAnswerHasSomeText { 
    STAssertEqualObjects(answer.text, @"The answer is 42", 
        @"Answers need to contain some text"); 
} 
 
- (void)testSomeoneProvidedTheAnswer { 
    STAssertTrue([answer.person isKindOfClass: [Person class]], 
        @"A Person gave this Answer"); 
} 
 
- (void)testAnswersNotAcceptedByDefault { 
    STAssertFalse(answer.accepted, @"Answer not accepted by default"); 
} 
 
- (void)testAnswerCanBeAccepted { 
    STAssertNoThrow(answer.accepted = YES, 
        @"It is possible to accept an answer"); 
} 
 
- (void)testAnswerHasAScore { 
    STAssertTrue(answer.score == 42, 
        @"Answer's score can be retrieved"); 

--- Page 155 ---
} 
 
@end
You’ll have enough experience now with implementing code
based on test ﬁxtures like this to ﬁll in the implementation
of Answer so far yourself. The interesting bit comes when
linking Answers to Questions. We need the answers to be ranked in
descending order of score, except that an accepted answer
(if there is one) must come ﬁrst. Let’s add some tests to the
AnswerTests ﬁxture to show what those comparisons should look
like.
- (void)setUp { 
    answer = [[Answer alloc] init]; 
    answer.text = @"The answer is 42"; 
    answer.person = [[Person alloc] initWithName: @"Graham Lee" 
        avatarLocation: @"http://example.com/avatar.png"]; 
    answer.score = 42; 
    otherAnswer = [[Answer alloc] init]; 
    otherAnswer.text = @"I have the answer you need"; 
    otherAnswer.score = 42; 
} 
 
- (void)testAcceptedAnswerComesBeforeUnaccepted { 
    otherAnswer.accepted = YES; 
    otherAnswer.score = answer.score + 10; 
 
    STAssertEquals([answer compare: otherAnswer], NSOrderedDescending, 
        @"Accepted answer should come ﬁrst"); 
    STAssertEquals([otherAnswer compare: answer], NSOrderedAscending, 
        @"Unaccepted answer should come last"); 
} 
 
- (void)testAnswersWithEqualScoresCompareEqually { 
    STAssertEquals([answer compare: otherAnswer], NSOrderedSame, 
        @"Both answers of equal rank"); 
    STAssertEquals([otherAnswer compare: answer], NSOrderedSame, 
         @"Each answer has the same rank"); 
} 
 
- (void)testLowerScoringAnswerComesAfterHigher { 
    otherAnswer.score = answer.score + 10; 
    STAssertEquals([answer compare: otherAnswer], NSOrderedDescending, 
        @"Higher score comes ﬁrst"); 

--- Page 156 ---
    STAssertEquals([otherAnswer compare: answer], NSOrderedAscending, 
        @"Lower score comes last"); 
}
Notice the symmetric requirements in each test: If we
require that a<b is true, we also need b>a to be true. You may
choose to write those as separate tests, but I didn’t,
because they’re testing identical requirements but in
diﬀerent ways. Here’s an implementation of -[Answer compare:]
that addresses all the requirements in the test ﬁxture.
- (NSComparisonResult)compare:(Answer *)otherAnswer { 
    if (accepted && !(otherAnswer.accepted)) { 
        return NSOrderedAscending; 
    } else if (!accepted && otherAnswer.accepted){ 
        return NSOrderedDescending; 
    } 
    if (score > otherAnswer.score) { 
        return NSOrderedAscending; 
    } else if (score < otherAnswer.score) { 
        return NSOrderedDescending; 
    } else { 
        return NSOrderedSame; 
    } 
}
With a working comparison method, it should be easy to
provide the list of answers for any question in the correct
order.
@interface QuestionTests : SenTestCase { 
    Question *question; 
    Answer *lowScore; 
    Answer *highScore;
} 
 
@end 
 
- (void)setUp { 
    question = [[Question alloc] init]; 
    question.date = [NSDate distantPast]; 
    question.title = @"Do iPhones also dream of electric sheep?"; 
    question.score = 42; 
 
    Answer *accepted = [[Answer alloc] init]; 
    accepted.score = 1; 

--- Page 157 ---
    accepted.accepted = YES; 
    [question addAnswer: accepted]; 
 
    lowScore = [[Answer alloc] init]; 
    lowScore.score = -4; 
    [question addAnswer: lowScore]; 
 
    highScore = [[Answer alloc] init]; 
    highScore.score = 4; 
    [question addAnswer: highScore]; 
} 
- (void)tearDown { 
    question = nil; 
    lowScore = nil; 
    highScore = nil; 
} 
 
- (void)testQuestionCanHaveAnswersAdded { 
    Answer *myAnswer = [[Answer alloc] init];
    STAssertNoThrow([question addAnswer: myAnswer], 
        @"Must be able to add answers"); 
} 
 
- (void)testAcceptedAnswerIsFirst { 
    STAssertTrue([[question.answers objectAtIndex: 0] isAccepted], 
        @"Accepted answer comes ﬁrst"); 
} 
 
- (void)testHighScoreAnswerBeforeLow { 
    NSArray *answers = question.answers; 
    NSInteger highIndex = [answers indexOfObject: highScore]; 
    NSInteger lowIndex = [answers indexOfObject: lowScore]; 
    STAssertTrue(highIndex < lowIndex, 
        @"High-scoring answer comes ﬁrst"); 
}
There are a few problems with getting this to compile. I
decided I wanted to use the -[Answer isAccepted] method here,
but it doesn’t exist: I previously created a @property for
whether answers are accepted, but it doesn’t provide that
method. Creating it is a simple refactoring exercise on the
Answer class:
@property (getter=isAccepted) BOOL accepted;

--- Page 158 ---
The remaining compile problems relate to providing the
methods we want to implement on Question: the new
implementation follows:
@class Answer; 
@interface Question : NSObject { 
    NSMutableSet *answerSet; 
} 
 
@property (retain) NSDate *date; 
@property (copy) NSString *title; 
@property NSInteger score; 
@property (readonly) NSArray *answers; 
 
- (void)addAnswer: (Answer *)answer; 
 
@end 
#import "Question.h" 
#import "Answer.h" 
@implementation Question 
 
@synthesize date; 
@synthesize title; 
@synthesize score; 
 
- (id)init { 
    if ((self = [super init])) { 
        answerSet = [[NSMutableSet alloc] init]; 
    } 
    return self; 
} 
 
- (void)addAnswer:(Answer *)answer { 
    [answerSet addObject: answer]; 
} 
 
- (NSArray *)answers { 
    return [[answerSet allObjects] 
        sortedArrayUsingSelector: @selector(compare:)]; 
} 
 
@end
Notice that although the requirements on the list of
questions in a topic and the list of answers are fairly similar,
the implementations of each are quite diﬀerent. Test-driven

--- Page 159 ---
development still gives you lots of ﬂexibility in how you
write application code. You are not constrained to follow
particular patterns or methods.
That’s actually all we need from the data model, as far as
it’s possible to tell from the requirements. In the next
chapter, we’ll look at the application logic.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 160 ---
7. Application Logic
Now that I can create and manipulate objects that the user
cares about working with in BrowseOverﬂow, it’s time to
think about hooking up with the real StackOverﬂow service
so that the objects created in the app reﬂect the content of
the site. This means going to the Stack Exchange API
documentation at http://api.stackoverﬂow.com/1.1/usage
and ﬁnding out how to consume their data.
Plan of Attack
According to the API documentation, StackOverﬂow has
methods for requesting the questions in a topic, and the
details for a question including the list of answers for that
question. This does not validate the design for the domain
model from Chapter 6, “The Data Model,” but indicates that
because it’s a good ﬁt for the data coming from the service,
creating the objects we’ve designed from StackOverﬂow’s
data should be straightforward. The data will be sent in
JSON format;1 we need objects that can retrieve that, and
construct our domain objects from the encoded data.
1. JSON is the JavaScript Object Notation, a lightweight data markup format
that’s very similar to Apple’s property list format. JSON is described in more
detail at http://json.org.
It’s always good to have an endgame in mind. Remember
the system metaphor described in Chapter 2, “Techniques
for Test-Driven Development.” The way in which I want to
develop this application’s logic is depicted in Figure 7.1. The
app has a StackOverflowManager, which it can ask for questions
associated with a particular Topic instance. That object
fetches the JSON using a StackOverflowCommunicator object, and
passes it to a QuestionBuilder that constructs the Question object.
The StackOverflowManager communicates with the app via a
delegate to ﬁnd out whether to additionally fetch the

--- Page 161 ---
answers and people associated with the question, before
ﬁnally passing the completed Question object to the delegate.
Similar interactions exist for an AnswerBuilder and PersonBuilder
class.
Figure 7.1. Class diagram for the proposed app logic
classes.
In this interaction, the StackOverflowManager acts as a Façade to the
domain logic. The app’s controller can work with the model
objects created here, without needing to know any of the
details about the network connection, the object notation or
how the objects are constructed. The various Builder classes
encapsulate the creation of the model objects, to avoid
making the manager too complicated. If the details of
constructing a Question, for instance, were to change, then
ﬁnding the relevant code in Question Builder is easier than
grubbing through all the manager class’s source to ﬁnd the
methods to update.
However, the tests could end up taking us in a diﬀerent
direction. We might ﬁnd while implementing the code that
the design planned previously is not suitable or that a better
design presents itself. This is ﬁne; all we need now is a high-
level goal to aim for.

--- Page 162 ---
Design Patterns
Both the Façade and Builder patterns employed in
this design are described in the classic book on
the topic, Design Patterns by Gamma, Helm,
Johnson, and Vlissides (also known as the “Gang
of Four”). This book, and the general topic of
design patterns, was introduced in Chapter 2.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 163 ---
Creating a Question
The ﬁrst piece of the puzzle to implement is the ability to
build a question. Let’s start at the beginning: The
application will ask the StackOverflowManager to provide its
delegate with questions on a particular topic. That means
that the StackOverflowManager class must have a delegate. It seems
like it’s time to create a StackOverflowManagerTests ﬁxture, but
because I’m concentrating on this workﬂow of creating
questions, I’m going to call it QuestionCreationTests instead. The
QuestionCreationTests class should be an Objective-C test case
class, added to the BrowseOverflowTests target but not the
BrowseOverflow app target.
#import "QuestionCreationTests.h" 
#import "StackOverﬂowManager.h" 
 
@implementation QuestionCreationTests 
{ 
@private 
    StackOverﬂowManager *mgr; 
} 
 
- (void)setUp { 
    mgr = [[StackOverﬂowManager alloc] init]; 
} 
 
- (void)tearDown { 
    mgr = nil; 
} 
 
- (void)testNonConformingObjectCannotBeDelegate { 
    STAssertThrows(mgr.delegate = 
        (id <StackOverﬂowManagerDelegate>)[NSNull null], 
        @"NSNull should not be used as the delegate as doesn't" 
        @" conform to the delegate protocol"); 
} 
 
- (void)testConformingObjectCanBeDelegate { 
    id <StackOverﬂowManagerDelegate> delegate = 
        [[MockStackOverﬂowManagerDelegate alloc] init]; 
    STAssertNoThrow(mgr.delegate = delegate, 
        @"Object conforming to the delegate protocol should be used" 

--- Page 164 ---
        @" as the delegate"); 
} 
 
@end
Try running the tests now (Cmd-U), and you’ll ﬁnd quite a
number of errors and warnings. For a very simple pair of
tests, this puts a lot of requirements onto the product before
the tests will pass. Even to get the code to compile it will
need three additions:
• A StackOverflowManager class with a delegate property must be
added to both the app and the test target. (It’s usual to
use a weak relationship between an object and its
delegate, to avoid a retain cycle.)
• A StackOverflowManagerDelegate protocol, which the manager’s
delegate must conform to, must also be added to both
targets. The StackOverflowManagerDelegate protocol should extend
the NSObject protocol.
• A MockStackOverflowManagerDelegate class. This will not be part of
the product; it gives us a way to detect how the
manager interacts with its delegate. It should just be
added to the test case target.
Here’s a ﬁrst attempt at the interface and implementation of
StackOverflowManager. The #import directives have been left out for
clarity.
@interface StackOverﬂowManager : NSObject 
 
@property (weak) id<StackOverﬂowManagerDelegate> delegate; 
 
@end 
 
@implementation StackOverﬂowManager 
 
@synthesize delegate; 
 
@end
This is, unfortunately, not a successful implementation. The
-testNonConformingObjectCannotBeDelegate test fails: It’s possible to set

--- Page 165 ---
objects that do not conform to the delegate protocol as
delegates for the StackOverflowManager class. I want to forbid that
so that I don’t forget the protocol conformance—and
therefore the methods I need to implement—on the real
application’s delegate. The beneﬁt of enforcing the protocol
conformance at runtime is that if someone does try to hook
up an instance of the manager to the wrong delegate
object, the error will be reported in the setup code rather
than at an indeterminate time later in the running of the
app.
Override the -[StackOverflowManager setDelegate:] accessor in the
implementation. This also means changing the property’s
declaration from @property(weak) to @property (weak, nonatomic) so that
you don’t have to supply a matching get accessor
implementation.
- (void)setDelegate:(id<StackOverﬂowManagerDelegate>)newDelegate { 
    if (![newDelegate conformsToProtocol: 
        @protocol(StackOverﬂowManagerDelegate)]) { 
        [[NSException exceptionWithName: NSInvalidArgumentException 
            reason: 
            @"Delegate object does not conform to the delegate protocol" 
            userInfo: nil] raise]; 
    } 
    delegate = newDelegate; 
}
Is that a complete implementation? There’s one thing left to
test: What happens if the application uses nil as the
delegate? That should be supported, because maybe the
app wants to fetch the content but doesn’t care about the
results. Another test on QuestionCreationTests shows that it
currently isn’t supported:
- (void)testManagerAcceptsNilAsADelegate { 
    STAssertNoThrow(mgr.delegate = nil, 
        @"It should be acceptable to use nil as an object's delegate"); 
}
Running the tests conﬁrms that this test fails: nil cannot
currently be used as the delegate. A small ﬁx (highlighted in

--- Page 166 ---
the following code) corrects this.
- (void)setDelegate:(id<StackOverﬂowManagerDelegate>)newDelegate { 
    if (newDelegate && 
        ![newDelegate conformsToProtocol: 
            @protocol(StackOverﬂowManagerDelegate)]) { 
        [[NSException exceptionWithName: NSInvalidArgumentException 
    reason: @"Delegate object does not conform to the delegate protocol" 
        userInfo: nil] raise]; 
    } 
    delegate = newDelegate; 
}
Now that the manager has a delegate, it can start doing
some real work. The ﬁrst thing that ought to happen is that
if the manager is asked to provide questions for some topic,
it should contact the communicator class and tell it to
download the JSON.
A little aside: I don’t want to have to develop the
StackOverflowCommunicator class now—I’m just trying to ﬁnd out how
the StackOverflowManager should behave. But it looks like the
communicator class is already needed. The way to deal with
this is to deﬁne the StackOverflowCommunicator class in both the app
and the test target, and at the same time create a mock—a
subclass called MockStackOverflowCommunicator—just in the test case’s
target that implements the same methods. Where the tests
need the manager to use the communicator class, they can
hand it the mock. Later, when implementing the actual
communicator class, I can see how it must be used because
the interface will already be at least partially deﬁned.
So, back to the test. The manager should ask the
communicator for data when it’s asked to provide questions
on a particular topic. That interaction could look like this (a
test in the QuestionCreationTests ﬁxture):
- (void)testAskingForQuestionsMeansRequestingData { 
    MockStackOverﬂowCommunicator *communicator = 
        [[MockStackOverﬂowCommunicator alloc] init]; 
    mgr.communicator = communicator; 
    Topic *topic = [[Topic alloc] initWithName: @"iPhone" 

--- Page 167 ---
        tag: @"iphone"]; 
    [mgr fetchQuestionsOnTopic: topic]; 
    STAssertTrue([communicator wasAskedToFetchQuestions], 
        @"The communicator should need to fetch data."); 
}
To get this to build, we need to provide a communicator
property on the StackOverflowManager class:
@property (strong) StackOverﬂowCommunicator *communicator;
This means deﬁning the StackOverflowCommunicator class interface.
At this time, the test and requirements indicate that there
should be some method called on it, but there is no
speciﬁcation of what method. That gives us free rein to
deﬁne the method as we see ﬁt, especially because we can
always change it later:
@interface StackOverﬂowCommunicator : NSObject { 
 
} 
 
- (void)searchForQuestionsWithTag: (NSString *)tag; 
 
@end
However, we don’t (yet!) need to implement that method on
StackOverflowCommunicator. Some people reviewing early drafts of
the chapter suggested creating an empty implementation of
-searchForQuestionsWithTag: here, in order to suppress a compiler
warning. That doesn’t quite match the “red-green-refactor”
scheme. Right now we’re concentrating on getting -
testAskingForQuestionsMeansRequestingData to pass, and should work on
that with extreme prejudice. Tidying up warnings can be left
for the refactoring: you could also choose to leave that
warning in as a reminder that StackOverflowCommunicator is not yet
production ready. That’s what warnings are for: They’re
notices by the compiler that something isn’t quite right in
your code.
What we do need is a mock implementation that provides
proof that this method has been called. You may choose to

--- Page 168 ---
reach for OCMock at this point, but it’s very simple to create
such a mock from scratch, as an Objective-C class that’s
added to the BrowseOverflowTests target:
@interface MockStackOverﬂowCommunicator : StackOverﬂowCommunicator 
- (BOOL)wasAskedToFetchQuestions; 
@end 
 
@implementation MockStackOverﬂowCommunicator 
{ 
    BOOL wasAskedToFetchQuestions; 
} 
- (void)searchForQuestionsWithTag:(NSString *)tag { 
    wasAskedToFetchQuestions = YES; 
} 
 
- (BOOL)wasAskedToFetchQuestions { 
    return wasAskedToFetchQuestions; 
} 
 
@end
All this implementation does is set a ﬂag when the API
method is called. It’s not very exciting, and it’s not as robust
as a mock could be (for example, there’s no error if the
method is called twice in a test), but it’ll do for now. The test
will now compile, but it doesn’t pass; we didn’t implement
the -[StackOverflowManager fetchQuestionsOnTopic:] method yet. Here’s an
implementation that, when added to StackOverflowManager.m,
passes the test:2
2. Don’t forget to add the method declaration to StackOverflowManager.h too, so
that the method becomes part of the class’s API. In general I’ll leave this out:
Methods on a class that are called from tests are by deﬁnition part of that
class’s interface, so should be deﬁned in the @interface.
- (void)fetchQuestionsOnTopic:(Topic *)topic { 
    [communicator searchForQuestionsWithTag: [topic tag]]; 
}
There isn’t much to the implementation, but we had to write
a lot of supporting code to get to this point. That isn’t a
problem, because a lot of questions were raised—and
answered—in writing all that additional code.

--- Page 169 ---
Assume for the moment that the StackOverflowCommunicator does its
magic (which it will later, when we get around to
constructing that class). Two possibilities exist for what
happens next:
• The communicator couldn’t retrieve information from
the Stack Overﬂow website and tells the manager what
went wrong.
• The communicator received some JSON data and sends
it back to the manager to make some questions.
Both of these cases must be handled in the application,
which means that both cases must be tested. A common
mistake—not just in TDD, but in any discipline of software
engineering—is to only ask about, code and test the “happy
path” without specifying or discovering what happens in
case of error. Such oversight can lead to software that
crashes and burns horribly when presented with unexpected
situations—or worse, software that tries to carry on
obliviously after an important error has occurred. Even
though you’re using test-driven development now, a little
humility can still go a long way.
Let’s start by dealing with the error case. We’ll assume that
the communicator informs the manager about the error it
encountered. The manager should tell its delegate about the
problem, but being a Façade, it should report an error at a
higher level (that is, “getting the questions you wanted
failed,” not “looking up a DNS entry failed”). The
communication error should still be made available as the
underlying error so that if we need error-reporting behavior
(for the app’s support staﬀ, for example), this error can be
seen. The following tests added to the QuestionCreationTests
ﬁxture encapsulate those requirements.
- (void)testErrorReturnedToDelegateIsNotErrorNotiﬁedByCommunicator { 
    MockStackOverﬂowManagerDelegate *delegate = 
        [[MockStackOverﬂowManagerDelegate alloc] init]; 
    mgr.delegate = delegate; 

--- Page 170 ---
    NSError *underlyingError = [NSError errorWithDomain: @"Test domain" 
        code: 0 userInfo: nil]; 
    [mgr searchingForQuestionsFailedWithError: underlyingError]; 
    STAssertFalse(underlyingError == [delegate fetchError], 
        @"Error should be at the correct level of abstraction"); 
} 
 
- (void)testErrorReturnedToDelegateDocumentsUnderlyingError {
    MockStackOverﬂowManagerDelegate *delegate = 
        [[MockStackOverﬂowManagerDelegate alloc] init]; 
    mgr.delegate = delegate; 
    NSError *underlyingError = [NSError errorWithDomain: @"Test domain" 
        code: 0 userInfo: nil]; 
    [mgr searchingForQuestionsFailedWithError: underlyingError]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects([[[delegate fetchError] userInfo] 
        objectForKey: NSUnderlyingErrorKey], underlyingError, 
        @"The underlying error should be available to client code"); 
}
It’s worth refactoring these tests to move all the common
code into a single spot. Before implementing the -
searchingForQuestionsFailedWithError: method, notice that the mock
delegate needs a -fetchError method to show the test what
error it received from the manager. That means that the
manager must have some way to signal an error to its
delegate, which in turn means a method on the delegate
protocol:
- (void)fetchingQuestionsOnTopic: (Topic *)topic 
                 failedWithError: (NSError *)error;
In our mock delegate, the implementation of this method
should just squirrel the error away so that the test can later
retrieve and examine what the manager object sent.
@interface MockStackOverﬂowManagerDelegate : NSObject 
    <StackOverﬂowManagerDelegate> 
@property (strong) NSError *fetchError; 
@end 
 
@implementation MockStackOverﬂowManagerDelegate 
 
@synthesize fetchError; 
 
- (void)fetchingQuestionsOnTopic: (Topic *)topic 

--- Page 171 ---
                 failedWithError: (NSError *)error { 
    self.fetchError = error; 
} 
 
@end
That’s enough to support implementing the method that’s
being tested, which goes on StackOverflowManager. Notice that the
implementation introduces a couple of new constants, which
are declared in StackOverflowManager.h like this:
extern NSString *StackOverﬂowManagerError; 
 
enum { 
    StackOverﬂowManagerErrorQuestionSearchCode 
};
The method implementation and the deﬁnition of the string
constant both go in StackOverflowManager.m.
- (void)searchingForQuestionsFailedWithError:(NSError *)error { 
    NSDictionary *errorInfo = [NSDictionary dictionaryWithObject: error 
        forKey: NSUnderlyingErrorKey]; 
    NSError *reportableError = [NSError 
        errorWithDomain: StackOverﬂowManagerSearchFailedError 
                   code: StackOverﬂowManagerErrorQuestionSearchCode 
               userInfo:errorInfo]; 
    [delegate fetchingQuestionsOnTopic: nil 
                       failedWithError: reportableError]; 
} 
 
//... 
 
@end 
 
NSString *StackOverﬂowManagerError = @"StackOverﬂowManagerError";
Although this method passes its tests, it doesn’t seem like
the method provides enough utility to complete the API
contract. The delegate method includes a ‘topic’ parameter,
explaining which topic the manager couldn’t download the
content for; but currently, that parameter is set to nil.
Do we need it? Take another look at the description of the
app in Chapter 5. “Test-Driven Development of an iOS App.”

--- Page 172 ---
The “landing” view contains a list of topics, but no
questions, so although the app needs multiple topics at that
point, it probably won’t need to fetch questions for any of
them. The next view contains a set of questions for one
particular topic, so here the app does need the manager to
retrieve questions; but there’s only one topic involved. It
seems that this parameter is extraneous, so remove it to
change the delegate method signature in both the interface
and implementation to:
- (void)fetchingQuestionsFailedWithError: (NSError *)error;
It’s easy to then change the implementation and the tests
to use the updated method signature. Build the project, and
then use Xcode’s Issue Navigator (the keyboard shortcut is
Cmd-4) to ﬁnd and ﬁx all the compiler warnings and errors.
Okay, so that’s the one identiﬁed failure case dealt with.
The next part of the story is that the communicator
retrieves some JSON and sends it to the manager. The
manager’s job is to pass this JSON to a QuestionBuilder object
that can create Question objects. What we need can be
described by this test in the QuestionCreationTests ﬁxture:
- (void)testQuestionJSONIsPassedToQuestionBuilder { 
    FakeQuestionBuilder *builder = [[FakeQuestionBuilder alloc] init]; 
    mgr.questionBuilder = builder; 
    [mgr receivedQuestionsJSON: @"Fake JSON"]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects(builder.JSON, @"Fake JSON", 
        @"Downloaded JSON is sent to the builder"); 
    mgr.questionBuilder = nil; 
}
Again, let’s take a look at what is needed to make this work.
The FakeQuestionBuilder is, as the name suggests, the fake version
of a QuestionBuilder. We don’t have a QuestionBuilder class yet, so
that class’s interface needs to be deﬁned in both the app
and the test case target: It can be a subclass of NSObject. We
know that it needs to receive the string from the manager
and return question objects it ﬁnds by parsing the string as

--- Page 173 ---
JSON. Looking at the problem more closely, there’s nothing
we’ve done yet that stops the QuestionBuilder from receiving any
string, which might not be JSON—and even if it is, might not
be usable to create questions. Taking all that together, the
QuestionBuilder interface should look like this:
- (NSArray *)questionsFromJSON: (NSString *)objectNotation 
                         error: (NSError **)error;
The fake version—a subclass of QuestionBuilder that is deﬁned in
the test case target alone—needs to keep a reference to the
JSON it receives; we don’t (yet) need to consider the return
value or error parameter, so returning nil is ﬁne. The header
for FakeQuestionBuilder looks like this:
#import <Foundation/Foundation.h> 
#import "QuestionBuilder.h" 
 
@class Question; 
 
@interface FakeQuestionBuilder : QuestionBuilder
@property (copy) NSString *JSON; 
@end
This is the implementation of FakeQuestionBuilder:
#import "FakeQuestionBuilder.h" 
#import "Question.h" 
 
@implementation FakeQuestionBuilder 
 
@synthesize JSON; 
 
- (NSArray *)questionsFromJSON: (NSString *)objectNotation 
                         error: (NSError **)error { 
    self.JSON = objectNotation; 
    return nil; 
} 
 
@end
Finally, the StackOverflowManager needs to know what QuestionBuilder to
use, which in the test method is provided as a strong
property called questionBuilder. Putting all that in place allows us

--- Page 174 ---
to write this implementation of -
[StackOverflowManagerreceivedQuestionsJSON:].
- (void)receivedQuestionsJSON:(NSString *)objectNotation { 
    NSArray *questions = [questionBuilder 
        questionsFromJSON: objectNotation error: NULL]; 
}
Enough to pass this test, but not enough to be particularly
useful. We’ve already dealt with error reporting for the
network communication case; now let’s ensure that the
manager passes an appropriate error to its delegate if it
can’t get questions from the QuestionBuilder. The ﬁrst thing to do
is to make sure it’s explicit that the FakeQuestionBuilder will
actually return the correct value, and set an error we want.
Let’s make that controllable from the test ﬁxture:
@interface FakeQuestionBuilder : QuestionBuilder { 
} 
@property (copy) NSString *JSON; 
@property (copy) NSArray *arrayToReturn; 
@property (copy) NSError *errorToSet; 
@end 
 
@implementation FakeQuestionBuilder 
 
@synthesize JSON; 
@synthesize arrayToReturn; 
@synthesize errorToSet; 
 
- (NSArray *)questionsFromJSON: (NSString *)objectNotation 
                         error: (NSError **)error { 
    self.JSON = objectNotation; 
    return arrayToReturn; 
} 
 
@end
Now we write the tests to ensure that when the builder
returns nil, the manager tells its delegate about the error.
From the application’s perspective, this error occurs in the
same “get some questions” task that the network error
does, so we expect the error to be signaled in the same way.

--- Page 175 ---
This means we can use the interface for telling the delegate
about errors that we built earlier in the chapter. This test
goes in QuestionCreationTests; the ﬁxture’s instance variables -setUp
and -tearDown methods are also shown to demonstrate how the
test is conﬁgured.
@implementation QuestionCreationTests 
{ 
@private 
    StackOverﬂowManager *mgr; 
    MockStackOverﬂowManagerDelegate *delegate; 
    NSError *underlyingError; 
} 
 
- (void)setUp { 
    mgr = [[StackOverﬂowManager alloc] init]; 
    delegate = [[MockStackOverﬂowManagerDelegate alloc] init]; 
    mgr.delegate = delegate; 
    underlyingError = [NSError errorWithDomain: @"Test domain" 
        code: 0 userInfo: nil]; 
} 
 
- (void)tearDown { 
    mgr = nil; 
    delegate = nil; 
    underlyingError = nil; 
} 
 
- (void)testDelegateNotiﬁedOfErrorWhenQuestionBuilderFails { 
    FakeQuestionBuilder *builder = [[FakeQuestionBuilder alloc] init]; 
    builder.arrayToReturn = nil; 
    builder.errorToSet = underlyingError; 
    mgr.questionBuilder = builder; 
    [mgr receivedQuestionsJSON: @"Fake JSON"]; 
    STAssertNotNil([[[delegate fetchError] userInfo] 
        objectForKey: NSUnderlyingErrorKey], 
        @"The delegate should have found out about the error"); 
    mgr.questionBuilder = nil; 
} 
This requires that we ﬂesh out the implementation of -
[StackOverflowManagerreceivedQuestionsJSON:] to set errors properly.
- (void)receivedQuestionsJSON:(NSString *)objectNotation { 
    NSError *error = nil; 
    NSArray *questions = [questionBuilder 

--- Page 176 ---
        questionsFromJSON: objectNotation error: &error]; 
    if (!questions) { 
        NSError *reportableError = [NSError 
            errorWithDomain: StackOverﬂowManagerSearchFailedError 
                      code: StackOverﬂowManagerErrorQuestionSearchCode 
                   userInfo:[NSDictionary dictionaryWithObject: error 
                            forKey: NSUnderlyingErrorKey]]; 
        [delegate fetchingQuestionsFailedWithError: reportableError]; 
    } 
}
Oops! I broke something. The new test, -
testDelegateNotifiedOfErrorWhenQuestionBuilderFails, passes, but now -
testQuestionJSONIsPassedToQuestionBuilder crashes. Let’s take a look at
the debugger output (look in the Console Navigator—Cmd-7
—for the most recent “Test BrowseOverflowTests” event):
[2259:207] *** Terminating app due to uncaught exception 
'NSInvalidArgumentException', reason: '*** -[NSCFDictionary
initWithObjects:forKeys:count:]: attempt to insert nil value at objects[0]
(key:NSUnderlyingError)'
Either the test setup is wrong, and the StackOverflowManager class
should always receive an error when its question builder
returns nil, or the code is wrong and should be changed to
accept the possibility that it didn’t receive an error. I think
the latter case is better in this instance. We have one test
where the error is important and another where it’s
unnecessary, so on balance, ignoring a lack of error seems
acceptable. That changes the implementation of -
[StackOverflowManager receivedQuestionsJSON]:
- (void)receivedQuestionsJSON:(NSString *)objectNotation { 
    NSError *error = nil; 
    NSArray *questions = [questionBuilder 
        questionsFromJSON: objectNotation error: &error]; 
    if (!questions) { 
        NSDictionary *errorInfo = nil; 
        if (error) { 
            errorInfo = [NSDictionary dictionaryWithObject: error 
                forKey: NSUnderlyingErrorKey]; 
        } 
        NSError *reportableError = [NSError 
            errorWithDomain: StackOverﬂowManagerSearchFailedError 

--- Page 177 ---
                       code: StackOverﬂowManagerErrorQuestionSearchCode 
                   userInfo: errorInfo]; 
        [delegate fetchingQuestionsFailedWithError: reportableError]; 
    } 
}
Great—I’ve ﬁxed the crash, and both tests now pass.
Incidentally, this is a good time to refactor both the tests
and the code. We have a couple of tests that use the same
FakeQuestionBuilder instance; that instance could be conﬁgured as
part of the ﬁxture. Notice that two methods on
StackOverflowManager, -receivedQuestionsJSON: and -
searchingForQuestionsFailedWithError:—both implement the same code
for passing an error to the delegate. This can be pulled out
to a private method; I chose to call it -
tellDelegateAboutQuestionSearchError:. The classes we’ve created so far
are depicted in Figure 7.2, including the fakes and mocks so
that you can see how the tests are supported by these extra
classes.
Figure 7.2. Classes created to support the question
creation tests.
Testing Private Methods
I have often been asked, “Should I test my private
methods?” or the related question “How should I
test my private methods?” People asking the second

--- Page 178 ---
question have assumed that the answer to the ﬁrst
is “Yes” and are now looking for a way to expose
their classes’ private interfaces in their test suites.
My answer relies on observation of a subtle fact: You
already have tested your private methods. By
following the red–green–refactor approach common
in test-driven development, you designed your
objects’ public APIs to do the work those objects
need to do. With that work speciﬁed by the tests—
and the continued execution of the tests assuring
you that you haven’t broken anything—you are free
to organize the internal plumbing of your classes as
you see ﬁt.
Your private methods are already tested because all
you’re doing is refactoring behavior that you already
have tests for. You should never end up in a
situation where a private method is untested or
incompletely tested, because you create them only
when you see an opportunity to clean up the
implementation of public methods. This ensures that
the private methods exist only to support the class’s
public behavior, and that they must be invoked
during testing because they are deﬁnitely being
called from public methods.
Two things need to happen if the QuestionBuilder returns an
array of questions:
• The delegate ﬁnds out about the questions.
• The manager should not tell the delegate that an error
occurred.
Let’s ensure that both of these things happen, by writing
some new tests on the QuestionCreationTests ﬁxture.
- (void)setUp { 
    //... 

--- Page 179 ---
    Question *question = [[Question alloc] init]; 
    questionArray = [NSArray arrayWithObject: question]; 
} 
 
- (void)tearDown { 
    //... 
    questionArray = nil; 
} 
 
- (void)testDelegateNotToldAboutErrorWhenQuestionsReceived { 
    questionBuilder.arrayToReturn = questionArray; 
    [mgr receivedQuestionsJSON: @"Fake JSON"]; 
    STAssertNil([delegate fetchError], @"No error should be received on
success"); 
} 
 
- (void)testDelegateReceivesTheQuestionsDiscoveredByManager { 
    questionBuilder.arrayToReturn = questionArray; 
    [mgr receivedQuestionsJSON: @"Fake JSON"]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects([delegate receivedQuestions], questionArray, @"The
manager should have sent its questions to the delegate"); 
}
We’re already 50% of the way toward success, because one
of these two tests passes without making any code changes.
The other requires that our fake delegate implementation
store the array of questions it receives so the test can ask
about it, which in turn needs that the manager inform its
delegate about the questions. A new method is needed on
the delegate protocol:
- (void)didReceiveQuestions: (NSArray *)questions;
With these pieces in place, we can extend the
StackOverﬂowManager implementation so that it passes the
new test.
- (void)receivedQuestionsJSON:(NSString *)objectNotation { 
    NSError *error = nil; 
    NSArray *questions = [questionBuilder 
        questionsFromJSON: objectNotation error: &error]; 
    if (!questions) { 
        [self tellDelegateAboutQuestionSearchError: error]; 
    } 
    else { 

--- Page 180 ---
        [delegate didReceiveQuestions: questions]; 
    } 
}
Did we forget anything? Yes—what happens if the
QuestionBuilder returns an empty array? This looks like the
success case (an array is returned), but could reasonably be
considered an error (no questions are actually provided). In
fact, I don’t think this is an error. There might really be no
questions on a particular topic, and if not, the app would
want to know about that. So I’ll write a test that shows this
should be considered a success case. There aren’t any code
changes needed, but the test is still useful because it
documents that I’ve considered this case and decided that
the StackOverﬂowManager API works in this particular way.
- (void)testEmptyArrayIsPassedToDelegate { 
    questionBuilder.arrayToReturn = [NSArray array]; 
    [mgr receivedQuestionsJSON: @"Fake JSON"]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects([delegate receivedQuestions], [NSArray array],
        @"Returning an empty array is not an error"); 
}
So now we have the complete workﬂow from requesting a
list of questions on some topic to providing those questions,
including handling errors that might occur. However, it still
remains to actually fetch the data from the server and
construct the questions from the data. Let’s solve the latter
problem ﬁrst.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 181 ---
Building Questions from JSON
Having decided how the BrowseOverﬂow app will retrieve
the data describing questions from the Stack Overﬂow
website, we can use that data to create the question
objects. It’s time to ﬂesh out the implementation of
QuestionBuilder and to create a new test ﬁxture called
QuestionBuilderTests to describe this implementation. Incidentally,
this raises a question about class naming: If we’re testing
question construction in QuestionBuilderTests, just what was
QuestionCreationTests for? It’s a valid question; the class names
both suggest that they’re responsible for the same thing.
I’m going to rename QuestionCreationTests to QuestionCreationWorkflowTests,
because that class is really testing how the app interacts
with the question-creation machinery and isn’t about the
nuts and bolts of building question objects.
Renaming a class is very simple using Xcode’s refactoring
capabilities. Select the class name in the interface ﬁle, right-
click, and choose Rename from the Refactor menu.
The API for QuestionBuilder has already been speciﬁed because
we needed to know how the class worked to design
StackOverflowManager. We can already specify that the string
passed to QuestionBuilder will not be nil, because the
StackOverflowManager will have handled any errors that occurred
earlier in the process. Also, if the string cannot be parsed as
JSON, the QuestionBuilder will return nil and set an error, if the
error parameter is non-NULL.3
3. Remember that this unit test is testing the manager unit, not the
communicator unit. After we have a complete set of tests and a green bar
here, it doesn’t mean we’re done: We still need to construct the other classes
and integrate them.
@implementation QuestionBuilderTests 
 
- (void)setUp { 
    questionBuilder = [[QuestionBuilder alloc] init]; 
} 

--- Page 182 ---
- (void)tearDown { 
    questionBuilder = nil; 
} 
 
- (void)testThatNilIsNotAnAcceptableParameter { 
    STAssertThrows([questionBuilder questionsFromJSON: nil error: NULL], 
        @"Lack of data should have been handled elsewhere"); 
} 
 
- (void)testNilReturnedWhenStringIsNotJSON { 
    STAssertNil([questionBuilder questionsFromJSON: @"Not JSON" 
                                             error: NULL], 
        @"This parameter should not be parsable");
} 
 
- (void)testErrorSetWhenStringIsNotJSON { 
    NSError *error = nil; 
    [questionBuilder questionsFromJSON:@"Not JSON" error: &error]; 
    STAssertNotNil(error, @"An error occurred, we should be told"); 
} 
 
- (void)testPassingNullErrorDoesNotCauseCrash { 
    STAssertNoThrow([questionBuilder questionsFromJSON: @"Not JSON" 
                                                 error: NULL], 
        @"Using a NULL error parameter should not be a problem"); 
} 
 
@end
An implementation of the -[QuestionBuilder questionsFromJSON:error:]
method that passes these tests is still far from being
complete. Notice that the error code and error domain
should be deﬁned in the same way as for the
StackOverflowManager’s errors, earlier.
- (NSArray *)questionsFromJSON:(NSString *)objectNotation 
                         error:(NSError **)error { 
    NSParameterAssert(objectNotation != nil); 
    if (error != NULL) { 
        *error = [NSError errorWithDomain: QuestionBuilderErrorDomain 
            code: QuestionBuilderInvalidJSONError userInfo: nil]; 
    } 
    return nil; 
} 

--- Page 183 ---
It’s time to start interpreting the JSON content. To know
what we ought to be accepting, we need to look at the Stack
Overﬂow API documentation. The API behavior is speciﬁed
by example. Although the name of each method and the
parameters understood are documentation, we must ﬁnd
out what output to expect by trying the methods out for
ourselves. Using the curl command line tool to get
http://api.stackoverﬂow.com/1.1/search?
tagged=iphone&pagesize=20 shows that this data is
returned:
{ 
 "total": 2000, 
 "page": 1, 
 "pagesize": 20, 
 "questions": [ 
  { 
   "tags": [ 
    "iphone", 
    "cocoa-touch" 
   ], 
   "answer_count": 1, 
   "favorite_count": 1, 
   "question_timeline_url": "/questions/5512861/timeline", 
   "question_comments_url": "/questions/5512861/comments", 
   "question_answers_url": "/questions/5512861/answers", 
   "question_id": 5512861, 
   "owner": { 
    "user_id": 679808, 
    "user_type": "registered", 
    "display_name": "vijay singh adhikari", 
    "reputation": 141, 
    "email_hash": "9c5334a58034d77b048ba9627e169cdd" 
   }, 
   "creation_date": 1301658112, 
   "last_edit_date": 1301665259, 
   "last_activity_date": 1301665259, 
   "up_vote_count": 0, 
   "down_vote_count": 0, 
   "view_count": 37, 
   "score": 0, 
   "community_owned": false, 
   "title": "Read from uiimageView" 
  }, 

--- Page 184 ---
  /* plenty more removed ... */ 
 ] 
}
The ﬁrst thing we need to ensure, assuming that the
QuestionBuilder receives real JSON-formatted data, is that there’s
an array called “questions” in the returned object.
- (void)testRealJSONWithoutQuestionsArrayIsError { 
    NSString *jsonString = @"{ \"noquestions\": true }"; 
    STAssertNil([questionBuilder questionsFromJSON: jsonString 
        error: NULL], 
        @"No questions to parse in this JSON"); 
}
This test already passes. However, the QuestionBuilder only has
the error code for “Invalid JSON,” which seems inaccurate
because the JSON is well-formatted but doesn’t contain the
necessary information. Let’s ﬁx the error that’s returned.
- (void)testRealJSONWithoutQuestionsReturnsMissingDataError { 
    NSString *jsonString = @"{ \"noquestions\": true }"; 
    NSError *error = nil; 
    [questionBuilder questionsFromJSON:jsonString error: &error]; 
    STAssertEquals([error code], QuestionBuilderMissingDataError, 
        @"This case should not be an invalid JSON error"); 
}
Getting this test to pass means that the QuestionBuilder must
(ﬁnally!) actually interpret the JSON it receives. The error
code enumeration in QuestionBuilder.h must be expanded:
enum { 
    QuestionBuilderInvalidJSONError, 
    QuestionBuilderMissingDataError, 
};
And now we can build a more complete implementation of -
[QuestionBuilder questionsFromJSON:error:].
- (NSArray *)questionsFromJSON:(NSString *)objectNotation 
                         error:(NSError **)error { 
    NSParameterAssert(objectNotation != nil); 
    NSData *unicodeNotation = [objectNotation 
        dataUsingEncoding: NSUTF8StringEncoding]; 
    NSError *localError = nil; 

--- Page 185 ---
    id jsonObject = [NSJSONSerialization 
        JSONObjectWithData: unicodeNotation options: 0 
        error: &localError]; 
    NSDictionary *parsedObject = (id)jsonObject; 
    if (parsedObject == nil) { 
        if (error != NULL) { 
            *error = [NSError errorWithDomain:QuestionBuilderErrorDomain 
                code: QuestionBuilderInvalidJSONError userInfo: nil]; 
        } 
        return nil; 
    } 
    NSArray *questions = [parsedObject objectForKey: @"questions"]; 
    if (questions == nil) { 
        if (error != NULL) { 
            *error = [NSError errorWithDomain:QuestionBuilderErrorDomain 
                code: QuestionBuilderMissingDataError userInfo:nil]; 
        } 
        return nil; 
    } 
    return nil; 
}
If the “questions” array is not empty, the builder should
create one of the app’s Question model objects for each
object in the array. The object returned from -
questionsFromJSON:error: should then be an array, with each
member being a Question instance and the same number of
those as were objects in the JSON questions list.
We also need to consider some subtleties. The Stack
Overﬂow API documentation says “the API only makes a
best eﬀort attempt to ﬁll all applicable ﬁelds on returned
objects; an application should be able to handle partial
returns sensibly.” That means our class has to be able to
handle the cases where some of the ﬁelds are either
undeﬁned or set to null in the JSON data. Let’s add three
tests: First, require that if an array containing one question
deﬁnition in JSON is passed to the builder, we’ll get one
question back. Second, ensure that all the ﬁelds are set
correctly; and third, ensure that an entirely empty question
object can be created. We’ll assume by induction that if it
creates one question correctly, it would create N questions

--- Page 186 ---
correctly, and that intermediate states of data completeness
are okay (though if they aren’t valid assumptions, we can
always add a test later to demonstrate the problem and
prove that we’ve ﬁxed it).
Where can we get a JSON string that looks like a real Stack
Overﬂow question? Why not from the website itself? In this
test I’ll use real data: I’ve pasted in a response from the
Stack Overﬂow API to use in my tests, although I did elide
most of the question’s body text for brevity. The reasons for
pasting it rather than fetching it from the API are to avoid
problems with network availability, and to avoid the data
changing between runs of the test. This is of paramount
importance. We want the tests to fail because the code is
buggy, not because the network isn’t available.
static NSString *questionJSON = @"{" 
@"\"total\": 1," 
@"\"page\": 1," 
@"\"pagesize\": 30," 
@"\"questions\": [" 
@"{" 
@"\"tags\": [" 
@"\"iphone\"," 
@"\"security\"," 
@"\"keychain\"" 
@"]," 
@"\"answer_count\": 1," 
@"\"accepted_answer_id\": 3231900," 
@"\"favorite_count\": 1," 
@"\"question_timeline_url\": \"/questions/2817980/timeline\","
@"\"question_comments_url\": \"/questions/2817980/comments\"," 
@"\"question_answers_url\": \"/questions/2817980/answers\"," 
@"\"question_id\": 2817980," 
@"\"owner\": {" 
@"\"user_id\": 23743," 
@"\"user_type\": \"registered\"," 
@"\"display_name\": \"Graham Lee\"," 
@"\"reputation\": 13459," 
@"\"email_hash\": \"563290c0c1b776a315b36e863b388a0c\"" 
@"}," 
@"\"creation_date\": 1273660706," 
@"\"last_activity_date\": 1278965736," 
@"\"up_vote_count\": 2,"

--- Page 187 ---
@"\"down_vote_count\": 0," 
@"\"view_count\": 465," 
@"\"score\": 2," 
@"\"community_owned\": false," 
@"\"title\": 
    \"Why does Keychain Services return the wrong keychain content?\"," 
@"\"body\": 
    \"<p>I've been trying to use persistent keychain references.</p>\"" 
@"}" 
@"]" 
@"}"; 
 
- (void)setUp { 
    questionBuilder = [[QuestionBuilder alloc] init]; 
    question = [[questionBuilder questionsFromJSON: questionJSON 
                                             error: NULL] 
        objectAtIndex: 0]; 
} 
 
- (void)tearDown { 
    questionBuilder = nil; 
    question = nil; 
} 
 
- (void)testJSONWithOneQuestionReturnsOneQuestionObject { 
    NSError *error = nil; 
    NSArray *questions = [questionBuilder 
        questionsFromJSON: questionJSON error: &error]; 
    STAssertEquals([questions count], (NSUInteger)1, 
        @"The builder should have created a question"); 
} 
 
- (void)testQuestionCreatedFromJSONHasPropertiesPresentedInJSON {
    STAssertEquals(question.questionID, 2817980, 
        @"The question ID should match the data we sent"); 
    STAssertEquals([question.date timeIntervalSince1970], 
        (NSTimeInterval)1273660706, 
         @"The date of the question should match the data"); 
    STAssertEqualObjects(question.title, 
      @"Why does Keychain Services return the wrong keychain content?", 
      @"Title should match the provided data"); 
    STAssertEquals(question.score, 2, @"Score should match the data"); 
    Person *asker = question.asker; 
    STAssertEqualObjects(asker.name, @"Graham Lee", 
        @"Looks like I should have asked this question"); 
    STAssertEqualObjects([asker.avatarURL absoluteString], 
    @"http://www.gravatar.com/avatar/563290c0c1b776a315b36e863b388a0c", 
    @"The avatar URL should be based on the supplied email hash"); 

--- Page 188 ---
} 
 
- (void)testQuestionCreatedFromEmptyObjectIsStillValidObject { 
    NSString *emptyQuestion = @"{ \"questions\": [ {} ] }"; 
    NSArray *questions = [questionBuilder 
        questionsFromJSON: emptyQuestion error: NULL]; 
    STAssertEquals([questions count], (NSUInteger)1, 
        @"QuestionBuilder must handle partial input"); 
}
Notice that in testing the question creation from complete
data, I have used multiple assertions in the same test,
ensuring that each property is set correctly. I usually try to
avoid this style of test, but in this case there wouldn’t be
much to be gained from splitting the assertions across
multiple tests apart from an increased page count. We want
to know that the data is consumed correctly in its entirety,
so the diﬀerent assertions all stand together as part of the
same test.
Another interesting thing about working with the API is that
the search request doesn’t return the bodies to the
questions. Getting that information (which is surely
important) requires making a second request to the server.
Should the app do this as part of building the question, or
should it retrieve the question’s body later? Looking back at
the requirements in Chapter 5, it’s clear that when the app
initially searches for questions, it doesn’t need the question
bodies; the app just presents a list of question titles and
some other information to the user. The question body is not
shown until the user drills in by tapping on one of the
questions in the list.
That workﬂow is consistent with holding oﬀ from
downloading the question body until the user moves to a
view where the body will be presented. Therefore, the Question
class needs to be extended. Each instance should retain its
question ID, which can be presented to the service again
later to retrieve the body. The StackOverflowManager will need to

--- Page 189 ---
support that, and the QuestionBuilder must be able to add that
content to the object.
There are several new tests implemented on diﬀerent
ﬁxtures. First, we’ll ensure that the StackOverflowManager can
handle a request for ﬁlling in the question details, by adding
these tests to QuestionCreationTests.
- (void)setUp { 
    //... 
    questionToFetch = [[Question alloc] init]; 
    questionToFetch.questionID = 1234; 
    questionArray = [NSArray arrayWithObject: questionToFetch]; 
    communicator = [[MockStackOverﬂowCommunicator alloc] init]; 
    mgr.communicator = communicator; 
} 
 
- (void)tearDown { 
    //... 
    questionToFetch = nil; 
    questionArray = nil; 
    communicator = nil; 
} 
 
- (void)testAskingForQuestionBodyMeansRequestingData { 
    [mgr fetchBodyForQuestion: questionToFetch]; 
    STAssertTrue([communicator wasAskedToFetchBody], 
        @"The communicator should need to retrieve data for the" 
        @" question body"); 
} 
 
- (void)testDelegateNotiﬁedOfFailureToFetchQuestion { 
    [mgr fetchingQuestionBodyFailedWithError: underlyingError]; 
    STAssertNotNil([[[delegate fetchError] userInfo] 
        objectForKey: NSUnderlyingErrorKey], 
        @"Delegate should have found out about this error"); 
} 
 
- (void)testManagerPassesRetrievedQuestionBodyToQuestionBuilder { 
    [mgr receivedQuestionBodyJSON: @"Fake JSON"];
    STAssertEqualObjects(questionBuilder.JSON, @"Fake JSON", 
        @"Successfully-retrieved data should be passed to the builder"); 
} 
 
- (void)testManagerPassesQuestionItWasSentToQuestionBuilderForFillingIn { 
    [mgr fetchBodyForQuestion: questionToFetch]; 

--- Page 190 ---
    [mgr receivedQuestionBodyJSON: @"Fake JSON"];
    STAssertEqualObjects(questionBuilder.questionToFill, 
        questionToFetch, 
        @"The question should have been passed to the builder"); 
}
Next, require that the QuestionBuilder handles the response
correctly, ﬁlling in the question body when it’s valid, and
that it contains the required content. These tests belong in
QuestionBuilderTests.
- (void)testBuildingQuestionBodyWithNoDataCannotBeTried { 
    STAssertThrows([questionBuilder 
        ﬁllInDetailsForQuestion: question fromJSON: nil], 
        @"Not receiving data should have been handled earlier"); 
} 
- (void)testBuildingQuestionBodyWithNoQuestionCannotBeTried { 
    STAssertThrows([questionBuilder 
        ﬁllInDetailsForQuestion: nil fromJSON: questionJSON], 
        @"No reason to expect that a nil question is passed"); 
} 
 
- (void)testNonJSONDataDoesNotCauseABodyToBeAddedToAQuestion { 
    [questionBuilder ﬁllInDetailsForQuestion: question 
                                     fromJSON: stringIsNotJSON]; 
    STAssertNil(question.body, @"Body should not have been added"); 
} 
 
- (void)testJSONWhichDoesNotContainABodyDoesNotCauseBodyToBeAdded { 
    [questionBuilder ﬁllInDetailsForQuestion: question 
                                     fromJSON: noQuestionsJSONString];
    STAssertNil(question.body, @"There was no body to add"); 
} 
 
- (void)testBodyContainedInJSONIsAddedToQuestion { 
    [questionBuilder ﬁllInDetailsForQuestion: question 
                                     fromJSON: questionJSON]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects(question.body, 
      @"<p>I've been trying to use persistent keychain references.</p>", 
      @"The correct question body is added"); 
}
Finally, notice that the tests of question creation require that
the question have the correct Person instance associated with
it. Oops! It looks like I forgot to create that property in
Chapter 6. Add a test to the QuestionTests ﬁxture created in that

--- Page 191 ---
chapter to ensure that the property exists and works
properly.
 - (void)setUp { 
    // ... 
    asker = [[Person alloc] initWithName: @"Graham Lee" 
        avatarLocation:@"http://example.com/avatar.png"]; 
    question.asker = asker; 
} 
 
- (void)testQuestionWasAskedBySomeone { 
    STAssertEqualObjects(question.asker, asker, 
        @"Question should keep track of who asked it."); 
}
By now you have seen enough test-driven code
implemented to be able to write the code to pass these
tests yourself. Consider this your exercise for the chapter—
or look at the project in GitHub to see how the code looks,
and at the very similar code for the AnswerBuilder class. Because
it turns out that both QuestionBuilder and AnswerBuilder need to
deﬁne Person instances—describing people who asked or
answered questions—I also refactored QuestionBuilder’s Person-
creation code out into a separate PersonBuilder class.
Now the app can take JSON data in the format provided by
the StackOverﬂow API and use it to construct question
objects suitable for display to the user. There’s just one step
left before we move on to the display side, and that’s
downloading the content from the network. This is the
subject of the next chapter.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 192 ---
8. Networking Code
The code in BrowseOverﬂow can parse data received from
the Stack Overﬂow website and use it to build model objects
that will be used in the app. The problem of fetching the
data from the website in the ﬁrst place still remains. In this
chapter you’ll see how to build that code, and how to deal
with the problem of talking to the outside world in a test-
driven fashion.
On the face of it, the problem we have to deal with next in
BrowseOverﬂow seems intractable: looking back to Chapter
3, “How to Write a Unit Test,” you’ll remember that unit
tests are supposed to be fast, repeatable, and reliable. How
do you achieve those properties when dealing with network
code? So many issues can aﬀect the performance and
reliability of a network connection: the local hardware
conﬁguration, the wires, routers, switches, and computers
that make up the network, errors in the numerous protocols
used to ﬁnd and talk to a server—the list goes on. How can
we take all those into account in our tests?
The simple answer is that we won’t take these into account.
In fact, we want to remove any reliance on the network from
our test code. Removing the network from networking code?
How will we do that? To answer that question, let’s look at
the design of Apple’s Cocoa API for fetching network
content: NSURLConnection.
NSURLConnection Class Design
To initiate a network operation using NSURLConnection, you create
a new connection instance with an NSURLRequest that
encapsulates the URL you want to fetch content from, in
addition to some properties such as how the retrieved
content should be cached.

--- Page 193 ---
NSURLConnection manages choosing a protocol handler based on
the URL’s protocol (http:// or ftp://), fetching content and
dealing with errors. Whenever something novel occurs—
such as new data being received or the protocol needing
authentication to proceed—the NSURLConnection informs its
delegate, which is the application’s interface to the facility.
This organization is outlined in Figure 8.1.
Figure 8.1. The separation of concerns between
NSURLConnection and its delegate.
The delegate pattern is used throughout the Cocoa APIs;
indeed, you’ve already encountered it in the
BrowseOverﬂow app because the StackOverflowManager class uses
a delegate to communicate with the app. The advantage of
the delegate class is that it separates the business of
interacting with a subsystem from the performance of that
subsystem’s duties. The delegate just needs to know when
interesting things happen, and be able to express the
application’s needs if a decision ever needs to be made.
For networking code, this means that as long as the
delegate does the correct thing when it receives a callback,
it doesn’t matter whether that callback comes from an
NSURLConnection or a test harness. The test cases can set up
“fake” networking scenarios and investigate how the

--- Page 194 ---
application code responds; if that works properly, we can be
reasonably conﬁdent that it will work when interacting with
a real network connection. The unit tests don’t need to talk
to a network; they can pretend to be the network. We’ll use
the NSURLConnectionDelegate methods to implement
StackOverflowCommunicator’s dealings with the network and the Stack
Overﬂow web service.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 195 ---
StackOverﬂowCommunicator Implementation
Most of the application’s interface to StackOverflowCommunicator has
already been deﬁned when we designed the StackOverflowManager
to use the communicator class. What’s left is to ﬁll in the
deﬁned methods, ensuring that they create connections to
appropriate URLs. In addition, we will make the
communicator a delegate of NSURLConnection, so we must be
certain that the delegate methods are implemented and
working correctly. Let’s start with creating the connections.
The ﬁrst step in getting this working is to ensure that the
communicator tries to download content from the correct
URLs. We’ll need a new test ﬁxture, StackOverflowCommunicatorTests.
- (void)testSearchingForQuestionsOnTopicCallsTopicAPI { 
    StackOverﬂowCommunicator *communicator = 
        [[StackOverﬂowCommunicator alloc] init]; 
    [communicator searchForQuestionsWithTag: @"ios"]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects([[communicator URLToFetch] absoluteString], 
     @"http://api.stackoverﬂow.com/1.1/search?tagged=ios&pagesize=20", 
     @"Use the search API to ﬁnd questions with a particular tag"); 
}
This requires a point in the communicator’s workﬂow where
the test can sense what URL it’s trying to access. The
communicator itself will need to keep track of the URL it’s
using:
@interface StackOverﬂowCommunicator : NSObject { 
@protected 
    NSURL *fetchingURL; 
} 
 
- (void)searchForQuestionsWithTag: (NSString *)tag; 
- (void)downloadInformationForQuestionWithID: (NSInteger)identiﬁer; 
- (void)downloadAnswersToQuestionWithID: (NSInteger)identiﬁer; 
- (void)fetchBodyForQuestion: (NSInteger)questionID; 
 
@end
But the ability to inspect that URL is needed only in tests;
it’s not naturally a part of the class’s API. Deﬁne a subclass

--- Page 196 ---
of StackOverflowCommunicator that oﬀers this ability. This subclass will
be used only in the unit test’s target, not in the app.
@interface InspectableStackOverﬂowCommunicator : 
    StackOverﬂowCommunicator 
- (NSURL *)URLToFetch; 
 
@end 
 
@implementation InspectableStackOverﬂowCommunicator 
 
- (NSURL *)URLToFetch { 
    return fetchingURL; 
} 
 
@end
This pattern of deﬁning a subclass with the introspection
capabilities needed to support testing helps to keep the test
code separate from the production code. The subclass is
deﬁned only in the test target, and its superclass (the
production class) only needs to contain application code. If
you don’t like the idea of creating a subclass just to add a
getter for an otherwise private instance variable, an
alternative exists. Key-Value Coding will let you ﬁnd the
value of an instance variable even if no accessor methods
are deﬁned for it, so you could use [StackOverflowCommunicator
valueForKey: @"fetchingURL"] in the test case instead of creating this
subclass. However, I ﬁnd that the pattern shown here is
more explicit in documenting that the variable is only being
retrieved to support the tests.
Now the test can be refactored to use an instance of this
inspectable subclass.
- (void)testSearchingForQuestionsOnTopicCallsTopicAPI { 
    InspectableStackOverﬂowCommunicator *communicator = 
        [[InspectableStackOverﬂowCommunicator alloc] init]; 
    [communicator searchForQuestionsWithTag: @"ios"]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects([[communicator URLToFetch] absoluteString], 
     @"http://api.stackoverﬂow.com/1.1/search?tagged=ios&pagesize=20", 
     @"Use the search API to ﬁnd questions with a particular tag"); 
}

--- Page 197 ---
That gives us enough supporting material to work on the
code to implement this behavior.
@implementation StackOverﬂowCommunicator 
 
- (void)fetchContentAtURL:(NSURL *)url { 
    fetchingURL = url; 
} 
 
- (void)searchForQuestionsWithTag:(NSString *)tag { 
    [self fetchContentAtURL: [NSURL URLWithString: 
        [NSString stringWithFormat: 
      @"http://api.stackoverﬂow.com/1.1/search?tagged=%@&pagesize=20", 
        tag]]];
} 
 
@end
The tests for initiating calls to ﬁll in question and answer
details will look very similar.
- (void)setUp { 
    communicator = [[InspectableStackOverﬂowCommunicator alloc] init]; 
} 
 
- (void)tearDown { 
    communicator = nil; 
} 
 
- (void)testFillingInQuestionBodyCallsQuestionAPI { 
    [communicator downloadInformationForQuestionWithID: 12345]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects([[communicator URLToFetch] absoluteString], 
        @"http://api.stackoverﬂow.com/1.1/questions/12345?body=true", 
        @"Use the question API to get the body for a question"); 
} 
- (void)testFetchingAnswersToQuestionCallsQuestionAPI { 
    [communicator downloadAnswersToQuestionWithID: 12345]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects([[communicator URLToFetch] absoluteString],
@"http://api.stackoverﬂow.com/1.1/questions/12345/answers?body=true", 
        @"Use the question API to get answers on a given question"); 
}
With those tests passing, we know that the communicator is
talking to the correct API methods. It would be possible to
have the methods on StackOverflowCommunicator return hard-coded
URLs pasted from the test cases as things currently stand. If

--- Page 198 ---
you want to be certain that the methods are doing the
correct thing, you could create extra tests that exercise the
same code with diﬀerent tag strings and question
identiﬁers. Personally, I trust myself enough not to “cheat”
at writing code (but not enough to assume I get the code
correct1 even when I’m not cheating; hence the baby steps
and unit tests).
1. Guessing or assuming that code is correct often fails when considering edge
cases. Where the question ID is of type NSInteger, does the code work across
its entire signed 32-bit range? On Mac OS X, NSInteger can be a 64-bit type;
will the code work in these cases, too?
The next thing that needs to happen is that the
communicator must create an NSURLConnection object that will
download the networked content. First, the test:
- (void)testSearchingForQuestionsCreatesURLConnection { 
    [communicator searchForQuestionsWithTag: @"ios"]; 
    STAssertNotNil([communicator currentURLConnection], 
        @"There should be a URL connection in-ﬂight now."); 
    [communicator cancelAndDiscardURLConnection]; 
}
It looks like we’ll add two methods on the
InspectableStackOverflowCommunicator class: the ﬁrst to ﬁnd out what
NSURLConnection the object has created, and the second to throw
it away to help the test clean up after itself. (In particular,
the documentation for NSURLConnection says that it retains its
delegate; that connection will need to be removed.)
- (NSURLConnection *)currentURLConnection { 
    return fetchingConnection; 
} 
 
- (void)cancelAndDiscardURLConnection { 
    [fetchingConnection cancel]; 
    fetchingConnection = nil; 
} 
This turns out not to be so true. When I came to implement
the code for this test, I decided that the communicator

--- Page 199 ---
would also need to throw away any in-progress connection if
it needs to start a new one. The test for that looks like this:
- (void)testStartingNewSearchThrowsOutOldConnection { 
    [communicator searchForQuestionsWithTag: @"ios"]; 
    NSURLConnection *ﬁrstConnection = 
        [communicator currentURLConnection]; 
    [communicator searchForQuestionsWithTag: @"cocoa"]; 
    STAssertFalse([[communicator currentURLConnection] 
        isEqual: ﬁrstConnection], 
        @"The communicator needs to replace its URL connection" 
        @" to start a new one"); 
    [communicator cancelAndDiscardURLConnection]; 
}
When I came to make both of these tests pass, this is the
method I came up with on the real StackOverflowCommunicator class
(that is, this implementation is not speciﬁc to the
inspectable subclass).
- (void)fetchContentAtURL:(NSURL *)url { 
    fetchingURL = url; 
 
    NSURLRequest *request = [NSURLRequest requestWithURL: fetchingURL]; 
 
    [fetchingConnection cancel]; 
    fetchingConnection = [NSURLConnection connectionWithRequest: request 
                                                       delegate: self]; 
 
}
It looks like the real StackOverflowCommunicator can internally make
use of the -cancelAndDiscardURLConnection method, so I’m going to
remove it from the InspectableStackOverflowCommunicator and put it on
the production class. That can easily be done in Xcode by
selecting the method in InspectableStackOverflowCommunicator.m and
choosing the Move Up refactoring from Xcode’s Edit,
Refactor menu.
The tests in place now demonstrate that a NSURLConnection
instance gets created when searching for tagged questions.
Whether you use knowledge of the class design to declare
the other cases of retrieving question content and answers

--- Page 200 ---
covered (because all cases use -fetchContentAtURL:) is up to you.
To save a few rainforests, I’ll leave them out here, although
you can see them in the sample code at github.
What happens next is that control is handed over to
NSURLConnection, which will call back into StackOverflowCommunicator at
various points deﬁned in the documentation.2 Not all of the
delegate methods will be needed in this code. Here are the
requirements:
2. Apple’s class reference for NSURLConnection is currently at
http://developer.apple.com/library/ios/#documentation/Cocoa/Reference/Foun
dation/Classes/NSURLConnection_Class/Reference/Reference.html.
• When a response is received, if it has HTTP status 200
(OK) the communicator should prepare to receive data
from the connection.
• If a response is received that has an HTTP error status
but is not a redirect, the communicator should send an
error to the StackOverflowManager. Additionally, it should cancel
the connection.
• When the connection receives new data, the
communicator should append it to the data it has
received so far.
• If the connection fails with an error, the manager
should be notiﬁed of the error, using whichever method
was deﬁned in Chapter 7 for that purpose. The
communicator can discard any data fetched before the
error occurred.
• If the connection succeeds, the data received should be
communicated to the manager using the appropriate
StackOverflowManager API. The communicator can then discard
its local copy of the data.
There are two design issues to solve before proceeding. One
is how to let the communicator object know about its
manager. Because the manager itself has a delegate, and
the communicator is a delegate of its NSURLConnection, it seems

--- Page 201 ---
appropriate to make the manager a delegate of the
communicator so there is a single pattern used throughout
the interaction.
The second design problem to solve is how to decide which
of the manager’s methods to signal when success or failure
occur. Because of the way the beginning of the NSURLConnection
interaction was designed, all three requests for diﬀerent
types of data funnel into the same method for initiating a
connection. This is desirable; the work done in each case is
very similar, so it would be a waste to have three versions
of the code. We will, however, need a way for the
communicator class to keep track of what it’s supposed to
be doing so it can choose the correct manager methods to
invoke on completion.
My preferred solution here is to use blocks. The three “entry
points” into StackOverflowCommunicator—that is, the three methods
that StackOverflowManager can call—can each create two blocks,
containing the code to run on success or failure of the URL
connection. The actual connection delegate code can then
be general purpose and invoke the blocks at appropriate
times to get the correct logic executed.
With the goal of working toward this design, it’s time to start
writing the tests. When I wrote the ﬁrst of these tests, I
wanted to cancel the network connection after setting up
the original method and before simulating connection
delegate events. The reason for doing this was to avoid any
chance that the URL connection might get scheduled on a
run loop and run to completion while the tests were running.
I realized I’d also have to do that in every subsequent test of
the connection delegate callbacks. Therefore, I broke out
the creation of the NSURLConnection in -fetchContentAtURL: into a
separate helper method, and created a new tests-only
subclass NonNetworkedStackOverflowCommunicator that doesn’t actually
create the NSURLConnection instance.

--- Page 202 ---
As the components of the class fell into place as the test
coverage grew, it became clear that the method signature
needed changing, so in the following code you’ll see
references to -fetchContentAtURL:completionHandler:errorHandler:. The ﬁrst
things to test were the interfaces between the URL
connection delegate code and the rest of the logic. That
means success and failure conditions should each send
appropriate messages to the communicator’s own delegate.
A slight wrinkle in deﬁning the error-handling is related to
the way in which NSURLConnection processes its responses. If it
gets a body of data from the URL in question, then even if
that body describes an error at the protocol level,
NSURLConnection believes it has succeeded. You need to
investigate whether the response you receive represents an
error such as HTTP status 404 and handle it appropriately.
The tests appropriate to fetching questions on a topic are
shown here; the others are very similar.
- (void)setUp { 
    communicator = [[InspectableStackOverﬂowCommunicator alloc] init]; 
    nnCommunicator = [[NonNetworkedStackOverﬂowCommunicator alloc] 
        init]; 
    manager = [[MockStackOverﬂowManager alloc] init]; 
    nnCommunicator.delegate = manager; 
    fourOhFourResponse = [[FakeURLResponse alloc] 
        initWithStatusCode: 404]; 
    receivedData = [@"Result" dataUsingEncoding: NSUTF8StringEncoding]; 
} 
 
- (void)tearDown { 
    [communicator cancelAndDiscardURLConnection]; 
    communicator = nil; 
    nnCommunicator = nil; 
    manager = nil; 
    fourOhFourResponse = nil; 
    receivedData = nil; 
} 
 
- (void)testReceivingResponseDiscardsExistingData { 
    nnCommunicator.receivedData = [@"Hello" 
        dataUsingEncoding: NSUTF8StringEncoding]; 
    [nnCommunicator searchForQuestionsWithTag: @"ios"]; 

--- Page 203 ---
    [nnCommunicator connection: nil didReceiveResponse: nil]; 
    STAssertEquals([nnCommunicator.receivedData length], (NSUInteger)0, 
        @"Data should have been discarded"); 
} 
 
- (void)testReceivingResponseWith404StatusPassesErrorToDelegate { 
    [nnCommunicator searchForQuestionsWithTag: @"ios"]; 
    [nnCommunicator connection: nil didReceiveResponse: 
        (NSURLResponse *)fourOhFourResponse]; 
    STAssertEquals([manager topicFailureErrorCode], 404, 
        @"Fetch failure was passed through to delegate"); 
} 
 
- (void)testNoErrorReceivedOn200Status { 
    FakeURLResponse *twoHundredResponse = 
        [[FakeURLResponse alloc] initWithStatusCode: 200]; 
    [nnCommunicator searchForQuestionsWithTag: @"ios"]; 
    [nnCommunicator connection: nil didReceiveResponse: 
        (NSURLResponse *)twoHundredResponse]; 
    STAssertFalse([manager topicFailureErrorCode] == 200, 
        @"No need for error on 200 response"); 
} 
 
- (void)testConnectionFailingPassesErrorToDelegate { 
    [nnCommunicator searchForQuestionsWithTag: @"ios"]; 
    NSError *error = [NSError errorWithDomain: @"Fake domain" 
        code: 12345 userInfo: nil]; 
    [nnCommunicator connection: nil didFailWithError: error]; 
    STAssertEquals([manager topicFailureErrorCode], 12345, 
        @"Failure to connect should get passed to the delegate"); 
} 
 
- (void)testSuccessfulQuestionSearchPassesDataToDelegate { 
    [nnCommunicator searchForQuestionsWithTag: @"ios"]; 
    [nnCommunicator setReceivedData: receivedData]; 
    [nnCommunicator connectionDidFinishLoading: nil]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects([manager topicSearchString], @"Result", 
        @"The delegate should have received data on success"); 
}
All those tests provide enough information to guide the
implementation of some of the StackOverflowCommunicator delegate
methods. Before looking at the code, it’s useful to see the
class layout in Figure 8.2 to appreciate how the design of
this part of the app has evolved in response to trying to test

--- Page 204 ---
it. This will also explain some of the new classes that appear
in the preceding testing code.
Figure 8.2. The classes created so far to implement
and assist testing of the StackOverﬂowCommunicator
networking code.
It may seem counterproductive to have created three new
test classes (four, if you count the FakeURLResponse class) and
separated one class’s interface out into a protocol just to ﬁll
in a few details of an existing class, but it’s a common way
of working. The beneﬁts are that we now have two
(production) classes that interact only across an abstract
interface—the StackOverflowCommunicatorDelegate protocol—and that
can each be replaced by other implementations without
aﬀecting each other. The beneﬁt we’ve seen in relation to
functional testing is that either class can be substituted for
one entirely under the control of the test developer. This
substitution can be employed in other aspects of testing. For
example, in performance testing the application, the entire
networking component could be replaced with a simulation
that delivers data (and errors) at a predictable rate to the
rest of the app. An integration test could retrieve known
data from a local web server to avoid problems connecting
across the Internet to stackoverﬂow.com.
You should be careful about how you divide functionality
between test harness code and production code. If you end
up writing a test that’s only exercising harness code, you

--- Page 205 ---
either put code in the harness that ought to be in the app,
or you made your fake objects so hard to understand that
you need to test them. Either way, you have a problem that
needs addressing, because you have a test that isn’t telling
you anything about how your app behaves.
Back to the code: Here’s the expanded interface for the
StackOverflowCommunicator class, along with the newly implemented
methods. Again, only the topic-searching code is shown for
brevity; the question body and answer list fetching code just
diﬀers in the completion and error-handling blocks.
#import <Foundation/Foundation.h> 
#import "StackOverﬂowCommunicatorDelegate.h" 
 
@interface StackOverﬂowCommunicator : NSObject { 
@protected 
    NSURL *fetchingURL; 
    NSURLConnection *fetchingConnection; 
    NSMutableData *receivedData; 
@private 
    id <StackOverﬂowCommunicatorDelegate> delegate; 
    void (^errorHandler)(NSError *); 
    void (^successHandler)(NSString *); 
} 
 
@property (assign) id <StackOverﬂowCommunicatorDelegate> delegate; 
 
- (void)searchForQuestionsWithTag: (NSString *)tag; 
- (void)downloadInformationForQuestionWithID: (NSInteger)identiﬁer; 
- (void)downloadAnswersToQuestionWithID: (NSInteger)identiﬁer; 
 
- (void)cancelAndDiscardURLConnection; 
@end 
extern NSString *StackOverﬂowCommunicatorErrorDomain; 
 
@implementation StackOverﬂowCommunicator 
 
@synthesize delegate; 
 
- (void)launchConnectionForRequest: (NSURLRequest *)request  { 
  [self cancelAndDiscardURLConnection]; 
    fetchingConnection = [NSURLConnection connectionWithRequest: request 
                                                       delegate: self]; 
 

--- Page 206 ---
} 
- (void)fetchContentAtURL:(NSURL *)url 
             errorHandler:(void (^)(NSError *))errorBlock 
           successHandler:(void (^)(NSString *))successBlock { 
    fetchingURL = url; 
    errorHandler = [errorBlock copy]; 
    successHandler = [successBlock copy]; 
    NSURLRequest *request = [NSURLRequest requestWithURL: fetchingURL]; 
 
    [self launchConnectionForRequest: request]; 
 
 
 
} 
 
- (void)searchForQuestionsWithTag:(NSString *)tag { 
    [self fetchContentAtURL: [NSURL URLWithString: 
                              [NSString stringWithFormat: 
      @"http://api.stackoverﬂow.com/1.1/search?tagged=%@&pagesize=20", 
      tag]] 
               errorHandler: ^(NSError *error) { 
                   [delegate searchingForQuestionsFailedWithError: 
                       error]; 
               } 
             successHandler: ^(NSString *objectNotation) { 
                 [delegate receivedQuestionsJSON: objectNotation]; 
             }]; 
} 
 
- (void)connection:(NSURLConnection *)connection 
didReceiveResponse:(NSURLResponse *)response { 
    receivedData = nil; 
    NSHTTPURLResponse *httpResponse = (NSHTTPURLResponse *)response; 
    if ([httpResponse statusCode] != 200) { 
        NSError *error = [NSError 
            errorWithDomain: StackOverﬂowCommunicatorErrorDomain 
                       code: [httpResponse statusCode] 
                   userInfo: nil]; 
        errorHandler(error); 
        [self cancelAndDiscardURLConnection]; 
    } 
    else { 
        receivedData = [[NSMutableData alloc] init]; 
    } 
} 
 
- (void)connection:(NSURLConnection *)connection 
  didFailWithError:(NSError *)error { 

--- Page 207 ---
    receivedData = nil; 
    fetchingConnection = nil; 
    fetchingURL = nil; 
    errorHandler(error); 
} 
 
- (void)connectionDidFinishLoading:(NSURLConnection *)connection { 
    fetchingConnection = nil; 
    fetchingURL = nil; 
    NSString *receivedText = [[NSString alloc] 
        initWithData: receivedData 
 
        encoding: NSUTF8StringEncoding]; 
    receivedData = nil; 
    successHandler(receivedText); 
} 
 
- (void)dealloc { 
    [fetchingConnection cancel]; 
} 
 
@end 
 
NSString *StackOverﬂowCommunicatorErrorDomain = 
    @"StackOverﬂowCommunicatorErrorDomain";
There’s just one remaining part left to this class. When data
is received by the communicator class, it should append
that data to the portion of the response it has already
gathered. The test for that looks like this:
- (void)testAdditionalDataAppendedToDownload { 
    [nnCommunicator setReceivedData: receivedData]; 
    NSData *extraData = [@" appended" dataUsingEncoding:
NSUTF8StringEncoding]; 
    [nnCommunicator connection: nil didReceiveData: extraData]; 
    NSString *combinedString = [[NSString alloc] 
        initWithData: [nnCommunicator receivedData] 
           encoding: NSUTF8StringEncoding]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects(combinedString, @"Result appended",
        @"Received data should be appended to the downloaded data"); 
} 
It requires adding this method to StackOverflowCommunicator:
- (void)connection:(NSURLConnection *)connection 
    didReceiveData:(NSData *)data { 

--- Page 208 ---
    [receivedData appendData: data]; 
}
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 209 ---
Conclusion
Over the preceding few pages, we’ve grown a network-
handling class for the BrowseOverﬂow app, using tests to
guide the design and implementation. By adopting the
delegate pattern and creating suitable fake object classes to
act as a test harness for the production code, we’ve
managed to build and test this network handler without
connecting to the network at all.
Even though interacting with the network is complicated,
error prone, and nondeterministic, we’ve still managed to
meet the expectation that the project’s unit tests should be
repeatable, reliable, and fast. At this point the project’s unit
test suite still takes under 0.1s to execute on any Mac I care
to try it on, which is more than fast enough that I can run
the tests every time I build without being slowed down in
my work.
Now that we have all the code necessary to fetch data from
the website and model it inside the app, the remaining task
is to present this data to the users and allow them to
interact with it. The next chapter will describe building the
view controllers necessary to give users of BrowseOverﬂow
something to look at.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 210 ---
9. View Controllers
The BrowseOverﬂow app now has a very stable base,
because all the model and “business logic” code has been
grown using tests. Many people attempting to adopt app-
wide unit testing practices of any form—including TDD—get
despondent when moving “higher up” in the app toward the
controller and view layers. How can code that is supposed to
interact with a user be subjected to automated testing? That
is exactly what you’ll ﬁnd out in this chapter as we build up
the view controllers and associated objects.
Class Organization
Each of the views shown and described in Chapter 5, “Test-
Driven Development of an iOS App,” is basically the same:
There’s a table, whether it’s a table of topic names, of
question titles or the question body and answers.
Navigating through the app provides a “master-detail”
representation, where tapping on an item at one level
provides more information about that item. Therefore,
there’s really only one view to support: a table view with a
data source to represent the information being displayed
and a delegate to respond to taps from the user, preparing
the next level of table view if appropriate.
If there’s only one view in the app, then only one view
controller is needed. A problem frequently occurring in iOS
apps is having a diﬀerent view controller and XIB for every
level in an app, even though they’re all presenting data in
very similar ways. The end result of this is a lot of repeated
code throughout the app, with the application’s behavior
being very tightly coupled to the data presentation.
The principle culprit for this repetition of code is the use of
Apple’s UITableViewController class. By putting the view
management and data preparation into the same object,

--- Page 211 ---
this class makes it harder to write code that can be reused
in diﬀerent contexts: You might ﬁnd that you need to show
the same data but provide diﬀerent behavior, or show
diﬀerent data in a similar context. UITableViewController makes it
diﬃcult to do either. It is what object-oriented programmers
refer to as a “God class”: a class that has absorbed all the
functionality in an app and is responsible for everything.
With this goal of reusability in mind, we’ll aim for the
solution shown in Figure 9.1. There’s a single UIViewController
subclass called BrowseOverflowViewController, which holds a
reference to a table view data source object (that is, a
custom class that implements the UITableViewDataSource protocol)
and delegate object (a custom implementation of
UITableViewDelegate). There will be a diﬀerent data source and
delegate at each level of the application, and it’s through
these objects that the custom app behavior and information
presentation will be provided. The BrowseOverflowViewController will
also have a reference to a UITableView instance because it’s
responsible for setting up the view and, therefore, will hook
up the data source and delegate to the table view.
Figure 9.1. Class diagram for the view controllers in
the BrowseOverﬂow app.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 212 ---
The View Controller Class
With just one view controller in the whole application, after
we’ve implemented this one class we have most of the
app’s presentation done, right? Actually, this will probably
turn out not to be true. The design shown in Figure 9.1
means that most of the data preparation (that is, translating
the model objects’ properties into elements of the view) will
be done by the various UITableViewDataSource implementations.
First we need to create the class. Apple supplies a template
for a UIViewController subclass that allows us to avoid having to
write some of the code from scratch. Use Xcode’s File, New,
New File menu item to bring up the ﬁle template chooser,
and select UIViewController subclass. Click Next, and click
Next again (leaving the class as a subclass of
UIViewController, not targeted for iPad, and with a XIB for
user interface). Finally, name the ﬁle BrowseOverflowViewController.m
and add it to both the app and test case targets. Put the ﬁle
in the project’s group for application ﬁles, so that it does not
get lost among the test ﬁxture ﬁles.
The ﬁrst few tests are simple: We want the view controller to
have strong properties to track the other objects that will
help to prepare the view—in other words, the table view, its
data source and delegate. Here’s the implementation of a
new test case ﬁxture called BrowseOverflowViewControllerTests that
checks for these details. Just to provide some variation from
the similar tests in Chapter 6, “The Data Model”—and
showing again that TDD does not constrain developers to
any one choice of implementation—these tests use the
property introspection capabilities of the Objective-C
runtime to ﬁnd out whether the properties exist.
The Objective-C Runtime

--- Page 213 ---
The resolution of methods, properties, and other
features of objects and classes in the Objective-C
language is performed at runtime by a library of C
functions. In this respect, Objective-C diﬀers from
other compiled object-oriented languages like C++
and Java, which do all that work in the compiler.
An advantage of Objective-C’s dynamic approach is
that the runtime functions are available to
application (and test) code, providing a very
powerful collection of introspection capabilities as
well as the capability for an application to modify a
class at runtime. The introspection facility is useful
in testing whether a class implements some
expected method, which, in addition to supporting
unit tests, also makes it easy for applications to
target multiple versions of an operating system,
framework, or library. If the app discovers at runtime
that some feature is missing, it can avoid using that
feature.
The Objective-C Runtime library also provides other
features, such as the associated storage facility that
is used later in this chapter. Apple’s documentation
on the library can be found here:
http://developer.apple.com/library/ios/#documentati
on/Cocoa/Conceptual/ObjCRuntimeGuide/Introductio
n/Introduction.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40008048
-CH1-SW1.
#import "BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests.h" 
#import "BrowseOverﬂowViewController.h" 
 
@implementation BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests 
{ 
    BrowseOverﬂowViewController *viewController; 
} 
 
- (void)setUp { 

--- Page 214 ---
    viewController = [[BrowseOverﬂowViewController alloc] init]; 
} 
 
- (void)tearDown { 
    viewController = nil; 
} 
 
- (void)testViewControllerHasATableViewProperty { 
    objc_property_t tableViewProperty = 
       class_getProperty([viewController class], "tableView"); 
    STAssertTrue(tableViewProperty != NULL, 
        @"BrowseOverﬂowViewController needs a table view"); 
} 
- (void)testViewControllerHasADataSourceProperty { 
    objc_property_t dataSourceProperty = 
        class_getProperty([viewController class], "dataSource"); 
    STAssertTrue(dataSourceProperty != NULL, 
        @"View Controller needs a data source"); 
} 
 
- (void)testViewControllerHasATableViewDelegateProperty { 
    objc_property_t delegateProperty = 
        class_getProperty([viewController class], "tableViewDelegate"); 
    STAssertTrue(delegateProperty != NULL, 
        @"View Controller needs a table view delegate"); 
} 
@end
The tests require synthesized properties on the
BrowseOverflowViewController class, deﬁned like this in the interface:
#import <UIKit/UIKit.h> 
 
@interface BrowseOverﬂowViewController : UIViewController 
 
@property (strong) UITableView *tableView; 
@property (strong) id <UITableViewDataSource> dataSource; 
@property (strong) id <UITableViewDelegate> tableViewDelegate; 
 
@end
The implementation is similarly simple:
@implementation BrowseOverﬂowViewController 
 
@synthesize tableView; 
@synthesize dataSource; 
@synthesize tableViewDelegate; 

--- Page 215 ---
 
@end
The view controller’s primary responsibility will be to ensure
that the table view is connected to its data source and
delegate, so that the table has something to do. This needs
to be done after the view is loaded (otherwise the table view
won’t be there to connect); it seems that -viewDidLoad would be
a good place to expect this to be done. Before we go
overboard on creating more fake objects, it would be good
to try writing the test using a real UITableView. Here are two
new tests on BrowseOverflowViewControllerTests, along with the
changes in the ﬁxture:
@implementation BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests 
{ 
    BrowseOverﬂowViewController *viewController; 
    UITableView *tableView; 
} 
 
- (void)setUp { 
    viewController = [[BrowseOverﬂowViewController alloc] init]; 
    tableView = [[UITableView alloc] init]; 
    viewController.tableView = tableView; 
} 
 
- (void)tearDown { 
    viewController = nil; 
    tableView = nil; 
} 
 
- (void)testViewControllerConnectsDataSourceInViewDidLoad { 
    id <UITableViewDataSource> dataSource = 
         [[EmptyTableViewDataSource alloc] init]; 
    viewController.dataSource = dataSource; 
    [viewController viewDidLoad]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects([tableView dataSource], dataSource, 
    @"View controller should have set the table view's data source"); 
} 
 
- (void)testViewControllerConnectsDelegateInViewDidLoad { 
    id <UITableViewDelegate> delegate = 
        [[EmptyTableViewDelegate alloc] init]; 
    viewController.tableViewDelegate = delegate; 
    [viewController viewDidLoad]; 

--- Page 216 ---
    STAssertEqualObjects([tableView delegate], delegate,    @"View 
controller should have set the table view's delegate"); 
 
} 
 
@end
We’ll need to provide implementations of the data source
and delegate protocols, but hopefully we’ll be able to reuse
those later. The protocol implementations can both be do-
nothing classes that just conform to the required protocols.
In the case of the data source protocol, two required
methods will need implementing, but placeholder
implementations will be ﬁne because we don’t have any
indication of what those methods would do yet. Those
empty classes are both shown next. Although these classes
are not SenTestCase subclasses, they are for the moment only
being used to support the tests, so you can group them with
the test ﬁxtures in Xcode’s project navigator.
EmptyTableViewDataSource.h 
 
#import <UIKit/UIKit.h> 
 
@interface EmptyTableViewDataSource : NSObject <UITableViewDataSource> 
 
@end 
 
EmptyTableViewDataSource.m 
 
#import "EmptyTableViewDataSource.h" 
 
@implementation EmptyTableViewDataSource 
 
- (NSInteger)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView 
    numberOfRowsInSection:(NSInteger)section { 
    return 0; 
} 
 
- (UITableViewCell *)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView 
    cellForRowAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath { 
    return nil; 
} 
 

--- Page 217 ---
@end 
 
EmptyTableViewDelegate.h 
 
#import <UIKit/UIKit.h> 
 
@interface EmptyTableViewDelegate : NSObject <UITableViewDelegate> 
 
@end 
 
EmptyTableViewDelegate.m 
 
#import "EmptyTableViewDelegate.h" 
 
@implementation EmptyTableViewDelegate 
 
@end
After all that, the implementation of -[BrowseOverflowViewController
viewDidLoad] is almost anticlimactically brief. The template code
provided by Apple already calls through to the superclass’s
implementation of the method. The changes added to make
the preceding tests pass are shown in bold next.
- (void)viewDidLoad 
{ 
     [super viewDidLoad]; 
    self.tableView.delegate = self.tableViewDelegate; 
    self.tableView.dataSource = self.dataSource; 
}
Now that we have the table view conﬁgured with a data
source and delegate, we should give it some data to display.
Let’s start at the beginning of the app, with the list of topics.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 218 ---
TopicTableDataSource and TopicTableDelegate
The ﬁrst view a user sees should be a list of topics so that
the user can choose one to look at recent questions on that
topic. Reviewing the model objects we created in Chapter 6,
you can see that although Topics can hold Questions, and Questions
can have Answers, nothing contains a Topic. If all we need is a
list of topics, the topic data source just needs to hold a NSArray
of Topic instances.
We already have an empty data source that we’re not using
—well, for nothing other than to be a data source, anyway—
so let’s add the array to that. First, we’ll change its name:
It’s going to stop being an EmptyTableViewDataSource and start being
a TopicTableDataSource. This is easily done with Xcode’s refactoring
capabilities: Right-click the EmptyTableViewDataSource’s name in its
interface ﬁle, choose Refactor, Rename, and type
TopicTableDataSource. Xcode should rename the class and its
source ﬁles and also make changes to the
BrowseOverflowViewControllerTests ﬁxture to use the new name. It’s
worth running the tests again to make sure all that worked.
After it did, add the TopicTableDataSource class to the app target;
it’s just become production code.
Let’s ensure that we can provide an array of topics to the
data source, by creating a new test in a new test ﬁxture,
TopicTableDataSourceTests.
#import "TopicTableDataSourceTests.h" 
#import "TopicTableDataSource.h" 
#import "Topic.h" 
 
@implementation TopicTableDataSourceTests 
 
- (void)testTopicDataSourceCanReceiveAListOfTopics { 
    TopicTableDataSource *dataSource = 
        [[TopicTableDataSource alloc] init]; 
    Topic *sampleTopic = [[Topic alloc] initWithName: @"iPhone" 
                                                 tag: @"iphone"]; 
    NSArray *topicsList = [NSArray arrayWithObject: sampleTopic]; 
    STAssertNoThrow([dataSource setTopics: topicsList], 

--- Page 219 ---
        @"The data source needs a list of topics"); 
} 
 
@end
Notice that there’s no need—certainly not at the moment,
anyway—to implement a getter for this property. An
instance variable and a setter method in TopicTableDataSource will
work:
- (void)setTopics: (NSArray *)newTopics { 
    topics = newTopics; 
}
Now that the object has a list of topics, it should prepare
those topics for display in a table view. One of the things a
table view needs to know is how many rows to display,
which should be the number of Topic instances the data
source has. Unless you tell it otherwise, a table view has a
single section (section 0), so it will ask only how many rows
there are in section 0. I’ll add a couple of diﬀerent tests to
TopicTableDataSource to enforce some generality in the method.
Here is how the whole ﬁxture looks after refactoring the
existing code: Because the -setUp method and one of the
tests depends on -[TopicTableDataSource setTopics:] working, I
decided it was OK to remove the test for that method’s
existence. It wouldn’t be a problem to have left it, and some
people do: It’s still available via git’s history1 should I need
it in the future.
1. And it seems someone wrote a book about it anyway.
#import "TopicTableDataSourceTests.h" 
#import "TopicTableDataSource.h" 
#import "Topic.h" 
 
@implementation TopicTableDataSourceTests 
{ 
    TopicTableDataSource *dataSource; 
    NSArray *topicsList; 
} 
 
- (void)setUp { 

--- Page 220 ---
    dataSource = [[TopicTableDataSource alloc] init]; 
    Topic *sampleTopic = [[Topic alloc] initWithName: @"iPhone" 
                                                 tag: @"iphone"]; 
    topicsList = [NSArray arrayWithObject: sampleTopic]; 
    [dataSource setTopics: topicsList]; 
} 
 
- (void)tearDown { 
    dataSource = nil; 
    topicsList = nil; 
} 
 
- (void)testOneTableRowForOneTopic { 
    STAssertEquals((NSInteger)[topicsList count], 
        [dataSource tableView: nil numberOfRowsInSection: 0], 
        @"As there's one topic, there should be one row in the table"); 
} 
 
- (void)testTwoTableRowsForTwoTopics { 
    Topic *topic1 = [[Topic alloc] initWithName: @"Mac OS X" 
                                            tag: @"macosx"]; 
    Topic *topic2 = [[Topic alloc] initWithName: @"Cocoa" 
                                            tag: @"cocoa"]; 
    NSArray *twoTopicsList = [NSArray arrayWithObjects: 
        topic1, topic2, nil]; 
    [dataSource setTopics: twoTopicsList]; 
    STAssertEquals((NSInteger)[twoTopicsList count],
        [dataSource tableView: nil numberOfRowsInSection: 0], 
        @"There should be two rows in the table for two topics"); 
} 
 
@end
That seems like a good set of tests, except that because I
believe the table view “will ask only how many rows there
are in section 0,” I should make that requirement explicit. If
it turns out to be wrong later, I want to ﬁnd out in the
noisiest way possible. This test requires the data source to
fail if asked for section 1. A table with more than one section
would ask for section 1 in addition to other sections.
- (void)testOneSectionInTheTableView { 
    STAssertThrows([dataSource tableView: nil 
                   numberOfRowsInSection: 1], 
        @"Data source doesn't allow asking about additional sections"); 
}

--- Page 221 ---
The implementation of -[TopicTableDataSource
tableView:numberOfRowsInSection:] that passes all of these tests is
shown next.
- (NSInteger)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView 
    numberOfRowsInSection:(NSInteger)section { 
    NSParameterAssert(section == 0); 
    return [topics count]; 
}
The other thing that a table view data source needs to do is
to prepare cells for the table view to display. For every Topic
in the list, there should be a cell. Conversely, the data
source shouldn’t prepare cells for any row in the table for
which a Topic doesn’t exist: This isn’t expected to happen.
Where there is a Topic, the text label in the cell should be the
title of the Topic. This set of requirements can—you’ve
guessed it—be expressed as a collection of unit tests on the
TopicTableDataSourceTests ﬁxture.
- (void)testDataSourceCellCreationExpectsOneSection { 
    NSIndexPath *secondSection = [NSIndexPath indexPathForRow: 0 
                                                    inSection: 1]; 
    STAssertThrows([dataSource tableView: nil 
                   cellForRowAtIndexPath: secondSection], 
        @"Data source will not prepare cells for unexpected sections"); 
} 
 
- (void)testDataSourceCellCreationWillNotCreateMoreRowsThanItHasTopics 
{ 
    NSIndexPath *afterLastTopic = 
        [NSIndexPath indexPathForRow: [topicsList count] inSection: 0]; 
    STAssertThrows([dataSource tableView: nil 
                   cellForRowAtIndexPath: afterLastTopic], 
    @"Data source will not prepare more cells than there are topics"); 
} 
 
- (void)testCellCreatedByDataSourceContainsTopicTitleAsTextLabel { 
    NSIndexPath *ﬁrstTopic = [NSIndexPath indexPathForRow: 0 
                                                 inSection: 0]; 
    UITableViewCell *ﬁrstCell = [dataSource tableView: nil 
                                 cellForRowAtIndexPath: ﬁrstTopic]; 
    NSString *cellTitle = ﬁrstCell.textLabel.text; 
    STAssertEqualObjects(@"iPhone", cellTitle, 

--- Page 222 ---
        @"Cell's title should be equal to the topic's title"); 
}
We immediately hit a problem when we try to satisfy these
requirements in application code. The initializer for
UITableViewCell looks like this:
- (id)initWithStyle:(UITableViewCellStyle)style 
    reuseIdentiﬁer:(NSString *)reuseIdentiﬁer;
There’s nothing in the app’s requirements to tell us what
value these style and reuseIdentifier parameters should take.
That’s because they’re not really customer requirements;
the reuse identiﬁer is just a contract between the table view
and its data source to allow the table view to recycle
previously created cells. The customers and users probably
don’t care what we do with this value. They might care if the
application runs out of memory through creating too many
cells, but performance testing is outside the remit of unit
testing. You can do anything here, from allowing the code to
use any reuse identiﬁer to enforcing a value through a test
as an internal requirement on the code.
Similarly, users might have an opinion on what the table
view cells look like, but it doesn’t matter so much what cell
style we use to get there. Unit tests on view code are a
tricky subject. Most of the details of an app’s presentation
won’t be in code anyway; they’ll be in graphics assets and
XIB ﬁles. If customers don’t like the graphics, you just
change them. It shouldn’t be too contentious then to leave
presentation details in code untested: ﬂexibility being more
important than (what are ultimately subjective) opinions of
correctness.2
2. This is about presentation, not about the functional behavior of drawing to a
view. If some view code is supposed to display certain data and doesn’t, or
draws only an arc segment where it’s supposed to draw a complete circle,
those are bugs: bugs that can be expressed as tests. But testing whether the
interface that the code and other assets create is liked, or usable, must be
left to other means.

--- Page 223 ---
All of this means that our requirements are indeed
complete, and that it’s time to implement -[TopicTableDataSource
tableView:cellForRowAtIndexPath:].
- (UITableViewCell *)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView cellForRowAtIndexPath:
(NSIndexPath *)indexPath { 
    NSParameterAssert([indexPath section] == 0); 
    NSParameterAssert([indexPath row] < [topics count]); 
    UITableViewCell *topicCell = 
        [[UITableViewCell alloc] initWithStyle: 
        UITableViewCellStyleDefault reuseIdentiﬁer: @"Topic"]; 
    topicCell.textLabel.text = 
        [[topics objectAtIndex: [indexPath row]] name]; 
    return topicCell; 
}
Knowing something about the use of UITableView, it would be
standard practice to allow the table view to dequeue cells
for reuse by the data source. We can’t predict how or when
the table view will do this, and making sure that the table
view and data source work together well is the responsibility
of an integration test, not a unit test; remember that unit
testing is only one of many testing tools at our disposal. But
we can ensure that our tests still pass when we change the
implementation of -[TopicTableDataSource tableView:cellForRowAtIndexPath:].
NSString *topicCellReuseIdentiﬁer = @"Topic"; 
 
- (UITableViewCell *)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView cellForRowAtIndexPath:
(NSIndexPath *)indexPath { 
    NSParameterAssert([indexPath section] == 0); 
    NSParameterAssert([indexPath row] < [topics count]); 
    UITableViewCell *topicCell =[tableView 
        dequeueReusableCellWithIdentiﬁer: topicCellReuseIdentiﬁer]; 
    if (!topicCell) { 
        topicCell = [[UITableViewCell alloc] 
            initWithStyle: UITableViewCellStyleDefault 
          reuseIdentiﬁer: topicCellReuseIdentiﬁer]; 
    } 
    topicCell.textLabel.text = 
        [[topics objectAtIndex: [indexPath row]] name]; 
    return topicCell; 
}

--- Page 224 ---
Indeed, the tests do still pass.
With the user able to see a list of topics, selecting any of
those topics should take the user to the list of questions in
that topic. Selection is handled in the table view’s delegate,
speciﬁcally these methods:
- (NSIndexPath *)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView 
    willSelectRowAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath; 
- (void)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView 
    didSelectRowAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath;
The ﬁrst method is used to veto or change the user’s
selection of a table view row, which doesn’t seem to ﬁt what
we need to do. We need to ﬁnd out when the user has
selected a topic so that the app can present the question
list: That’s a job for ...didSelectRow.... As with the data source
class, we can co-opt the existing empty delegate class by
refactoring it to be named TopicTableDelegate.
It doesn’t seem like a good idea for the delegate to actually
prepare the next view controller: That would mix the
responsibilities of a table view delegate with view
management. A better design is to have the delegate notify
the view controller about the selected Topic, so that the view
controller can interact with its navigation controller to push
the next view controller into place. That means the delegate
instance needs to have a reference to the data source
object. It would be appropriate to set that up while the table
view is being conﬁgured. Here is the BrowseOverflowViewControllerTests
ﬁxture after adding that requirement; unchanged test
methods are not shown here.
@implementation BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests 
{ 
    BrowseOverﬂowViewController *viewController; 
    UITableView *tableView; 
    id <UITableViewDataSource> dataSource; 
    TopicTableDelegate *delegate; 
} 
 
- (void)setUp { 

--- Page 225 ---
    viewController = [[BrowseOverﬂowViewController alloc] init]; 
    tableView = [[UITableView alloc] init]; 
    viewController.tableView = tableView; 
    dataSource = [[TopicTableDataSource alloc] init]; 
    delegate = [[TopicTableDelegate alloc] init]; 
    viewController.dataSource = dataSource; 
    viewController.tableViewDelegate = delegate; 
} 
 
- (void)tearDown { 
    viewController = nil; 
    tableView = nil; 
    dataSource = nil; 
} 
- (void)testViewControllerConnectsDataSourceInViewDidLoad { 
    [viewController viewDidLoad]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects([tableView dataSource], dataSource, 
    @"View controller should have set the table view's data source"); 
} 
 
- (void)testViewControllerConnectsDelegateInViewDidLoad { 
    [viewController viewDidLoad]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects([tableView delegate], delegate, 
    @"View controller should have set the table view's delegate"); 
} 
 
- (void)testViewControllerConnectsDataSourceToDelegate { 
    [viewController viewDidLoad]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects(delegate.tableDataSource, dataSource, 
    @"The view controller should tell the table view delegate about 
    its data source"); 
} 
 
@end
To get the new -testViewControllerConnectsDataSourceToDelegate test to
compile requires a new property on the TopicTableDelegate class.
#import <UIKit/UIKit.h> 
 
@class TopicTableDataSource; 
 
@interface TopicTableDelegate : NSObject <UITableViewDelegate> 
 
@property (strong) TopicTableDataSource *tableDataSource; 
 
@end

--- Page 226 ---
The implementation just needs the corresponding @synthesize
directive. Now we are in a position to add the code to
BrowseOverflowViewController to make this happen. Initially this
seems like a simple, one-line addition to -viewDidLoad is all we
need:
self.tableViewDelegate.tableDataSource = self.dataSource;
Unfortunately, that’s not so. The tableViewDelegate property is
currently of type id <UITableViewDelegate>, and that type doesn’t
have a tableDataSource property. We need to change the type of
tableViewDelegate to TopicTableDelegate. However, this might stop the
BrowseOverflowViewController from being a general class that works
for each view in the app, as originally planned. For the
moment we’ll make this change anyway, and press on with
implementing the delegate behavior. We can evaluate
whether to use this class in a more general context when we
come to build the code for the questions table.
Change the type of the tableViewDelegate property, and you’ll ﬁnd
you also need to change the type of the
BrowseOverflowViewController’s dataSource property to TopicTableDataSource.
After you’ve made both of those changes, the preceding line
can be added to -[BrowseOverflowViewController viewDidLoad]. Now the
tests pass again.
On to the delegate’s behavior. It should ﬁnd out which Topic
object was represented by the tapped cell and create a
notiﬁcation to pass to the view controller, telling to it push a
new view controller for questions in that Topic. The ﬁrst part
of what we’ll need is still on the data source: a method to
report the Topic instance that’s represented by a particular
table view cell. Cell locations are identiﬁed by index paths,
so we’re really asking for the Topic at a particular index path,
expressed here as a test on TopicTableDataSourceTests.
- (void)testDataSourceIndicatesWhichTopicIsRepresentedForAnIndexPath { 
    NSIndexPath *ﬁrstRow = [NSIndexPath indexPathForRow: 0 
                                              inSection: 0]; 
    Topic *ﬁrstTopic = [dataSource topicForIndexPath: ﬁrstRow]; 

--- Page 227 ---
    STAssertEqualObjects(ﬁrstTopic.tag, @"iphone", 
        @"The iPhone Topic is at row 0"); 
}
This implementation on TopicTableDataSource will be suﬃcient. The
method should also be declared in the class’s interface.
Notice that I’ve been able to refactor some of the table view
preparation code to use the new method: These changes
are also shown.
- (Topic *)topicForIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath { 
    return [topics objectAtIndex: [indexPath row]]; 
} 
 
- (UITableViewCell *)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView 
         cellForRowAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath { 
    NSParameterAssert([indexPath section] == 0); 
    NSParameterAssert([indexPath row] < [topics count]); 
    UITableViewCell *topicCell = [tableView 
        dequeueReusableCellWithIdentiﬁer: topicCellReuseIdentiﬁer]; 
    if (!topicCell) {
        topicCell = [[UITableViewCell alloc] 
            initWithStyle: UITableViewCellStyleDefault 
          reuseIdentiﬁer: topicCellReuseIdentiﬁer]; 
    } 
    topicCell.textLabel.text = 
        [[self topicForIndexPath: indexPath] name]; 
    return topicCell; 
}
Now we have the infrastructure to build -[TopicTableDelegate
tableView: didSelectRowAtIndexPath:]. Remember that we require it to
post a notiﬁcation, with the selected Topic instance as the
notiﬁcation’s object. We immediately run into a problem:
Notiﬁcations are normally posted to the -[NSNotificationCenter
defaultCenter] singleton, but that object oﬀers no way to
investigate its state. How can we tell that the notiﬁcation
was posted?
One obvious way is to use the fact that if the object under
test posts a notiﬁcation, we can receive that notiﬁcation in
the test code. This means using a real, live NSNotificationCenter:
The trade-oﬀ against creating a fake notiﬁcation center is

--- Page 228 ---
that the real notiﬁcation center might introduce
complications that stop tests being reliably repeatable, or
make them very slow. On the other hand, it takes time to
build a fake class.
NSNotificationCenter is not too complicated. It just keeps track of
what invocations to call on what objects when a notiﬁcation
is posted. It doesn’t even do any asynchronous work. It will
be easiest to create the test using a real object: If it turns
out to be problematic, we can rebuild the test. Here is a new
ﬁxture, TopicTableDelegateTests, making use of the NSNotificationCenter.
#import "TopicTableDelegateTests.h" 
#import "TopicTableDelegate.h" 
#import "TopicTableDataSource.h" 
#import "Topic.h" 
 
@implementation TopicTableDelegateTests 
{ 
    NSNotiﬁcation *receivedNotiﬁcation; 
    TopicTableDataSource *dataSource; 
    TopicTableDelegate *delegate; 
    Topic *iPhoneTopic; 
} 
 
- (void)setUp { 
    delegate = [[TopicTableDelegate alloc] init]; 
    dataSource = [[TopicTableDataSource alloc] init]; 
    iPhoneTopic = [[Topic alloc] initWithName: @"iPhone" 
                                          tag: @"iphone"]; 
    [dataSource setTopics: [NSArray arrayWithObject: iPhoneTopic]]; 
    delegate.tableDataSource = dataSource; 
    [[NSNotiﬁcationCenter defaultCenter] 
        addObserver: self 
           selector: @selector(didReceiveNotiﬁcation:) 
               name: TopicTableDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation 
             object: nil]; 
} 
 
- (void)tearDown { 
    receivedNotiﬁcation = nil; 
    dataSource = nil; 
    delegate = nil; 
    iPhoneTopic = nil; 
    [[NSNotiﬁcationCenter defaultCenter] removeObserver: self]; 

--- Page 229 ---
} 
 
- (void)didReceiveNotiﬁcation: (NSNotiﬁcation *)note { 
    receivedNotiﬁcation = note; 
} 
 
- (void)testDelegatePostsNotiﬁcationOnSelectionShowingWhichTopicWasSelected
{ 
    NSIndexPath *selection = [NSIndexPath indexPathForRow: 0 
                                                inSection: 0]; 
    [delegate tableView: nil didSelectRowAtIndexPath: selection]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects([receivedNotiﬁcation name], 
        @"TopicTableDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation", 
        @"The delegate should notify that a topic was selected"); 
    STAssertEqualObjects([receivedNotiﬁcation object], 
        iPhoneTopic, 
        @"The notiﬁcation should indicate which topic was selected"); 
} 
 
@end
It’s very important to remove the test ﬁxture as an observer
in -tearDown. Failure to do so would mean the notiﬁcation
center keeping a stale reference to the ﬁxture instance after
OCUnit is ﬁnished with it, which might lead to a crash in a
later test.
With that infrastructure in place, the -[TopicTableDelegate tableView:
didSelectRowAtIndexPath:] method can look like this. The
TopicTableDidSelectTopicNotification constant should be deﬁned in
TopicTableDelegate.m, and exposed via an extern declaration in the
header.
- (void)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView 
        didSelectRowAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath { 
    NSNotiﬁcation *note = 
        [NSNotiﬁcation notiﬁcationWithName: 
            TopicTableDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation 
            object: [tableDataSource topicForIndexPath: indexPath]]; 
    [[NSNotiﬁcationCenter defaultCenter] postNotiﬁcation: note]; 
}
This allows the test to pass, so we’re at the green stage in
red—green—refactor. Actually, refactoring seems like a good
idea: We had to go through a lot of changes to make the

--- Page 230 ---
BrowseOverflowViewController’s instance variable types more speciﬁc,
just to get this table view delegate class to work. After we
got there, we found that the object needs to ask the data
source for some internal data to do its thing. Perhaps it was
overly aggressive to make the delegate and data source
diﬀerent objects. It would be good to combine these objects,
removing the public access to the data source’s internal
details and, hopefully, cleaning up some of the mess we
made in the view controller.3
3. If you followed along making all the changes in this section, I apologize now,
and oﬀer as consolation that you can look forward to following along with all
the refactoring. This kind of change is quite common in test-driven
development, but will ultimately be for the best. We’ve tried something out,
found that we can make it work, and then also discovered a more satisfactory
way of doing the same thing. Two for the price of one, if you will.
The ﬁrst step is to remove the -tableView:didSelectRowAtIndexPath:
method from the TopicTableDelegate class and put it onto the
TopicTableDataSource class. But wait: What we actually want to do
is to demonstrate that the TopicTableDataSource class can exhibit
the same selection behavior that we previously
implemented on TopicTableDelegate. We should write a test. In
fact, we can change the way TopicTableDelegateTests works so that
it tests the data source. Here is that ﬁxture again: Most of
the changes are removed lines, and the test sends a
delegate message to the data source instead of the
(removed) delegate object.
#import "TopicTableDelegateTests.h" 
#import "TopicTableDataSource.h" 
#import "Topic.h" 
 
@implementation TopicTableDelegateTests 
{ 
    NSNotiﬁcation *receivedNotiﬁcation; 
    TopicTableDataSource *dataSource; 
    Topic *iPhoneTopic; 
} 
 
- (void)setUp { 
    dataSource = [[TopicTableDataSource alloc] init]; 

--- Page 231 ---
    iPhoneTopic = [[Topic alloc] initWithName: @"iPhone" 
                                          tag: @"iphone"]; 
    [dataSource setTopics: [NSArray arrayWithObject: iPhoneTopic]]; 
    [[NSNotiﬁcationCenter defaultCenter] 
        addObserver: self 
           selector: @selector(didReceiveNotiﬁcation:) 
               name: TopicTableDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation 
             object: nil]; 
} 
 
- (void)tearDown { 
    receivedNotiﬁcation = nil; 
    dataSource = nil; 
    iPhoneTopic = nil; 
    [[NSNotiﬁcationCenter defaultCenter] removeObserver: self]; 
} 
- (void)didReceiveNotiﬁcation: (NSNotiﬁcation *)note { 
    receivedNotiﬁcation = note; 
} 
 
- (void)testDelegatePostsNotiﬁcationOnSelectionShowingWhichTopicWasSelected
{ 
    NSIndexPath *selection = [NSIndexPath indexPathForRow: 0 
                                                inSection: 0]; 
    [dataSource tableView: nil didSelectRowAtIndexPath: selection]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects([receivedNotiﬁcation name], 
        @"TopicTableDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation", 
        @"The delegate should notify that a topic was selected"); 
    STAssertEqualObjects([receivedNotiﬁcation object], 
        iPhoneTopic, 
        @"The notiﬁcation should indicate which topic was selected"); 
} 
 
@end
We ﬁnd that the test no longer builds. The data source
object doesn’t respond to the method being tested, and the
compiler can no longer ﬁnd the deﬁnition of the notiﬁcation
name constant. The implementations on TopicTableDelegate ought
to work—let’s remove them from that class and migrate
them over to TopicTableDataSource (literally a cut-and-paste job).
We should add UITableViewDelegate to the list of protocols
TopicTableDataSource conforms to. Here are the complete interface
and implementation with changes highlighted.

--- Page 232 ---
TopicTableDataSource.h 
 
#import <UIKit/UIKit.h> 
 
@class Topic; 
 
@interface TopicTableDataSource : NSObject <UITableViewDataSource, 
        UITableViewDelegate> 
 
- (void)setTopics: (NSArray *)newTopics; 
- (Topic *)topicForIndexPath: (NSIndexPath *)indexPath; 
 
@end 
 
extern NSString *TopicTableDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation; 
 
TopicTableDataSource.m 
 
#import "TopicTableDataSource.h" 
#import "Topic.h" 
NSString *topicCellReuseIdentiﬁer = @"Topic"; 
 
@implementation TopicTableDataSource 
{ 
    NSArray *topics; 
} 
 
- (void)setTopics: (NSArray *)newTopics { 
    topics = newTopics; 
} 
 
- (NSInteger)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView 
 numberOfRowsInSection:(NSInteger)section { 
    NSParameterAssert(section == 0); 
    return [topics count]; 
} 
 
- (Topic *)topicForIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath { 
    return [topics objectAtIndex: [indexPath row]]; 
} 
 
- (UITableViewCell *)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView 
         cellForRowAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath { 
    NSParameterAssert([indexPath section] == 0); 
    NSParameterAssert([indexPath row] < [topics count]); 
    UITableViewCell *topicCell = [tableView 
        dequeueReusableCellWithIdentiﬁer: topicCellReuseIdentiﬁer]; 
    if (!topicCell) {

--- Page 233 ---
        topicCell = [[UITableViewCell alloc] 
            initWithStyle: UITableViewCellStyleDefault 
          reuseIdentiﬁer: topicCellReuseIdentiﬁer]; 
    } 
    topicCell.textLabel.text = 
        [[self topicForIndexPath: indexPath] name]; 
    return topicCell; 
} 
 
- (void)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView 
    didSelectRowAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath { 
    NSNotiﬁcation *note = [NSNotiﬁcation 
        notiﬁcationWithName: TopicTableDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation 
                      object: [self topicForIndexPath: indexPath]]; 
    [[NSNotiﬁcationCenter defaultCenter] postNotiﬁcation: note]; 
} 
 
@end 
 
NSString *TopicTableDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation = 
    @"TopicTableDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation";
When I run the tests now, everything works, but there’s a
warning in BrowseOverflowViewControllerTests relating to a type
conversion using the TopicTableDataSource class in an instance
variable. We need to clean up that ﬁxture and indeed, the
BrowseOverflowViewController class itself. Most of what we’re doing is
removing code or just changing types; there won’t be any
sample code to show, so just follow along with the
discussion for the next couple of paragraphs. We’ll take a
look at the ﬁnal state of the classes at the end.
The ﬁrst thing to notice is that because the TopicTableDelegate no
longer does anything, there’s no need for the view controller
to have an instance, nor for it to pass the instance to a table
view. It should instead pass the TopicTableDataSource instance as
the table’s delegate. This means that -
[BrowseOverflowViewControllerTeststestViewControllerHasATableViewDelegateProperty]
and -testViewControllerConnectsDataSourceToDelegate are no longer
necessary and can be removed.
Furthermore, the -testViewControllerConnectsDelegateInViewDidLoad test
should ensure that the table view’s delegate is connected to

--- Page 234 ---
the view controller’s data source property. The data source
is now fulﬁlling both roles. Having made this change, we
ﬁnd that the test ﬁxture isn’t using its delegate instance
variable at all, so it can be removed along with references in
-setUp and -tearDown. Also, the type of the dataSource instance
variable can be changed to id <UITableViewDataSource,
UITableViewDelegate> to reﬂect that variable’s dual role.
Now we ﬁnd that a test starts failing again:
BrowseOverflowViewController still passes its delegate property to the
table view, instead of using the data source as the delegate.
That line needs changing in -viewDidLoad to use the data source
for both purposes.
That makes the test pass, but there’s now untested code.
BrowseOverflowViewController still has a delegate property and,
indeed, passes it a data source in -viewDidLoad. None of this is
required anymore, so we can remove all the deﬁnitions and
uses of the delegate property. Finally, because the view
controller no longer needs to know about custom methods
on the data source object, we can return to using the
generic id <UITableViewDataSource, UITableViewDelegate> type to refer to
that property.
However, it’s not quite ﬁnal. Notice that the TopicTableDelegate
class is no longer used nor tested at all; it’s entirely
redundant. You can convince yourself of this by doing a
projectwide search in Xcode. A more incontrovertible
demonstration is to remove that class completely and run
the tests again. The suite still builds and passes.
For reference, here are the ﬁles aﬀected by that refactoring
work (the ones that remain, anyway). As an aside, because
the TopicTableDataSource no longer needs to tell any external
objects about which Topic is at which index path, you can
remove -[TopicTableDataSourceTests
testDataSourceIndicatesWhichTopicIsRepresentedForAnIndexPath]. The method -
[TopicTableDataSourcetopicForIndexPath:] is still used internally, so don’t

--- Page 235 ---
delete it. You could move the declaration out of the header
ﬁle and into a class continuation if you wanted to “tidy up”
the interface, though. Remember, even though you remove
that test, the method is still eﬀectively being tested
because it’s used elsewhere in the class.
BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests.m 
 
#import "BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests.h" 
#import "BrowseOverﬂowViewController.h" 
#import "TopicTableDataSource.h" 
 
@implementation BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests 
{ 
    BrowseOverﬂowViewController *viewController; 
    UITableView *tableView; 
    id <UITableViewDataSource, UITableViewDelegate> dataSource; 
} 
 
- (void)setUp { 
    viewController = [[BrowseOverﬂowViewController alloc] init]; 
    tableView = [[UITableView alloc] init]; 
    viewController.tableView = tableView; 
    dataSource = [[TopicTableDataSource alloc] init]; 
    viewController.dataSource = dataSource; 
} 
 
- (void)tearDown { 
    viewController = nil; 
    tableView = nil; 
    dataSource = nil; 
} 
 
- (void)testViewControllerHasATableViewProperty { 
    objc_property_t tableViewProperty = 
        class_getProperty([viewController class], "tableView"); 
    STAssertTrue(tableViewProperty != NULL, 
        @"BrowseOverﬂowViewController needs a table view"); 
} 
 
- (void)testViewControllerHasADataSourceProperty { 
    objc_property_t dataSourceProperty = 
        class_getProperty([viewController class], "dataSource"); 
    STAssertTrue(dataSourceProperty != NULL, 
        @"View Controller needs a data source"); 
} 

--- Page 236 ---
 
- (void)testViewControllerConnectsDataSourceInViewDidLoad { 
    [viewController viewDidLoad]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects([tableView dataSource], dataSource, 
      @"View controller should have set the table view's data source"); 
} 
 
- (void)testViewControllerConnectsDelegateInViewDidLoad { 
    [viewController viewDidLoad]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects([tableView delegate], dataSource, 
        @"View controller should have set the table view's delegate"); 
} 
 
@end 
 
BrowseOverﬂowViewController.h 
 
#import <UIKit/UIKit.h> 
 
@interface BrowseOverﬂowViewController : UIViewController 
 
@property (strong) UITableView *tableView; 
@property (strong) id <UITableViewDataSource, UITableViewDelegate> 
    dataSource; 
 
@end 
 
BrowseOverﬂowViewController.m 
 
#import "BrowseOverﬂowViewController.h" 
#import "TopicTableDataSource.h" 
 
@implementation BrowseOverﬂowViewController 
 
@synthesize tableView; 
@synthesize dataSource; 
 
- (void)viewDidLoad 
{ 
    [super viewDidLoad]; 
    self.tableView.delegate = self.dataSource; 
    self.tableView.dataSource = self.dataSource; 
} 
 
@end

--- Page 237 ---
This seems like a much better situation. The view controller
is again independent of the details of the table data source.
A class that needed to know too much about the insides of
another has been merged, creating a single well-
encapsulated class with a clear responsibility. And the tests
still run. To complete the story of the topics table, we need
to create the questions table, and present it on the screen.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 238 ---
Telling the View Controller to Create a New
View Controller
The view controller should create a new view controller that
is set up to display questions in the selected topic. The ﬁrst
thing we need it to do is register for the notiﬁcation sent by
the data source. We only want for the view controller to
push a new view while its own view is active. In other words,
a view controller shouldn’t push the next view while it’s
lying dormant in the background, because that will allow the
view hierarchy to get out of sync.
This can be arranged by registering for the notiﬁcation in -
[BrowseOverflowViewController viewDidAppear:] and removing that
notiﬁcation in -[BrowseOverflowViewController viewWillDisappear:], so that
the view controller will receive the notiﬁcation only while its
view is active. Let’s write tests to require these methods to
perform the correct registration and deregistration. These
tests will require an interesting situation that we haven’t yet
come across: test code implemented on the class under
test, rather than in a fake object or test ﬁxture. We need a
method that the view controller executes in response to the
notiﬁcation, that we can use to discover when the class has
received the notiﬁcation.
It would be poor design to implement that method on the
BrowseOverflowViewController class, which is supposed to be
production code, not test-supporting code. Objective-C
oﬀers us a way to keep the separation between test code
and production code while still adding a method onto the
required class: using categories. We can create a category
whose code is stored in the test ﬁxture, but that adds
additional methods to BrowseOverflowViewController. Here is the
category, along with the tests implemented on
BrowseOverflowViewControllerTests. Both of these parts live in the
BrowseOverflowViewControllerTests.m implementation ﬁle.

--- Page 239 ---
static const char *notiﬁcationKey = 
"BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTestsAssociatedNotiﬁcationKey"; 
@implementation BrowseOverﬂowViewController (TestNotiﬁcationDelivery) 
 
- (void)userDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation: (NSNotiﬁcation *)note { 
    objc_setAssociatedObject(self, notiﬁcationKey, note, 
        OBJC_ASSOCIATION_RETAIN); 
} 
 
@end 
 
@implementation BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests 
 
- (void)setUp { 
    //... 
    objc_removeAssociatedObjects(viewController); 
} 
- (void)tearDown { 
    objc_removeAssociatedObjects(viewController); 
    //... 
} 
 
//... 
- (void)testDefaultStateOfViewControllerDoesNotReceiveNotiﬁcations { 
    [[NSNotiﬁcationCenter defaultCenter] 
     postNotiﬁcationName: TopicTableDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation 
     object: nil 
     userInfo: nil]; 
    STAssertNil(objc_getAssociatedObject(viewController, 
        notiﬁcationKey), 
        @"Notiﬁcation should not be received before -viewDidAppear:"); 
} 
 
- (void)testViewControllerReceivesTableSelectionNotiﬁcationAfterViewDidAppear
{ 
    [viewController viewDidAppear: NO]; 
    [[NSNotiﬁcationCenter defaultCenter] 
     postNotiﬁcationName: TopicTableDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation 
     object: nil 
     userInfo: nil]; 
    STAssertNotNil(objc_getAssociatedObject(viewController, 
        notiﬁcationKey), 
        @"After -viewDidAppear: the view controller should handle" 
        @"selection notiﬁcations"); 
} 
 
-
(void)testViewControllerDoesNotReceiveTableSelectNotiﬁcationAfterViewWillDisa

--- Page 240 ---
ppear { 
    [viewController viewDidAppear: NO]; 
    [viewController viewWillDisappear: NO]; 
    [[NSNotiﬁcationCenter defaultCenter] 
     postNotiﬁcationName: TopicTableDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation 
     object: nil 
     userInfo: nil]; 
    STAssertNil(objc_getAssociatedObject(viewController, 
        notiﬁcationKey), 
        @"After -viewWillDisappear: is called, the view controller" 
        @"should no longer respond to topic selection notiﬁcations"); 
} 
 
@end
The category method uses Objective-C’s associated storage
facility to record the notiﬁcation received by a
BrowseOverflowViewController object. The tests set up the associated
storage, conﬁgure the view controller instance, and then
post a notiﬁcation. If the class is adding and removing itself
as an observer as required, the associated object should be
set only when the notiﬁcation is received after calling -
viewDidAppear: but before calling -viewWillDisappear: and not at any
other time.
Two of these tests—which ensure that the view controller
doesn’t receive the notiﬁcations at diﬀerent points in its life
cycle—already pass, because the view controller currently
doesn’t receive any notiﬁcations at all. This can be quickly
remedied by adding the following methods to
BrowseOverflowViewController.
- (void)viewDidAppear:(BOOL)animated { 
    [[NSNotiﬁcationCenter defaultCenter] 
     addObserver: self 
     selector: @selector(userDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation:) 
     name: TopicTableDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation 
     object: nil]; 
} 
 
- (void)viewWillDisappear:(BOOL)animated { 
    [[NSNotiﬁcationCenter defaultCenter] 
     removeObserver: self 
     name: TopicTableDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation 

--- Page 241 ---
     object: nil]; 
}
However, this cannot be considered a complete
implementation of those methods. Apple’s class
documentation for UIViewController4 says, for each of these
methods, “If you override this method, you must call super at
some point in your implementation.” We must require this of
our own methods, but how?
4.
http://developer.apple.com/library/ios/#documentation/uikit/reference/UIView
Controller_Class/Reference/Reference.html
To check whether an object being tested calls a method
previously, we have been providing fake implementations of
those methods that record whether they are called, and the
parameters if applicable. You can’t make a class extend one
class in the app and a diﬀerent class in the test ﬁxture, so
the only way we could insert sensing code to check for calls
to super would be if we could replace the real methods on
UIViewController with our sensing methods. Luckily, the
Objective-C runtime allows us to do exactly that: replace
one method on a class with another. Initially, this requires
adding our sensing methods to a category on UIViewController;
again I’ve chosen to add this short category to
BrowseOverflowViewControllerTests.m because it (currently) only
supports tests in that ﬁxture.
static const char *viewDidAppearKey = 
    "BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTestsViewDidAppearKey"; 
static const char *viewWillDisappearKey = 
    "BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTestsViewWillDisappearKey"; 
@implementation UIViewController (TestSuperclassCalled) 
 
- (void)browseOverﬂowViewControllerTests_viewDidAppear: (BOOL)animated 
{ 
    NSNumber *parameter = [NSNumber numberWithBool: animated]; 
    objc_setAssociatedObject(self, viewDidAppearKey, parameter, 
        OBJC_ASSOCIATION_RETAIN); 
} 
 
- (void)browseOverﬂowViewControllerTests_viewWillDisappear: 

--- Page 242 ---
    (BOOL)animated { 
    NSNumber *parameter = [NSNumber numberWithBool: animated]; 
    objc_setAssociatedObject(self, viewWillDisappearKey, parameter, 
        OBJC_ASSOCIATION_RETAIN); 
} 
 
@end
In -[BrowseOverflowViewControllerTests setUp], the ﬁxture should swap
the real implementations for the fake ones. This arranges
that when, for example, a -viewDidAppear: message is sent to a
UIViewController instance, the implementation of -
browseOverflowViewControllerTests_viewDidAppear: will be run instead.
Similarly, the -tearDown method swaps the implementations
back to their original positions. Because we’ll need to swap
methods four times (once each for two methods in -setUp, and
again in -tearDown) I’ll create a class method on the test ﬁxture
to do the actual swapping.
@implementation BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests 
{ 
    //... 
    SEL realViewDidAppear, testViewDidAppear; 
    SEL realViewWillDisappear, testViewWillDisappear; 
} 
 
+ (void)swapInstanceMethodsForClass: (Class) cls selector: (SEL)sel1 
    andSelector: (SEL)sel2 { 
    Method method1 = class_getInstanceMethod(cls, sel1); 
    Method method2 = class_getInstanceMethod(cls, sel2); 
    method_exchangeImplementations(method1, method2); 
} 
 
- (void)setUp { 
    //... 
    realViewDidAppear = @selector(viewDidAppear:); 
    testViewDidAppear = 
        @selector(browseOverﬂowViewControllerTests_viewDidAppear:); 
    [BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests 
        swapInstanceMethodsForClass: [UIViewController class] 
                           selector: realViewDidAppear 
                        andSelector: testViewDidAppear]; 
 
    realViewWillDisappear = @selector(viewWillDisappear:); 
    testViewWillDisappear = 

--- Page 243 ---
      @selector(browseOverﬂowViewControllerTests_viewWillDisappear:); 
    [BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests 
        swapInstanceMethodsForClass: [UIViewController class] 
                           selector: realViewWillDisappear 
                        andSelector: testViewWillDisappear]; 
} 
 
- (void)tearDown { 
    //... 
    [BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests 
        swapInstanceMethodsForClass: [UIViewController class] 
                           selector: realViewDidAppear 
                        andSelector: testViewDidAppear]; 
    [BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests 
        swapInstanceMethodsForClass: [UIViewController class] 
                           selector: realViewWillDisappear 
                       andSelector: testViewWillDisappear]; 
}
This approach is not without its limitations. Interesting
things could happen with the tests if the framework tries to
run multiple tests in parallel. This could cause the test
versions of the methods to be swapped back for the Apple-
supplied implementations while tests are running, meaning
that results are not reliably reported. OCUnit does not
currently oﬀer the capability to execute tests concurrently,
but you should bear this in mind if future versions of the
framework add that capability. Nevertheless, the technique
allows us to test that the super implementation of the
methods is called.
- (void)testViewControllerCallsSuperViewDidAppear { 
    [viewController viewDidAppear: NO]; 
    STAssertNotNil(objc_getAssociatedObject(viewController, 
        viewDidAppearKey), 
        @"-viewDidAppear: should call through to superclass" 
        @"implementation"); 
} 
 
- (void)testViewControllerCallsSuperViewWillDisappear { 
    [viewController viewWillDisappear: NO]; 
    STAssertNotNil(objc_getAssociatedObject(viewController, 
        viewWillDisappearKey), 
        @"-viewWillDisappear: should call through to superclass" 

--- Page 244 ---
        @"implementation"); 
}
Neither of the methods currently invokes the superclass
implementation, but that can be ﬁxed: Add the appropriate
calls to super in -[BrowseOverflowViewController viewDidAppear:] and -
[BrowseOverflowViewController viewWillDisappear:].5
5. One of this chapter’s technical reviewers made the valid point that all the
contortions gone through previously to test this delegation to the superclass
in a test demonstrate one thing: that a unit test might not be the best place
to express this requirement. This sort of thing is something the static analyzer
could easily detect; however, when I tried that it didn’t report a problem.
Now let’s build the code that will be executed when the user
selects a topic, the code that will pass the selected topic to
a newly created view controller. The ﬁrst thing to notice is
that we’re already (ab)using the BrowseOverflowViewController’s
reaction to the topic selection notiﬁcation to investigate
when the notiﬁcation is received, whereas we now need to
use it to supply production behavior. Again, the method-
exchanging approach used previously will help to have it
both ways: We’ll provide an (initially empty) implementation
of -[BrowseOverflowViewController userDidSelectTopicNotification] in the
production class, rename the method in the test support
category, and ensure that the tests that need the support
version exchange the methods correctly. The changes to the
category and test ﬁxture in BrowseOverflowViewControllerTests.m are
shown here. Notice that in this case, only the tests that
require the altered behavior from the category swap the
method implementations. It is not done in -setUp, so that tests
requiring the default behavior can function.
@implementation BrowseOverﬂowViewController (TestNotiﬁcationDelivery) 
 
- (void)browseOverﬂowControllerTests_userDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation: 
    (NSNotiﬁcation *)note { 
    objc_setAssociatedObject(self, notiﬁcationKey, note, 
        OBJC_ASSOCIATION_RETAIN); 
} 
 
@end 

--- Page 245 ---
 
//... 
 
@implementation BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests 
{ 
    BrowseOverﬂowViewController *viewController; 
    UITableView *tableView; 
    id <UITableViewDataSource, UITableViewDelegate> dataSource; 
    SEL realViewDidAppear, testViewDidAppear; 
    SEL realViewWillDisappear, testViewWillDisappear; 
    SEL realUserDidSelectTopic, testUserDidSelectTopic; 
} 
- (void)setUp { 
    viewController = [[BrowseOverﬂowViewController alloc] init]; 
    tableView = [[UITableView alloc] init]; 
    viewController.tableView = tableView; 
    dataSource = [[TopicTableDataSource alloc] init]; 
    viewController.dataSource = dataSource; 
    objc_removeAssociatedObjects(viewController); 
 
    realViewDidAppear = @selector(viewDidAppear:); 
    testViewDidAppear = 
        @selector(browseOverﬂowViewControllerTests_viewDidAppear:); 
    [BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests 
         swapInstanceMethodsForClass: [UIViewController class] 
                        selector: realViewDidAppear 
                      andSelector: testViewDidAppear]; 
 
    realViewWillDisappear = @selector(viewWillDisappear:); 
    testViewWillDisappear = 
      @selector(browseOverﬂowViewControllerTests_viewWillDisappear:); 
    [BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests 
        swapInstanceMethodsForClass: [UIViewController class] 
                       selector: realViewWillDisappear 
                     andSelector: testViewWillDisappear]; 
 
    realUserDidSelectTopic = @selector(userDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation:); 
    testUserDidSelectTopic = 
@selector(browseOverﬂowControllerTests_userDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcati
on:) 
;} 
//... 
 
- (void)testDefaultStateOfViewControllerDoesNotReceiveNotiﬁcations { 
      [BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests 
        swapInstanceMethodsForClass: 
            [BrowseOverﬂowViewController class] 
                           selector: realUserDidSelectTopic 

--- Page 246 ---
                        andSelector: testUserDidSelectTopic]; 
    [[NSNotiﬁcationCenter defaultCenter] 
     postNotiﬁcationName: TopicTableDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation 
     object: nil 
     userInfo: nil]; 
     STAssertNil(objc_getAssociatedObject(viewController, 
        notiﬁcationKey), 
        @"Notiﬁcation should not be received before -viewDidAppear:"); 
     [BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests 
        swapInstanceMethodsForClass: 
            [BrowseOverﬂowViewController class] 
                              selector: realUserDidSelectTopic 
                           andSelector: testUserDidSelectTopic]; 
} 
- (void)testViewControllerReceivesTableSelectionNotiﬁcationAfterViewDidAppear
{ 
      [BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests 
        swapInstanceMethodsForClass: 
            [BrowseOverﬂowViewController class] 
                             selector: realUserDidSelectTopic 
                           andSelector: testUserDidSelectTopic]; 
    [viewController viewDidAppear: NO]; 
    [[NSNotiﬁcationCenter defaultCenter] 
     postNotiﬁcationName: TopicTableDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation 
     object: nil 
     userInfo: nil]; 
    STAssertNotNil(objc_getAssociatedObject(viewController, 
        notiﬁcationKey), 
        @"After -viewDidAppear: the view controller should handle" 
        @" selection notiﬁcations"); 
      [BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests 
        swapInstanceMethodsForClass: 
                [BrowseOverﬂowViewController class] 
                                  selector: realUserDidSelectTopic 
                                  andSelector: testUserDidSelectTopic]; 
} 
 
-
(void)testViewControllerDoesNotReceiveTableSelectNotiﬁcationAfterViewWillDisa
ppear { 
    [BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests 
        swapInstanceMethodsForClass: 
               [BrowseOverﬂowViewController class] 
                                 selector: realUserDidSelectTopic 
                                 andSelector: testUserDidSelectTopic]; 
    [viewController viewDidAppear: NO]; 
    [viewController viewWillDisappear: NO]; 
    [[NSNotiﬁcationCenter defaultCenter] 

--- Page 247 ---
     postNotiﬁcationName: TopicTableDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation 
     object: nil 
     userInfo: nil]; 
    STAssertNil(objc_getAssociatedObject(viewController, 
        notiﬁcationKey), 
        @"After -viewWillDisappear: is called, the view controller" 
        @" should no longer respond to topic selection notiﬁcations"); 
    [BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests 
        swapInstanceMethodsForClass: 
            [BrowseOverﬂowViewController class] 
                           selector: realUserDidSelectTopic 
                        andSelector: testUserDidSelectTopic]; 
} 
@end 
That little bit of refactoring allows us to write tests of the
behavior of the object when it does receive a new
notiﬁcation. The main feature of this behavior is that the
view controller should push another view controller onto the
navigation stack. Should the view controller ﬁnd out about
its UINavigationController instance via its existing navigationController
property, or should we have the application’s code pass a
navigation controller to the class via a property that we
deﬁne? The second approach seems redundant; Apple has
already arranged that a view controller is told where its
navigation controller is, so there’s no need to reinvent that
particular wheel.
It seems we might be able to use the UINavigationController in a
test without modiﬁcation or resorting to fakes. The controller
has a topViewController property that returns the view controller
at the top of the navigation stack. With any luck, we should
be able to see that pushing our new view controller changes
the topViewController property. Initially, let’s change -
[BrowseOverflowViewControllerTests setUp] to put the view controller
under test into a UINavigationController. We need to make sure
that doing so doesn’t break any of the existing behavior.
@implementation BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests 
{ 
    //... 
    UINavigationController *navController; 

--- Page 248 ---
} 
 
- (void)setUp { 
    //... 
    navController = [[UINavigationController alloc] 
        initWithRootViewController: viewController]; 
} 
 
- (void)tearDown { 
    //... 
    navController = nil; 
} 
 
//tests... 
@end
When we run the tests again, we ﬁnd that they still all pass;
putting the BrowseOverflowViewController inside a UINavigationController
doesn’t break anything. Let’s press on. As a result of
running -userDidSelectTopicNotification: the topViewController of the
navigation controller should be a new instance of
BrowseOverflowViewController.
- (void)testSelectingTopicPushesNewViewController { 
    [viewController userDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation: nil]; 
    UIViewController *currentTopVC = navController.topViewController; 
    STAssertFalse([currentTopVC isEqual: viewController], 
        @"New view controller should be pushed onto the stack"); 
    STAssertTrue([currentTopVC isKindOfClass: 
      [BrowseOverﬂowViewController class]], 
      @"New view controller should be a BrowseOverﬂowViewController"); 
}
New code must be added to the BrowseOverflowViewController's
implementation of -userDidSelectTopicNotification: to make this
happen (note: This is the method in BrowseOverflowViewController.m,
not the category method in the test ﬁxture).
- (void)userDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation: (NSNotiﬁcation *)note { 
    BrowseOverﬂowViewController *nextViewController = 
        [[BrowseOverﬂowViewController alloc] init]; 
    [[self navigationController] pushViewController: nextViewController 
                                           animated: YES]; 
}

--- Page 249 ---
But the new view controller doesn’t have a table data
source. That’s not correct. We need a data source for the
question list associated with the selected topic. The topic
should be the object referenced in the notiﬁcation, which we
could conﬁgure the data source with.
- (void)testNewViewControllerHasAQuestionListDataSourceForTheSelectedTopic
{ 
    Topic *iPhoneTopic = [[Topic alloc] initWithName: @"iPhone" 
                                                 tag: @"iphone"]; 
    NSNotiﬁcation *iPhoneTopicSelectedNotiﬁcation = 
        [NSNotiﬁcation notiﬁcationWithName: 
          TopicTableDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation 
        object: iPhoneTopic]; 
    [viewController userDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation: 
        iPhoneTopicSelectedNotiﬁcation]; 
    BrowseOverﬂowViewController *nextViewController = 
        (BrowseOverﬂowViewController *)navController.topViewController; 
    STAssertTrue([nextViewController.dataSource 
        isKindOfClass: [QuestionListTableDataSource class]], 
        @"Selecting a topic should push a list of questions"); 
    STAssertEqualObjects([(QuestionListTableDataSource *) 
      nextViewController.dataSource topic], iPhoneTopic, 
      @"The questions to display should come from the selected topic"); 
}
This test gives us the ﬁrst clues we need to implement the
next part of the app: the data source for a list of questions
in one topic.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 250 ---
The Question List Data Source
Before getting at all involved with new functionality on this
object, we need to make the ﬁnal test from the previous
section pass. That requires a new app class, called
QuestionListTableDataSource, with a topic property that is set to a Topic
instance. Because it’s being used as the dataSource property of
the BrowseOverflowViewController, we know that it needs to conform
to the table view delegate and data source protocols. That
means providing implementations of a couple of required
methods in the data source protocol, which again we’ll ﬁll in
later.
QuestionListTableDataSource.h 
 
#import <Foundation/Foundation.h> 
 
@class Topic; 
@interface QuestionListTableDataSource : NSObject 
    <UITableViewDataSource, UITableViewDelegate> 
 
@property (strong) Topic *topic; 
 
@end 
 
QuestionListTableDataSource.m 
 
#import "QuestionListTableDataSource.h" 
 
@implementation QuestionListTableDataSource 
 
@synthesize topic; 
 
- (NSInteger)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView 
    numberOfRowsInSection:(NSInteger)section { 
    return 0; 
} 
 
- (UITableViewCell *)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView 
         cellForRowAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath { 
    return nil; 
} 
 
@end

--- Page 251 ---
Then we should create and conﬁgure one of these in -
[BrowseOverflowViewController userDidSelectTopicNotification:].
- (void)userDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation: (NSNotiﬁcation *)note { 
    Topic * selectedTopic =(Topic *)[note object]; 
    BrowseOverﬂowViewController *nextViewController = 
        [[BrowseOverﬂowViewController alloc] init]; 
    QuestionListTableDataSource *questionsDataSource = 
         [[QuestionListTableDataSource alloc] init]; 
    questionsDataSource.topic = selectedTopic; 
    nextViewController.dataSource = questionsDataSource; 
    [[self navigationController] pushViewController: nextViewController 
         animated: YES]; 
}
The actual business of displaying questions is fairly similar
to the business of conﬁguring cells for the Topic table view,
so these tests will look similar. The key diﬀerence is that
there are more details of the question to display—the title,
score, asker’s name and avatar—and by default, table view
cells do not have the capability to display this many
separate details. An easy way to conﬁgure a cell to show
multiple diﬀerent properties of the question is to deﬁne a
custom cell subclass with the subviews appropriate for
those properties. So the tests we write for the
UITableViewDataSource methods—tests on a new ﬁxture,
QuestionListTableDataSourceTests—will require that those properties
exist.
@implementation QuestionListTableDataSourceTests 
{ 
    QuestionListTableDataSource *dataSource; 
    Topic *iPhoneTopic; 
    NSIndexPath *ﬁrstCell; 
    Question *question1, *question2; 
    Person *asker1; 
} 
 
- (void)setUp { 
    dataSource = [[QuestionListTableDataSource alloc] init]; 
    iPhoneTopic = [[Topic alloc]initWithName: @"iPhone" 
                                        tag: @"iphone"]; 
    dataSource.topic = iPhoneTopic; 

--- Page 252 ---
    ﬁrstCell = [NSIndexPath indexPathForRow: 0 inSection: 0]; 
    question1 = [[Question alloc] init]; 
    question1.title = @"Question One"; 
    question1.score = 2; 
    question2 = [[Question alloc] init]; 
    question2.title = @"Question Two"; 
 
    asker1 = [[Person alloc]initWithName: @"GrahamLee" 
        avatarLocation: 
  @"http://www.gravatar.com/avatar/563290c0c1b776a315b36e863b388a0c"]; 
    question1.asker = asker1; 
} 
 
- (void)tearDown { 
    dataSource = nil; 
    iPhoneTopic = nil; 
    ﬁrstCell = nil; 
    question1 = nil; 
    question2 = nil; 
    asker1 = nil; 
} 
- (void)testTopicWithNoQuestionsLeadsToOneRowInTheTable { 
    STAssertEquals([dataSource tableView: nil numberOfRowsInSection: 0], 
        (NSInteger)1, 
         @"The table view needs a 'no data yet' placeholder cell"); 
} 
 
- (void)testTopicWithQuestionsResultsInOneRowPerQuestionInTheTable { 
    [iPhoneTopic addQuestion: question1]; 
    [iPhoneTopic addQuestion: question2]; 
    STAssertEquals([dataSource tableView: nil numberOfRowsInSection: 0], 
        (NSInteger)2, 
        @"Two questions in the topic means two rows in the table"); 
} 
 
- (void)testContentOfPlaceholderCell { 
    UITableViewCell *placeholderCell = [dataSource tableView: nil 
        cellForRowAtIndexPath: ﬁrstCell]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects(placeholderCell.textLabel.text, 
        @"There was a problem connecting to the network.", 
        @"The placeholder cell ought to display a placeholder message"); 
} 
 
- (void)testPlaceholderCellNotReturnedWhenQuestionsExist { 
    [iPhoneTopic addQuestion: question1]; 
    UITableViewCell *cell = [dataSource tableView: nil 
        cellForRowAtIndexPath: ﬁrstCell]; 
    STAssertFalse([cell.textLabel.text isEqualToString: 

--- Page 253 ---
        @"There was a problem connecting to the network."], 
        @"Placeholder should only be shown when there's no content"); 
} 
 
- (void)testCellPropertiesAreTheSameAsTheQuestion { 
    [iPhoneTopic addQuestion: question1]; 
    QuestionSummaryCell *cell = 
        (QuestionSummaryCell *)[dataSource tableView: nil 
        cellForRowAtIndexPath: ﬁrstCell]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects(cell.titleLabel.text, 
        @"Question One", 
        @"Question cells display the question's title");
    STAssertEqualObjects(cell.scoreLabel.text, @"2", 
        @"Question cells display the question's score"); 
    STAssertEqualObjects(cell.nameLabel.text, @"Graham Lee", 
        @"Question cells display the asker's name"); 
}
There are two distinct situations this data source needs to
take into account, because it’s displaying data that will
come from the network. It’s possible that a slow or
unavailable network means the topic won’t have any
question data available at the time the table is displayed, in
which case the table should show a placeholder describing
the problem. That is why this ﬁxture tests that there’s still
one row in the table view even when there aren’t any
questions in the topic—the placeholder cell should still exist.
Getting these tests to pass requires extending our trivial
implementation of QuestionListTableDataSource:
QuestionListTableDataSource.h 
 
#import <Foundation/Foundation.h> 
 
@class Topic; 
@class QuestionSummaryCell; 
@class AvatarStore; 
 
@interface QuestionListTableDataSource : NSObject 
    <UITableViewDataSource, UITableViewDelegate> 
 
@property (strong) Topic *topic; 
@property (weak) IBOutlet QuestionSummaryCell *summaryCell; 
 

--- Page 254 ---
@end 
 
QuestionListTableDataSource.m 
 
@implementation QuestionListTableDataSource 
 
@synthesize topic; 
@synthesize summaryCell; 
 
- (NSInteger)tableView:(UITableView *)aTableView 
 numberOfRowsInSection:(NSInteger)section { 
    return [[topic recentQuestions] count] ?: 1; 
} 
 
- (UITableViewCell *)tableView:(UITableView *)aTableView 
         cellForRowAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath { 
    UITableViewCell *cell = nil; 
    if ([topic.recentQuestions count]) { 
        Question *question = [topic.recentQuestions 
            objectAtIndex: indexPath.row]; 
        summaryCell = [tableView 
            dequeueReusableCellWithIdentiﬁer: @"question"]; 
        if (!summaryCell) { 
            [[NSBundle bundleForClass: [self class]] 
                loadNibNamed: @"QuestionSummaryCell" 
                       owner: self 
                     options: nil]; 
        } 
        summaryCell.titleLabel.text = question.title; 
        summaryCell.scoreLabel.text = 
            [NSString stringWithFormat: @"%d", question.score]; 
        summaryCell.nameLabel.text = question.asker.name; 
 
        cell = summaryCell; 
        summaryCell = nil; 
    } 
    else { 
        cell = [tableView dequeueReusableCellWithIdentiﬁer: 
            @"placeholder"]; 
        if (!cell) { 
            cell = [[UITableViewCell alloc] 
                initWithStyle: UITableViewCellStyleDefault 
              reuseIdentiﬁer: @"placeholder"]; 
        } 
        cell.textLabel.text = 
            @"There was a problem connecting to the network."; 
    } 
    return cell; 

--- Page 255 ---
} 
 
@end
That doesn’t yet get us to passing tests. The test calls for
QuestionListTableDataSource to use a special UITableViewCell subclass
called QuestionSummaryCell. It’s quite easy to deﬁne this class.
QuestionSummaryCell.h 
 
#import <UIKit/UIKit.h> 
 
@interface QuestionSummaryCell : UITableViewCell 
 
@property (strong) IBOutlet UILabel *titleLabel; 
@property (strong) IBOutlet UILabel *scoreLabel; 
@property (strong) IBOutlet UILabel *nameLabel; 
 
@end 
 
QuestionSummaryCell.m 
 
#import "QuestionSummaryCell.h" 
 
@implementation QuestionSummaryCell 
 
@synthesize titleLabel; 
@synthesize scoreLabel; 
@synthesize nameLabel; 
 
@end
Even now we’re not in a position to get the tests to pass.
Why not? The various properties on the QuestionSummaryCell need
initialization for the test to work. In the production code, it
would be useful to use a XIB ﬁle, so that display properties
such as the subview’s positions, fonts, sizes, and so on are
easily conﬁgurable without having to change the code. It
would be possible to create a collection of view objects in
the test ﬁxture to pass in to the cell during tests. Then we
would have to arrange for this collection of objects to be
used by the -tableView:cellForRowAtIndexPath: method in a test, but

--- Page 256 ---
the objects from the XIB in the app. That’s some complexity
to add to a method just so that it can be used in a test.
Is there a problem with using the XIB in both the app and
the test? It makes the code simpler, although it does mean
that problems in the XIB ﬁle might manifest as unit test
failures, leading us to spend time tracking bugs in the code
that don’t really exist. It’s a trade-oﬀ, to be sure, but in this
case I think it’s worthwhile.
Create a new empty XIB ﬁle, calling it “QuestionSummaryCell.xib”.
Lay out a UITableViewCell instance, with the labels required to
display the various properties. Change the cell’s class to
QuestionSummaryCell, and connect the labels to the cell’s outlets in
the header ﬁle as shown in Figure 9.2. Outlets are
connected by holding the Ctrl key and dragging from the
label in the XIB to the declaration of the outlet property in
the header ﬁle.
Image
Figure 9.2. Layout of views in
QuestionSummaryCell.xib, and connections to the
cell’s properties.
Finally, change the class of the “File’s Owner” to
QuestionListTableDataSource, and connect the cell to that class’s
summaryCell outlet. Now the tests written for the cell creation
previously can pass, because the XIB ﬁle allows the test
(and app) to generate cells conﬁgurable in the way required
by the tests.
This isn’t a complete implementation of the table view’s
data source methods. We still need to display avatar images
of the person who asked each question. Here are the
additions to the QuestionListTableDataSourceTests ﬁxture:6
6. The AvatarStore class can be found in the book’s sample code project at
GitHub. It’s responsible for fetching avatar images from the gravatar.com
website and notifying the app when new images are available. Because it’s
mainly doing network tasks, building this part of the app is very similar to

--- Page 257 ---
constructing the StackOverflowManager and StackOverflowCommunicator seen earlier
in the project.
@implementation QuestionListTableDataSourceTests 
{ 
  //... 
    AvatarStore *store; 
    NSNotiﬁcation *receivedNotiﬁcation; 
} 
 
- (void)didReceiveNotiﬁcation: (NSNotiﬁcation *)note { 
    receivedNotiﬁcation = note; 
} 
 
- (void)setUp { 
  //... 
    store = [[AvatarStore alloc] init]; 
} 
 
- (void)tearDown { 
    // ... 
    store = nil; 
    receivedNotiﬁcation = nil; 
} 
 
//... 
 
- (void)testCellGetsImageFromAvatarStore { 
    dataSource.avatarStore = store; 
    NSURL *imageURL = [[NSBundle bundleForClass: [self class]] 
        URLForResource: @"Graham_Lee" 
        withExtension: @"jpg"]; 
    NSData *imageData = [NSData dataWithContentsOfURL: imageURL]; 
    [store setData: imageData forLocation: 
  @"http://www.gravatar.com/avatar/563290c0c1b776a315b36e863b388a0c"]; 
    [iPhoneTopic addQuestion: question1]; 
    QuestionSummaryCell *cell = 
        (QuestionSummaryCell *)[dataSource tableView: nil 
                               cellForRowAtIndexPath: ﬁrstCell]; 
    STAssertNotNil(cell.avatarView.image, 
        @"The avatar store should supply the avatar images"); 
} 
 
- (void)testQuestionListRegistersForAvatarNotiﬁcations { 
    FakeNotiﬁcationCenter *center = 
        [[FakeNotiﬁcationCenter alloc] init]; 
    dataSource.notiﬁcationCenter = (NSNotiﬁcationCenter *)center; 
    [dataSource registerForUpdatesToAvatarStore: store]; 

--- Page 258 ---
    STAssertTrue([center hasObject: dataSource 
        forNotiﬁcation: AvatarStoreDidUpdateContentNotiﬁcation], 
  @"The data source should know when new images have been downloaded"); 
} 
 
- (void)testQuestionListStopsRegisteringForAvatarNotiﬁcations { 
    FakeNotiﬁcationCenter *center = 
        [[FakeNotiﬁcationCenter alloc] init]; 
    dataSource.notiﬁcationCenter = (NSNotiﬁcationCenter *)center; 
    [dataSource registerForUpdatesToAvatarStore: store]; 
    [dataSource removeObservationOfUpdatesToAvatarStore: store]; 
    STAssertFalse([center hasObject: dataSource 
        forNotiﬁcation: AvatarStoreDidUpdateContentNotiﬁcation], 
        @"The data source should no longer listen to avatar store" 
        @" notiﬁcations"); 
} 
 
- (void)testQuestionListCausesTableReloadOnAvatarNotiﬁcation { 
    ReloadDataWatcher *fakeTableView = [[ReloadDataWatcher alloc] init]; 
    dataSource.tableView = (UITableView *)fakeTableView; 
    [dataSource avatarStoreDidUpdateContent: nil]; 
    STAssertTrue([fakeTableView didReceiveReloadData], 
        @"Data source should get the table view to reload when new data" 
        @" is available"); 
} 
 
@end
The data source will attempt to populate a UIImageView in the
cell using data from the AvatarStore. Because you can only
create a UIImage with data that really is an image, I’ve added a
(rather handsome) sample image to the project that can be
used in the test target. Either use this image or provide your
own. Because the AvatarStore might not have received the
image data from the remote server when the table view is
drawn, the AvatarStore will post notiﬁcations when it gets new
content. The data source must listen for these notiﬁcations
and tell the table to reload its data—meaning that it needs a
reference to the table view. Here is the new state of the
QuestionListTableDataSource class, with changes highlighted:
QuestionListTableDataSource.h 
 
#import <Foundation/Foundation.h> 

--- Page 259 ---
 
@class Topic; 
@class QuestionSummaryCell; 
@class AvatarStore; 
 
@interface QuestionListTableDataSource : NSObject 
    <UITableViewDataSource, UITableViewDelegate> 
 
@property (strong) Topic *topic; 
@property (weak) IBOutlet QuestionSummaryCell *summaryCell; 
@property (strong) AvatarStore *avatarStore; 
@property (weak) UITableView *tableView; 
@property (strong) NSNotiﬁcationCenter *notiﬁcationCenter; 
 
- (void)registerForUpdatesToAvatarStore: (AvatarStore *)store; 
- (void)removeObservationOfUpdatesToAvatarStore: (AvatarStore
*)store; 
- (void)avatarStoreDidUpdateContent: (NSNotiﬁcation *)notiﬁcation; 
 
@end 
 
QuestionListTableDataSource.m 
 
#import "QuestionListTableDataSource.h" 
#import "QuestionSummaryCell.h" 
#import "Topic.h" 
#import "Question.h" 
#import "Person.h" 
#import "AvatarStore.h" 
 
@implementation QuestionListTableDataSource 
 
@synthesize topic; 
@synthesize summaryCell; 
@synthesize avatarStore; 
@synthesize tableView; 
@synthesize notiﬁcationCenter; 
 
- (NSInteger)tableView:(UITableView *)aTableView 
 numberOfRowsInSection:(NSInteger)section { 
    return [[topic recentQuestions] count] ?: 1; 
} 
- (UITableViewCell *)tableView:(UITableView *)aTableView 
         cellForRowAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath { 
    UITableViewCell *cell = nil; 
    if ([topic.recentQuestions count]) { 
        Question *question = [topic.recentQuestions 
            objectAtIndex: indexPath.row]; 

--- Page 260 ---
        summaryCell = [tableView dequeueReusableCellWithIdentiﬁer: 
            @"question"]; 
        if (!summaryCell) { 
            [[NSBundle bundleForClass: [self class]] 
                    loadNibNamed: @"QuestionSummaryCell" 
                                owner: self 
                              options: nil]; 
        } 
        summaryCell.titleLabel.text = question.title; 
        summaryCell.scoreLabel.text = 
            [NSString stringWithFormat: @"%d", question.score]; 
        summaryCell.nameLabel.text = question.asker.name; 
 
          NSData *avatarData = [avatarStore dataForURL: 
            question.asker.avatarURL]; 
          if (avatarData) { 
            summaryCell.avatarView.image = [UIImage imageWithData: 
                avatarData]; 
          }
        cell = summaryCell; 
        summaryCell = nil; 
    } 
    else { 
        cell = [tableView dequeueReusableCellWithIdentiﬁer: 
            @"placeholder"]; 
       if (!cell) { 
            cell = [[UITableViewCell alloc] 
                initWithStyle: UITableViewCellStyleDefault 
                reuseIdentiﬁer: @"placeholder"]; 
        } 
        cell.textLabel.text = 
            @"There was a problem connecting to the network."; 
    } 
    return cell; 
} 
 
- (void)registerForUpdatesToAvatarStore:(AvatarStore *)store { 
    [notiﬁcationCenter addObserver: self 
        selector: @selector(avatarStoreDidUpdateContent:) 
            name: AvatarStoreDidUpdateContentNotiﬁcation 
          object: store]; 
} 
- (void)removeObservationOfUpdatesToAvatarStore: (AvatarStore
*)store { 
    [notiﬁcationCenter removeObserver: self 
        name: AvatarStoreDidUpdateContentNotiﬁcation 
      object: store]; 
} 

--- Page 261 ---
 
- (void)avatarStoreDidUpdateContent:(NSNotiﬁcation *)notiﬁcation { 
    [tableView reloadData]; 
} 
 
@end
The link from a data source to its table view will be set up in
-[BrowseOverflowViewController viewDidLoad], so the test to ensure that it
happens goes in BrowseOverflowViewControllerTests.
- (void)testViewControllerConnectsTableViewBacklinkInViewDidLoad { 
    QuestionListTableDataSource *questionDataSource = 
        [[QuestionListTableDataSource alloc] init]; 
    viewController.dataSource = questionDataSource; 
    [viewController viewDidLoad]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects(questionDataSource.tableView, 
        tableView, 
        @"Back-link to table view should be set in data source");
}
To avoid breaking anything, the view controller should set
this property only when the dataSource object deﬁnes the
property. (Remember, TopicTableDataSource objects don’t have a
link back to their table view.)
- (void)viewDidLoad 
{ 
    [super viewDidLoad]; 
    self.tableView.delegate = self.dataSource; 
    self.tableView.dataSource = self.dataSource; 
    objc_property_t tableViewProperty = 
        class_getProperty([dataSource class], "tableView"); 
    if (tableViewProperty) { 
        [dataSource setValue: tableView forKey: @"tableView"]; 
    } 
} 
The ﬁnal step is to add the UIImageView to the XIB and connect it
to the outlet deﬁned previously on the QuestionSummaryCell. The
XIB should end up looking like Figure 9.3.
Image

--- Page 262 ---
Figure 9.3. Layout of views in
QuestionSummaryCell.xib, with the image view
added.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 263 ---
Where Next
From here on out, the behavior looks similar to that you’ve
already seen throughout this chapter. Selection of a
question from the list is handled in a way very similar to
that for selecting a topic; after a question is selected,
another view controller is pushed, this time displaying the
question content and any answers that have been provided.
You could decide to implement this code yourself as an
exercise—remember to write tests ﬁrst!—or grab the sample
code from GitHub and see how I did it.
With the view controllers and table data sources in place, all
the components of the app are in place, and the one
remaining task is to ensure that they are all properly
connected. This will be the topic of the next chapter, after
which we should have a complete and working app.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 264 ---
10. Putting It All Together
We’ve created all the parts of the app now—a data model
along with the behavior needed to update the model from
the Internet; classes to present the data in views; and
controllers to take care of the application’s workﬂow. What
we haven’t done yet is put these classes together to make a
complete, functioning application. Hopefully, the work we’ve
put into designing these classes to be used and to work in
isolation means it won’t be too hard to construct the app.
Completing the Application’s Workﬂow
The ﬁnishing touch is to make sure that the classes we’ve
created are instantiated and conﬁgured correctly to support
the application workﬂow. They all work in isolation, but can
we integrate them into an app? I certainly hope so; but if
any problems appear, we should create tests to ensure that
we ﬁx them.
It makes sense to start from the beginning—the ﬁrst view in
the app is the list of topics, so the application should make
sure that the list exists and that the view controller is ready
to display the list for the user. The entry point for the
application is in the app delegate’s -
application:didFinishLaunchingWithOptions: method, so the work to
conﬁgure and display the ﬁrst view should occur there.
Testing that method should be done in a ﬁxture for the app
delegate; that doesn’t exist, so we should create
BrowseOverflowAppDelegateTests ﬁrst.
The sample app delegate creates a navigation controller
and conﬁgures it as the window’s root view controller.
Here’s the template code:
- (BOOL)application:(UIApplication *)application 
    didFinishLaunchingWithOptions:(NSDictionary *)launchOptions 
{ 

--- Page 265 ---
    // Override point for customization after application launch. 
    // Add the navigation controller's view to the window and display. 
    self.window.rootViewController = self.navigationController; 
    [self.window makeKeyAndVisible]; 
    return YES; 
}
I’m happy to believe that Apple’s engineers know how to
write iOS apps, but because I’ll be making changes to this
method, I want to ensure that I don’t break any of their
sterling work. Therefore I’ll begin by encapsulating the
current behavior as testable requirements on the method.
BrowseOverﬂowAppDelegateTests.h 
 
#import <SenTestingKit/SenTestingKit.h> 
 
@interface BrowseOverﬂowAppDelegateTests : SenTestCase 
 
@end 
 
BrowseOverﬂowAppDelegateTests.m 
 
#import "BrowseOverﬂowAppDelegateTests.h" 
 
#import <UIKit/UIKit.h> 
#import "BrowseOverﬂowAppDelegate.h" 
 
@implementation BrowseOverﬂowAppDelegateTests { 
    UIWindow *window; 
    UINavigationController *navigationController; 
    BrowseOverﬂowAppDelegate *appDelegate; 
} 
 
- (void)setUp { 
    window = [[UIWindow alloc] init]; 
    navigationController = [[UINavigationController alloc] init]; 
    appDelegate = [[BrowseOverﬂowAppDelegate alloc] init]; 
    appDelegate.window = window; 
    appDelegate.navigationController = navigationController; 
} 
 
- (void)tearDown { 
    window = nil; 
    navigationController = nil; 
    appDelegate = nil; 

--- Page 266 ---
} 
 
- (void)testWindowIsKeyAfterApplicationLaunch { 
    [appDelegate application: nil didFinishLaunchingWithOptions: nil]; 
    STAssertTrue(window.keyWindow, 
        @"App delegate's window should be key"); 
} 
 
- (void)testWindowHasRootNavigationControllerAfterApplicationLaunch { 
    [appDelegate application: nil didFinishLaunchingWithOptions: nil]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects(window.rootViewController, 
        navigationController, 
        @"App delegate's navigation controller should be the root VC"); 
} 
 
- (void)testAppDidFinishLaunchingReturnsYES { 
    STAssertTrue([appDelegate application: nil 
        didFinishLaunchingWithOptions: nil], 
        @"Method should return YES"); 
} 
 
@end
These tests pass without issue because they were reverse-
engineered from the code.1 What we get here is notiﬁcation
if any changes made to this method break the existing
behavior. Incidentally, the fact that these tests are
motivated by existing code rather than by design is clear in
the form of the tests. For example, we have a test called
“testAppDidFinishLaunchingReturnsYES”—it doesn’t express what the
intention behind returning YES is, or what it means to return
YES, just that this is what we expect to happen.
1. In fact you might ﬁnd that you need to add the BrowseOverflowAppDelegate.m
source ﬁle to the test bundle target’s “Compile Sources” build phase to get
the test to compile successfully, if Xcode hasn’t already done that for you.
Now that we know what will happen if we break anything,
we can get on with expressing the application’s behavior.
The app should start by showing a list of topics, and we’ve
already arranged that a BrowseOverflowViewController using a
TopicTableDataSource can do that. So a reasonable set of
requirements would be that after the app launches, the root
navigation controller’s top view controller should be a

--- Page 267 ---
BrowseOverflowViewController, and that it has a TopicTableDataSource
conﬁgured as its data source object. Because the app’s
launch behavior is determined by the app delegate, these
tests both belong on BrowseOverflowAppDelegateTests.
- (void)testNavigationControllerShowsABrowseOverﬂowViewController { 
    [appDelegate application: nil didFinishLaunchingWithOptions: nil]; 
    id visibleViewController = 
        appDelegate.navigationController.topViewController; 
    STAssertTrue([visibleViewController isKindOfClass: 
        [BrowseOverﬂowViewController class]], 
    @"Views in this app are supplied by BrowseOverﬂowViewControllers"); 
} 
 
- (void)testFirstViewControllerHasATopicTableDataSource { 
    [appDelegate application: nil didFinishLaunchingWithOptions: nil]; 
    BrowseOverﬂowViewController *viewController = 
        (BrowseOverﬂowViewController *) 
         appDelegate.navigationController.topViewController; 
    STAssertTrue([viewController.dataSource isKindOfClass: 
        [TopicTableDataSource class]], 
        @"First view should display a list of topics"); 
}
These tests will fail because there currently isn’t a top view
controller in the navigation controller’s stack. The -
application:didFinishLaunchingWithOptions: method should supply the
correct objects.
- (BOOL)application:(UIApplication *)application 
    didFinishLaunchingWithOptions:(NSDictionary *)launchOptions 
{ 
    BrowseOverﬂowViewController *ﬁrstViewController = 
        [[BrowseOverﬂowViewController alloc] initWithNibName: nil 
        bundle: nil]; 
    TopicTableDataSource *dataSource = 
        [[TopicTableDataSource alloc] init]; 
    ﬁrstViewController.dataSource = dataSource; 
    self.navigationController.viewControllers = 
        [NSArray arrayWithObject: ﬁrstViewController]; 
    self.window.rootViewController = self.navigationController; 
    [self.window makeKeyAndVisible]; 
    return YES; 
}

--- Page 268 ---
That’s the view controller, but what content should it
display? It’s best to leave that ﬂexible; although the list of
topics shown in the app will need to be distributed as part of
the app, there’s no “correct” value, and it could change as
new topics get used on the website, or whoever is
marketing BrowseOverﬂow wants to promote diﬀerent
terms. We won’t require a speciﬁc value for the contents of
the list, but we will make sure the app starts with a non-
zero-length list of topics to display.
- (void)testTopicListIsNotEmptyOnAppLaunch { 
    [appDelegate application: nil didFinishLaunchingWithOptions: nil]; 
    id <UITableViewDataSource> dataSource = 
      [(BrowseOverﬂowViewController *)[appDelegate.navigationController 
      topViewController] dataSource]; 
    STAssertFalse([dataSource tableView: nil 
                  numberOfRowsInSection: 0] == 0, 
        @"There should be some rows to display"); 
}
There are many ways to get this list into the data source.
For now, a method on the app delegate that constructs the
array in code will be suﬃcient.
- (NSArray *)topics { 
    NSString *tags[] = { @"iphone", @"cocoa-touch", @"uikit", 
        @"objective-c", @"xcode" }; 
    NSString *names[] = { @"iPhone", @"Cocoa Touch", @"UIKit", 
        @"Objective-C", @"Xcode" }; 
    NSMutableArray *topicList = [NSMutableArray array]; 
    for (NSInteger i = 0; i < 5; i++) { 
        Topic *thisTopic = [[Topic alloc] initWithName: names[i] 
                                                   tag: tags[i]]; 
        [topicList addObject: thisTopic]; 
    } 
    return [topicList copy]; 
} 
 
- (BOOL)application:(UIApplication *)application 
didFinishLaunchingWithOptions:(NSDictionary *)launchOptions 
{ 
    BrowseOverﬂowViewController *ﬁrstViewController = 
[[BrowseOverﬂowViewController alloc] initWithNibName: nil bundle: nil]; 
    TopicTableDataSource *dataSource = [[TopicTableDataSource alloc] 

--- Page 269 ---
        init]; 
    [dataSource setTopics: [self topics]]; 
    ﬁrstViewController.dataSource = dataSource; 
    self.navigationController.viewControllers = 
        [NSArray arrayWithObject: ﬁrstViewController]; 
    self.window.rootViewController = self.navigationController; 
    [self.window makeKeyAndVisible]; 
    return YES; 
}
This should be everything needed to get the ﬁrst view onto
the screen, so it’s time to take a look at how the application
behaves. Run the application by pressing Command-R, or by
clicking the Run button on the left of Xcode’s toolbar. You’ll
be greeted by the disappointing sight of Figure 10.1.

--- Page 270 ---
Figure 10.1. Current state of the BrowseOverﬂow
application.
That’s unexpected. When this happened, I went back to the
tests and reexamined whether my expectations were being

--- Page 271 ---
met: Does the application deﬁnitely conﬁgure the correct
view controller? The BrowseOverflowAppDelegateTests ﬁxture ensures
that this is the case. Does the view controller conﬁgure the
table view’s data source? Yes, that’s required in
BrowseOverflowViewControllerTests. Does the view controller put a
UITableView onto the screen? That’s not controlled by code, so
there’s no test for it; it’s in the XIB. Inspecting
BrowseOverflowViewController.xib shows that there isn’t a table view in
it. Put a UITableView into the interface, and connect it to the
tableView property on the class to end up with a situation
shown in Figure 10.2.
Figure 10.2. Conﬁguring a table view in Interface
Builder.
This mistake serves to reiterate a point I made in Chapter 1,
“About Software Testing and Unit Testing”: that test-driven

--- Page 272 ---
code is not guaranteed to result in a working app. It reduces
the risk associated with bugs in the code, but in this case a
bug in the data means that the app did not function
correctly. Unit testing is a useful tool but is not the only tool
in the box. Anyway, with that issue ﬁxed, let’s check
whether the app does something useful now. Run it again, to
see the more pleasant sight that is Figure 10.3.

--- Page 273 ---
Figure 10.3. The Topic table view displayed by the
running app.
It’s satisfying to ﬁnally see the app doing something useful,
having spent so many chapters on writing code. Let’s

--- Page 274 ---
capitalize on this result by getting the next view—the table
of questions for a particular topic—to follow on. This will be
a little more complex than the topic table was, because the
app needs to (asynchronously) fetch content from the
network and display that content when it loads. We’ve
written code for that, in the StackOverflowManager and its
connected classes. So far, that code hasn’t been integrated
into the app workﬂow at all.
The StackOverflowManager was designed to take a delegate it would
inform when important events occur. Because there’s a one-
one relationship between the manager object and its
delegate, it makes sense for each class that needs to use
StackOverflowManager’s features to have its own instance. There are
a lot of components to conﬁgure—the StackOverflowManager uses a
StackOverflowCommunicator and all the various ...Builder classes—and it
makes sense to do this in a single place to reduce code
duplication. Some developers would look for a Dependency
Injection or Inversion of Control framework.
That level of conﬁgurability is useful when there are multiple
implementations of a class and an expectation that
changing between implementations (particularly after the
app is in the ﬁeld) is a common occurrence, but that is not
true in this case. We can create an object that is responsible
for creating and vending conﬁgured instances of the
necessary classes. Notice that because this is all we need,
the principle of YAGNI (Ya Ain’t Gonna Need It) leads us to
avoid doing anything more complicated—not just out of
principle, but because then we would need to write a load of
tests and application code for functionality the app won’t
make use of. This conﬁguration will be represented by a new
class, called BrowseOverflowObjectConfiguration, with a new test ﬁxture,
BrowseOverflowObjectConfigurationTests. The test ﬁxture is shown here.
#import "BrowseOverﬂowObjectConﬁgurationTests.h" 
#import "BrowseOverﬂowObjectConﬁguration.h" 
#import "StackOverﬂowManager.h" 

--- Page 275 ---
 
#import <UIKit/UIKit.h> 
 
@implementation BrowseOverﬂowObjectConﬁgurationTests 
 
- (void)testConﬁgurationOfCreatedStackOverﬂowManager { 
    BrowseOverﬂowObjectConﬁguration *conﬁguration =
        [[BrowseOverﬂowObjectConﬁguration alloc] init]; 
    StackOverﬂowManager *manager =
        [conﬁguration stackOverﬂowManager]; 
    STAssertNotNil(manager, @"The StackOverﬂowManager should exist"); 
    STAssertNotNil(manager.communicator, 
        @"Manager should have a StackOverﬂowCommunicator"); 
    STAssertNotNil(manager.questionBuilder, 
        @"Manager should have a question builder"); 
    STAssertNotNil(manager.answerBuilder, 
        @"Manager should have an answer builder"); 
    STAssertEqualObjects(manager.communicator.delegate, manager, 
        @"The manager is the communicator's delegate"); 
} 
 
@end
The implementation of the class, BrowseOverflowObjectConfiguration, is
shown next.
BrowseOverﬂowObjectConﬁguration.h 
 
#import <Foundation/Foundation.h> 
 
@class StackOverﬂowManager; 
 
@interface BrowseOverﬂowObjectConﬁguration : NSObject 
 
- (StackOverﬂowManager *)stackOverﬂowManager; 
 
@end 
BrowseOverﬂowObjectConﬁguration.m 
 
#import "BrowseOverﬂowObjectConﬁguration.h" 
#import "StackOverﬂowManager.h" 
#import "StackOverﬂowCommunicator.h" 
#import "QuestionBuilder.h" 
#import "AnswerBuilder.h" 
 
@implementation BrowseOverﬂowObjectConﬁguration 
 

--- Page 276 ---
- (StackOverﬂowManager *)stackOverﬂowManager { 
    StackOverﬂowManager *manager = [[StackOverﬂowManager alloc] init]; 
    manager.communicator = [[StackOverﬂowCommunicator alloc] init]; 
    manager.communicator.delegate = manager; 
    manager.questionBuilder = [[QuestionBuilder alloc] init]; 
    manager.answerBuilder = [[AnswerBuilder alloc] init]; 
    return manager; 
} 
 
@end
Because this object represents application-level
conﬁguration, it makes sense for the class to be instantiated
once, in the application delegate, and passed to the view
controllers, which can make use of the StackOverflowManager
instances it creates as they need them. That requirement
can be speciﬁed as a test in the BrowseOverflowAppDelegateTests
ﬁxture.
- (void)testFirstViewControllerHasAnObjectConﬁguration { 
    [appDelegate application: nil didFinishLaunchingWithOptions: nil]; 
    BrowseOverﬂowViewController *topicViewController = 
      (BrowseOverﬂowViewController *)[appDelegate.navigationController 
      topViewController]; 
    STAssertNotNil(topicViewController.objectConﬁguration, 
  @"The view controller should have an object conﬁguration instance"); 
}
This requires a simple property declaration and synthesis on
the BrowseOverflowViewController class, and the following addition to
-[BrowseOverflowAppDelegateapplication:didFinishLaunchingWithOptions:].
- (BOOL)application:(UIApplication *)application 
    didFinishLaunchingWithOptions:(NSDictionary *)launchOptions 
{ 
    BrowseOverﬂowViewController *ﬁrstViewController = 
        [[BrowseOverﬂowViewController alloc] initWithNibName: nil 
                                                       bundle: nil]; 
    ﬁrstViewController.objectConﬁguration = 
        [[BrowseOverﬂowObjectConﬁguration alloc] init]; 
    TopicTableDataSource *dataSource = 
        [[TopicTableDataSource alloc] init]; 
    [dataSource setTopics: [self topics]]; 
    ﬁrstViewController.dataSource = dataSource; 
    self.navigationController.viewControllers = 

--- Page 277 ---
        [NSArray arrayWithObject: ﬁrstViewController]; 
    self.window.rootViewController = self.navigationController; 
    [self.window makeKeyAndVisible]; 
    return YES; 
}
That addresses the topic list view controller, but it’s the
question list and question detail views that will need to
make use of StackOverflowManager objects. Therefore, the view
controller should, when creating new view controllers to
push onto the navigation stack, pass the object
conﬁguration instance through to the new controllers. This
test belongs on the BrowseOverflowViewControllerTests ﬁxture.
-
(void)testSelectingTopicNotiﬁcationPassesObjectConﬁgurationToNewViewControll
er { 
    BrowseOverﬂowObjectConﬁguration *objectConﬁguration = 
        [[BrowseOverﬂowObjectConﬁguration alloc] init]; 
    viewController.objectConﬁguration = objectConﬁguration; 
    [viewController userDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation: nil]; 
    BrowseOverﬂowViewController *newTopVC = 
        (BrowseOverﬂowViewController *)navController.topViewController; 
    STAssertEqualObjects(newTopVC.objectConﬁguration, 
        objectConﬁguration, 
        @"The object conﬁguration should be passed through to the" 
        @" new view controller"); 
}
One line must be added to -
[BrowseOverflowViewControlleruserDidSelectTopicNotification:].
    nextViewController.objectConﬁguration = self.objectConﬁguration;
The test and code change required to support the same
behavior on question selection is very similar—the view
controller showing the question’s details needs to be able to
create a StackOverflowManager, so it should receive the
BrowseOverflowObjectConfiguration instance, too.
Now that the view controllers have the capability to
download content from Stack Overﬂow, they should actually
do so. Taking the question list view as an example, we want

--- Page 278 ---
to start downloading data before the view appears, to
improve the chance that the data is ready to display when
the table is shown to the user, or shortly after. The view
controller’s -viewWillAppear: method is an appropriate point in
the view controller’s life cycle to do this work.
As ever, the test shouldn’t actually connect to the network.
Because the view controller gets its StackOverflowManager
conﬁgured by the BrowseOverflowObjectConfiguration class, we have an
opportunity to change the object it receives by changing the
behavior of the object conﬁguration instance it uses. A
subclass of BrowseOverflowObjectConfiguration can support unit tests
by allowing the test ﬁxture to decide what object the view
controller will use.
TestObjectConﬁguration.h 
 
#import "BrowseOverﬂowObjectConﬁguration.h" 
 
@interface TestObjectConﬁguration : BrowseOverﬂowObjectConﬁguration 
 
@property (strong) id objectToReturn; 
 
@end 
 
TestObjectConﬁguration.m 
 
#import "TestObjectConﬁguration.h" 
 
@implementation TestObjectConﬁguration 
 
@synthesize objectToReturn; 
 
- (StackOverﬂowManager *)stackOverﬂowManager { 
    return (StackOverﬂowManager *)self.objectToReturn; 
} 
 
@end
Now a test on BrowseOverflowViewControllerTests can use this object to
set up a test that determines whether the view controller
asks the manager to fetch a list of questions to populate a
QuestionListTableDataSource.

--- Page 279 ---
- (void)testViewWillAppearOnQuestionListInitiatesLoadingOfQuestions { 
    TestObjectConﬁguration *conﬁguration = 
        [[TestObjectConﬁguration alloc] init]; 
    MockStackOverﬂowManager *manager = 
        [[MockStackOverﬂowManager alloc] init]; 
    conﬁguration.objectToReturn = manager; 
    viewController.objectConﬁguration = conﬁguration; 
    viewController.dataSource = 
        [[QuestionListTableDataSource alloc] init]; 
    [viewController viewWillAppear: YES]; 
    STAssertTrue([manager didFetchQuestions], 
        @"View controller should have arranged for question content" 
        @" to be downloaded"); 
}
The MockStackOverflowManager manager currently supports only
testing the StackOverflowCommunicator delegate API, but we need to
extend it to detect whether the “external” API requests from
the app are being called. A simple ﬂag to report whether the
-fetchQuestionsOnTopic: message was sent will support the
preceding test.
MockStackOverﬂowManager.h 
 
@class Topic; 
 
@interface MockStackOverﬂowManager : NSObject 
    <StackOverﬂowCommunicatorDelegate> { 
    // ... 
    BOOL wasAskedToFetchQuestions; 
} 
// ... 
 
- (BOOL)didFetchQuestions; 
- (void)fetchQuestionsOnTopic: (Topic *)topic; 
@end 
 
MockStackOverﬂowManager.m 
 
#import "MockStackOverﬂowManager.h" 
#import "Topic.h" 
 
@implementation MockStackOverﬂowManager 
// ... 
- (BOOL)didFetchQuestions { 
    return wasAskedToFetchQuestions; 

--- Page 280 ---
} 
 
- (void)fetchQuestionsOnTopic:(Topic *)topic { 
    wasAskedToFetchQuestions = YES; 
} 
@end
Now the app code can be implemented, in -
[BrowseOverflowViewControllerviewWillAppear:]. It only makes sense for the
question list to be fetched when the table is going to display
a list of questions, so the code incorporates that condition.
Don’t forget to write additional tests to ensure that the
question list isn’t requested at other times (and that the
question details are loaded when required).
- (void)viewWillAppear:(BOOL)animated { 
    [super viewWillAppear: animated]; 
    self.manager = [objectConﬁguration stackOverﬂowManager]; 
    if ([self.dataSource isKindOfClass: 
        [QuestionListTableDataSource class]]) { 
        Topic *selectedTopic = 
            [(QuestionListTableDataSource *)self.dataSource topic]; 
        [self.manager fetchQuestionsOnTopic: selectedTopic]; 
    } 
}
That covers loading the data, but what about using it? After
the stack overﬂow manager has downloaded the content
and prepared the model objects, it will use its delegate
protocol to signal to the view controller that the data is
ready, or that there was an error in the process. We
therefore require that when the StackOverflowManager instance is
created, the view controller is set as its delegate and that
the BrowseOverflowViewController class conforms to the delegate
protocol. This pair of tests belongs on the
BrowseOverflowViewControllerTests ﬁxture.
- (void)testViewControllerConformsToStackOverﬂowManagerDelegateProtocol { 
    STAssertTrue([viewController conformsToProtocol: 
        @protocol(StackOverﬂowManagerDelegate)], 
        @"View controllers need to be StackOverﬂowManagerDelegates"); 
} 
 

--- Page 281 ---
- 
(void)testViewControllerConﬁguredAsStackOverﬂowManagerDelegateOnManage
rCreation { 
    [viewController viewWillAppear: YES]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects(viewController.manager.delegate, 
        viewController, 
        @"View controller sets itself as the manager's delegate"); 
}
The ﬁrst test can easily be made to pass by changing the
declaration of BrowseOverflowViewController to:
@interface BrowseOverﬂowViewController : UIViewController 
    <StackOverﬂowManagerDelegate>
This introduces a number of warnings, because the protocol
requires a number of methods to be implemented on the
conforming class. We don’t know what those methods need
to do yet, so we provide empty method bodies.
A single line added to -[BrowseOverflowController viewWillAppear:] is
suﬃcient to get the other test passing.
- (void)viewWillAppear:(BOOL)animated { 
    [super viewWillAppear: animated]; 
    self.manager = [objectConﬁguration stackOverﬂowManager]; 
    self.manager.delegate = self; 
    // ... 
}
However, making this test pass comes at the cost of earlier
tests failing. Where we’ve used the MockStackOverflowManager
instance to examine how the view controller uses its
manager, that object doesn’t have a delegate property, so
the view controller is sending it messages it doesn’t
implement. It should be easy enough to add a property of
type id to the MockStackOverflowManager class to suppress these
errors without changing the behavior of the tests.
Now let’s think about the requirements of those protocol
methods. When the view controller receives notiﬁcation
from the StackOverflowManager that some questions have been
downloaded, it should add those questions to its data source

--- Page 282 ---
(which is, presumably, a QuestionListTableDataSource) and tell the
table view to reload its data. Remember, although the
StackOverflowManager’s helpers download and create a list of Question
objects, they do not then add the questions to the selected
Topic. On BrowseOverflowViewControllerTests:
- (void)testDownloadedQuestionsAreAddedToTopic { 
    QuestionListTableDataSource *topicDataSource = 
        [[QuestionListTableDataSource alloc] init]; 
    viewController.dataSource = topicDataSource; 
    Topic *topic = [[Topic alloc] initWithName: @"iPhone" 
                                           tag: @"iphone"]; 
    topicDataSource.topic = topic; 
    Question *question1 = [[Question alloc] init]; 
    [viewController didReceiveQuestions: 
        [NSArray arrayWithObject: question1]];
    STAssertEqualObjects([topic.recentQuestions lastObject], question1, 
        @"Question was added to the topic"); 
} 
 
- (void)testTableViewReloadedWhenQuestionsReceived { 
    QuestionListTableDataSource *topicDataSource = 
        [[QuestionListTableDataSource alloc] init]; 
    viewController.dataSource = topicDataSource; 
    ReloadDataWatcher *watcher = [[ReloadDataWatcher alloc] init]; 
    viewController.tableView = (UITableView *)watcher; 
    [viewController didReceiveQuestions: [NSArray array]]; 
    STAssertTrue([watcher didReceiveReloadData], 
        @"Table view was reloaded after fetching new data"); 
}
Notice that the topicDataSource object is used in both tests;
that’s a good opportunity for refactoring. The ReloadDataWatcher
class was introduced in the previous chapter to support
testing the avatar-loading code.
An implementation of -[BrowseOverflowViewControllerdidReceiveQuestions:]
that passes the preceding two tests looks like this:
- (void)didReceiveQuestions:(NSArray *)questions { 
    Topic *topic = 
        ((QuestionListTableDataSource *)self.dataSource).topic; 
    for (Question *thisQuestion in questions) { 
        [topic addQuestion: thisQuestion]; 
    } 

--- Page 283 ---
    [tableView reloadData]; 
}
This brings up the question: What do we do when there was
an error downloading the questions? There’s no need to add
any questions to the topic—we don’t have any to add—and
the app shouldn’t remove any it has already downloaded,
because the user may want to review those questions even
when no more can be retrieved. Therefore, there won’t be
any change to the app’s data regarding the currently viewed
topic, so there’s no need to reload the table.
The app could present the error to the user, but because it’s
likely to be due to something out of the user’s hands
(stackoverﬂow.com being down or unreachable is the most
likely culprit), there would be little for the user to do. It
seems that doing nothing at all is appropriate, so that the -
[BrowseOverflowViewControllerfetchingQuestionsFailedWithError:] method can
be left empty.2
2. Because the method doesn’t need to do anything, you may consider making
the method optional in the protocol declaration and requiring that
StackOverﬂowManager test for its existence before invoking it.
As before in this chapter, the code required to handle the
QuestionDetailDataSource case (dealing with received answers and
the question’s body) is similar to the code we’ve just added,
so it is left out. Have a go at implementing it yourself, or
look at the project on GitHub.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 284 ---
Displaying User Avatars
The ﬁnal missing piece of the puzzle is to give the question
list and detail data source classes avatar stores, so they can
display images for the people who ask and answer
questions on Stack Overﬂow. As with the StackOverflowManager,
AvatarStore instances have some speciﬁc conﬁguration
requirements—they must be passed a notiﬁcation center to
use—so it makes sense to set them up in the
BrowseOverflowObjectConfiguration class. Additionally, because the
store is a cache, it seems sensible to use the same instance
for each data source. That doesn’t mean making the
AvatarStore a singleton; instead, the conﬁguration class should
know to return the same object every time it’s asked.
Singletons or Single Instances?
This diﬀerence between “there can only ever be one
of these objects” and “this application needs only
one instance of this class” is a subtle one, but
making the wrong choice can lead to problems
maintaining and developing the app. As you’ve
already seen when using the NSNotificationCenter class,
testing code that uses Singleton classes is tricky and
requires special tricks. Because testing is a special
example of reusing a class in a diﬀerent context, the
general conclusion is that reusing code that relies
on the Singleton pattern is diﬃcult.
So when should a class be a Singleton, and when
should we just arrange for there to be only one
instance of a non-Singleton class? When there is
genuinely a reason why more than one instance of a
class cannot work in any context, Singleton may be
a useful pattern. In any other case, it’s unnecessary
and can work against you. If the same object is
being used in multiple contexts, a possibility exists

--- Page 285 ---
that concurrency problems will be exhibited, even if
those contexts are functionally unrelated.
Consider the example of UIKit’s UIApplication class.
Instances of UIApplication represent the state of this
process’s app. Any process can only ever be a part
of one application, so there’s a reason why
enforcing that only one instance of UIApplication can
exist in each process.
Most developers do not implement the Singleton
pattern for their app delegate classes, despite the
fact that each app has only a single instance of the
class. Are they wrong to work this way? Probably
not; the important property of the app delegate is
that there should be one instance per UIApplication
instance. This means that there happens to be a
single app delegate per process—because UIApplication
is a Singleton—not that the app delegate must by
necessity be a Singleton.
The tests that require BrowseOverflowObjectConfiguration to return a
conﬁgured instance of AvatarStore—and the same instance on
every invocation—go in the BrowseOverflowObjectConfigurationTests
ﬁxture.
@implementation BrowseOverﬂowObjectConﬁgurationTests 
{ 
    BrowseOverﬂowObjectConﬁguration *conﬁguration; 
} 
 
- (void)setUp { 
    conﬁguration = [[BrowseOverﬂowObjectConﬁguration alloc] init]; 
} 
 
- (void)tearDown { 
    conﬁguration = nil; 
} 
 
- (void)testConﬁgurationOfCreatedAvatarStore { 
    AvatarStore *store = [conﬁguration avatarStore]; 

--- Page 286 ---
    STAssertEqualObjects([store notiﬁcationCenter], 
        [NSNotiﬁcationCenter defaultCenter], 
        @"Conﬁgured AvatarStore posts notiﬁcations to" 
        @" the default center"); 
} 
 
- (void)testSameAvatarStoreAlwaysReturned { 
    AvatarStore *store1 = [conﬁguration avatarStore]; 
    AvatarStore *store2 = [conﬁguration avatarStore]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects(store1, store2, 
        @"The same store should always be used"); 
} 
 
@end
We can’t currently see what notiﬁcation center the AvatarStore
object will use. Previously, I created an AvatarStore+TestingExtensions
category3 to provide extra visibility into the class, and we
can add a method there to see its notiﬁcation center. (Don’t
forget to import the category header into the test ﬁxture.)
3. If you haven’t already done so, you can get this ﬁle by cloning the GitHub
project at https://github.com/iamleeg/BrowseOverﬂow.
- (NSNotiﬁcationCenter *)notiﬁcationCenter { 
    return notiﬁcationCenter; 
}
It’s easy to get the ﬁrst test to pass, by creating a method
on BrowseOverflowObjectConfiguration that returns a correctly
conﬁgured instance of AvatarStore.
- (AvatarStore *)avatarStore { 
    AvatarStore *avatarStore = [[AvatarStore alloc] init]; 
    [avatarStore useNotiﬁcationCenter: 
        [NSNotiﬁcationCenter defaultCenter]]; 
    return avatarStore; 
}
This implementation doesn’t satisfy the second
requirement, that the object returned must always be the
same instance of AvatarStore. We can arrange that using the
Grand Central Dispatch library.
- (AvatarStore *)avatarStore { 
    static AvatarStore *avatarStore = nil; 

--- Page 287 ---
    static dispatch_once_t onceToken; 
    dispatch_once(&onceToken, ^{ 
        avatarStore = [[AvatarStore alloc] init]; 
        [avatarStore useNotiﬁcationCenter: 
            [NSNotiﬁcationCenter defaultCenter]]; 
    }); 
    return avatarStore; 
}
In this version of the method, the onceToken variable is used as
an indication to dispatch_once() whether or not the block that
creates the AvatarStore instance has already been executed. If
not, it creates a new instance; otherwise, it skips that code
and returns the previously created object. In this way the
class itself is not required to be a Singleton, but the
conﬁguration object can ensure it only ever hands out one
object, no matter how many times an avatar store is
requested.
Now the view controller should pass a conﬁgured avatar
store to each data source that needs one. This needs to be
done before the view appears, and it seems sensible to put
this code into the -viewWillAppear: method because that’s where
the view controller does the rest of its conﬁguration of its
data source objects. So, in BrowseOverflowViewControllerTests, write a
new test that requires the data sources to have an avatar
store object after -[BrowseOverflowViewControllerviewWillAppear:] is called.
 - (void)testQuestionListViewIsGivenAnAvatarStore { 
    QuestionListTableDataSource *listDataSource = 
        [[QuestionListTableDataSource alloc] init]; 
    viewController.dataSource = listDataSource; 
    [viewController viewWillAppear: YES]; 
    STAssertNotNil(listDataSource.avatarStore, 
        @"The avatarStore property should be conﬁgured in" 
        @" -viewWillAppear:"); 
}
Again, implementing this test reveals a problem elsewhere
in the app. Now that the list view is conﬁgured with an
avatar store, it’s calling out to that store for images

--- Page 288 ---
whenever it’s asked to prepare a table view cell. This is
causing an exception to be thrown in the test suite:
2011-11-22 07:42:21.671 BrowseOverﬂow[582:fb03] *** Terminating app due to
uncaught exception 'NSInvalidArgumentException', reason: '-[__NSCFDictionary
setObject:forKey:]: attempt to insert nil key'
The call stack shows that this is happening in the -[AvatarStore
dataForURL:] method. The method is reproduced next, with the
crashing line shown in bold:
- (NSData *)dataForURL:(NSURL *)url { 
    NSData *avatarData = [dataCache objectForKey: [url absoluteString]]; 
    if (!avatarData) { 
        GravatarCommunicator *communicator = 
            [[GravatarCommunicator alloc] init]; 
        [communicators setObject: communicator 
                          forKey: [url absoluteString]]; 
        communicator.delegate = self; 
        [communicator fetchDataForURL: url]; 
    } 
    return avatarData; 
}
The problem is that the URL being given to the store is nil,
and the code can’t cope with that. It’s tempting to go back
to the test that’s calling this code and ﬁll in the model
objects to avoid this crash. In this case, that is not the right
approach: The app should be more robust about handling
unexpected inputs. Instead of changing all the places where
the AvatarStore is invoked with a nil URL, I’m going to require
that it handle that case gracefully, with a new test on
AvatarStoreTests.
- (void)testNilDataReturnedWhenNilURLPassed { 
    STAssertNil([store dataForURL: nil], 
                @"Don't return data when passed a nil URL"); 
}
The changes to the AvatarStore class are straightforward:
- (NSData *)dataForURL:(NSURL *)url { 
    if (url == nil) { 
        return nil; 

--- Page 289 ---
    } 
    // ...
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 290 ---
Finishing Oﬀ and Tidying Up
That’s nearly everything, but we need to tie up a few loose
ends before we can call the app complete. Well, some of
them seem more like “glaring mistakes” than “loose ends,”
but we’ll come to that later.
To start with, the QuestionListTableDataSource needs to know which
notiﬁcation center instance to use when the user selects a
question in the list, and the BrowseOverflowViewController doesn’t
currently tell it. It should, and we can require that with a test
on BrowseOverflowViewControllerTests:
-
(void)testViewControllerHooksUpQuestionListNotiﬁcationCenterInViewDidAppear
{ 
    QuestionListTableDataSource *questionDataSource = 
        [[QuestionListTableDataSource alloc] init]; 
    viewController.dataSource = questionDataSource; 
    [viewController viewDidAppear: YES]; 
    STAssertEqualObjects(questionDataSource.notiﬁcationCenter, 
        [NSNotiﬁcationCenter defaultCenter], @""); 
}
The addition to -[BrowseOverflowViewController viewDidAppear:] is very
simple.
    if ([self.dataSource isKindOfClass: 
        [QuestionListTableDataSource class]]) { 
        ((QuestionListTableDataSource *)dataSource).notiﬁcationCenter = 
            [NSNotiﬁcationCenter defaultCenter]; 
    }
Unfortunately, when I added this test and code to the test
suite, I found that an unrelated test started to fail. If you’re
unlucky4 you’ll have found this, too, but catching this failure
seems dependent on a race condition. In -
[QuestionDetailDataSourcetestAnswererPropertiesInAnswerCell], an assertion
failure in -[AnswerBuilderaddAnswersToQuestion:fromJSON:error:] is occurring:
the question parameter should never be nil but for some
reason, in this test, it is.
4. Or, if you value learning from mistakes above an easy life, “if you’re lucky.”

--- Page 291 ---
What’s really weird about that is that the -
testAnswererPropertiesInAnswerCell method doesn’t use an AnswerBuilder
instance. What it does use, on the other hand, is the run
loop; this is one of the tests that spins the run loop for a
short time to let a UIWebView load its content. Because the view
controller is now hooking up a notiﬁcation center to the
QuestionListTableDataSource, notiﬁcations that were previously
getting lost by being sent to nil are now being caught, and
handled when this test runs the run loop. In other words,
there’s always been a problem, but unfortunately we’ve
only just started detecting it.
To ﬁnd where the code was going wrong, I had to perform
that task seldom relied on by test-driven developers: I used
the debugger. Speciﬁcally, I added a breakpoint on -
addAnswersToQuestion:fromJSON:error: with a condition of question==nil. I
found that -
[BrowseOverflowViewControllerTeststestDefaultStateOfViewControllerDoesNotReceiveQues
tionSelectionNotification] is using nil as the argument for a
notiﬁcation that will eventually make its way into a
parameter of the method:
-
(void)testDefaultStateOfViewControllerDoesNotReceiveTopicSelectionNotiﬁcation
s { 
    [BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests 
      swapInstanceMethodsForClass: [BrowseOverﬂowViewController class] 
                         selector: realUserDidSelectTopic 
                      andSelector: testUserDidSelectTopic]; 
    [[NSNotiﬁcationCenter defaultCenter] 
     postNotiﬁcationName: TopicTableDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation 
     object: nil 
     userInfo: nil]; 
    STAssertNil(objc_getAssociatedObject(viewController, 
        notiﬁcationKey), 
        @"Notiﬁcation should not be received before -viewDidAppear:"); 
    [BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests swapInstanceMethodsForClass: 
        [BrowseOverﬂowViewController class] 
        selector: realUserDidSelectTopic 
     andSelector: testUserDidSelectTopic]; 
}

--- Page 292 ---
To reiterate, this has never been acceptable, but I’ve been
getting away with it until now. The solution is to alloc and init
a Question instance and use it in this test.
-
(void)testDefaultStateOfViewControllerDoesNotReceiveTopicSelectionNotiﬁcation
s 
{ 
    Question *question = [[Question alloc] init]; 
    [BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests 
      swapInstanceMethodsForClass: [BrowseOverﬂowViewController class] 
                         selector: realUserDidSelectTopic 
                      andSelector: testUserDidSelectTopic]; 
    [[NSNotiﬁcationCenter defaultCenter] 
     postNotiﬁcationName: TopicTableDidSelectTopicNotiﬁcation 
     object: question 
     userInfo: nil]; 
    STAssertNil(objc_getAssociatedObject(viewController, 
        notiﬁcationKey), 
        @"Notiﬁcation should not be received before -viewDidAppear:"); 
    [BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests 
      swapInstanceMethodsForClass: [BrowseOverﬂowViewController class] 
                          selector: realUserDidSelectTopic 
                       andSelector: testUserDidSelectTopic]; 
}
Now the app works completely, but it’s not very beautiful. In
fact, it’s downright ugly. Figures 10.4 and 10.5 demonstrate
what’s going wrong, in the question list and question detail
views, respectively.

--- Page 293 ---
Figure 10.4. BrowseOverﬂow’s question list view.

--- Page 294 ---
Figure 10.5. BrowseOverﬂow showing the detail of a
question, and the answers.
The most obvious problem is that the content from each row
is overlapping the adjacent rows. The cause is that the table

--- Page 295 ---
view isn’t being told how much space to leave for each row,
so it is using its default value, even though we’ve added
custom rows of a diﬀerent size.
Some programmers would say at this point that “views
cannot be unit tested” and would switch to writing untested
code at this point, but I think this is too soon. Writing unit
tests for some aspects of view code can be a Sisyphean
task. Aesthetic requirements are more variable than logical
requirements, and don’t have the same binary
“works/doesn’t work” property that is the cornerstone of
unit testing. Demonstrating that a particular pixel on the
screen should be a particular shade of red is something you
can write the test for, but when your graphical designer
decides that a diﬀerent shade of red should be used, or
some text overlaps that pixel, your test starts failing.
In this case, we can clearly deﬁne a requirement on the view
in a way that has a yes/no answer and that is a measure of
“correctness” rather than whimsy: The height of a row in the
table view should be larger than the height of the content of
that row. Simple to express, obvious whether it’s satisﬁed or
not—something we can write a test for.
A table view gets the height for each row from its delegate,
so the code that conﬁgures the height of the question list
cells belongs in QuestionListTableDataSource. Therefore the test
belongs in QuestionListTableDataSourceTests:
- (void)testHeightOfAQuestionRowIsAtLeastTheSameAsTheHeightOfTheCell { 
    [iPhoneTopic addQuestion: question1]; 
    UITableViewCell *cell = [dataSource tableView: nil 
                            cellForRowAtIndexPath: ﬁrstCell]; 
    NSInteger height = [dataSource tableView: nil 
                     heightForRowAtIndexPath: ﬁrstCell]; 
    STAssertTrue(height >= cell.frame.size.height, 
        @"Give the table enough space to draw the view."); 
}
There is no implementation of that method yet. For a ﬁrst
passing implementation of the code, I’ll look in the

--- Page 296 ---
QuestionSummaryCell.xib ﬁle to see how big the row should be and
return that number.
- (CGFloat)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView 
    heightForRowAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath { 
    return 132.0f; 
}
A similar method must be implemented on the
QuestionDetailDataSource class to set the heights of the question
body and answer cells in the other table.
The rows in the table are now the correct height, which
makes it easy to see that a problem exists in the question
detail view, as demonstrated in Figure 10.6. The question
body is not being displayed correctly in the top row.

--- Page 297 ---
Figure 10.6. The question detail is missing the most
important part: the question that was asked.
The problem is that the StackOverflowManager doesn’t tell its
delegate when this content is downloaded, so the view

--- Page 298 ---
controller does not know that the view needs updating. A
new test on QuestionCreationWorkflowTests should require that the
manager tell its delegate about the event.
- (void)testManagerNotiﬁesDelegateWhenQuestionBodyIsReceived { 
    [mgr fetchBodyForQuestion: questionToFetch]; 
    [mgr receivedQuestionBodyJSON: @"Fake JSON"];
    STAssertEqualObjects(delegate.bodyQuestion, questionToFetch, 
        @"Update delegate when question body ﬁlled"); 
}
This needs a new method in the StackOverflowManagerDelegate
protocol that the manager can call when the question body
is ﬁlled in.
- (void)bodyReceivedForQuestion: (Question *)question;
To see this method being called, the MockStackOverflowManagerDelegate
should implement it, along with a method to test whether it
received the delegate method.
MockStackOverﬂowManagerDelegate.h 
 
@interface MockStackOverﬂowManagerDelegate : NSObject 
    <StackOverﬂowManagerDelegate> 
// ... 
@property (strong) Question *bodyQuestion; 
 
@end 
 
MockStackOverﬂowManagerDelegate.m 
 
// ... 
@synthesize bodyQuestion; 
 
- (void)bodyReceivedForQuestion:(Question *)question { 
    self.bodyQuestion = question; 
} 
// ...
This test will not pass until the manager calls the delegate
method, so -[StackOverflowManager receivedQuestionBodyJSON:] needs
updating.

--- Page 299 ---
- (void)receivedQuestionBodyJSON:(NSString *)objectNotation { 
    [questionBuilder ﬁllInDetailsForQuestion: self.questionToFill 
                                     fromJSON: objectNotation]; 
    [delegate bodyReceivedForQuestion: self.questionToFill]; 
    self.questionToFill = nil; 
}
The BrowseOverflowViewControllerTests ﬁxture should require that
when the view controller receives that delegate callback, it
tells the table to update.
- (void)testTableReloadedWhenQuestionBodyReceived { 
    QuestionDetailDataSource *detailDataSource = 
        [[QuestionDetailDataSource alloc] init]; 
    viewController.dataSource = detailDataSource; 
    ReloadDataWatcher *watcher = [[ReloadDataWatcher alloc] init]; 
    viewController.tableView = (UITableView *)watcher; 
    [viewController bodyReceivedForQuestion: nil]; 
    STAssertTrue([watcher didReceiveReloadData], 
        @"Table reloaded when question body received"); 
}
Finally, the delegate method should be implemented on
BrowseOverflowViewController so that this test passes.
- (void)bodyReceivedForQuestion:(Question *)question { 
    [tableView reloadData]; 
}
This doesn’t appear to address the problem.
StackOverflowCommunicator was only designed to deal with one “in-
ﬂight” network connection at a time, but the view controller
is asking for both the question body and its answers
together. As a simple workaround, change the
QuestionCreationWorkflowTests ﬁxture to require that the
StackOverflowManager ask a second communicator instance to fetch
the question body.
@implementation QuestionCreationWorkﬂowTests 
{ 
@private 
    StackOverﬂowManager *mgr; 
    MockStackOverﬂowManagerDelegate *delegate; 
    FakeQuestionBuilder *questionBuilder; 
    MockStackOverﬂowCommunicator *communicator; 

--- Page 300 ---
    MockStackOverﬂowCommunicator *bodyCommunicator; 
    Question *questionToFetch; 
    NSError *underlyingError; 
    NSArray *questionArray; 
} 
 
- (void)setUp { 
    mgr = [[StackOverﬂowManager alloc] init]; 
    delegate = [[MockStackOverﬂowManagerDelegate alloc] init]; 
    mgr.delegate = delegate; 
    underlyingError = [NSError errorWithDomain: @"Test domain" 
                                          code: 0 
                                      userInfo: nil]; 
    questionBuilder = [[FakeQuestionBuilder alloc] init]; 
    questionBuilder.arrayToReturn = nil; 
    mgr.questionBuilder = questionBuilder; 
    questionToFetch = [[Question alloc] init]; 
    questionToFetch.questionID = 1234; 
    questionArray = [NSArray arrayWithObject: questionToFetch]; 
    communicator = [[MockStackOverﬂowCommunicator alloc] init]; 
    mgr.communicator = communicator; 
    bodyCommunicator = [[MockStackOverﬂowCommunicator alloc] init]; 
    mgr.bodyCommunicator = bodyCommunicator; 
} 
 
- (void)tearDown { 
    mgr = nil; 
    delegate = nil; 
    questionBuilder = nil; 
    questionToFetch = nil; 
    questionArray = nil; 
    communicator = nil; 
    bodyCommunicator = nil; 
    underlyingError = nil; 
} 
 
// ... 
 
- (void)testAskingForQuestionBodyMeansRequestingData { 
    [mgr fetchBodyForQuestion: questionToFetch]; 
    STAssertTrue([bodyCommunicator wasAskedToFetchBody], 
        @"The communicator should need to retrieve data for" 
        @" the question body"); 
} 
 
// ...

--- Page 301 ---
The bodyCommunicator property must be declared and synthesized
on StackOverflowManager. To pass this test, the manager should use
the new property.
- (void)fetchBodyForQuestion: (Question *)question { 
    self.questionToFill = question; 
    [bodyCommunicator downloadInformationForQuestionWithID: 
        question.questionID]; 
}
The BrowseOverflowObjectConfiguration class is required to ﬁll in this
property in a test on the BrowseOverflowObjectConfigurationTests suite.
- (void)testConﬁgurationOfCreatedStackOverﬂowManager { 
    StackOverﬂowManager *manager = [conﬁguration 
        stackOverﬂowManager]; 
    STAssertNotNil(manager, @"The StackOverﬂowManager should exist"); 
    STAssertNotNil(manager.communicator, 
        @"Manager should have a StackOverﬂowCommunicator"); 
    STAssertNotNil(manager.bodyCommunicator, 
        @"Manager needs a second StackOverﬂowCommunicator"); 
    STAssertNotNil(manager.questionBuilder, 
        @"Manager should have a question builder"); 
    STAssertNotNil(manager.answerBuilder, 
        @"Manager should have an answer builder"); 
    STAssertEqualObjects(manager.communicator.delegate, manager, 
        @"The manager is the communicator's delegate"); 
    STAssertEqualObjects(manager.bodyCommunicator.delegate,
manager,
        @"The manager is the delegate of the body communicator"); 
}
Change the implementation of the object conﬁguration class
to pass this test.
- (StackOverﬂowManager *)stackOverﬂowManager { 
    StackOverﬂowManager *manager = [[StackOverﬂowManager alloc] init]; 
    manager.communicator = [[StackOverﬂowCommunicator alloc] init]; 
    manager.communicator.delegate = manager; 
    manager.bodyCommunicator = [[StackOverﬂowCommunicator alloc]
init]; 
    manager.bodyCommunicator.delegate = manager; 
    manager.questionBuilder = [[QuestionBuilder alloc] init]; 
    manager.answerBuilder = [[AnswerBuilder alloc] init]; 
    return manager; 
}

--- Page 302 ---
Again we ﬁnd the assertion failure where the answer builder
is being asked to add answers to a nil question. This time,
there are two reasons. The ﬁrst is because the
StackOverflowManager is using an internal instance variable,
questionToFill, to track where the body and the answers are
stored, and when either succeeds this variable is set to nil,
which will break when the other success or failure method is
called. That this variable is used for ﬁlling in the question
body is an internal detail of the class, so it can be refactored
(to use a diﬀerent instance variable) without aﬀecting the
tests. Assuming a new Question property, questionNeedingBody, the
following methods on StackOverflowManager can be changed:
- (void)fetchBodyForQuestion: (Question *)question { 
    self.questionNeedingBody = question; 
    [bodyCommunicator downloadInformationForQuestionWithID: 
        question.questionID]; 
} 
 
- (void)receivedQuestionBodyJSON:(NSString *)objectNotation { 
    [questionBuilder ﬁllInDetailsForQuestion: self.questionNeedingBody 
                                     fromJSON: objectNotation]; 
    [delegate bodyReceivedForQuestion: self.questionNeedingBody]; 
    self.questionNeedingBody = nil; 
} 
- (void)fetchingQuestionBodyFailedWithError:(NSError *)error { 
    NSDictionary *errorInfo = nil; 
    if (error) { 
        errorInfo = [NSDictionary dictionaryWithObject: error 
            forKey: NSUnderlyingErrorKey]; 
    } 
    NSError *reportableError = [NSError 
        errorWithDomain: StackOverﬂowManagerError
                   code: StackOverﬂowManagerErrorQuestionBodyFetchCode 
               userInfo:errorInfo]; 
    [delegate fetchingQuestionBodyFailedWithError: reportableError]; 
    self.questionNeedingBody = nil; 
}
The second problem before we can move on is that the app
can call -[Question BuilderfillInDetailsForQuestion:fromJSON:] with JSON
that contains no questions, but the app will still try to
extract a question from the (empty) array contained in that

--- Page 303 ---
JSON. Because this is data from the server that could
potentially be broken in this way in the running app, this
should not crash the app. We require in QuestionBuilderTests that
data with an empty questions array should be accepted.
- (void)testEmptyQuestionsArrayDoesNotCrash { 
    STAssertNoThrow([questionBuilder ﬁllInDetailsForQuestion: question 
        fromJSON: emptyQuestionsArray], 
        @"Don't throw if no questions are found"); 
}
A very simple change to QuestionBuilder passes this test.
- (void)ﬁllInDetailsForQuestion:(Question *)question 
                        fromJSON:(NSString *)objectNotation { 
    NSParameterAssert(question != nil); 
    NSParameterAssert(objectNotation != nil); 
    NSData *unicodeNotation = [objectNotation 
        dataUsingEncoding: NSUTF8StringEncoding]; 
    NSDictionary *parsedObject = 
        [NSJSONSerialization JSONObjectWithData: unicodeNotation 
                                        options: 0 
                                          error: NULL]; 
    if (![parsedObject isKindOfClass: [NSDictionary class]]) { 
        return; 
    } 
    NSString *questionBody = [[[parsedObject 
        objectForKey: @"questions"] lastObject] objectForKey: @"body"]; 
    if (questionBody) { 
        question.body = questionBody; 
    } 
}
With all that in place, the question detail view ﬁnally looks
like what the customer wanted, back in Chapter 5, “Test-
Driven Development of an iOS App.”
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 304 ---
Ship It!
That’s the sample application complete—well, it’s very
rough around the edges, but the functionality is all there.
The app was built by writing 182 unit tests, which all run (on
my Mac, anyway) in about a second.5 No code was added to
the app without a failing test being written ﬁrst; at no point
did we move on before ensuring that all tests passed.
5. Not all of the 182 tests are shown in this book, refer to the sample code on
GitHub for the complete test suite.
Despite the slightly artiﬁcial way in which the app was built,
with each “layer” being completed before moving on to the
next, the integration step undertaken in this chapter to
convert a collection of independent classes into a working
app with useful features was incredibly straightforward.
Because the behavior and interface of each class in the app
had been carefully speciﬁed by the tests, when it came time
to put all those classes together, they worked well—with few
problems.
There was no sleight of hand in the way code and problems
have been presented over the last few chapters. The
(mercifully) small number of bugs and regressions on
display represent every such problem I encountered, and
the order in which classes, tests, and implementation code
are introduced in this book truly represent the order in
which I built the app. The race condition described and
addressed earlier in this chapter is the only time in the
whole project that I needed to use the debugger, and for me
this is the biggest beneﬁt of test-driven development.
Throughout this project I had a very good view of the
capabilities and limitations of the code I had written:
Anything that passes a test has been done, anything that
fails is broken, and anything I don’t have a test for doesn’t
exist. This visibility, and the capability to make changes to

--- Page 305 ---
the code and see the eﬀect of those changes, combine to
give developers great conﬁdence over their coding.
In the next chapter, I’ll reﬂect on the BrowseOverﬂow
project, taking the speciﬁc problems we solved in writing
this app to make general points about applying test-driven
development to Cocoa apps. The project work is complete
and won’t be added to in future chapters. You may want to
carry on improving it yourself, using the application code
and test ﬁxtures as a basis to practice test-driven
development. A hint to get you started—if you browse to the
same topic’s list of questions twice, you’re likely to ﬁnd that
questions get duplicated in the list. That probably shouldn’t
happen. If a question appears once in the StackOverﬂow
website, it should appear once in the app.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 306 ---
11. Designing for Test-Driven
Development
In the preceding six chapters, we’ve taken the speciﬁcation
for a product and turned it into a working iPhone app, using
the principle of test-driven development. It’s time to take a
step back, look at what we’ve done, and see what general
guidelines can help in designing classes that will be
implemented using a test-driven approach.
Design to Interfaces, Not Implementations
Whenever you’re writing a test in a TDD project, you’re
designing a part of the class that is being tested: what setup
it needs, how its API can be used, and what the class does in
response to its API being used. It’s best to stay away from
decisions about how the class does what it does when
writing the test, and defer these decisions until you’re trying
to make the test pass. If your code relies on an object
implementing a method or property, your test should reﬂect
that requirement. It should not make assumptions about
how that method or property is provided.
If you think in this way when you write the test, you leave
open the possibility for diﬀerent implementations to be used
in diﬀerent contexts, and you make it easier to change the
implementation that’s used in production if you discover
problems with performance, security, or other
characteristics. You’re designing to the interface, not the
implementation.
The main beneﬁt of designing to the interface in TDD is that
it makes it very easy to replace dependencies on complex
systems with fake or mock objects. This is a pattern we’ve
seen throughout the development of BrowseOverﬂow. For
instance, the StackOverflowCommunicator object relies on receiving

--- Page 307 ---
certain callbacks from NSURLConnection, but doesn’t have any
dependency on how the NSURLConnection object is implemented—
so it’s possible to use those callbacks out of context to test
them. In its turn, the StackOverflowCommunicator sends messages to
its delegate, but it doesn’t care what the delegate does with
these messages. In the real app, the delegate is a
StackOverflowManager that takes the data, constructs model objects
out of it, and then messages a view controller to update a
data source and refresh a table view. In the tests, all that is
ignored and the delegate is a simple object that records
whether it has received the delegate messages.
The way this independence between an object and the
implementation of its collaborators has often been
expressed, both in Apple’s frameworks and in the
BrowseOverﬂow code, is through the use of protocols.1 The
NSURLConnection class knows that its delegate implements the
NSURLConnectionDataDelegate protocol, just as the StackOverflowCommunicator
knows that its delegate implements the
StackOverflowCommunicatorDelegate protocol. All these objects know
about their delegates is that they implement the methods
speciﬁed in the delegate protocol; they do not need to know
about what the delegates do as a result of receiving those
methods. The ﬂip side is that all the delegates need to know
is that they will receive the messages documented in the
protocol declaration; they do not need to know what goes
on in order to produce those messages. That allows us to
test our delegate classes by messaging them from a test
ﬁxture instead of a production class.
1. Protocols are not the only way to do this, and in older code (before optional
methods were introduced in protocols) you may see “informal protocols,”
which are categories deﬁned on NSObject that declare, but do not deﬁne, the
interface methods.
Delegates are not the only way to design to an interface. In
fact, it’s a technique that can be used anywhere one class
needs to communicate with another. Consider a
hypothetical future version of the BrowseOverﬂow app,

--- Page 308 ---
where you’ve decided to change the model implementation
to use Core Data. That means setting up managed object
contexts, persistent stores, and so on. But you already have
a lot of controller classes that implement the logic this app
will need—they just talk to “plain old” Objective-C objects
rather than NSManagedObject subclasses. That’s not a problem. As
long as anywhere that needs, for example, a Question instance
knows about the “Question-ness” of that object—its title,
body text, relationship to a person and so on—it can use any
implementation that provides those properties. To keep
tests simple, you may choose to carry on using the non-Core
Data implementations of the model classes in unit tests so
that the tests don’t need to deal with the complexity of Core
Data.
You can create tests where an object communicates with a
“fake” implementation of a protocol, and tests where the
real implementation is exercised by generating protocol
messages from a “fake” source. In the real application, the
real implementation will be exercised by the real source. You
could even have a situation where the objects on both sides
of the interface are fakes, so that fake messages are being
consumed by fake receivers. Would that ever be useful?
There’s no case in unit testing where you’d want to do that,
because it would result in a test that wasn’t actually testing
any production code. A situation where you would want to
put an assembly of fake objects together is in performance
testing. If you’re designing the architecture of a complex
application and want to know something about its
performance characteristics—for example, whether it can
process incoming data at a particular rate—you could
produce a test app that follows the same architecture but
where each component does no real work. So you may
hypothesize that the network code will take 0.1s to process
each message, and create a class that listens for incoming
data, then waits 0.1s before messaging the next

--- Page 309 ---
component. In this way you can tweak parameters, such as
the frequency of incoming messages or the way in which
they are queued, and see the resulting behavior of the
overall system.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 310 ---
Tell, Don’t Ask
If you have classes that are designed to use any
implementation of a particular interface, you need to be
able to choose which implementation is used in any context.
You want your lightweight implementation that signals
which methods have been called to be used in your tests,
but you want to use an implementation that performs some
useful work in your app.
It is easier to swap collaborator implementations if you
conﬁgure which collaborator an object should use at
runtime, instead of coding that object to choose the object
for itself. This principle is known as “tell, don’t ask”:You tell
an object what data and objects it uses; it doesn’t ask its
environment for the things it needs.
We’ve seen the diﬀerence between these two approaches—
telling, and asking—in developing the BrowseOverﬂow app,
particularly in dealing with notiﬁcations. The
QuestionListTableDataSource class is told what notiﬁcation center
instance to use: In the app, this is always the singleton -
[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter] object. In tests, it’s simple to set
up the object to use a fake notiﬁcation center that oﬀers the
visibility needed to make the tests possible.
Conversely, BrowseOverflowViewController always asks for the
singleton instance, so the tests cannot swap in a fake
notiﬁcation center. Instead, the tests have to go through the
complex (and fragile) contortions of using the Objective-C
runtime to replace (or “swizzle”) method implementations
before the tests can be executed. Tests that are too “clever”
can be harder to read and understand, and more likely to
fail due to changes in the environment. Perhaps a future
release of the iOS SDK will change the implementation of -
[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter] in a way the tests haven’t
anticipated, or a future release of OCUnit will attempt to
execute multiple tests in parallel. These tests were built this

--- Page 311 ---
way to show how much harder it can be to rely on shared
classes, even though it seems like a way out of constructing
a fake object.
Singleton classes are a leading cause of asking rather than
telling: It’s all too easy to get the default NSFileManager, or the
shared UIApplication. Where the singleton class exposes
complicated or environment-dependent behavior (as is true
with each of these two examples), tests exercising this code
can become either diﬃcult to construct or nondeterministic
in outcome. It’s always best in these cases to tell the
application code what object to use, and pass it the
singleton in the app. As explored in Chapter 10, “Putting It
All Together,” consider whether your own classes really
need to be a singleton, or whether it just happens to be the
case that there’s one instance of the class in the app.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 312 ---
Small, Focused Classes and Methods
A quick search through the application source for
BrowseOverﬂow shows that the longest method in the whole
app is about 35 lines of code. Most methods are 10 lines or
fewer in length. Stepping back a bit to see the bigger
picture, most classes declare only a few methods and
properties; each of the class and protocol header ﬁles ﬁts
comfortably on a single screen in Xcode on my laptop. The
application’s behavior is the result of the rich interaction of
a large number of small classes, each responsible for a
single facet of the desired functionality.
This organization of the code into small, highly cohesive
classes is as much a side-eﬀect of test-driven development
as it is a principle to follow. Because you have to write a test
for each aspect of the app’s behavior before you can write
the app code, the inclination is to write as little code as
possible for each aspect so that you can get on to writing
the next test and adding the next piece of behavior.
There’s a lot of value in writing highly speciﬁc tests to
achieve as close to a 1:1 mapping between test and app
code as is feasible. If one thing goes wrong in the app, the
best outcome is that exactly one test fails, so that you can
see the one problem and reason quickly about its solution.
Conversely if one bug leads to a lot of test failures, you have
to stop and think about what all the failing tests have in
common so that you can try to identify the root cause of the
multiple failures.
In addition, if one test is responsible for specifying the
behavior of a large swathe of app code, the likelihood that
any of a number of problems can cause the test to fail will
increase. This, like the case of multiple test failures, slows
you down when you come to analyze the failure and try to
determine which part of the code under test is causing the
problem. Taking these two conditions together, we see that

--- Page 313 ---
having small methods that are each responsible for a limited
amount of the app’s behavior is beneﬁcial to maintaining
the app’s unit tests (and, by inference, the app itself: The
tests are there to support the quality of the application,
after all).
Just as it makes sense to keep each method short and
focused on a small aspect of what the app does, it’s best to
keep each class small and responsible for a limited number
of things. Having multiple responsibilities in a single class
means that it’s possible for the code related to diﬀerent
responsibilities to become interdependent, perhaps using
the same instance variables or relying on common private
methods. That makes it harder to change the code for one
of the application’s responsibilities without aﬀecting other
behavior, which is undesirable because it makes code
harder to maintain.
Clearly the optimal number of responsibilities for any class
is one, as described by Robert C. Martin in his Single
Responsibility Principle. With only one responsibility, the
possibility for the code in a class to break the behavior of
some other feature is greatly reduced. The code in the
BrowseOverﬂow app follows the Single Responsibility
Principle. It might seem that “fetch questions from
stackoverﬂow.com” is one responsibility, but on closer
inspection there are two: downloading data from the server
and parsing that data to produce a representation that can
be displayed in the application’s view. That’s why the code
is broken into the separate StackOverflowCommunicator and ...Builder
classes, all coordinated by the StackOverflowManager.
Similarly, although UIKit provides the UITableViewController that
can act as both a view controller and a table view’s data
source, this combination of responsibilities violates the
Single Responsibility Principle. Indeed in the
BrowseOverﬂow app, it proved possible to use a single view

--- Page 314 ---
controller class to control three diﬀerent table views, just by
changing the data source.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 315 ---
Encapsulation
A useful addition to the Single Responsibility Principle is that
if a class is given responsibility for some aspect of the app’s
behavior, it had better be entirely responsible for that
aspect. Although having multiple responsibilities in the
same class can lead to complicated coupling between those
responsibilities, having a single responsibility spread
between multiple classes makes it hard to understand how
that responsibility works, because you need to jump
between multiple source code ﬁles to see how it’s
implemented.
From the perspective of a developer trying to write code in a
test-driven approach, if a responsibility is not encapsulated
behind one class, it becomes harder to test the behavior of
each participating class in isolation. The reason comes back
to the idea of designing to an interface: If a responsibility is
spread across many classes, the likelihood is that the
implementation of any of those classes depends on the
implementation of the other classes. Conversely, if a single
class is entirely responsible for performing a task, getting
that task done in a diﬀerent way is as simple as switching
out that one class.
Behavior in the BrowseOverﬂow app is encapsulated into
classes that each completely implement the work they’re
responsible for. In Chapter 9, “View Controllers,” I started to
design separate UITableView data source and delegate classes
for each view, thinking that these were separate
responsibilities and deserved to be in separate classes. It
turned out that this design didn’t lead to encapsulated
classes; the delegate classes always needed to use objects
in the data source, so the two classes were tightly coupled
together. I decided to combine the classes into a single class
that was both the table view’s data source and delegate.

--- Page 316 ---
The new, combined class still has a single responsibility—
managing the table view—and is now well-encapsulated.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 317 ---
Use Is Better Than Reuse
Although many of the preceding design principles have put
a lot of emphasis on creating classes that can be
interchanged with diﬀerent implementations or reused in
multiple contexts, the ﬁrst and most important factor to be
sure of is that the class is needed in the single context of
the app you’re trying to write before you even design the
tests that exercise it.2
2. You could think of this as the Non-Zero Responsibility Principle.
Through the process of developing BrowseOverﬂow, I
frequently referred back to the app’s requirements to see
what was needed when designing a particular class or
collection of classes. I wrote the app with the goal of
satisfying these requirements, and although I looked for
opportunities to reuse code within the context of the app (as
with the example of BrowseOverflowViewController, which acts as the
view controller for three separate views), I didn’t worry
about generalizing the created classes beyond the app’s
requirements. For example, the QuestionListTableDataSource is useful
for displaying a list of Stack Overﬂow questions, and not for
much else.
This comes back to the principle introduced in Chapter 2,
“Techniques for Test-Driven Development,” called Ya Ain’t
Gonna Need It. Any time you’re editing code in test-driven
development, you should be adding something useful—
whether that’s writing a new test to document some
expected behavior of the app, writing the application code
that passes a test and adds new functionality, or refactoring
to improve the readability and maintainability of the code.
Anything else is unnecessary, so you probably shouldn’t be
doing it.3
3. You shouldn’t be adding it to the app, anyway. Writing code to research an
algorithm or third-party API is valuable, but that research code shouldn’t be
shipped.

--- Page 318 ---
Think back to the System Metaphor: the high-level model of
what features you need to provide and how they ﬁt together
into the app. If you’re working on code that doesn’t ﬁt into
your product’s system metaphor, that code probably isn’t
responsible for anything in the app, and as such won’t be
needed.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 319 ---
Testing Concurrent Code
Testing code that’s designed to run “in the background”—
meaning on any thread that isn’t the UI or “main” thread—
can be hard. We’ve seen that in testing the preparation of
the BrowseOverﬂow app’s user interface, where some of the
cells rely on the UIWebView class to display some content.
UIWebView loads and renders its content asynchronously, which
means that we’re forced in the test to wait for it to ﬁnish
before checking whether its content matches our
expectations. We could potentially hook into the UIWebView’s
ﬂow and have the test watch for it completing its rendering,
but that would just be a more clever way of waiting for it to
ﬁnish. We’d also have to be sure that any “clever” approach
to the test wasn’t going to get stymied by the test
framework tearing the ﬁxture down before the background
code had completed.
Threading, or asynchronous behavior of any form, is one of
the application’s responsibilities, so according to the Single
Responsibility Principle it should be put into one class.
That’s not always easy, because reasons often exist for code
running on diﬀerent threads to be temporally cohesive.
Examples include the need to communicate updates to the
UI on the main thread, and synchronization to ensure that
collaborating code on diﬀerent threads always has a
consistent view of any shared data.
Although it may not be straightforward to encapsulate
asynchronicity entirely in a single class, patterns are
available that simplify the construction (and, as a result, the
testing) of concurrent code. A very powerful pattern is the
Producer–Consumer pattern, in which the producer is
responsible for requesting that asynchronous operations be
performed, and the consumer is responsible for observing
and executing these requests. The iOS SDK provides the
NSOperationQueue class as an implementation of the consumer,

--- Page 320 ---
with the associated NSOperation class modeling the work units
that are scheduled from the producer. NSOperationQueue is built on
a lower-level library called Grand Central Dispatch, which
also implements the Producer–Consumer pattern.
Producer–Consumer provides a natural interface that we can
use to investigate the behavior of concurrent code. In
testing the producer, we need to ensure that it adds work
(or NSOperations) to a queue, so we can provide it with a stub
queue and discover whether the queue receives the
operations. We can implement each operation as standalone
code and test that this operation functions correctly in
isolation. Finally, we could test the queue’s logic for
dispatching or scheduling operations, although this won’t be
necessary if you use the Apple-supplied NSOperationQueue.
Every part of the concurrent system can be tested
separately, without needing to rely on complicated
scheduling tricks in test ﬁxtures to wait for background code
to complete. However, this ability to completely unit test
concurrent code says nothing about its behavior in the
integrated system, and it’s still possible for resource
contention or scheduling problems to exist in the code. The
only way to detect these is to test the whole concurrent
system in a variety of environments—a problem that is
beyond this book’s scope.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 321 ---
Don’t Be Cleverer Than Necessary
Brian Kernighan, co-inventor of the C programming
language, co-wrote a book called The Elements of
Programming Style, with P. J. Plauger, which contains this
quote:
Everyone knows that debugging is twice as hard as
writing a program in the ﬁrst place. So if you’re as
clever as you can be when you write it, how will you
ever debug it?
Test-driven developers can reduce the amount of time they
spend stepping through code in the debugger, by creating a
suite of tests that automatically tests their code and tells
them whether it does what they expect. But that doesn’t
remove the need to write debuggable code. As we saw
when integrating the BrowseOverﬂow app, there are still
times when the debugger comes in handy. Besides, the
reason for keeping the suite of unit tests around is to make
it easy to ﬁnd regressions; if you can tell what’s going wrong
but not where or how to ﬁx it, some of that utility is lost.
Your own opinion of what language features or tricks count
as “too clever” will depend on your experience and comfort
level, but some things are more likely than others to
generate code that works in tests but not in production. In
the previous section, I described how code that works in the
(usually) single-threaded world of a test suite can have
concurrency problems that show up in a multithreaded app.
Code that changes the (global) Objective-C runtime state is
likely to cause these problems: For example, if you
dynamically exchange method implementations on a class,
code running in two diﬀerent threads could have diﬀerent
expectations of what a method will do. This problem was
noted in Chapter 9, but because the method exchange (or
“swizzling”) was being done in the single-threaded

--- Page 322 ---
environment of the test suite, concurrency problems were
not going to be encountered.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 323 ---
Prefer a Wide, Shallow Inheritance Hierarchy
Classes that are tightly coupled to other classes are diﬃcult
to test in isolation. There is no tighter coupling than
inheritance, which connects the interface and
implementation of two classes. Not only does the code in
the subclass depend on the internals of the superclass
behaving correctly, but superclass code that works when
you test that class can be broken by the changes in
behavior introduced in the subclass.
If you want to introduce an inheritance hierarchy in your
own classes, consider whether alternatives are available. If
the inheritance relationship would provide custom behavior
in the superclass’s workﬂow, a callback interface via either a
delegate or block parameters is a way to separate the
customization from the original workﬂow. None of the
application classes in BrowseOverﬂow subclass other app
classes, so there is minimal coupling between the
implementations of the various classes in the app. The only
place where classes deﬁned in the project are subclassed is
in the test suite, where some subclasses (such as the
NonNetworkedStackOverflowCommunicator) have methods stubbed out to
limit the amount of superclass behavior invoked in the test.
Sometimes you’re forced into subclassing somebody else’s
class by the behavior of their code: For example, all the
entities in a Core Data stack must be instances of
NSManagedObject, and all the objects in a view hierarchy must be
instances of UIView. In these cases, the only possible course of
action for performing some tasks is subclassing; do so with
care and consult the class documentation to ﬁnd out what
the limitations are.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 324 ---
Conclusion
The general approach to test-driven app design is to make
each component of the app as independent of everything
else that’s going on as possible. In this chapter, patterns for
removing dependence on other classes, on the code’s
environment, and on other threads have all been explored.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 325 ---
12. Applying Test-Driven
Development to an Existing Project
You’ve seen a full-featured app developed from inception to
completion in a test-driven fashion. Many of you won’t be
coming into this from scratch, though; you’ll have existing
apps with code that has grown organically from the ﬁrst
beta version you gave to testers, through major releases
and bug ﬁx revisions to the state it’s currently in. Does TDD
oﬀer you anything? This chapter provides answers to that
question.
The Most Important Test You’ll Write Is the
First
Your app code probably works, for the most part: You
wouldn’t have released it to your customers if it hadn’t at
least passed some basic usage tests. But does any
particular method in it satisfy all its requirements, or work
when faced with the whole range of possible inputs? Those
are the sort of questions you can use unit tests to answer.
Each test you add will prove that one more little piece of
your app is working as you expect, and the ﬁrst test takes
you from no proof to one little piece of proof. That’s an
inﬁnite enhancement in your conﬁdence about the code, so
it’s the most important test you will ever write. It’s also the
test that will need you to set up a test ﬁxture target and to
ensure that you can build parts of your app code in the test
ﬁxture, so in that respect, it’s the most important test, too.
Furthermore, it’ll prove that adding tests to this venerable
project is possible and does help, so that also makes it the
most important test.
But how should you approach writing that ﬁrst test? What
should it test? The answer to that question is simple: What

--- Page 326 ---
is the next thing you need to change? If you have a bug you
need to work on, write a test that fails while this bug is still
present and that will pass when you ﬁx the bug. If the next
thing you need to do is to add a new feature, start thinking
about how that feature will work and capture the ﬁrst
requirement as a new test. Starting by writing that ﬁrst test
will help get you into the “test infected” mindset and onto
writing the second test, and then the rest of the test suite
that will grow and develop with your app.
A great place to start is by examining the compiler
warnings, and the results of Xcode’s static code analysis
(press Cmd-Shift-B in Xcode, or choose Analyze from the
Product menu). Both of these reports describe problems that
are already present in the application code, that could
potentially cause issues at runtime, and are usually
localized and easy to ﬁx. Projects that have been under
development for a long time often accumulate warnings or
analysis issues, even through no fault of the developers: For
example, the static analyzer is a fairly recent addition to
Xcode so your past self couldn’t help you out by using it.
Cleaning up these problems will give you immediate
feedback, as the number of warnings or reports is reduced.
This gives you an important psychological boost as you
realize that you’re cleaning up your source code and making
things better.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 327 ---
Refactoring to Support Testing
The ﬁrst problem usually encountered when you start
adding unit tests to an existing project—after you’ve worked
up the motivation to write the ﬁrst test—is diﬃculty in
getting any of the classes to work on its own. With no
particular pressure to isolate each class, it’s easy to get
complex systems of dependencies and coupled behavior
between multiple classes so that instantiating any one class
in the ﬁxture ends up re-creating almost the entire app. How
can you overcome this complexity and separate the app into
testable parts—remembering that you cannot yet rely on
tests telling you whether anything has broken?
It may not be necessary when you start testing a class to
remove every single connection it depends on; if you can
break out a few classes into an independent—but internally
coupled—subsystem, you can test that subsystem on its
own and worry about cleaning up its innards later.
The ﬁrst step in this process is to identify “inﬂection points”
in the software—places that seem like they could almost be
the interface between two separate components. Natural
inﬂection points include the boundaries between the model,
view, and controller layers. Others depend on the
capabilities and architecture of your own app. These
inﬂection points will not necessarily already represent clean
breaks between separate modules; the important part is to
identify where they are and what you could do to completely
separate the concerns of each module.
After you’ve found an inﬂection point, you need to make the
smallest changes possible to tease the two connected
subsystems apart. The changes need to be small because
you cannot (yet) test their impact on the app’s functionality,
so you’re potentially introducing risky changes at this point.
The risk will prove worthwhile after you have a greater
ability to write automatic tests of your app’s code, but for

--- Page 328 ---
the moment it’s necessary to tread carefully. If there’s a
point where a test can be introduced for even part of the
interaction, take the opportunity to reduce the risk
associated with further changes.
A change1 that’s often useful at this point is to ﬁnd a
method on one side of the inﬂection point that uses lots of
properties of objects on the other side, and push it across
the boundary. Perhaps it can be converted into a single call
to a method on the other side of the boundary, or a method
on one side that relies on delegate-style callbacks across
the boundary. Making this change enhances the
encapsulation of each module by removing the need for
classes on each side to know about and change the
properties of classes on the other side. If one class is
frequently making use of properties deﬁned on another
class, consider whether the property should be moved to
the class that’s using it or whether the classes are sharing
some responsibility and should be merged.
1. Strictly speaking, it’s hard to call these changes “refactoring” because
there’s no proof that the code’s behavior isn’t being modiﬁed.
If the two modules are now communicating only via
messages, there could be an opportunity to introduce a
protocol or other interface that describes these messages
and protects the modules from each needing to know how
the other is implemented. Where the messages sent by one
module are received by multiple classes in the other, a
Façade2 object can be used to collect the messages into one
class and then a protocol deﬁned to expose the methods on
the façade.
2. The Façade pattern is described in the “Gang of Four” book: Design Patterns:
Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software, by Gamma, Helm, Johnson,
and Vlissides, Addison-Wesley 1994.
After one of the subsystems is communicating with a single
interface on the other subsystem, the second subsystem
can be replaced in a test ﬁxture by a mock implementation

--- Page 329 ---
of the interface. The ﬁrst module can be instantiated in the
ﬁxture and made to communicate with the fake version of
the second, so you can document and verify expectations of
the interaction.
The speciﬁc techniques or changes you’ll need to employ
depend very much on both the organization of your existing
code and the intended architecture you have in mind.
Michael Feathers discusses a variety of possible approaches
in his book Working Eﬀectively with Legacy Code (Prentice
Hall, 2004); the code examples are in Java but are easy to
follow, and it’s the principles rather than the speciﬁc source
code changes that are important.
Real-World Inﬂection Points
I once worked on a Mac app that had all the
hallmarks of having provided a long and illustrious
service for its programmers. The APIs used ran all
the way from ancient third-party GUI frameworks
designed for Mac OS 8 to the latest Cocoa additions.
Any architecture that had originally been designed
was now long lost under the additions and changes
that had been made over the years, in much the
same way that Tudor manor houses are sometimes
extended and remodeled so much that it’s a
surprise to ﬁnd an original wall or roof timber
somewhere deep in the center.
It was still possible to identify separate
responsibilities in this app—some code did logging,
a few functions (there weren’t really many classes in
the code) managed the ﬁle system and so on. These
related functions were all grouped into source ﬁles,
so that, for example, the logging code was all in
app_logging.c. This meant that the inﬂection points were
clear, because each of these responsibilities could
be treated as a separate module. Getting to the

--- Page 330 ---
point where they could truly be used separately was
going to be diﬃcult, because the various functions
relied on global shared state, and in some cases
needed to be called in a certain order for that state
to be set up correctly.
To break this coupling, I ﬁrst created local accessor
functions in each of the modules that returned the
global variables, and changed the existing code so
that all the functions used these accessors instead
of reading the globals directly. Then I deﬁned a
structure inside each module that had an element
for each of the globals and made the accessors look
up the global state in these functions. Finally, I
gathered all the initialization code into a single
function that populated each module’s state
structure.
Each of these steps was separately very small and
had no eﬀect on the overall behavior of the app, but
the combined result was that each module was
completely separated from the others and
depended on a single structure being ﬁlled in before
the module’s functions were used. It became
possible to build test drivers that linked to just one
of the modules and conﬁgured the way that module
behaved by changing the elements of the module’s
state structure. In other words, each module in the
app could now be tested in isolation from the rest of
the application.
Separating the classes inside a tightly coupled module
works in the same way as separating the modules did.
Decide what responsibilities the module has, and which
class should take on each responsibility. Then, working
carefully, reorganize the code into the new classes so that

--- Page 331 ---
each class depends only on the interface of its collaborators,
not on their implementations.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 332 ---
Testing to Support Refactoring
After you’re in a position where classes or groups of classes
in your app can be instantiated in a test suite and tested
independently of each other, you can really pick up steam.
It’s now possible to specify exactly the required behavior on
each class, and that means you’re free to make any
changes you want to how the classes are implemented. You
know that you’ll be able to see quickly whether you’ve
changed what the class does, and you don’t have to commit
to anything until you’ve seen all the tests pass.
That sort of conﬁdence makes it possible to think about
wholesale changes to an app that don’t seem possible—or
at least not worthwhile—when you aren’t supported by the
collection of tests. My experience of working on projects
that aren’t supported by tests is that architectural decisions
made early on tend to outstay their welcome. If the code
almost works, then continual patching and tweaking when
bug reports are made seems preferable to making any
larger-scale changes, because the potential beneﬁts seem
outweighed by the high probability of introducing
regressions or getting lost and ending up with an
unbuildable, unworking mess.
The only solution available to address this crumbling code
ediﬁce that’s collapsing under its own weight often seems to
be the nuclear option: Wipe the code out and start again
from scratch. That would still mean being in a situation
where the code is unreleasable until it does everything the
original, messy version does. What are all the capabilities of
the original version, anyway?
Many programmers accept that code they wrote six months
ago is low quality in comparison with the code they write
today, and that in another six months today’s code will look
poor in comparison with what they will then be able to do.
Wouldn’t it be great to support adopting the knowledge of

--- Page 333 ---
your future self, by leaving a collection of notes explaining
everything the code you have today does; notes that let
programmers change and improve the code without any
fear? That’s what a unit test suite allows you to do. The
suite of tests is that collection of notes, telling your fellow
developers and future selves what you did and why, and
whether what they’re doing functions in the same way.
Code that is well covered by unit tests is very easy to
change, because much of the risk associated with making
changes is removed. If part of the architecture needs to be
replaced, you can make that replacement—there’s a set of
tests to let you know what your new version needs to do. Do
you want to take some existing behavior and move it onto a
new class? Edit the tests for that behavior so that they
exercise the new class, and then get them back into a
passing state. Changing the algorithm used to implement an
app feature? You don’t need to change the tests at all; what
you already have will tell you whether the new algorithm
covers all the cases needed in the app.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 334 ---
Do I Really Need to Write All These Tests?
As I said at the beginning of this chapter, the ﬁrst test is the
most important because it’s the one that proves you can
write unit tests for your existing project. The previous
section shows that after you have a collection of tests in
place for a class or feature, you can make even large
architectural changes with conﬁdence because you always
know where you are, what doesn’t work (yet), and what you
need to ﬁx.
One possible interpretation of this situation is that it’s time
to initiate the “write a load of unit tests” project, spending—
how long? A week? A month? Three?—doing nothing but
writing tests and making changes needed to support the
application code running in the test suite. Not only is this
not necessary, but I would argue that it’s actually harmful to
your project.
The main downside to doing nothing but writing tests is that
it’s demoralizing: You’re spending lots of time writing code
but not actually adding any new features to your product,
and that makes it feel like time wasted. A demoralized
developer is a less-productive developer, so the time
needed to ﬁnish this “project” will increase, and then you
may not feel like going back to working on the app after
you’re done—assuming you are ever “done” and don’t just
give up in disgust, vowing never to write another unit test
for the rest of your professional career. However, it also
comes back to the point made in Chapter 2, “Techniques for
Test-Driven Development.” The principle beneﬁt of the red–
green–refactor workﬂow is that you’re thinking about the
code’s requirements at the same time as the code itself, as
two aspects of one small problem that’s relatively easy for
one person to solve. The “improve test coverage” project
destroys this relationship between the code and the tests,
and therefore removes this important beneﬁt.

--- Page 335 ---
The best approach to testing a legacy app is the same as
the approach taken to test a brand new app: Write the tests
as you need to make changes. Some developers swear by
the “boy scout rule” of programming: Always leave the code
cleaner than you found it (the analogy is with the Boy
Scouts of America’s rule—always leave the campsite cleaner
than you found it). If you need to work on a particular class,
doing the work needed to support test-driven development
on that class’s code creates an important and useful
improvement to your project—and probably helps you to
understand more about how that class behaves and what
you need to do to get your work done.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 336 ---
13. Beyond Today’s Test-Driven
Development
I hope that this book has enthused you about the possibility
of writing test-driven iOS apps, shown you how to get
started, and convinced you that even the most gnarly of
legacy projects can beneﬁt from a test-driven approach
after you do a bit of groundwork to get started. This chapter
wraps things up by looking at techniques and technology
related to TDD. Some of these things are already available
but are not in common use yet; others are not available
now, or work in other environments but not Cocoa Touch.
These are all concepts and technologies you could be using
for your apps soon.
Expressing Ranges of Input and Output
Many of the tests created for the BrowseOverﬂow app used
a speciﬁc result to stand in for a general case. For example,
if a table view data source constructs the ﬁrst cell in a table
correctly, perhaps it will create all cells correctly. If a
question presents two answers in the correct order, perhaps
it will order all answers correctly.
The reason for making these conceptual leaps ultimately
comes down to life’s being too short to do otherwise. We
have to trust ourselves (or whoever will write or maintain
the app code) to avoid taking shortcuts, to understand that
the test represents an unwritten general rule, and to write
code that satisﬁes the general rule rather than merely
passing the test as written. To do otherwise would involve
an explosion in the number of tests, because a wide enough
collection of examples would have to be considered before
special-casing the code to make each test pass became
harder than writing the general solution.

--- Page 337 ---
It would be great if there were an easy way to write a test
that expressed “for each of these inputs, the following
outputs should be produced” or even “for any valid input,
the following should be true of the result.” You could do that
today in OCUnit, by deﬁning a collection of inputs and
outputs—perhaps a dictionary that maps an input onto the
expected result—and creating a test that loops over the
collection, testing each result. Although that works, it means
cluttering up tests that use this technique with code that
implements the loop rather than expressing what the test is
supposed to be telling you.
Other unit test frameworks have ways of abstracting this
collection of values out of the test, so that the test ﬁxture is
responsible for preparing the inputs, and each test is
responsible for verifying that for a given input, the expected
result occurs. A test in this situation can pass and fail
multiple times in the same run, if the expectations are met
for only part of the input domain.
An example of this form of testing is available in the JUnit
framework, where it is called Theories. The test ﬁxture
provides a method that generates an array of datapoints to
be used as inputs for the tests; each test encapsulates a
theory that should hold for any input condition. The
framework takes on the responsibility of running each test
once for every datapoint supplied by the ﬁxture, and for
distinguishing successful and failing instances of the same
test.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 338 ---
Behavior-Driven Development
The workﬂow involved in TDD can be described in the
following way: Find out what your app needs to do, express
it in executable form, and then make it work. Behavior-
Driven Development, or BDD, takes this approach to writing
software and applies it more generally, so that customer
requirements are documented as executable test cases from
the start.
BDD is not just about tool support and a test framework; it
also requires that the customer needs be captured in a
standard form, where each requirement also functions as its
own acceptance test. Part of this standardized requirement
form is the ubiquitous language, a glossary of terms from
the problem domain used in the same way by everybody in
the team. The point of deﬁning a ubiquitous language is that
it reduces some of the ambiguity in communicating between
customers and users—who are usually experts in the
problem domain but not in software—and developers, who
are usually experts in software but not in the problem
domain.
Many developers will create a domain-speciﬁc language
(DSL), a programming language that exposes software
behavior in terms of the ubiquitous language. It’s this DSL
that allows customers to review the executable test cases in
terms that they understand, and to conﬁrm that they
accurately capture the software requirements.
BDD tests follow a very similar pattern to TDD, although
because the tests are a communication aid and not just a
developer tool, there is more emphasis on making them
readable. The tests are usually referred to as “specs”
because they are the speciﬁcations for features in the
ﬁnished app. A spec in the Cedar1 BDD framework for Mac
and iOS follows this format.

--- Page 339 ---
1. https://github.com/pivotal/cedar and http://twitter.com/cedarbdd
describe(@"Deep Thought", ^{ 
    beforeEach(^{ 
        //... set up the environment 
    }); 
    it(@"should solve the great question", ^{ 
        //... test code 
        expect(theAnswer).to(equal(42)); 
    }); 
});
Notice that the naming and ordering convention of the test
macros promotes reading the success criteria as if it were
an English language sentence: expect the answer to equal
42. This is done using “matchers”; macros that separate the
description of a test condition from evaluation of its result.
In Chapter 4, “Tools for Testing,” you saw the big collection
of macros deﬁned by OCUnit, and the similarly large
collection deﬁned by the Google toolkit. The problem with
OCUnit-style test frameworks is that whenever you want to
express a new type of test, you have to construct a new
STAssert...() macro, which leads to duplication and increased
eﬀort of learning and using the framework. Matchers reduce
the duplication—you would still need a new matcher, but
evaluate it in a standard way—and the improved readability
of the test reduces the cognitive load associated with using
matchers in tests. They have the useful side-eﬀect of being
easier for nonprogrammers to understand, too.
A common form for matchers is Hamcrest; and an Objective-
C implementation called OCHamcrest can be found at
http://code.google.com/p/hamcrest/wiki/TutorialObjectiveC.
Hamcrest matchers can be used in OCUnit tests to make the
tests easier to read; they are not tied to BDD frameworks
like Cedar.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 340 ---
Automatic Test Case Generation
Chapter 12, “Applying Test-Driven Development to an
Existing Project,” showed that it is possible to add unit tests
to an existing project; there are challenges, but it can be
done. One of the problems is knowing when your tests
express all the diﬀerent conditions. Because you’re taking
the implementation and trying to work out the
requirements, how do you know what all the supported
inputs are? Do they represent all the required inputs?
It would be useful, at least as a starting point, to use the
code as a guideline—to read through a method, making a
note of every decision or loop, and looking at the conditions
needed to go down each branch. After you had mapped out
all the conditions, you would know what input states are
supported by the method and what it does in response to
each state. You would know that executing the method with
each of the diﬀerent input states in turn would represent a
complete test of the method’s functionality. Armed with this
knowledge, you could decide whether the app needs to
support all the inputs the method provides, whether the
method behaves in the correct way for any given
preconditions, and whether it needs to support any
additional states.
Building this table of possible input states would be time-
consuming even on a comparatively short method, and as
with all time-consuming tasks, it would be great to get a
computer to do it for you. That’s where klee comes in. Klee
is a tool based on the LLVM compiler used in Xcode that
analyzes your compiled code2 to construct this table of
input conditions. To use klee, you instrument your code to
tell it that some of the variables are symbolic. Klee executes
your code in a virtual machine, and whenever the code tries
to access a symbolic variable, klee keeps track of all the

--- Page 341 ---
possible values that variable could have. For example, if
klee encountered the line:
2. More precisely, it analyses the LLVM bitcode, an intermediate representation
of the compiled code from which the compiler creates a machine language
binary.
    if (x > 0)
where x was symbolic, it would know that there are now two
paths the code can take, but in subsequent lines of the
function, if klee took the true branch of the if condition, x
will now only ever be greater than 0; and if it took the other
branch, x will only ever be less than or equal to 0. It can also
discover conditions that would lead to app termination, such
as the code dereferencing a NULL pointer or accessing an
array beyond its bounds.
Klee’s output is a collection of ﬁles, one for each of the
possible paths through the app code. For each case, klee
records an example of the values the symbolic variables
must take to execute that path. This ﬁle can be used as
input to a klee runner, which sets the symbolic variables to
the speciﬁed values and executes the code, allowing you to
see what the result of executing that condition is. Klee
cannot tell you whether the result is correct, of course; its
purpose is to produce the minimal set of tests that express
the total range of code behavior.
Klee has its limitations; it can test programs that use the
standard C library (part of libSystem on iOS) by providing its
own implementation of the functions in that library. It can’t
currently be used to generate tests for an iOS app, and the
more complex the code you’re examining is, the more
conditions klee will discover and report. It’s a useful tool for
analyzing small functions in isolation, and as it matures will
become a useful aid in understanding legacy code.
Similar tools in other environments are more capable. A lot
of academic software engineering research is focused on

--- Page 342 ---
the Java language, and tools that can generate tests from
symbolic execution of Java bytecode, or that can analyze
UML diagrams to produce Java test code, are comparatively
mature, although they are mainly still research projects.
Examples of improvements on “blind” path execution
include Directed Automated Random Testing3 and using
knowledge of how objects usually interface with each other
to prune unlikely or nonsensical code paths.4
3. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2001425
4. http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/freeabs_all.jsp?arnumber=5770597
Automatic test case generation tools like klee are also
useful in cases where you have unit tests, even where
you’ve been using test-driven development and so have
entirely grown the code using the tests as a speciﬁcation.
By completely analyzing all possible paths of execution, the
generation tool can point out conditions that can be met in
the code but that are not covered by tests. Examples
include methods that can be passed NULL as a parameter and
methods that can be called in a diﬀerent sequence than is
expected in the test ﬁxture.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 343 ---
Automatically Creating Code to Pass Tests
When we have tools like klee to automatically generate test
coverage from executable code, a question naturally arises:
Can we go the other way? Given a collection of tests, could
a computer automatically provide code that satisﬁes all the
requirements in the tests? In TDD it’s our set of unit tests
that express what the code should do in computer-readable
form, so perhaps it’s possible to turn that representation
into a running app in the same way our forebears turned
human-readable C into machine language with their
compilers.
On the surface, it seems that for all of its beneﬁts, TDD
introduces a certain amount of redundancy into the
development process. You ﬁrst write a test that describes to
the computer how the app should behave, then you write
the app code that describes to the computer how the app
does behave. Eﬀectively, you express the same requirement
in two ways (three, if you count the refactoring step where
you write the same app code again in a more pleasant
form). If you could get a compiler-like tool to go from a test
ﬁxture to a running app, you could remove some of this
redundancy but still get to design each class’s API and
specify its behavior.
To some extent this is already possible, although that extent
is very limited. For systems whose operation can be
completely speciﬁed in a formal grammar like Z,5 it’s
possible to construct the software entirely from the
speciﬁcation—in reality, this is not much diﬀerent from
“programming” the software in the Z language though.
5. http://sdg.csail.mit.edu/6.894/scanPapers/UsingZ2.pdf: The Z notation is a
combination of mathematical set theory and predicate logic that can be used
to precisely specify software behavior.
There’s a very wide gap between a speciﬁcation constructed
in Z and a collection of unit test ﬁxtures. Unit tests, while

--- Page 344 ---
being executable code, are ultimately produced for the
programmer’s beneﬁt. They tell you what you need to know
about writing the app; they don’t tell the computer
everything it needs to know to do the same. In part, that’s
deliberate: By designing each class to be independent of the
others, and each method to be testable in isolation, we
knowingly leave out information on how the methods and
classes are hooked up to each other. Another reason unit
tests aren’t a complete speciﬁcation of an app’s behavior is
that it’s easy for people to rely on tacit knowledge to write
tests that, despite being incomplete, are unambiguous to
the people who need to read them. For example, you and I
know that -[UIViewController viewWillAppear:] gets called before -
[UIViewController viewDidAppear:], so we don’t need to document
anything about their ordering in our tests. If a computer
were to generate app code from the tests, though, it would
need to be told that.
It would probably be possible to provide some of this tacit
information via the frameworks themselves, just as the
framework documentation tells us developers about
ordering and other requirements. For the moment, though,
generating an application entirely from a test speciﬁcation
remains more complicated than writing the tests and the
code in parallel.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 345 ---
Conclusion
The features Apple supplies in Xcode’s OCUnit framework
are suﬃcient to build full-featured apps using TDD, but do
not represent the cutting edge of software engineering.
Newer features, extensions of the technique and helpful
tools all exist, and are in various stages of readiness for iOS
developers. As these become available to and adopted by
iOS developers, they will become useful strings in our bows
as we write and ship quality apps.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 346 ---
Index
A
adding topics to data source (BrowseOverﬂow app),
133–136
agile projects, 6
analysis paralysis, 4
Answer objects (BrowseOverﬂow app), 81–85
APIs, NSURLConnection, 113–114
application logic, BrowseOverﬂow app
questions, creating, 88–102
questions, creating from JSON, 102–111
apps
BrowseOverﬂow, 59
Answer objects, 81–85
implementing, 63–64
model layer, 67
Person class, 75–76
Question class, 73–75
questions, connecting to other classes, 76–80
setting up, 64–65
Topic class, 68–72
use cases, 60–63
legacy apps, testing, 213
ARC (Automatic Reference Counting), 69
assertions, 7–8
avatars, displaying in BrowseOverﬂow app, 185–189
B
Beck, Kent, 13, 35
best practices

--- Page 347 ---
code, writing, 205
focused methods/classes, implementing, 204–205
test-driven development
refactoring, 15–18
testing ﬁrst, 13–15
beta testing, 2, 5
black box testing, 4
BrowseOverﬂow app, 59
application logic
questions, creating, 88–102
questions, creating from JSON, 102–111
data sources, testing, 143–146
implementing, 63–64
model layer, 67
Answer objects, 81–85
Person class, 75–76
Question class, 73–75
questions, connecting to other classes, 76–80
Topic class, 68–72
question list
data source, 158
displaying, 160–169
setting up, 64–65
StackOverﬂowCommunicator class, 114–124
table view, 135–137
topics, adding to data source, 133–136
use cases, 60–63
user avatars, displaying, 185–189
view controllers, 149, 171–174, 178–185
views, testing, 192–195, 199
workﬂow, verifying, 171–174, 178–185

--- Page 348 ---
BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests test case ﬁxture,
128–132, 138, 147–148
bugs
cost of ﬁxing, 3
in library code, testing, 20
C
CATCH (C++ Adaptive Test Cases in Headers), 48–50
class organization, mirroring, 30
classes
“God class”, 127
“tell, don’t ask” principle, 203
designing to interfaces, 201
“fake” objects, 203
delegates, 202
non-Core Data implementations, 202
inheritance, 208
Single Responsibility principle, 204–205
StackOverﬂowCommunicator, 114–124
test ﬁxtures, 31
UITableViewController, 127
Cocoa API, NSURLConnection, 114
code
concurrent, testing, 206–207
debugging, 207
networking code
connections, creating for BrowseOverﬂow app, 114–
124
NSURLConnection API, 114
refactoring, 19
reusability, 127
reusing, 205

--- Page 349 ---
running with known input, 24–25
view code
testing, 192–195, 199
unit testing, 136–137
writing
encapsulation, 205
Single Responsibility principle, 204–205
code smell, 17
concurrent code, testing, 206–207
conﬁguring
source control systems, 38
XCode projects, 36–46
connections, creating for BrowseOverﬂow app, 114–
124
Continuous Integration tools, 52–53
CruiseControl, 57–58
Hudson, 53–57
creating
questions (BrowseOverﬂow app), 88–111
view controllers, 149
CruiseControl, 57–58
customer environment testing, 5
cyclomatic complexity, 10
D
data sources
BrowseOverﬂow app, adding topics, 133–136
question list, 158–169
testing, 143–146
debugging, 207
delegate protocols, object/implementation
independence, 202

--- Page 350 ---
deregistration, notiﬁcations, 149–151
designing
interfaces, 201
“fake” objects, 203
delegates, 202
non-Core Date implementations, 202
test-driven apps, 18
“Ya Ain’t Gonna Need It” principle, 205–206
displaying
question list, BrowseOverFlow app, 160–169
user avatars, BrowseOverﬂow app, 185–189
domain analysis, 67
BrowseOverﬂow app
Answer objects, 81–85
Person class, 75–76
questions, connecting to other classes, 76–80
Topic class, 68–75
E
editing code, “Ya Ain’t Gonna Need It” principle”,
206
encapsulation, 205
examples of testing practices, 7
expressing input and output ranges, 215
F
“fake” objects, designing to interface, 202
Feathers, Michael, 211
fetching content, NSURLConnection API, 113–114
ﬁxing bugs, cost of, 3
focused methods/classes, implementing, 204–205
Fowler, Martin, 19
FZAAsertTrue() macro, 28–29

--- Page 351 ---
G
“Gang of Four”, 19, 88
GHUnit, 47–48
goal of software testing, 2
“God class”, 127
Grand Central Dispatch, 207
GTM (Google Toolkit for Mac), 46
H-I
Hudson, 53–57
identifying inﬂection points, 210–212
improving readability of unit tests, 28–29
inﬂection points, identifying, 210–212
inheritance, 208
initial tests, writing, 209–210
inﬂection points, identifying, 210–212
refactoring, 213
input ranges, expressing, 215
inspecting unit test results, 26
integration tests, 4
interfaces, designing to, 201
“fake” objects, 203
delegates, 202
non-Core Data implementations, 202
introspection facility, Objective-C, 129
iterations, 6
J-K-L
Jenkins, 53
JSON, building questions (BrowseOverﬂow app), 102–
111

--- Page 352 ---
Kernighan, Brian, 207
legacy apps, testing, 213
library code, testing, 20
M
macros
FZAAssertTrue(), 28–29
OCUnit, 38
Martin, Robert C., 204
McConnell, Steve, 3
memory management, testing, 69
methods
private methods, testing, 100
replacing, 151–158
Single Responsibility principle, 204–205
mirroring class organization, 30
mock objects, OCMock, 50–52
model layer, BrowseOverﬂow app, 67
multiple unit tests, organizing, 29–32
N
networking code, NSURLConnection API, 113–114
notiﬁcations
registration, 149–151
testing, 140–142
NSURLConnection API, 113–114
O
Objective-C runtime, 129
methods, replacing, 151–158
OCMock, 50–52
OCUnit framework, 35

--- Page 353 ---
alternatives to
CATCH, 48–50
GHUnit, 47–48
GTM, 46
OCMock, 50–52
ranges of input and output, expressing, 215
unit testing, macros, 38
Xcode projects, conﬁguring, 36–46
organizing multiple unit tests, 29–32
output ranges, expressing, 215
P
penetration testing, 7
Person class, BrowseOverﬂow app, 75–76
Plauger, P.J., 207
private methods, testing, 100
Producer-Consumer pattern, 206
projects, BrowseOverﬂow app
Answer objects, 81–85
model layer, 67
Person class, 75–76
Question class, 73–75
questions, connecting to other classes, 76–80
setting up, 64–65
Topic class, 68–72
protocols, object/implementation independence, 202
Q
QA (Quality Assurance), 1
beta testers, 2
black box testing, 4
cost of ﬁxing, 3

--- Page 354 ---
software, when to test, 6–7
waterfall software project mangement process, 3–4
Question class, BrowseOverﬂow app, 73–75
questions, BrowseOverﬂow app
connecting to other classes, 76–80
creating, 88–102
creating from JSON, 102–111
data source, 158
displaying, 160–169
R
ranges of input and output, expressing, 215
readability of unit tests, improving, 28–29
red stage, 16
red green refactoring process, 15–17
refactoring, 15–19
initial tests, 213
unit tests, 32–34
in XCode, 133
registering notiﬁcations, 149–151
replacing methods, 151–158
requirements for unit testing, 23
results of unit tests
inspecting, 26
verifying, 26–28
retrieving content, NSURLConnection API, 113–114
reusability, UITableViewController class, 127
reuse identiﬁers, 136
reusing code, 205–206
running code with known input, 24–25
S

--- Page 355 ---
setting up BrowseOverﬂow app, 64–65
Single Responsibility principle, 204–205
singleton classes, “tell, don’t ask” principle”, 203
software testing
best practices
refactoring, 15–18
testing ﬁrst, 13–15
black box testing, 4
during development cycle, 21–22
examples of, 7
goal of, 2
unit testing, 7–11
CATCH, 48–50
code, running with known input, 24–25
Continuous Integration, 52–57
CruiseControl, 57–58
GHUnit, 47–48
GTM, 46
multiple tests, organizing, 29–32
OCMock, 50–52
readability, improving, 28–29
refactoring, 32–34
requirements, 23
results, inspecting, 26
results, verifying, 26–28
waterfall software project management process, 3–4
analysis paralysis, 4
bugs, cost of ﬁxing, 3
when to test, 6–7
source control systems, conﬁguring, 38
stackoverﬂow.com website, BrowseOverﬂow app, 59
Answer objects, 81–85

--- Page 356 ---
implementing, 63–64
model layer, 67
Person class, 75–76
Question class, 73–75
questions, connecting to other classes, 76–80
setting up, 64–65
Topic class, 68–72
use cases, 60–63
StackOverﬂowCommunicator class, 114–124
subclasses, inheritance, 208
swapping methods, 151–158
System Metaphor, 18
system tests, 4
T
table view (BrowseOverﬂow app), 135–137
“tell, don’t ask” principle, 203
test case ﬁxtures
BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests, 138, 147–148
TopicTableDataSource, 144–146
TopicTableDataSourceTests, 134–136
TopicTableDelegateTests, 143
test-driven apps, designing, 18
testing
concurrent code, 206–207
data sources, 143–146
during development cycle, 21–22
memory management, 69
notiﬁcations, 140–142
private methods, 100
views, 192–195, 199
testing frameworks

--- Page 357 ---
CATCH, 48–50
GHUnit, 47–48
Google Toolkit for Mac, 46
OCMock, 50–52
text case ﬁxtures
BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests, 128–132
TopicTableDelegateTests, 141–142
text ﬁxtures, 31
threading, 206–207
Topic class, BrowseOverﬂow app, 68–72
topics, adding to data source (BrowseOverﬂow app),
133–136
TopicTable DelegateTests test case ﬁxture, 143
TopicTableDataSource test case ﬁxture, 144–146
TopicTableDataSourceTests test case ﬁxture, 134–136
TopicTableDelegateTests test case ﬁxture, testing
notiﬁcation, 141–142
U
UITableViewController class, 127
unit testing, 7–11
BrowseOverﬂow app, table view, 136–137
code, running with known input, 24–25
Continuous Integration, 52
CruiseControl, 57–58
Hudson, 53–57
multiple tests, organizing, 29–32
OCUnit, macros, 38
readability, improving, 28–29
refactoring, 32–34
requirements, 23
results, inspecting, 26

--- Page 358 ---
results, verifying, 26–28
testing frameworks
CATCH, 48–50
GHUnit, 47–48
GTM, 46
OCMock, 50–52
usability testing, 7
use cases, BrowseOverﬂow app, 60–63
use versus reuse, 205–206
user avatars (BrowseOverﬂow app), displaying, 185–
189
V
verifying
BrowseOverﬂow app workﬂow, 171–174, 178–185
unit test results, 26–28
view controllers
BrowseOverﬂow app, 171–174, 178–185
BrowseOverﬂowViewControllerTests test case ﬁxture,
128–132, 147–148
methods, replacing with Objective-C runtime, 151–158
new view controllers, creating, 149
notiﬁcations, registration and deregistration, 149–151
reusability, 127
views
table view (BrowseOverﬂow app), 135–137
testing, 192–195, 199
W
waterfall software project management process, 3
analysis paralysis, 4
bugs, cost of ﬁxing, 3

--- Page 359 ---
workﬂow (BrowseOverﬂow app), verifying, 171–174,
178–185
writing
code
encapsulation, 205
Single Responsibility principle, 204–205
use versus reuse, 205–206
initial tests, 209
inﬂection points, identifying, 210–212
refactoring, 213
X-Y-Z
XCode
OCUnit framework, 35
projects, conﬁguring, 36–46
refactoring, 133
XP (Extreme Programming), 6
code smell, 17
System Metaphor, 18
test-driven development, best practices, 13–18
YAGNI, 19–21
“Ya Ain’t Gonna Need It” principle, 19–21, 205–206
OceanofPDF.com