--- Page 2 ---
1. Preface
1. The Scope of This Book
2. From the Preface to the First Edition (Programming iOS
4)
3. Versions
4. Acknowledgments
5. Conventions Used in This Book
6. Using Code Examples
7. O’Reilly Online Learning
8. How to Contact Us
2. I. Language
1. 1. The Architecture of Swift
1. Ground of Being
2. Everything Is an Object?
3. Three Flavors of Object Type
4. Variables
5. Functions
6. The Structure of a Swift File
7. Scope and Lifetime
8. Object Members
9. Namespaces
10. Modules
11. Instances

--- Page 3 ---
12. Why Instances?
13. The Keyword self
14. Privacy
15. Design
2. 2. Functions
1. Function Parameters and Return Value
1. Void Return Type and Parameters
2. Function Signature
2. External Parameter Names
3. Overloading
4. Default Parameter Values
5. Variadic Parameters
6. Ignored Parameters
7. Modifiable Parameters
1. Calling Objective-C with Modifiable
Parameters
2. Called by Objective-C with Modifiable
Parameters
3. Reference Type Modifiable Parameters
8. Function in Function
9. Recursion
10. Function as Value
11. Anonymous Functions
1. Using Anonymous Functions Inline

--- Page 4 ---
2. Anonymous Function Abbreviated Syntax
12. Define-and-Call
13. Closures
1. How Closures Improve Code
2. Function Returning Function
3. Closure Setting a Captured Variable
4. Closure Preserving Captured Environment
5. Escaping Closures
14. Curried Functions
15. Function References and Selectors
1. Function Reference Scope
2. Selectors
3. 3. Variables and Simple Types
1. Variable Scope and Lifetime
2. Variable Declaration
3. Computed Variable Initialization
4. Computed Variables
1. Computed Properties
2. Property Wrappers
5. Setter Observers
6. Lazy Initialization
1. Singleton
2. Lazy Initialization of Instance Properties

--- Page 5 ---
7. Built-In Simple Types
1. Bool
2. Numbers
3. String
4. Character and String Index
5. Range
6. Tuple
7. Optional
4. 4. Object Types
1. Object Type Declarations and Features
1. Initializers
2. Properties
3. Methods
4. Subscripts
5. Nested Object Types
2. Enums
1. Raw Values
2. Associated Values
3. Enum Case Iteration
4. Enum Initializers
5. Enum Properties
6. Enum Methods
7. Why Enums?
3. Structs

--- Page 6 ---
1. Struct Initializers
2. Struct Properties
3. Struct Methods
4. Struct as Namespace
4. Classes
1. Value Types and Reference Types
2. Subclass and Superclass
3. Class Initializers
4. Class Deinitializer
5. Class Properties
6. Static/Class Members
5. Polymorphism
6. Casting
1. Casting Down
2. Type Testing and Casting Down Safely
3. Type Testing and Casting Optionals
4. Bridging to Objective-C
7. Type References
1. From Instance to Type
2. From self to Type
3. Type as Value
4. Summary of Type Terminology
5. Comparing Types
8. Protocols

--- Page 7 ---
1. Why Protocols?
2. Adopting a Library Protocol
3. Protocol Type Testing and Casting
4. Declaring a Protocol
5. Protocol Composition
6. Class Protocols
7. Optional Protocol Members
8. Implicitly Required Initializers
9. Expressible by Literal
9. Generics
1. Generic Declarations
2. Contradictory Resolution Is Impossible
3. Type Constraints
4. Explicit Specialization
5. Generic Invariance
6. Associated Type Chains
7. Where Clauses
10. Extensions
1. Extending Protocols
2. Extending Generics
11. Umbrella Types
1. Any
2. AnyObject
3. AnyClass

--- Page 8 ---
12. Collection Types
1. Array
2. Dictionary
3. Set
5. 5. Flow Control and More
1. Flow Control
1. Branching
2. Loops
3. Jumping
2. Privacy
1. Private and Fileprivate
2. Public and Open
3. Privacy Rules
3. Introspection
4. Operators
5. Memory Management
1. Memory Management of Reference Types
2. Exclusive Access to Value Types
6. Miscellaneous Swift Language Features
1. Synthesized Protocol Implementations
2. Key Paths
3. Instance as Function
4. Dynamic Membership

--- Page 9 ---
5. Property Wrappers
6. Custom String Interpolation
7. Reverse Generics
8. Function Builders
9. Result
3. II. IDE
1. 6. Anatomy of an Xcode Project
1. New Project
2. The Project Window
1. The Navigator Pane
2. The Inspectors Pane
3. The Editor
3. Project File and Dependents
1. Contents of the Project Folder
2. Groups
4. The Target
1. Build Phases
2. Build Settings
3. Configurations
4. Schemes and Destinations
5. From Project to Built App
1. Build Settings
2. Property List Settings

--- Page 10 ---
3. Nib Files
4. Resources
5. Code Files
6. Frameworks, SDKs, and Packages
6. The App Launch Process
1. The Entry Point
2. How an App Gets Going
3. App Without a Storyboard
7. Renaming Parts of a Project
2. 7. Nib Files
1. The Nib Editor Interface
1. Document Outline
2. Canvas
3. Inspectors
2. Loading a Nib
1. Loading a View Controller Nib
2. Loading a Main View Nib
3. Loading a View Nib Manually
3. Connections
1. Outlets
2. The Nib Owner
3. Automatically Configured Nibs
4. Misconfigured Outlets

--- Page 11 ---
5. Deleting an Outlet
6. More Ways to Create Outlets
7. Outlet Collections
8. Action Connections
9. More Ways to Create Actions
10. Misconfigured Actions
11. Connections Between Nibs — Not!
4. Additional Configuration of Nib-Based Instances
3. 8. Documentation
1. The Documentation Window
2. Class Documentation Pages
3. Quick Help
4. Symbol Declarations
5. Header Files
6. Sample Code
7. Internet Resources
4. 9. Life Cycle of a Project
1. Environmental Dependencies
1. Conditional Compilation
2. Build Action
3. Permissible Runtime Environment
4. Backward Compatibility
5. Device Type
6. Arguments and Environment Variables

--- Page 12 ---
2. Version Control
3. Editing and Navigating Your Code
1. Text Editing Preferences
2. Multiple Selection
3. Autocompletion and Placeholders
4. Snippets
5. Refactoring and Structure Editing
6. Fix-it and Live Syntax Checking
7. Navigation
8. Finding
4. Running in the Simulator
5. Debugging
1. Caveman Debugging
2. The Xcode Debugger
6. Testing
1. Unit Tests
2. Interface Tests
3. Test Plans
4. Massaging the Report
7. Clean
8. Running on a Device
1. Obtaining a Developer Program Membership
2. Signing an App
3. Automatic Signing

--- Page 13 ---
4. Manual Signing
5. Running the App
6. Managing Development Certificates and
Devices
9. Profiling
1. Gauges
2. Memory Debugging
3. Instruments
10. Localization
1. Creating Localized Content
2. Testing Localization
11. Distribution
1. Making an Archive
2. The Distribution Certificate
3. The Distribution Profile
4. Distribution for Testing
5. Final App Preparations
6. Screenshots and Video Previews
7. Property List Settings
8. Submission to the App Store
4. III. Cocoa
1. 10. Cocoa Classes
1. Subclassing
2. Categories and Extensions

--- Page 14 ---
1. How Swift Uses Extensions
2. How You Use Extensions
3. How Cocoa Uses Categories
3. Protocols
1. Optional Members
2. Informal Protocols
4. Some Foundation Classes
1. NSRange
2. NSNotFound
3. NSString and Friends
4. NSDate and Friends
5. NSNumber
6. NSValue
7. NSData
8. NSMeasurement and Friends
9. Equality, Hashability, and Comparison
10. NSArray and NSMutableArray
11. NSDictionary and NSMutableDictionary
12. NSSet and Friends
13. NSIndexSet
14. NSNull
15. Immutable and Mutable
16. Property Lists
17. Codable

--- Page 15 ---
5. Accessors, Properties, and Key–Value Coding
1. Swift Accessors
2. Key–Value Coding
3. How Outlets Work
4. Cocoa Key Paths
5. Uses of Key–Value Coding
6. KeyPath Notation
6. The Secret Life of NSObject
2. 11. Cocoa Events
1. Reasons for Events
2. Subclassing
3. Notifications
1. Receiving a Notification
2. Unregistering
3. Posting a Notification
4. Timer
4. Delegation
1. Cocoa Delegation
2. Implementing Delegation
5. Data Sources
6. Actions
1. The Responder Chain
2. Nil-Targeted Actions

--- Page 16 ---
7. Key–Value Observing
1. Registration and Notification
2. Unregistering
3. Key–Value Observing Example
8. Swamped by Events
9. Delayed Performance
3. 12. Memory Management
1. Principles of Cocoa Memory Management
2. Rules of Cocoa Memory Management
3. What ARC Is and What It Does
4. How Cocoa Objects Manage Memory
5. Autorelease Pool
6. Memory Management of Instance Properties
7. Retain Cycles and Weak References
8. Unusual Memory Management Situations
1. Notification Observers
2. KVO Observers
3. Timers
4. Other Unusual Situations
9. Nib Loading and Memory Management
10. Memory Management of CFTypeRefs
11. Property Memory Management Policies
12. Debugging Memory Management Mistakes
4. 13. Communication Between Objects

--- Page 17 ---
1. Visibility Through an Instance Property
2. Visibility by Instantiation
3. Getting a Reference
1. Visibility by Relationship
2. Global Visibility
4. Notifications and Key–Value Observing
5. The Combine Framework
6. Alternative Architectures
1. Model–View–Controller
2. Router and Data Space
3. Model–View–Presenter
4. Protocols and Reactive Programming
5. VIPER
7. SwiftUI
1. Function Builders and Modifiers
2. State Properties
3. Bindings
4. Passing Data Downhill
5. Passing Data Uphill
6. Custom State Objects
5. A. C, Objective-C, and Swift
1. The C Language
1. C Data Types
2. C Enums

--- Page 18 ---
3. C Structs
4. C Pointers
5. C Arrays
6. C Strings
7. C Functions
2. Objective-C
1. Objective-C Objects and C Pointers
2. Objective-C Objects and Swift Objects
3. Exposure of Swift to Objective-C
4. Bridged Types and Boxed Types
5. Objective-C Methods
6. Selectors
7. CFTypeRefs
8. Blocks
9. API Markup
3. Bilingual Targets
5. Index

--- Page 19 ---
iOS 14 Programming
Fundamentals with Swift
SEVENTH EDITION
Swift, Xcode, and Cocoa Basics
Matt Neuburg

--- Page 20 ---
iOS 14 Programming Fundamentals with Swift, Seventh
Edition
by Matt Neuburg
Copyright © 2021 Matt Neuburg. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway
North, Sebastopol, CA 95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales
promotional use. Online editions are also available for most titles
(http://oreilly.com). For more information, contact our
corporate/institutional sales department: 800-998-9938 or
corporate@oreilly.com.
 
 
 
   
Editor: Rachel Roumeliotis
 
   
 
   
Indexer: Matt Neuburg
 
   
 
   
Production Editor: Kristen Brown
 
   
 
   
Cover Designer: Karen Montgomery
 
   
 
   
Proofreader: O’Reilly Production Services
 
   
Interior Designer: David Futato

--- Page 21 ---
 
   
 
   
 
   
Illustrator: Matt Neuburg
 
   
April 2015: First Edition
October 2015: Second Edition
October 2016: Third Edition
October 2017: Fourth Edition
September 2018: Fifth Edition
October 2019: Sixth Edition
October 2020: Seventh Edition
Revision History for the Seventh Edition
2020-09-23: First Release
See http://oreilly.com/catalog/errata.csp?isbn=9781492092094 for
release details.
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
iOS 14 Programming Fundamentals with Swift, the image of a harp
seal, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
The views expressed in this work are those of the author, and do not
represent the publisher’s views. While the publisher and the author
have used good faith efforts to ensure that the information and

--- Page 22 ---
instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and the
author disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including
without limitation responsibility for damages resulting from the use
of or reliance on this work. Use of the information and instructions
contained in this work is at your own risk. If any code samples or
other technology this work contains or describes is subject to open
source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your
responsibility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such
licenses and/or rights.
ISBN: 978-1-492-09209-4
[GP]

--- Page 23 ---
Preface
Ten years ago, in July of 2010, Chris Lattner created a folder on his
computer called Shiny, and a new computer language was born. Four
years later, in 2014, that language, renamed Swift, was introduced to
the public, and was greeted with a mixture of surprise and excitement
— and skepticism.
Prior to that moment, Cocoa programming, on iOS and before that on
Mac OS, had always been done chiefly in Objective-C. The Cocoa
frameworks that give an iOS app its functionality are based on
Objective-C; they expect to be spoken to in Objective-C. The
tradition of using Objective-C was long and deeply ingrained. For all
its faults, Objective-C was the language we had all learned to live
with as the price of programming Cocoa. Could Cocoa be spoken to
in a whole new language? Could this new language replace
Objective-C as the iOS developer’s language of choice?
No one knew. I certainly didn’t know! So the first thing I did, as an
experiment, was to try translating my own existing iOS apps into
Swift. Not only was I able to do it, but I found the new Swift versions
easier to understand and maintain than their Objective-C originals.
From that moment, I was convinced that the vast majority of new iOS
programmers would hitherto adopt Swift. I was right.

--- Page 24 ---
Swift is a superb language to learn, even (perhaps especially) if
you’ve never programmed before, and is the easiest and clearest way
to program iOS. It has these salient features:
Object-orientation
Swift is a modern, object-oriented language. It is purely object-
oriented: “Everything is an object.”
Clarity
Swift is easy to read and easy to write. Its syntax is clear,
consistent, and explicit, with few hidden shortcuts and minimal
syntactic trickery.
Safety
Swift enforces strong typing to ensure that it knows, and that you
know, what the type of every object reference is at every moment.
Economy
Swift is a fairly small language, providing some basic types and
functionalities and no more. The rest must be provided by your
code, or by libraries of code that you use — such as Cocoa.
Memory management
Swift manages memory automatically. You will rarely have to
concern yourself with memory management.
Cocoa compatibility
The Cocoa APIs are written primarily in C and Objective-C.
Swift is explicitly designed to interface with most of the Cocoa
APIs.

--- Page 25 ---
Earlier editions of this book, before 2014, taught the reader
Objective-C. After 2014, they teach Swift. This edition is geared to
Swift 5.3. The Swift language has reached a high state of maturity. It
has achieved ABI stability, which means that the Swift language has
become part of the system. Swift apps are smaller and faster than
ever.
The Foundation and Cocoa APIs, however, are still written in C and
Objective-C. To interact with them, you might have to know what
those languages would expect. Therefore in this book I describe
Objective-C in enough detail to allow you to read it when you
encounter it in the documentation and on the internet, and I
occasionally show some Objective-C code. Part III, on Cocoa, is
largely about learning to think the way Objective-C thinks — because
the structure and behavior of the Cocoa APIs are fundamentally
based on Objective-C. And the book ends with an appendix that
details how Swift and Objective-C communicate with one another, as
well as explaining how your app can be written partly in Swift and
partly in Objective-C.
The Scope of This Book
This book is intended to accompany and precede Programming iOS
14, which picks up where this book leaves off. If writing an iOS
program is like building a house of bricks, this book teaches you what
a brick is and how to handle it, while Programming iOS 14 shows
you some actual bricks and tells you how to assemble them.

--- Page 26 ---
When you have read this book, you’ll know about Swift, Xcode, and
the underpinnings of the Cocoa framework, and you will be ready to
proceed directly to Programming iOS 14. Conversely, Programming
iOS 14 assumes a knowledge of this book; it begins, like Homer’s
Iliad, in the middle of the story, with the reader jumping with all four
feet into views and view controllers, and with a knowledge of the
language and the Xcode IDE already presupposed. If you started
reading Programming iOS 14 and wondered about such unexplained
matters as Swift language basics, the UIApplicationMain function,
the nib-loading mechanism, Cocoa patterns of delegation and
notification, and retain cycles, wonder no longer — I didn’t explain
them there because I do explain them here.
This book doesn’t show how to write any particularly interesting iOS
apps, but it does constantly use my own real apps and real
programming situations to illustrate and motivate its explanations, as
it teaches you the underlying basis of iOS programming. It has three
parts:
Part I introduces the Swift language, from the ground up — I do
not assume that you know any other programming languages. My
way of teaching Swift is different from other treatments, such as
Apple’s; it is systematic and Euclidean, with pedagogical building
blocks piled on one another in what I regard as the most helpful
order. At the same time, I have tried to confine myself to the
essentials. Swift is not a big language, but it has some subtle and
unusual corners that you probably don’t need to know about. Also,
I never mention Swift playgrounds or the REPL. My focus here is
real-life iOS programming, and my explanation of Swift

--- Page 27 ---
concentrates on the practical aspects of the language that actually
come into play in the course of programming iOS.
Part II turns to Xcode, the world in which all iOS programming
ultimately takes place. It explains what an Xcode project is and
how it is transformed into an app, and how to work comfortably
and nimbly with Xcode to consult the documentation and to write,
navigate, and debug code, as well as how to bring your app
through the subsequent stages of running on a device and
submission to the App Store. There is also a chapter on nibs and
the nib editor (Interface Builder), including outlets and actions as
well as the mechanics of nib loading (but such specialized topics
as autolayout constraints in the nib are postponed to the other
book).
Part III introduces the Cocoa Touch framework. The Foundation
and UIKit frameworks, and other frameworks that they entail,
constitute Cocoa, which provides the underlying functionality that
any iOS app needs to have. To use a framework effectively, you
have to think the way the framework thinks, put your code where
the framework expects it, and fulfill many obligations imposed on
you by the framework. Also, Cocoa uses Objective-C, so you need
to know how your Swift code will interface with Cocoa’s features
and behaviors. Cocoa provides important foundational classes and
adds linguistic and architectural devices such as categories,
protocols, delegation, and notifications, as well as the pervasive
responsibilities of memory management. Key–value coding and
key–value observing are also discussed here.
The last chapter of Part III is about the general problem of how
objects can refer to one another in an iOS program. In addition to
the traditional Cocoa-based solutions, I also discuss the new Swift
Combine framework. Also, in June of 2019, Apple introduced
SwiftUI. It constitutes an alternative to UIKit and Cocoa, with a
completely different programming paradigm for constructing apps.
I do not teach SwiftUI in this book — that would require another

--- Page 28 ---
entire book — but I do explain its chief linguistic features, and I
talk about its solutions to the problem of communicating between
objects within an iOS app and how they differ from Cocoa
patterns.
From the Preface to the First Edition
(Programming iOS 4)
The popularity of the iPhone, with its largely free or very inexpensive
apps, and the subsequent popularity of the iPad, have brought and
will continue to bring into the fold many new programmers who see
programming for these devices as worthwhile and doable, even
though they may not have felt the same way about OS X. Apple’s
own annual WWDC developer conventions have reflected this trend,
with their emphasis shifted from OS X to iOS instruction.
The widespread eagerness to program iOS, however, though
delightful on the one hand, has also fostered a certain tendency to try
to run without first learning to walk. iOS gives the programmer
mighty powers that can seem as limitless as imagination itself, but it
also has fundamentals. I often see questions online from
programmers who are evidently deep into the creation of some
interesting app, but who are stymied in a way that reveals quite
clearly that they are unfamiliar with the basics of the very world in
which they are so happily cavorting.
It is this state of affairs that has motivated me to write this book,
which is intended to ground the reader in the fundamentals of iOS.
Here I have attempted to marshal and expound, in what I hope is a

--- Page 29 ---
pedagogically helpful and instructive yet ruthlessly Euclidean and
logical order, the principles and elements on which sound iOS
programming rests. My hope, as with my previous books, is that you
will both read this book cover to cover (learning something new often
enough to keep you turning the pages) and keep it by you as a handy
reference.
This book is not intended to disparage Apple’s own documentation
and example projects. They are wonderful resources and have
become more wonderful as time goes on. I have depended heavily on
them in the preparation of this book. But I also find that they don’t
fulfill the same function as a reasoned, ordered presentation of the
facts. The online documentation must make assumptions as to how
much you already know; it can’t guarantee that you’ll approach it in a
given order. And online documentation is more suitable to reference
than to instruction. A fully written example, no matter how well
commented, is difficult to follow; it demonstrates, but it does not
teach.
A book, on the other hand, has numbered chapters and sequential
pages; I can assume you know views before you know view
controllers for the simple reason that Part I precedes Part II. And
along with facts, I also bring to the table a degree of experience,
which I try to communicate to you. Throughout this book you’ll find
me referring to “common beginner mistakes”; in most cases, these are
mistakes that I have made myself, in addition to seeing others make
them. I try to tell you what the pitfalls are because I assume that, in
the course of things, you will otherwise fall into them just as naturally
as I did as I was learning. You’ll also see me construct many

--- Page 30 ---
examples piece by piece or extract and explain just one tiny portion
of a larger app. It is not a massive finished program that teaches
programming, but an exposition of the thought process that
developed that program. It is this thought process, more than
anything else, that I hope you will gain from reading this book.
Versions
This book is geared to Swift 5.3, iOS 14, and Xcode 12.
In general, only very minimal attention is given to earlier versions of
iOS and Xcode. Earlier versions can be very different from the
current version, and it would be impossible to go into detail about all
that has changed over the years. Besides, that information is readily
and compendiously available in my earlier books. Recent innovations
are called out clearly. The book does contain some advice about
backward compatibility (especially in Chapter 9).
I generally give method names in Swift, in the style of a function
reference (as described in Chapter 2) — that is, the name plus
parentheses containing the parameter labels followed by colon. Now
and then, if a method is already under discussion and there is no
ambiguity, I’ll use the bare name. In a few places, such as
Appendix A, where the Objective-C language is explicitly under
discussion, I use Objective-C method names.
I have tried to keep my code up-to-date right up to the moment when
the manuscript left my hands; but if, at some future time, a new
version of Xcode is released along with a new version of Swift, some

--- Page 31 ---
of the code in this book, and even some information about Swift
itself, might be slightly incorrect. Please make allowances, and be
prepared to compensate.
Screenshots of Xcode were taken using Xcode 12 under macOS 11
Big Sur. I have waited until the last moment before publication to
take these screenshots; I don’t expect the interface to have changed
significantly by the time you read this, and if it does, the difference
shouldn’t cause any confusion.
Acknowledgments
This book was written with the aid of some wonderful software:
Git (http://git-scm.com)
Sourcetree (http://www.sourcetreeapp.com)
TextMate (http://macromates.com)
AsciiDoc (http://www.methods.co.nz/asciidoc)
Asciidoctor (http://asciidoctor.org)
BBEdit (http://barebones.com/products/bbedit)
EasyFind (https://www.devontechnologies.com/support/download)
Snapz Pro X (http://www.ambrosiasw.com)
GraphicConverter (http://www.lemkesoft.com)
OmniGraffle (http://www.omnigroup.com)

--- Page 32 ---
At O’Reilly Media, many people have made writing this book fun
and easy; particular thanks go to Kristen Brown, Rachel Roumeliotis,
Dan Fauxsmith, Adam Witwer, Nick Adams, Heather Scherer,
Melanie Yarbrough, Sarah Schneider, and Sanders Kleinfeld. My first
editor was Brian Jepson; his influence is present throughout.
Finally, a special thanks to my beloved wife, Charlotte Wilson, for
her sharp eye, her critical ear, and her unflagging encouragement.
This book could not have been written without her.
Conventions Used in This Book
The following typographical conventions are used in this book:
Italic
Indicates new terms, URLs, email addresses, filenames, and file
extensions.
Constant width
Used for program listings, as well as within paragraphs to refer to
program elements such as variable or function names, databases,
data types, environment variables, statements, and keywords.
Constant width bold
Shows commands or other text that should be typed literally by
the user.
Constant width italic
Shows text that should be replaced with user-supplied values or
by values determined by context.

--- Page 33 ---
TIP
This element signifies a tip or suggestion.
NOTE
This element signifies a general note.
WARNING
This element indicates a warning or caution.
Using Code Examples
Supplemental material (code examples, exercises, etc.) is available
for download at http://github.com/mattneub/Programming-iOS-Book-
Examples.
This book is here to help you get your job done. In general, if
example code is offered with this book, you may use it in your
programs and documentation. You do not need to contact us for
permission unless you’re reproducing a significant portion of the
code. For example, writing a program that uses several chunks of
code from this book does not require permission. Selling or
distributing a CD-ROM of examples from O’Reilly books does
require permission. Answering a question by citing this book and

--- Page 34 ---
quoting example code does not require permission. Incorporating a
significant amount of example code from this book into your
product’s documentation does require permission.
We appreciate, but do not require, attribution. An attribution usually
includes the title, author, publisher, and ISBN. For example: “iOS 14
Programming Fundamentals with Swift by Matt Neuburg (O’Reilly).
Copyright 2021 Matt Neuburg, 978-1-492-09209-4.”
If you feel your use of code examples falls outside fair use or the
permission given above, feel free to contact us at
permissions@oreilly.com.
O’Reilly Online Learning
NOTE
For almost 40 years, O’Reilly Media has provided technology and business
training, knowledge, and insight to help companies succeed.
Our unique network of experts and innovators share their knowledge
and expertise through books, articles, and our online learning
platform. O’Reilly’s online learning platform gives you on-demand
access to live training courses, in-depth learning paths, interactive
coding environments, and a vast collection of text and video from
O’Reilly and 200+ other publishers. For more information, please
visit http://oreilly.com.

--- Page 35 ---
How to Contact Us
Please address comments and questions concerning this book to the
publisher:
O’Reilly Media, Inc.
1005 Gravenstein Highway North
Sebastopol, CA 95472
800-998-9938 (in the United States or Canada)
707-829-0515 (international or local)
707-829-0104 (fax)
We have a web page for this book, where we list errata, examples,
and any additional information. You can access this page at
https://oreil.ly/ios14-prog-fundamentals.
To comment or ask technical questions about this book, send email to
bookquestions@oreilly.com.
For news and more information about our books and courses, see our
website at http://www.oreilly.com.
Find us on Facebook: http://facebook.com/oreilly
Follow us on Twitter: http://twitter.com/oreillymedia
Watch us on YouTube: http://www.youtube.com/oreillymedia

--- Page 36 ---
Part I. Language
This part of the book teaches the Swift language, from the ground up.
The description is rigorous and orderly. Here you’ll become
sufficiently conversant with Swift to be comfortable with it, so that
you can proceed to the practical business of actual programming.
Chapter 1 surveys the structure of a Swift program, both
physically and conceptually. You’ll learn how Swift code files are
organized, and you’ll be introduced to the most important
underlying concepts of the object-oriented Swift language:
variables and functions, scopes and namespaces, object types and
their instances.
Chapter 2 explores Swift functions. We start with the basics of
how functions are declared and called; then we discuss parameters
— external parameter names, default parameters, and variadic
parameters. Then we dive deep into the power of Swift functions,
with an explanation of functions inside functions, functions as
first-class values, anonymous functions, functions as closures,
curried functions, and function references and selectors.
Chapter 3 starts with Swift variables — their scope and lifetime,
and how they are declared and initialized, along with features such
as computed variables and setter observers. Then some important
built-in Swift types are introduced, including Booleans, numbers,
strings, ranges, tuples, and Optionals.

--- Page 37 ---
Chapter 4 is all about Swift object types — classes, structs, and
enums. It explains how these three object types work, and how
you declare, instantiate, and use them. Then it proceeds to
polymorphism and casting, protocols, generics, and extensions.
The chapter concludes with a discussion of Swift’s umbrella types,
such as Any and AnyObject, and collection types — Array,
Dictionary, and Set (including option sets).
Chapter 5 is a miscellany. We start with Swift’s flow control
structures for branching, looping, and jumping, including error
handling. Then I describe Swift access control (privacy),
introspection (reflection), and how to create your own operators.
Next I talk about Swift memory management. The chapter ends
with a survey of some recently added Swift language features:
synthesized protocol implementations, key paths, instances as
functions, dynamic members, property wrappers, custom string
interpolation, reverse generics, function builders, and Result.

--- Page 38 ---
Chapter 1. The Architecture
of Swift
It will be useful at the outset for you to have a general sense of how
the Swift language is constructed and what a Swift-based iOS
program looks like. This chapter will survey the overall architecture
and nature of the Swift language. Subsequent chapters will fill in the
details.
Ground of Being
A complete Swift command is a statement. A Swift text file consists
of multiple lines of text. Line breaks are meaningful. The typical
layout of a program is one statement, one line:
print("hello") 
print("world")
(The print command provides instant feedback in the Xcode
console.)
You can combine more than one statement on a line, but then you
need to put a semicolon between them:
print("hello"); print("world")

--- Page 39 ---
You are free to put a semicolon at the end of a statement that is last or
alone on its line, but no one ever does (except out of habit, because C
and Objective-C require the semicolon):
print("hello"); 
print("world");
Conversely, a single statement can be broken into multiple lines, to
prevent long statements from becoming long lines. But you should try
to do this at sensible places so as not to confuse Swift. After an
opening parenthesis is a good place:
print( 
    "world")
Comments are everything after two slashes in a line (so-called C++-
style comments):
print("world") // this is a comment, so Swift ignores it
You can also enclose comments in /*...*/, as in C. Unlike C, C-
style comments can be nested.
Many constructs in Swift use curly braces as delimiters:
class Dog { 
    func bark() { 
        print("woof") 
    } 
}

--- Page 40 ---
By convention, the contents of curly braces are preceded and
followed by line breaks and are indented for clarity, as shown in the
preceding code. Xcode will help impose this convention, but the truth
is that Swift doesn’t care, and layouts like this are legal (and are
sometimes more convenient):
class Dog { func bark() { print("woof") }}
Swift is a compiled language. This means that your code must build
— passing through the compiler and being turned from text into some
lower-level form that a computer can understand — before it can run
and actually do the things it says to do. The Swift compiler is very
strict; in the course of writing a program, you will often try to build
and run, only to discover that you can’t even build in the first place,
because the compiler will flag some error, which you will have to fix
if you want the code to run. Less often, the compiler will let you off
with a warning; the code can run, but in general you should take
warnings seriously and fix whatever they are telling you about. The
strictness of the compiler is one of Swift’s greatest strengths, and
provides your code with a large measure of audited correctness even
before it ever runs.
The Swift compiler’s error and warning messages range from the
insightful to the obtuse to the downright misleading. You will
sometimes know that something is wrong with a line of code, but the
Swift compiler might not be telling you clearly exactly what is wrong
or even where in the line to focus your attention (though Xcode 12
contains some significant improvements in this regard). My advice in
these situations is to pull the line apart into several lines of simpler

--- Page 41 ---
code until you reach a point where you can work out what the issue
is. Try to love the compiler even when its messages seem mysterious;
remember, it knows more than you do.
Everything Is an Object?
In Swift, “everything is an object.” That’s a boast common to various
modern object-oriented languages, but what does it mean? Well, that
depends on what you mean by “object” — and what you mean by
“everything.”
Let’s start by stipulating that an object, roughly speaking, is
something you can send a message to. A message, roughly speaking,
is an imperative instruction. For example, you can give commands to
a dog: “Bark!” “Sit!” In this analogy, those phrases are messages, and
the dog is the object to which you are sending those messages.
In Swift, the syntax of message-sending is dot-notation. We start with
the object; then there’s a dot (a period); then there’s the message.
(Some messages are also followed by parentheses, but ignore them
for now; the full syntax of message-sending is one of those details
we’ll be filling in later.) This is valid Swift syntax:
fido.bark() 
rover.sit()
By the way, a dot is also another good place to break up a long line
(before the dot):

--- Page 42 ---
fido 
    .bark()
The idea of everything being an object is a way of suggesting that
even “primitive” linguistic entities can be sent messages. Take, for
example, 1. It appears to be a literal digit and no more. It will not
surprise you, if you’ve ever used any programming language, that
you can say things like this in Swift:
let sum = 1 + 2
But it is surprising to find that 1 can be followed by a dot and a
message. This is legal and meaningful in Swift (don’t worry about
what it actually means):
let s = 1.description
But we can go further. Return to that innocent-looking 1 + 2 from
our earlier code. It turns out that this is actually a kind of syntactic
trickery, a convenient way of expressing and hiding what’s really
going on. Just as 1 is actually an object, + is actually a message; but
it’s a message with special syntax (operator syntax). In Swift, every
noun is an object, and every verb is a message.
Perhaps the ultimate acid test for whether something is an object in
Swift is whether you can modify it. An object type can be extended in
Swift, meaning that you can define your own messages on that type.
For example, you can’t normally send the sayHello message to a
number, but you can change a number type so that you can:

--- Page 43 ---
extension Int { 
    func sayHello() { 
        print("Hello, I'm \(self)") 
    } 
} 
1.sayHello() // outputs: "Hello, I'm 1"
In Swift, then, 1 is an object. In some languages, such as Objective-C,
it clearly is not; it is a “primitive” or scalar built-in data type. So the
distinction being drawn here is between object types on the one hand
and scalars on the other. In Swift, there are no scalars; all types are
ultimately object types. That’s what “everything is an object” really
means.
Three Flavors of Object Type
If you know Objective-C or some other object-oriented language, you
may be surprised by Swift’s notion of what kind of object 1 is. In
many languages, such as Objective-C, an object is a class or an
instance of a class (I’ll explain later what an instance is). Swift has
classes, but 1 in Swift is not a class or an instance of a class: the type
of 1, namely Int, is a struct, and 1 is an instance of a struct. And Swift
has yet another kind of thing you can send messages to, called an
enum.
So Swift has three kinds of object type: classes, structs, and enums. I
like to refer to these as the three flavors of object type. Exactly how
they differ from one another will emerge in due course. But they are
all very definitely object types, and their similarities to one another

--- Page 44 ---
are far stronger than their differences. For now, just bear in mind that
these three flavors exist.
(The fact that a struct or enum is an object type in Swift will surprise
you particularly if you know Objective-C. Objective-C has structs
and enums, but they are not objects. Swift structs, in particular, are
much more important and pervasive than Objective-C structs. This
difference between how Swift views structs and enums and how
Objective-C views them can matter when you are talking to Cocoa.)
Variables
A variable is a name for an object. Technically, it refers to an object;
it is an object reference. Nontechnically, you can think of it as a
shoebox into which an object is placed. The object may undergo
changes, or it may be replaced inside the shoebox by another object,
but the name has an integrity all its own. The object to which the
variable refers is the variable’s value.
In Swift, no variable comes implicitly into existence; all variables
must be declared. If you need a name for something, you must say
“I’m creating a name.” You do this with one of two keywords: let or
var. In Swift, declaration is usually accompanied by initialization —
you use an equal sign to give the variable a value immediately, as part
of the declaration. These are both variable declarations (and
initializations):
let one = 1 
var two = 2

--- Page 45 ---
Once the name exists, you are free to use it. We can change the value
of two to be the same as the value of one:
let one = 1 
var two = 2 
two = one
The last line of that code uses both the name one and the name two
declared in the first two lines: the name one, on the right side of the
equal sign, is used merely to refer to the value inside the shoebox one
(namely 1); but the name two, on the left side of the equal sign, is
used to replace the value inside the shoebox two. Before saying two
= one, the value of two was 2; afterward, it is 1.
A statement with a variable name on the left side of an equal sign is
called an assignment, and the equal sign is the assignment operator.
The equal sign is not an assertion of equality, as it might be in an
algebraic formula; it is a command. It means: “Get the value of
what’s on the right side of me, and use it to replace the value of
what’s on the left side of me.”
The two kinds of variable declaration differ in that a name declared
with let cannot have its initial value replaced. A variable declared
with let is a constant; its value is assigned once and stays. This
won’t even compile:
let one = 1 
var two = 2 
one = two // compile error

--- Page 46 ---
It is always possible to declare a name with var to give yourself the
most flexibility, but if you know you’re never going to replace the
initial value of a variable, it’s better to use let, as this permits Swift
to behave more efficiently — in fact, the Swift compiler will call
your attention to any case of your using var where you could have
used let, offering to change it for you.
Variables also have a type. This type is established when the variable
is declared and can never change. This won’t compile:
var two = 2 
two = "hello" // compile error
Once two is declared and initialized as 2, it is a number (properly
speaking, an Int) and it must always be so. You can replace its value
with 1 because that’s also an Int, but you can’t replace its value with
"hello" because that’s a string (properly speaking, a String) — and a
String is not an Int.
Variables literally have a life of their own — more accurately, a
lifetime of their own. As long as a variable exists, it keeps its value
alive. Thus, a variable can be not only a way of conveniently naming
something, but also a way of preserving it. I’ll have more to say
about that later.

--- Page 47 ---
WARNING
By convention, type names such as String or Int (or Dog) start with a capital
letter; variable names start with a small letter. Do not violate this convention. If
you do, your code might still compile and run just fine, but I will personally
send agents to your house to remove your kneecaps in the dead of night.
Functions
Executable code, like fido.bark() or one = two or print("hell
o"), cannot go just anywhere in your program. Failure to appreciate
this fact is a common beginner mistake, and can result in a
mysterious compile error message such as “Expected declaration.”
In general, executable code must live inside the body of a function. A
function is a batch of code that can be told, as a batch, to run. Its body
is delimited by curly braces. Typically, a function has a name, and it
gets that name through a function declaration. Function declaration
syntax is another of those details that will be filled in later, but here’s
an example:
func go() { 
    let one = 1 
    var two = 2 
    two = one 
}
That describes a sequence of things to do — declare one, declare two,
change the value of two to match the value of one — and it gives that
sequence a name, go; but it doesn’t perform the sequence. The

--- Page 48 ---
sequence is performed when someone calls the function. Thus, we
might say, elsewhere:
go()
That is a command to the go function that it should actually run. But
again, that command is itself executable code, so it cannot live on its
own either. It might live in the body of a different function:
func doGo() { 
    go() 
}
But wait! This is getting a little nutty. That, too, is just a function
declaration; to run it, someone must call doGo by saying doGo() —
and that’s executable code too. This seems like some kind of infinite
regression; it looks like none of our code will ever run. If all
executable code has to live in a function, who will tell any function to
run? The initial impetus must come from somewhere.
In real life, fortunately, this regression problem doesn’t arise.
Remember that your goal is ultimately to write an iOS app. Your app
will be run on an iOS device (or the Simulator) by a runtime that
already wants to call certain functions. So you start by writing special
functions that you know the runtime itself will call. That gives your
app a way to get started and gives you places to put functions that
will be called by the runtime at key moments.

--- Page 49 ---
TIP
Swift also has a special rule that a file called main.swift, exceptionally, can have
executable code at its top level, outside any function body, and this is the code
that actually runs when the program runs. You can construct your app with a
main.swift file, but in general you won’t need to. In the rest of this chapter I’ll
assume that we are not in a main.swift file.
The Structure of a Swift File
A Swift program can consist of one file or many files. In Swift, a file
is a meaningful unit, and there are definite rules about the structure of
the Swift code that can go inside it. Only certain things can go at the
top level of a Swift file — chiefly the following:
Module import statements
A module is an even higher-level unit than a file. A module can
consist of multiple files, and these can all see each other
automatically. Your app’s files belong to a single module and can
see each other. But a module can’t see another module without an
import statement. That is how you are able to talk to Cocoa in an
iOS program: the first line of your file says import UIKit.
Variable declarations
A variable declared at the top level of a file is a global variable:
all code in any file will be able to see and access it, without
explicitly sending a message to any object.
Function declarations
A function declared at the top level of a file is a global function:
all code in any file will be able to see and call it, without

--- Page 50 ---
explicitly sending a message to any object.
Object type declarations
The declaration for a class, a struct, or an enum.
This is a legal Swift file containing at its top level (just to
demonstrate that it can be done) an import statement, a variable
declaration, a function declaration, a class declaration, a struct
declaration, and an enum declaration:
import UIKit 
var one = 1 
func changeOne() { 
} 
class Manny { 
} 
struct Moe { 
} 
enum Jack { 
}
That’s a very silly and mostly empty example, but remember, our
goal is to survey the parts of the language and the structure of a file,
and the example shows them.
So much for the top level of a file. But now let’s talk about what can
go inside the curly braces that we see in our example. It turns out that
they, too, can all have variable declarations, function declarations,
and object type declarations within them! Indeed, any structural curly
braces can contain such declarations.
But what about executable code? You’ll notice that I did not say that
executable code can go at the top level of a file. That’s because it

--- Page 51 ---
can’t! Only a function body can contain executable code. A statement
like one = two or print("hello") is executable code, and can’t go
at the top level of a file. But in our previous example, func changeO
ne() is a function declaration, so executable code can go inside its
curly braces, because they constitute a function body:
var one = 1 
// executable code can't go here! 
func changeOne() { 
    let two = 2 // executable code 
    one = two   // executable code 
}
Similarly, executable code can’t go directly inside the curly braces
that accompany the class Manny declaration; that’s the top level of a
class declaration, not a function body. But a class declaration can
contain a function declaration, and that function declaration can
contain executable code:
class Manny { 
    let name = "manny" 
    // executable code can't go here! 
    func sayName() { 
        print(name) // executable code 
    } 
}
To sum up, Example 1-1 is a legal Swift file, schematically
illustrating the structural possibilities. (Ignore the hanky-panky with
the name variable declaration inside the enum declaration for Jack;
enum top-level variables have some special rules that I’ll explain
later.)

--- Page 52 ---
Example 1-1. Schematic structure of a legal Swift file
import UIKit 
var one = 1 
func changeOne() { 
    let two = 2 
    func sayTwo() { 
        print(two) 
    } 
    class Klass {} 
    struct Struct {} 
    enum Enum {} 
    one = two 
} 
class Manny { 
    let name = "manny" 
    func sayName() { 
        print(name) 
    } 
    class Klass {} 
    struct Struct {} 
    enum Enum {} 
} 
struct Moe { 
    let name = "moe" 
    func sayName() { 
        print(name) 
    } 
    class Klass {} 
    struct Struct {} 
    enum Enum {} 
} 
enum Jack { 
    var name : String { 
        return "jack" 
    } 
    func sayName() { 
        print(name) 
    } 

--- Page 53 ---
    class Klass {} 
    struct Struct {} 
    enum Enum {} 
}
Obviously, we can recurse down as far we like: we could have a class
declaration containing a class declaration containing a class
declaration, and so on. But I’m sure you have the idea by now, so
there’s no point illustrating further.
Scope and Lifetime
In a Swift program, things have a scope. This refers to their ability to
be seen by other things. Things are nested inside of other things,
making a nested hierarchy of things. The rule is that things can see
things at their own level and at a higher level containing them. The
levels are:
A module is a scope.
A file is a scope.
Curly braces are a scope.
When something is declared, it is declared at some level within that
hierarchy. Its place in the hierarchy — its scope — determines
whether it can be seen by other things.
Look again at Example 1-1. Inside the declaration of Manny is a name
variable declaration and a sayName function declaration; the code
inside sayName’s curly braces can see things outside those curly
braces at a higher containing level, and can therefore see the name

--- Page 54 ---
variable. Similarly, the code inside the body of the changeOne
function can see the one variable declared at the top level of the file;
indeed, everything throughout this file can see the one variable
declared at the top level of the file.
Scope is thus a very important way of sharing information. Two
different functions declared inside Manny would both be able to see
the name declared at Manny’s top level. Code inside Jack and code
inside Moe can both see the one declared at the file’s top level.
Things also have a lifetime, which is effectively equivalent to their
scope. A thing lives as long as its surrounding scope lives. In
Example 1-1, the variable one lives as long as the file lives —
namely, as long the program runs. It is global and persistent. But the
variable name declared at the top level of Manny exists only so long
as a Manny instance exists (I’ll talk in a moment about what that
means).
Things declared at a deeper level live even shorter lifetimes. Consider
this code:
func silly() { 
    if true { 
        class Cat {} 
        var one = 1 
        one = one + 1 
    } 
}
That code is silly, but it’s legal: remember, I said that variable
declarations, function declarations, and object type declarations can

--- Page 55 ---
appear in any structural curly braces. In that code, the class Cat and
the variable one will not even come into existence until someone
calls the silly function, and even then they will exist only during the
brief instant that the path of code execution passes through the if
construct. Suppose the function silly is called; the path of execution
then enters the if construct. Here, Cat is declared and comes into
existence; then one is declared and comes into existence; then the
executable line one = one + 1 is executed; and then the scope ends
— and both Cat and one vanish in a puff of smoke. And throughout
their brief lives, Cat and one were completely invisible to the rest of
the program. (Do you see why?)
Object Members
Inside the three object types (class, struct, and enum), things declared
at the top level have special names, mostly for historical reasons.
Let’s use the Manny class as an example:
class Manny { 
    let name = "manny" 
    func sayName() { 
        print(name) 
    } 
}
In that code:
name is a variable declared at the top level of an object
declaration, so it is called a property of that object.

--- Page 56 ---
sayName is a function declared at the top level of an object
declaration, so it is called a method of that object.
Things declared at the top level of an object declaration — properties,
methods, and any objects declared at that level — are collectively the
members of that object. Members have a special significance, because
they define the messages you are allowed to send to that object!
Namespaces
A namespace is a named region of a program. The names of things
inside a namespace cannot be reached by things outside it without
somehow first passing through the barrier of saying that region’s
name. This is a good thing because it allows the same name to be
used in different places without a conflict. Clearly, namespaces and
scopes are closely related notions.
Namespaces help to explain the significance of declaring an object at
the top level of an object, like this:
class Manny { 
    class Klass {} 
}
This way of declaring Klass makes Klass a nested type. It effectively
“hides” Klass inside Manny. Manny is a namespace! Code inside
Manny can see (and say) Klass directly. But code outside Manny
can’t do that. It has to specify the namespace explicitly in order to
pass through the barrier that the namespace represents. To do so, it

--- Page 57 ---
must say Manny’s name first, followed by a dot, followed by the term
Klass. In short, it has to say Manny.Klass.
The namespace does not, of itself, provide secrecy or privacy; it’s a
convenience. In Example 1-1, I gave Manny a Klass class, and I also
gave Moe a Klass class. But they don’t conflict, because they are in
different namespaces, and I can differentiate them, if necessary, as Ma
nny.Klass and Moe.Klass.
It will not have escaped your attention that the syntax for diving
explicitly into a namespace is the message-sending dot-notation
syntax. They are, in fact, the same thing.
In effect, message-sending allows you to see into scopes you can’t
see into otherwise. Code inside Moe can’t automatically see the Klass
declared inside Manny, but it can see it by taking one easy extra step,
namely by speaking of Manny.Klass. It can do that because it can
see Manny (because Manny is declared at a level that code inside
Moe can see).
Modules
The top-level namespaces are modules. Your app is a module and
hence a namespace; that namespace’s name is, by default, the name
of the app. If my app is called MyApp, then if I declare a class Manny
at the top level of a file, that class’s real name is MyApp.Manny. But I
don’t usually need to use that real name, because my code is already
inside the same namespace, and can see the name Manny directly.

--- Page 58 ---
When you import a module, all the top-level declarations of that
module become visible to your code as well, without your having to
use the module’s namespace explicitly to refer to them. For example,
Cocoa’s Foundation framework, where NSString lives, is a module.
When you program iOS, you will say import Foundation (or, more
likely, you’ll say import UIKit, which itself imports Foundation),
allowing you to speak of NSString without saying Foundation.NSSt
ring.
Swift itself is defined in a module — the Swift module. But you don’t
have to import it, because your code always implicitly imports the
Swift module. You could make this explicit by starting a file with the
line import Swift; there is no need to do this, but it does no harm
either.
That fact is important, because it solves a major mystery: where do
things like print come from, and why is it possible to use them
outside of any message to any object? print is in fact a function
declared at the top level of the Swift module, and your code can see
the Swift module’s top-level declarations because it imports Swift.
The print function becomes, as far as your code is concerned, an
ordinary top-level function like any other; it is global to your code,
and your code can speak of it without specifying its namespace. You
can specify its namespace — it is perfectly legal to say things like Sw
ift.print("hello") — but you probably never will, because you
won’t need to.
Your own app module, however, overshadows any modules you
import. That means that if you declare a term identical to an imported

--- Page 59 ---
term, you lose the magical ability to use the imported term without
specifying the namespace. If you were to declare a print function of
your own, it would effectively hide the Swift print function; you can
still call the Swift print function, but now you have to use the
namespaced Swift.print explicitly. Similarly, if you were to declare
your own String type, all code that refers to Swift’s String type would
require you to say Swift.String. Nearly always, that sort of thing is
accidental and you will prefer that your own terms not conflict with
any imported terms.
TIP
You can actually see the Swift top-level declarations and read and study them,
and this can be a useful thing to do. For example, to see the declaration of prin
t, Command-Control-click the term print in your code. Behold, there are some
Swift top-level declarations! You won’t see any executable Swift code here, but
you will see the declarations for various available Swift terms, including print.
Instances
Object types — class, struct, and enum — have an important feature
in common: they can be instantiated. In effect, when you declare an
object type, you are only defining a type. To instantiate a type is to
make a thing — an instance — of that type.
For example, I can declare a Dog class, and I can give my class a
method:
class Dog { 
    func bark() { 

--- Page 60 ---
        print("woof") 
    } 
}
But I don’t actually have any Dog objects in my program yet. I have
merely described the type of thing a Dog would be if I had one. To get
an actual Dog, I have to make one. The process of making an actual
Dog object whose type is the Dog class is the process of instantiating
Dog. The result is a new object — a Dog instance.
In Swift, instances can be created by using the object type’s name as
a function name and calling the function. This involves using
parentheses. When you append parentheses to the name of an object
type, you are sending a very special kind of message to that object
type: Instantiate yourself!
So now I’m going to make a Dog instance:
let fido = Dog()
There’s a lot going on in that code! I did two things. I instantiated
Dog, causing me to end up with a Dog instance. I also put that Dog
instance into a shoebox called fido — I declared a variable and
initialized the variable by assigning my new Dog instance to it. Now
fido is a Dog instance. (Moreover, because I used let, fido will
always be this same Dog instance. I could have used var instead, but
even then, initializing fido as a Dog instance would mean fido
could only be some Dog instance after that.)

--- Page 61 ---
Now that I have a Dog instance, I can send instance messages to it.
And what do you suppose they are? They are Dog’s properties and
methods! For example:
let fido = Dog() 
fido.bark()
That code is legal. Not only that, it is effective: it actually does cause
"woof" to appear in the console. I made a Dog and I made it bark!
(See Figure 1-1.)
Figure 1-1. Making an instance and calling an instance method
There’s an important lesson here, so let me pause to emphasize it. By
default, properties and methods are instance properties and methods.
You can’t use them as messages to the object type itself; you have to

--- Page 62 ---
have an instance to send those messages to. As things stand, this is
illegal and won’t compile:
Dog.bark() // compile error
It is possible to declare a function bark in such a way that saying Do
g.bark() is legal, but that would be a different kind of function — a
class function or a static function — and you would need to say so
when you declare it.
The same thing is true of properties. To illustrate, let’s give Dog a na
me property:
class Dog { 
    var name = "" 
}
That allows me to set a Dog’s name, but it needs to be an instance of
Dog:
let fido = Dog() 
fido.name = "Fido"
It is possible to declare a property name in such a way that saying Do
g.name is legal, but that would be a different kind of property — a
class property or a static property — and you would need to say so
when you declare it.
Why Instances?

--- Page 63 ---
Even if there were no such thing as an instance, an object type is
itself an object. We know this because it is possible to send a message
to an object type (the phrase Manny.Klass is a case in point). Why,
then, do instances exist at all?
The answer has mostly to do with the nature of instance properties.
The value of an instance property is defined with respect to a
particular instance. This is where instances get their real usefulness
and power.
Consider again our Dog class. I’ll give it a name property and a bark
method; remember, these are an instance property and an instance
method:
class Dog { 
    var name = "" 
    func bark() { 
        print("woof") 
    } 
}
A Dog instance comes into existence with a blank name (an empty
string). But its name property is a var, so once we have any Dog
instance, we can assign to its name a new String value:
let dog1 = Dog() 
dog1.name = "Fido"
We can also ask for a Dog instance’s name:
let dog1 = Dog() 
dog1.name = "Fido" 

--- Page 64 ---
print(dog1.name) // "Fido"
The important thing is that we can make more than one Dog instance,
and that two different Dog instances can have two different name
property values (Figure 1-2):
let dog1 = Dog() 
dog1.name = "Fido" 
let dog2 = Dog() 
dog2.name = "Rover" 
print(dog1.name) // "Fido" 
print(dog2.name) // "Rover"
Figure 1-2. Two dogs with different property values

--- Page 65 ---
Note that a Dog instance’s name property has nothing to do with the
name of the variable to which a Dog instance is assigned. The
variable is just a shoebox. You can pass an instance from one shoebox
to another. But the instance itself maintains its own internal integrity:
let dog1 = Dog() 
dog1.name = "Fido" 
var dog2 = Dog() 
dog2.name = "Rover" 
print(dog1.name) // "Fido" 
print(dog2.name) // "Rover" 
dog2 = dog1 
print(dog2.name) // "Fido"
That code didn’t change Rover’s name; it changed which dog was
inside the dog2 shoebox, replacing Rover with Fido.
The full power of object-based programming has now emerged.
There is a Dog object type which defines what it is to be a Dog. Our
declaration of Dog says that any and every Dog instance has a name
property and a bark method. But each Dog instance can have its own
name property value. So multiple instances of the same object type
behave alike — both Fido and Rover can bark, and will do so when
they are sent the bark message — but they are different instances and
can have different property values: Fido’s name is "Fido" while
Rover’s name is "Rover".
An instance is responsible not only for the values but also for the
lifetimes of its properties. Suppose we bring a Dog instance into
existence and assign to its name property the value "Fido". Then this
Dog instance is keeping the string "Fido" alive just so long as we do

--- Page 66 ---
not replace the value of its name with some other value — and just so
long as this instance lives.
In short, an instance is both code and data. The code it gets from its
type and in a sense is shared with all other instances of that type, but
the data belong to it alone. The data can persist as long as the instance
persists. The instance has, at every moment, a state — the complete
collection of its own personal property values. An instance is a device
for maintaining state. It’s a box for storage of data.
The Keyword self
An instance is an object, and an object is the recipient of messages.
Thus, an instance needs a way of sending a message to itself. This is
made possible by the keyword self. This word can be used wherever
an instance of the appropriate type is expected.
Let’s say I want to keep the thing that a Dog says when it barks, such
as "woof", in a property. Then in my implementation of bark I need
to refer to that property. I can do it like this:
class Dog { 
    var name = "" 
    var whatADogSays = "woof" 
    func bark() { 
        print(self.whatADogSays) 
    } 
}
Similarly, let’s say I want to write an instance method speak which is
merely a synonym for bark. My speak implementation can consist of

--- Page 67 ---
simply calling my own bark method. I can do it like this:
class Dog { 
    var name = "" 
    var whatADogSays = "woof" 
    func bark() { 
        print(self.whatADogSays) 
    } 
    func speak() { 
        self.bark() 
    } 
}
Observe that the term self in that example appears only in instance
methods. When an instance’s code says self, it is referring to this
instance. If the expression self.name appears in a Dog instance
method’s code, it means the name of this Dog instance, the one whose
code is running at that moment.
It turns out that every use of the word self I’ve just illustrated is
optional. You can omit it and all the same things will happen:
class Dog { 
    var name = "" 
    var whatADogSays = "woof" 
    func bark() { 
        print(whatADogSays) 
    } 
    func speak() { 
        bark() 
    } 
}

--- Page 68 ---
The reason is that if you omit the message recipient and the message
you’re sending can be sent to self, the compiler supplies self as the
message’s recipient under the hood. However, I never do that (except
by mistake). As a matter of style, I like to be explicit in my use of se
lf. I find code that omits self harder to read and understand. And
there are situations where you must say self, so I prefer to use it
whenever I’m allowed to.
Privacy
Earlier, I said that a namespace is not, of itself, an insuperable barrier
to accessing the names inside it. But such a barrier is sometimes
desirable. Not all data stored by an instance is intended for alteration
by, or even visibility to, another instance. And not every instance
method is intended to be called by other instances. Any decent
object-based programming language needs a way to endow its object
members with privacy — a way of making it harder for other objects
to see those members if they are not supposed to be seen.
Consider, for example:
class Dog { 
    var name = "" 
    var whatADogSays = "woof" 
    func bark() { 
        print(self.whatADogSays) 
    } 
    func speak() { 
        print(self.whatADogSays) 
    } 
}

--- Page 69 ---
Here, other objects can come along and change my property whatADo
gSays. Since that property is used by both bark and speak, we could
easily end up with a Dog that, when told to bark, says "meow". That
seems somehow undesirable:
let dog1 = Dog() 
dog1.whatADogSays = "meow" 
dog1.bark() // meow
You might reply: Well, silly, why did you declare whatADogSays with
var? Declare it with let instead. Make it a constant! Now no one can
change it:
class Dog { 
    var name = "" 
    let whatADogSays = "woof" 
    func bark() { 
        print(self.whatADogSays) 
    } 
    func speak() { 
        print(self.whatADogSays) 
    } 
}
That is a good answer, but it is not quite good enough. There are two
problems. Suppose I want a Dog instance itself to be able to change
its own whatADogSays — by assigning to self.whatADogSays. Then
whatADogSays has to be a var; otherwise, even the instance itself
can’t change it. Also, suppose I don’t want any other object to know
what this Dog says, except by calling bark or speak. Even when
declared with let, other objects can still read the value of whatADogS
ays. Maybe I don’t like that.

--- Page 70 ---
To solve this problem, Swift provides the private keyword. I’ll talk
later about all the ramifications of this keyword, but for now it’s
enough to know that it exists:
class Dog { 
    var name = "" 
    private var whatADogSays = "woof" 
    func bark() { 
        print(self.whatADogSays) 
    } 
    func speak() { 
        print(self.whatADogSays) 
    } 
}
Now name is a public property, but whatADogSays is a private
property: it can’t be seen by other types of object. A Dog instance can
speak of self.whatADogSays, but a Cat instance with a reference to
a Dog instance as fido cannot say fido.whatADogSays. The
important lesson here is that object members are public by default,
and if you want privacy, you have to ask for it.
To sum up: A class declaration defines a namespace. This namespace
requires that other objects use an extra level of dot-notation to refer to
what’s inside the namespace, but other objects can still refer to what’s
inside the namespace; the namespace does not, in and of itself, close
any doors of visibility. The private keyword lets you close those
doors.

--- Page 71 ---
RESERVED WORDS
Certain terms, like class and func and var and let and if and private and imp
ort, are reserved in Swift; they are part of the language. That means you can’t
use them as identifiers — such as the name of a class, a function, or a variable.
If you try to do so, you’ll get a compile error.
To force a reserved word to be an identifier, surround it by backticks (`). This
(extraordinarily confusing) code is legal:
class `func` { 
    func `if`() { 
        let `class` = 1 
    } 
}
Design
Instances do not come into being by magic. You have to instantiate a
type in order to obtain an instance. Much of the action of your
program, therefore, will consist of instantiating types. And of course
you will want those instances to persist, so you will also assign each
newly created instance to a variable as a shoebox to hold it, name it,
and give it a lifetime. The instance will persist according to the
lifetime of the variable that refers to it. And the instance will be
visible to other instances according to the scope of the variable that
refers to it.
Much of the art of object-based programming involves giving
instances a sufficient lifetime and making them visible to one another.
You will often put an instance into a particular shoebox — assigning

--- Page 72 ---
it to a particular variable, declared at a certain scope — exactly so
that, thanks to the rules of variable lifetime and scope, this instance
will persist long enough to keep being useful to your program while
it will still be needed, and so that other code can get a reference to
this instance and talk to it later.
Planning how you’re going to create instances, and working out the
lifetimes and communication between those instances, may sound
daunting. Fortunately, in real life, when you’re programming iOS, the
framework will provide scaffolding for you. Before you write a single
line of code, the framework ensures that your app, as it launches, is
given some instances that will persist for the lifetime of the app,
providing the basis of your app’s visible interface and giving you an
initial place to put your own instances and give them sufficiently long
lifetimes.
What about the question of what object types your program will need
in the first place, and what methods and properties they should have?
This is not as much of a worry as you might suppose. Swift itself
supplies a library of powerful and useful object types. Moreover,
much of your code when you’re programming iOS will be focused on
the details of real-world interface objects, such as labels and buttons
that the user can see and tap, and the framework will make it clear
what object types and facilities it offers for this purpose, and will
provide ways to ensure the appropriate persistence and visibility of
the associated instances.
What the framework cannot tell you is how to design the underlying
business logic of whatever your app does behind the scenes. This is

--- Page 73 ---
where you will have the most freedom — and the most difficulty
arriving at an appropriate architecture of object types, functionalities,
and relationships. These will not be easy decisions, and there are no
clear-cut answers. Object-based programming is an art; and allowing
your program (and your thinking) to evolve as you write code,
discovering new needs and issues, is an art within that art, which I
call growing a program. All individuals and teams develop their own
way of meeting the long-term challenges involved.

--- Page 74 ---
Chapter 2. Functions
Nothing is so characteristic of Swift syntax as the way you declare
and call functions. Probably nothing is so important, either! As I said
in Chapter 1, all your executable code is going to be in functions;
they are where the action is.
Function Parameters and Return Value
Remember those imaginary machines for processing miscellaneous
stuff that you drew in your math textbook in elementary school? You
know the ones I mean: with a funnel-like “hopper” at the top, and
then a bunch of gears and cranks, and then a tube at the bottom where
something is produced. A function works like that: you feed some
stuff in, the stuff is processed in accordance with what this particular
machine does, and something is produced. The stuff that goes in is
the input; what comes out is the output. More technically, a function
that expects input has parameters; a function that produces output has
a result.
Here’s the declaration for a silly but valid function that expects two
Int values, adds them together, and produces that sum:
func sum (_ x:Int, _ y:Int) -> Int { 
    let result = x + y 
    return result 
}

--- Page 75 ---
The syntax here is very strict and well-defined, and you can’t use
Swift unless you understand it perfectly. Let’s pause to appreciate it
in full detail. I’ll break the first line into pieces so that I can call them
out individually:
func sum                      
  
    (_ x:Int, _ y:Int)        
  
    -> Int {                  
  
        let result = x + y    
  
        return result         
  
}
The declaration starts with the keyword func, followed by the
name of this function; here, it’s sum. This is the name that must be
used in order to call the function — that is, in order to run the
code that the function contains.
The name of the function is followed by its parameter list. It
consists, minimally, of parentheses. If this function takes
parameters (input), they are listed inside the parentheses,
separated by a comma. Each parameter has a strict format: the
name of the parameter, a colon, and the type of the parameter.
This particular function declaration also has an underscore (_) and
a space before each parameter name in the parameter list. I’m not
going to explain that underscore yet, but I need it for the example,
so just trust me for now.
If the function is to return a value, then after the parentheses is an
arrow operator (->) followed by the type of value that this
function will return.
Then we have curly braces enclosing the body of the function —
its actual code.

--- Page 76 ---
Within the curly braces, in the function body, the variables
defined as the parameter names have sprung to life, with the types
specified in the parameter list.
If the function is to return a value, it must do so with the keyword
return followed by that value. And, not surprisingly, the type of
that value must match the type declared earlier for the return
value (after the arrow operator).
Here are some further points to note about the parameters and return
type of our function:
Parameters
Our sum function expects two parameters — an Int, to which it
gives the name x, and another Int, to which it gives the name y.
The function body code won’t run unless code elsewhere calls
this function and actually passes values of the specified types for
its parameters. If I try to call this function without providing a
value for each of these two parameters, or if either of the values I
provide is not an Int, the compiler will stop me with an error.
In the body of the function, therefore, we can confidently use
those values, referring to them by those names, certain that they
will exist as specified by our parameter list. The parameter names
x and y, indeed, are defined just so that the parameter values can
be referred to within the function body. The parameter declaration
is thus a kind of variable declaration: we are declaring variables x
and y for use inside this function. With regard to their scope,
these variables are local (internal) to the function; only the
function body can see them, and they are different from any other
x and y that may be used in other functions or at a higher level of
scope.
Return type

--- Page 77 ---
The last statement of our sum function’s body returns the value of
a variable called result; this variable was created by adding two
Int values together, so it is an Int, which is what this function is
supposed to produce. If I try to return a String (return
"howdy"), or if I omit the return statement altogether, the
compiler will stop me with an error.
The keyword return actually does two things. It returns the
accompanying value, and it also halts execution of the function. It
is permitted for more lines of code to follow a return statement,
but the compiler will warn if this means that those lines can never
be executed.
A function that returns a value must contain a return statement, so
if its body consists of just a single statement, it must be the return
statement. Starting in Swift 5.1, the keyword return can be
omitted in that situation. This is mostly to facilitate the SwiftUI
domain-specific language, and in general I like to say return
explicitly, but in some situations it does feel more elegant to omit
it.
You can view the function declaration before the curly braces as a
contract about what kinds of values will be used as input and about
what kind of output will be produced. According to this contract, the
function expects a certain number of parameters, each of a certain
type, and yields a certain type of result. Everything must correspond
to this contract. The function body, inside the curly braces, can use
the parameters as local variables. The returned value must match the
declared return type.
The same contract applies to code elsewhere that calls this function.
Here’s some code that calls our sum function:
let z = sum(4,5)

--- Page 78 ---
Focus your attention on the right side of the equal sign — sum(4,5).
That’s the function call. How is it constructed? It uses the name of the
function; that name is followed by parentheses; and inside those
parentheses, separated by a comma, are the values to be passed to
each of the function’s parameters. Technically, these values are called
arguments. Here, I’m using literal Int values, but I’m perfectly free to
use Int variables instead; the only requirement is that I use things that
have the correct type:
let x = 4 
let y = 5 
let z = sum(y,x)
In that code, I purposely used the names x and y for the variables
whose values are passed as arguments, and I purposely reversed them
in the call, to emphasize that these names have nothing to do with the
names x and y inside the function parameter list and the function
body. Argument names do not magically make their way to the
function. Their values are all that matter; their values are the
arguments.
What about the value returned by the function? That value is
magically substituted for the function call, at the point where the
function call is made. It happens that in the preceding code, the result
is 9. So the last line is exactly as if I had said:
let z = 9
The programmer and the compiler both know what type of thing this
function returns, so they also know where it is and isn’t legal to call

--- Page 79 ---
this function. It’s fine to call this function as the initialization part of
the declaration of the variable z, just as it would be to use 9 as the
initialization part of that declaration: in both cases, we have an Int,
and so z ends up being declared as an Int. But it would not be legal to
write this:
let z = sum(4,5) + "howdy" // compile error
Because sum returns an Int, that’s the same as trying to add an Int to a
String — and by default, you can’t do that in Swift.
Observe that it is legal to ignore the value returned from a function
call:
sum(4,5)
That code is rather silly in this particular situation, because we have
made our sum function go to all the trouble of adding 4 and 5 for us
and we have then thrown away the answer without capturing or using
it. The compiler knows this, and will warn that we are failing to use
the result of our function call. Nevertheless, a warning is not an error;
that code is legal. There are, in fact, lots of situations where it is
perfectly reasonable to ignore the value returned from a function call;
in particular, the function may do other things (technically called side
effects) in addition to returning a value, and the purpose of your call
to that function may be those other things.

--- Page 80 ---
TIP
If you’re ignoring a function call result deliberately, you can silence the
compiler warning by assigning the function call to _ (a variable without a name)
— for example, _ = sum(4,5). Alternatively, if the function being called is
your own, you can prevent the warning by marking the function declaration
with @discardableResult.
If you can call sum wherever you can use an Int, and if the parameters
of sum have to be Int values, doesn’t that mean you can call sum
inside a call to sum? Of course it does! This is perfectly legal (and
reasonable):
let z = sum(4,sum(5,6))
The only arguments against writing code like that are that you might
confuse yourself and that it might make things harder to debug later.
But technically it’s legal and quite normal.
Void Return Type and Parameters
Let’s return to our function declaration. With regard to a function’s
parameters and return type, there are two degenerate cases that allow
us to express a function declaration more briefly:
A function without a return type
No law says that a function must return a value. A function may
be declared to return no value. In that case, there are three ways to
write the declaration: you can write it as returning Void; you can
write it as returning (), an empty pair of parentheses; or you can

--- Page 81 ---
omit the arrow operator and the return type entirely. These are all
legal:
func say1(_ s:String) -> Void { print(s) } 
func say2(_ s:String) -> () { print(s) } 
func say3(_ s:String) { print(s) }
If a function returns no value, then its body need not contain a
return statement. If it does contain a return statement, it will
consist of the word return alone, and its purpose will be purely
to end execution of the function at that point.
A call to a function that returns no value is made purely for the
function’s side effects; it has no useful return value that can be
made part of a larger expression, so the statement that calls the
function will usually consist of the function call and nothing else.
A function without any parameters
No law says that a function must take any parameters. If it
doesn’t, the parameter list in the function declaration can be
completely empty. But you can’t omit the parameter list
parentheses themselves! They will be present in the function
declaration, after the function’s name:
func greet() -> String { return "howdy" }
Just as you cannot omit the parentheses (the parameter list) from a
function declaration, you cannot omit the parentheses from a
function call. Those parentheses will be empty if the function
takes no parameters, but they must be present:
let greeting = greet()
Notice the parentheses!

--- Page 82 ---
A function can lack both a return value and parameters; these are all
ways of expressing the same thing:
func greet1() -> Void { print("howdy") } 
func greet2() -> () { print("howdy") } 
func greet3() { print("howdy") }
Function Signature
If we ignore the parameter names in the function declaration, we can
completely characterize a function by the types of its inputs and its
output. To do so, we write the parameter types in parentheses,
followed by the arrow operator and the output type, like this:
(Int, Int) -> Int
That is a legal expression in Swift; it is the signature of a function. In
this case, it’s the signature of a function that takes two Int parameters
and returns an Int. In fact, it’s the signature of our sum function! Of
course, there can be other functions that take two Int parameters and
return an Int — and that’s just the point. This signature characterizes
all functions that have this number of parameters, of these types, and
that return a result of this type. A function’s signature is, in effect, its
type — the type of the function. The fact that functions have types
will be of great importance later on.
The signature of a function must include both the parameter list
(without parameter names) and the return type, even if one or both of
those is empty; the signature of a function that takes no parameters
and returns no value may be written () -> Void or () -> ().

--- Page 83 ---
External Parameter Names
A function can externalize the names of its parameters. The external
parameter names become part of the function’s name, and must
appear in a call to the function as labels to the arguments. There are
several reasons why this is a good thing:
It clarifies the purpose of each argument; an argument label can
give a clue as to how that argument contributes to the behavior of
the function.
It distinguishes one function from another; two functions with the
same name before the parentheses and the same signature, but
with different external parameter names, are two distinct
functions.
It helps Swift to interface with Objective-C and Cocoa, where
method parameters nearly always have external names.
TIP
It will be useful to have a term for the part of a function’s name that precedes
the parentheses, so I don’t have to keep calling it “the name before the
parentheses” to distinguish it from the external parameter names. Let’s call it
the function’s base name.
External parameter names are so standard in Swift that there’s a rule:
by default, all parameter names are externalized automatically, using
the internal name as the external name. If you want a parameter name
to be externalized, and if you want the external name to be the same
as the internal name, do nothing — that will happen all by itself.

--- Page 84 ---
If you want to depart from the default behavior, you can do either of
the following in your function declaration:
Change the name of an external parameter
If you want the external name of a parameter to be different from
its internal name, precede the internal name with the external
name and a space.
Suppress the externalization of a parameter
To suppress a parameter’s external name, precede the internal
name with an underscore and a space.
That explains my declaration func sum (_ x:Int, _ y:Int) -> I
nt at the start of this chapter: I was suppressing the externalization of
the parameter names, so as not to have to explain argument labels at
the outset.
Here’s the declaration for a function that concatenates a string with
itself a given number of times:
func echoString(_ s:String, times:Int) -> String { 
    var result = "" 
    for _ in 1...times { result += s } 
    return result 
}
That function’s first parameter has an internal name only, but its
second parameter has an external name, which will be the same as its
internal name, namely times. And here’s how to call it:
let s = echoString("hi", times:3)

--- Page 85 ---
In the call, as you can see, the external name precedes the argument
as a label, separated by a colon.
Now let’s say that in our echoString function we prefer to use time
s purely as an external name for the second parameter, with a
different name — say, n — as the internal name. And let’s strip the st
ring off the function’s base name and make it the external name of
the first parameter. Then the declaration would look like this:
func echo(string s:String, times n:Int) -> String { 
    var result = "" 
    for _ in 1...n { result += s } 
    return result 
}
In the body of that function, there is now no times variable available;
times is purely an external name, for use as a label in the call. The
internal name is n, and that’s the name the code refers to. And here’s
how to call it:
let s = echo(string:"hi", times:3)
TIP
The existence of external names doesn’t mean that the call can use a different
parameter order from the declaration. Our echo(string:times:) expects a
String parameter and an Int parameter, in that order. The order can’t be different
in the call, even though the label might appear to disambiguate which argument
goes with which parameter.

--- Page 86 ---
Overloading
In Swift, function overloading is legal (and common). This means
that two functions with exactly the same name, including their
external parameter names, can coexist as long as they have different
signatures. (Two functions with the same base name but different
external parameter names do not constitute a case of overloading;
they are simply two different functions with two different names.)
These two functions can coexist:
func say (_ what:String) { 
} 
func say (_ what:Int) { 
}
The reason overloading works is that Swift has strict typing. A String
parameter is not an Int parameter. Swift can tell them apart both in
the declaration and in a function call. So Swift knows unambiguously
that say("what") is different from say(1), and it knows which say
function each is calling.
Overloading works for the return type as well. Two functions with the
same name and parameter types can have different return types. But
the context of the call must disambiguate; that is, it must be clear
what return type the caller is expecting.
For example, these two functions can coexist:
func say() -> String { 
    return "one" 
} 
func say() -> Int { 

--- Page 87 ---
    return 1 
}
But now you can’t call say like this:
let result = say() // compile error
The call is ambiguous, and the compiler tells you so. The call must be
used in a context where the expected return type is clear. One
solution, as I’ll describe in Chapter 3, is to state the problematic type
explicitly (rather than relying on type inference):
let result: String = say()
Alternatively, the context itself might disambiguate. Suppose we have
another function that is not overloaded, and that expects a String
parameter:
func giveMeAString(_ s:String) { 
    print("thanks!") 
}
Then giveMeAString(say()) is legal, because only a String can go
in this spot, so we must be calling the say that returns a String.
Similarly:
let result = say() + "two"
Only a String can be “added” to a String, so this must be the say that
returns a String.

--- Page 88 ---
You can also disambiguate explicitly between overloads in a method
call using the name of the method, the keyword as, and the signature
of the desired method. The syntax is a little odd, because the entire
expression must be enclosed in parentheses, followed immediately by
the parentheses signifying that this is a method call:
let result = (say as () -> String)()
Default Parameter Values
A parameter can have a default value. This means that the caller can
omit the parameter entirely, supplying no argument for it; the value
will then be the default.
To specify a default value in a function declaration, append = and the
default value after the parameter type:
class Dog { 
    func say(_ s:String, times:Int = 1) { 
        for _ in 1...times { 
            print(s) 
        } 
    } 
}
In effect, there are now two functions, one with a single unlabeled
parameter, the other with an additional times: parameter. If you just
want to say something once, you can call the say that takes a single
unlabeled argument:
let d = Dog() 
d.say("woof") // same as d.say("woof", times:1)

--- Page 89 ---
If you want repetition, call the say that takes a times: parameter:
let d = Dog() 
d.say("woof", times:3)
Variadic Parameters
A parameter can be variadic. This means that the caller can supply as
many values of this parameter’s type as desired, separated by a
comma; the function body will receive these values as an array.
To indicate in a function declaration that a parameter is variadic,
follow it with three dots, like this:
func sayStrings(_ arrayOfStrings:String ...) { 
    for s in arrayOfStrings { print(s) } 
}
And here’s how to call it:
sayStrings("hey", "ho", "nonny nonny no")
The global print function takes a variadic first parameter, so you can
output multiple values with a single command:
print("Manny", 3, true) // Manny 3 true
The print function’s default parameters dictate further details of the
output. The default separator: (for when you provide multiple
values) is a space, and the default terminator: is a newline; you can
change either or both:

--- Page 90 ---
print("Manny", "Moe", separator:", ", terminator:", ") 
print("Jack") 
// output is "Manny, Moe, Jack" on one line
A function can declare a maximum of one variadic parameter
(because otherwise it might be impossible to determine where the list
of values ends).
WARNING
Unfortunately, there’s a hole in the Swift language: there’s no way to convert an
array into a comma-separated list of arguments (comparable to splatting in
Ruby). If what you’re starting with is an array of some type, you can’t use it
where a variadic of that type is expected.

--- Page 91 ---
INITIALIZERS ARE FUNCTIONS
In Chapter 1, I declared a Dog class and instantiated it, creating a Dog
instance, by saying Dog(). When you do this, you are actually calling a function
— a special function called an initializer. This particular initializer function takes
no parameters; hence the parentheses are empty. But an initializer is a function
like any other, so it can have parameters, external parameter names, default
parameter values, overloading, and so forth.
In Chapter 4 I’ll explain how initializers are declared and implemented. For now,
it’s enough to know that initializers are functions, and that the syntax for calling
them (and thus for creating an instance) is the same as the syntax for any other
function call. What’s special is only that the parentheses follow the name of the
type we’re instantiating.
Swift built-in types tend to have lots of initializers (and in Chapter 4 you’ll learn
how to give your own types lots of initializers). For example, we can create a
string like this:
let s = String(repeating: "ho", count: 2)
After that, s is the string "hoho". And there are many other String initializers,
each providing another way to make a String.
Ignored Parameters
A parameter whose local name is an underscore is ignored. The caller
must supply an argument, but it has no name within the function body
and cannot be referred to there. For example:
func say(_ s:String, times:Int, loudly _:Bool) {
No loudly parameter makes its way into the function body, but the
caller must still provide it:

--- Page 92 ---
say("hi", times:3, loudly:true)
What’s the purpose of this feature? It isn’t to satisfy the compiler,
because the compiler doesn’t complain if a parameter is never
referred to in the function body. I use it primarily as a kind of note to
myself, a way of saying, “Yes, I know there is a parameter here, and I
am deliberately not using it for anything.”
Modifiable Parameters
In the body of a function, a parameter is essentially a local variable.
By default, it’s a variable implicitly declared with let. You can’t
assign to it:
func say(_ s:String, times:Int, loudly:Bool) { 
    loudly = true // compile error 
}
If your code needs to assign to a parameter name within the body of a
function, declare a var local variable inside the function body and
assign the parameter value to it; your local variable can even have the
same name as the parameter:
func say(_ s:String, times:Int, loudly:Bool) { 
    var loudly = loudly 
    loudly = true // no problem 
}
In that code, loudly is a local variable; assigning to it doesn’t change
the value of any variable outside the function body. However, it is
also possible to configure a parameter in such a way that assigning to

--- Page 93 ---
it does modify the value of a variable outside the function body! One
typical use case is that you want your function to return more than
one result. Here I’ll write a rather advanced function that removes all
occurrences of a given character from a given string and returns the
number of occurrences that were removed:
func removeCharacter(_ c:Character, from s:String) -> Int { 
    var s = s 
    var howMany = 0 
    while let ix = s.firstIndex(of:c) { 
        s.remove(at:ix) 
        howMany += 1 
    } 
    return howMany 
}
And you call it like this:
let s = "hello" 
let result = removeCharacter("l", from:s) // 2
That’s nice, but the original string, s, is still "hello"! In the function
body, we removed all occurrences of the character from the local
copy of the String parameter.
If we want a function to alter the original value of an argument
passed to it, we must do the following:
The type of the parameter we intend to modify must be declared i
nout.
When we call the function, the variable holding the value to be
modified must be declared with var, not let.

--- Page 94 ---
Instead of passing the variable as an argument, we must pass its
address. This is done by preceding its name with an ampersand
(&).
Our removeCharacter(_:from:) now looks like this:
func removeCharacter(_ c:Character, from s: inout String) -> Int { 
    var howMany = 0 
    while let ix = s.firstIndex(of:c) { 
        s.remove(at:ix) 
        howMany += 1 
    } 
    return howMany 
}
And our call to removeCharacter(_:from:) now looks like this:
var s = "hello" 
let result = removeCharacter("l", from:&s)
After the call, result is 2 and s is "heo". Notice the ampersand
before the name s when we pass it as the from: argument. It is
required; if you omit it, the compiler will stop you. I like this
requirement, because it forces us to acknowledge explicitly to the
compiler, and to ourselves, that we’re about to do something
potentially dangerous: we’re letting this function, as a side effect,
modify a value outside of itself.

--- Page 95 ---
TIP
When a function with an inout parameter is called, the variable whose address
was passed as argument to that parameter is always set, even if the function
makes no changes to that parameter.
Calling Objective-C with Modifiable Parameters
You may encounter variations on this pattern when you’re using
Cocoa. The Cocoa APIs are written in C and Objective-C, so instead
of the Swift term inout, you’ll probably see some mysterious type
such as UnsafeMutablePointer. From your point of view as the caller,
however, it’s the same thing: you’ll prepare a var variable and pass
its address.
For instance, consider the problem of learning a UIColor’s RGBA
components. There are four such components: the color’s red, green,
blue, and alpha values. A function that, given a UIColor, returned the
components of that color, would need to return four values at once —
and that is something that Objective-C cannot do. So a different
strategy is used. The UIColor method getRed(_:green:blue:alph
a:) returns only a Bool reporting whether the component extraction
succeeded. Instead of returning the actual components, it says: “You
hand me four CGFloats as arguments, and I will modify them for you
so that they are the results of this operation.” Here’s roughly how the
declaration for getRed(_:green:blue:alpha:) appears in Swift:
func getRed(_ red: UnsafeMutablePointer<CGFloat>, 
    green: UnsafeMutablePointer<CGFloat>, 

--- Page 96 ---
    blue: UnsafeMutablePointer<CGFloat>, 
    alpha: UnsafeMutablePointer<CGFloat>) -> Bool
How would you call this function? The parameters are each an
UnsafeMutablePointer to a CGFloat. You’ll create four var CGFloat
variables beforehand, giving them each some value even though that
value will be replaced when you call getRed(_:green:blue:alph
a:). The arguments you’ll pass will be the addresses of those
variables. Those variables are where the component values will be
after the call; and you’ll probably be so sure that the component
extraction will succeed, that you won’t even bother to capture the
call’s actual result:
let c = UIColor.purple 
var r : CGFloat = 0 
var g : CGFloat = 0 
var b : CGFloat = 0 
var a : CGFloat = 0 
c.getRed(&r, green: &g, blue: &b, alpha: &a) 
// now r, g, b, a are 0.5, 0.0, 0.5, 1.0
Called by Objective-C with Modifiable Parameters
Sometimes, Cocoa will call your function with an
UnsafeMutablePointer parameter, and you will want to change its
value. To do this, you cannot assign directly to it, as we did earlier
with the inout parameter s that we declared in our implementation of
remove(from:character:). You’re talking to Objective-C, not to
Swift, and this is an UnsafeMutablePointer, not an inout parameter.
The technique here is to assign to the UnsafeMutablePointer’s point
ee property. Here (without further explanation) is an example from
my own code:

--- Page 97 ---
func popoverPresentationController( 
    _ popoverPresentationController: UIPopoverPresentationController, 
    willRepositionPopoverTo rect: UnsafeMutablePointer<CGRect>, 
    in view: AutoreleasingUnsafeMutablePointer<UIView>) { 
        view.pointee = self.button2 
        rect.pointee = self.button2.bounds 
}
Reference Type Modifiable Parameters
There is one very common situation where your function can modify
a parameter without declaring it as inout — namely, when the
parameter is an instance of a class. This is a special feature of classes,
as opposed to the other two object type flavors, enum and struct.
String isn’t a class; it’s a struct. That’s why we had to use inout in
order to modify a String parameter. So I’ll illustrate by declaring a
Dog class with a name property:
class Dog { 
    var name = "" 
}
Here’s a function that takes a Dog instance parameter and a String,
and sets that Dog instance’s name to that String. Notice that no inout
is involved:
func changeName(of d:Dog, to newName:String) { 
    d.name = newName 
}
Here’s how to call it. We pass a Dog instance directly:
let d = Dog() 
d.name = "Fido" 

--- Page 98 ---
print(d.name) // "Fido" 
changeName(of:d, to:"Rover") 
print(d.name) // "Rover"
We were able to change a property of our Dog instance d, even
though it wasn’t passed as an inout parameter, and even though it
was declared originally with let, not var. This appears to be an
exception to the rules about modifying parameters — but it isn’t. It’s
a feature of class instances, namely that they are themselves mutable.
In changeName(of:to:), we didn’t actually attempt to assign a
different Dog instance to the parameter. To do that, the Dog
parameter would need to be declared inout (and d would have to be
declared with var and we would have to pass its address as
argument).
Technically, we say that classes are reference types, whereas the other
object type flavors are value types. When you pass an instance of a
struct as an argument to a function, you effectively wind up with a
separate copy of the struct instance. But when you pass an instance of
a class as an argument to a function, you pass a reference to the class
instance itself. I’ll discuss this topic in more detail later (“Value Types
and Reference Types”).
Function in Function
A function can be declared anywhere, including inside the body of a
function. A function declared in the body of a function (also called a
local function) is available to be called by later code within the same
scope, but is completely invisible elsewhere.

--- Page 99 ---
This feature is an elegant architecture for functions whose sole
purpose is to assist another function. If only function A ever needs to
call function B, function B might as well be packaged inside function
A.
Here’s a typical example from one of my apps (I’ve omitted
everything except the structure):
func checkPair(_ p1:Piece, and p2:Piece) -> Path? { 
    // ... 
    func addPathIfValid(_ midpt1:Point, _ midpt2:Point) { 
        // ... 
    } 
    for y in -1..._yct { 
        addPathIfValid((pt1.x,y),(pt2.x,y)) 
    } 
    for x in -1..._xct { 
        addPathIfValid((x,pt1.y),(x,pt2.y)) 
    } 
    // ... 
}
What I’m doing in the first for loop (for y) and what I’m doing in
the second for loop (for x) are the same — but with a different set of
starting values. We could write out the functionality in full inside
each for loop, but that would be an unnecessary and confusing
repetition. (Such a repetition would violate the principle often
referred to as DRY, for “Don’t Repeat Yourself.”) To prevent that
repetition, we could refactor the repeated code into an instance
method to be called by both for loops, but that exposes this
functionality more broadly than we need, as it is called only by these

--- Page 100 ---
two for loops inside checkPair. A local function is the perfect
compromise.
TIP
Local functions are really local variables with function values (a notion that I’ll
explain later in this chapter). Therefore, a local function can’t have the same
name as a local variable in the same scope, and two local functions can’t have
the same name as one another in the same scope.
Recursion
A function can call itself. This is called recursion. Recursion seems a
little scary, rather like jumping off a cliff, because of the danger of
creating an infinite loop; but if you write the function correctly, you
will always have a “stopper” condition that handles the degenerate
case and prevents the loop from being infinite:
func countDownFrom(_ ix:Int) { 
    print(ix) 
    if ix > 0 { // stopper 
        countDownFrom(ix-1) // recurse! 
    } 
} 
countDownFrom(5) // 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0
Function as Value
If you’ve never used a programming language where functions are
first-class citizens, perhaps you’d better sit down now, because what
I’m about to tell you might make you feel a little faint: In Swift, a

--- Page 101 ---
function is a first-class citizen. This means that a function can be used
wherever a value can be used. A function can be assigned to a
variable; a function can be passed as an argument in a function call; a
function can be returned as the result of a function.
Swift has strict typing. You can assign a value to a variable or pass a
value into or out of a function only if it is the right type of value. In
order for a function to be used as a value, the function needs to have a
type. And indeed it does: a function’s signature is its type.
The chief purpose of using a function as a value is so that this
function can later be called without a definite knowledge of what
function it is. Here’s the world’s simplest (and silliest) example, just
to show the syntax and structure:
func doThis(_ f:() -> ()) { 
    f() 
}
That is a function doThis that takes one parameter (and returns no
value). The parameter, f, is itself a function! How do we know? Well,
look at its type (after the colon): it is () -> (). That’s a function
signature; in particular, it is the signature of a function that takes no
parameters and returns no value.

--- Page 102 ---
TYPE ALIASES CAN CLARIFY FUNCTION TYPES
To make function type specifiers clearer, we can take advantage of Swift’s type
alias feature to give a function type a name. The name can be descriptive, and
the possibly confusing arrow operator notation is avoided:
typealias VoidVoidFunction = () -> () 
func dothis(_ f:VoidVoidFunction) { 
    f() 
}
The function doThis, then, expects as its parameter a function, which
it names f. Then, within its body, doThis calls the function f that it
received as its parameter, by saying f(). So doThis is merely a
function that trivially calls another function. But it does this without
knowing in advance what function it is going to call. That’s the power
of functions being first-class citizens.
Having declared the function doThis, how would you call it? You’d
need to pass it a function as argument. Here’s one way to do that:
func doThis(_ f:() -> ()) { 
    f() 
} 
func whatToDo() { 
  
    print("I did it") 
} 
doThis(whatToDo) 
First, we declare a function (whatToDo) of the proper type — a
function that takes no parameters and returns no value.


--- Page 103 ---
Then, we call doThis, passing as argument a function reference
— in effect, the bare name of the function. Notice that we are not
calling whatToDo here; we are passing it.
Sure enough, this works: we pass whatToDo as argument to doThis; d
oThis calls the function that it receives as its parameter; and the
string "I did it" appears in the console.
Obviously, that example, while demonstrating a remarkable ability of
the Swift language, is far from compelling, because the outcome in
practice is no different from what would have happened if we had
simply called whatToDo directly. But in real life, encapsulating
function-calling in a function can reduce repetition and opportunity
for error. Moreover, a function may call its parameter function in
some special way; it might call it after doing other things, or at some
later time.
Here’s a case from my own code. A common thing to do in Cocoa is
to draw an image, directly, in code. One way of doing this involves
four steps:
let size = CGSize(width:45, height:20) 
UIGraphicsBeginImageContextWithOptions(size, false, 0) 
  
let p = UIBezierPath( 
    roundedRect: CGRect(x:0, y:0, width:45, height:20), cornerRadius: 8) 
p.stroke() 
  
let result = UIGraphicsGetImageFromCurrentImageContext()! 
  
UIGraphicsEndImageContext() 
Open an image context.
Draw into the context.

--- Page 104 ---
Extract the image.
Close the image context.
That works — in this case, it generates an image of a rounded
rectangle — but it’s ugly. The sole purpose of all that code is to
obtain result, the image; but that purpose is buried in all the other
code. At the same time, everything except for the two lines involving
the UIBezierPath p (step 2) is boilerplate; every time I do this in any
app, step 1, step 3, and step 4 are exactly the same. Moreover, I live
in mortal fear of forgetting a step; if I were to omit step 4 by mistake,
the universe would explode.
Since the only thing that’s different every time I draw is step 2, step 2
is the only part I should have to write out! The entire problem is
solved by writing a utility function expressing the boilerplate:
func imageOfSize(_ size:CGSize, _ whatToDraw:() -> ()) -> UIImage { 
    UIGraphicsBeginImageContextWithOptions(size, false, 0) 
    whatToDraw() 
    let result = UIGraphicsGetImageFromCurrentImageContext()! 
    UIGraphicsEndImageContext() 
    return result 
}
My imageOfSize utility is so useful that I declare it at the top level
of a file, where all my files can see it. To make an image, I can
perform step 2 (the actual drawing) in a function and pass that
function as argument to the imageOfSize utility:
func drawing() { 
    let p = UIBezierPath( 

--- Page 105 ---
        roundedRect: CGRect(x:0, y:0, width:45, height:20), 
        cornerRadius: 8) 
    p.stroke() 
} 
let image = imageOfSize(CGSize(width:45, height:20), drawing)
Now that is a beautifully expressive and clear way to turn drawing
instructions into an image.
TIP
Evidently Apple agrees with my criticism of UIGraphicsBeginImageContextW
ithOptions, because in iOS 10 a new class was introduced,
UIGraphicsImageRenderer, that expresses itself using syntax similar to my ima
geOfSize. Nevertheless, I’ll continue using imageOfSize in this chapter,
because it illustrates important aspects of Swift functions.
The Cocoa API is full of situations where you’ll pass a function to be
called by the runtime in some special way or at some later time.
Some common Cocoa situations even involve passing two functions.
For instance, when you perform view animation, you’ll often pass
one function prescribing the action to be animated and another
function saying what to do afterward:
func whatToAnimate() { // self.myButton is a button in the interface 
    self.myButton.frame.origin.y += 20 
} 
func whatToDoLater(finished:Bool) { 
    print("finished: \(finished)") 
} 
UIView.animate(withDuration:0.4, 
    animations: whatToAnimate, completion: whatToDoLater)

--- Page 106 ---
That means: Change the frame origin (that is, the position) of this
button in the interface, but do it over time (four-tenths of a second);
and then, when that’s finished, print a log message in the console
saying whether the animation was performed or not.
TIP
The Cocoa documentation will often describe a function to be passed in this
way as a handler, and will refer it as a block, because that’s the Objective-C
syntactic construct needed here. In Swift, it’s a function.
Anonymous Functions
Consider once again this example:
func whatToAnimate() { // self.myButton is a button in the interface 
    self.myButton.frame.origin.y += 20 
} 
func whatToDoLater(finished:Bool) { 
    print("finished: \(finished)") 
} 
UIView.animate(withDuration:0.4, 
    animations: whatToAnimate, completion: whatToDoLater)
There’s a slight bit of ugliness in that code. I’m declaring functions w
hatToAnimate and whatToDoLater, just because I want to pass those
functions in the last line. But I don’t really need the names whatToAn
imate and whatToDoLater for anything, except to refer to them in
the last line; neither the names nor the functions will ever be used
again. In my call to UIView.animate(withDuration:animations:c

--- Page 107 ---
ompletion:), it would be nice to be able to pass just the body of
those functions without a declared name.
We can do that. A nameless function body is called an anonymous
function, and is legal and common in Swift. To form an anonymous
function, you do two things:
1. Create the function body itself, including the surrounding curly
braces, but with no function declaration.
2. If necessary, express the function’s parameter list and return
type as the first thing inside the curly braces, followed by the
keyword in.
Let’s practice by transforming our named function declarations into
anonymous functions. Here’s the named function declaration for what
ToAnimate:
func whatToAnimate() { 
    self.myButton.frame.origin.y += 20 
}
Here’s an anonymous function that does the same thing. Notice how
I’ve moved the parameter list and return type inside the curly braces:
{ 
    () -> () in 
    self.myButton.frame.origin.y += 20 
}
Here’s the named function declaration for whatToDoLater:
func whatToDoLater(finished:Bool) { 
    print("finished: \(finished)") 

--- Page 108 ---
}
Here’s an anonymous function that does the same thing:
{ 
    (finished:Bool) -> () in 
    print("finished: \(finished)") 
}
Using Anonymous Functions Inline
Now that we know how to make anonymous functions, let’s use
them. The point where we need the functions is the point where we’re
passing the second and third arguments to animate(withDuration:a
nimations:completion:). We can create and pass anonymous
functions right at that point, like this:
UIView.animate(withDuration:0.4, 
    animations: { 
        () -> () in 
        self.myButton.frame.origin.y += 20 
    }, 
    completion: { 
        (finished:Bool) -> () in 
        print("finished: \(finished)") 
    } 
)
We can make the same improvement in the way we call the imageOfS
ize function from the preceding section. Earlier, we called that
function like this:
func drawing() { 
    let p = UIBezierPath( 
        roundedRect: CGRect(x:0, y:0, width:45, height:20), 

--- Page 109 ---
        cornerRadius: 8) 
    p.stroke() 
} 
let image = imageOfSize(CGSize(width:45, height:20), drawing)
We now know, however, that we don’t need to declare the drawing
function separately. We can call imageOfSize with an anonymous
function:
let image = imageOfSize(CGSize(width:45, height:20), { 
    () -> () in 
    let p = UIBezierPath( 
        roundedRect: CGRect(x:0, y:0, width:45, height:20), 
        cornerRadius: 8) 
    p.stroke() 
})
Anonymous functions are very commonly used in Swift, so make
sure you can read and write that code!
Anonymous Function Abbreviated Syntax
Anonymous functions are so common and so important in Swift that
some shortcuts for writing them are provided:
Omission of the return type
If the anonymous function’s return type is already known to the
compiler, you can omit the arrow operator and the specification of
the return type:
UIView.animate(withDuration:0.4, 
    animations: { 
        () in // * 
        self.myButton.frame.origin.y += 20 

--- Page 110 ---
    }, completion: { 
        (finished:Bool) in // * 
        print("finished: \(finished)") 
})
(Occasionally the compiler will fail to infer the anonymous
function’s return type, even though you think it should be
obvious, and will give a compile error. If that happens, just don’t
use this shortcut: supply an in expression with an explicit return
type.)
Omission of the in expression when there are no parameters
If the anonymous function takes no parameters, and if the return
type can be omitted, the in expression itself can be omitted:
UIView.animate(withDuration:0.4, 
    animations: { // * 
        self.myButton.frame.origin.y += 20 
    }, completion: { 
        (finished:Bool) in 
        print("finished: \(finished)") 
})
Omission of the parameter types
If the anonymous function takes parameters and their types are
already known to the compiler, the types can be omitted:
UIView.animate(withDuration:0.4, 
    animations: { 
        self.myButton.frame.origin.y += 20 
    }, completion: { 
        (finished) in // * 
        print("finished: \(finished)") 
})

--- Page 111 ---
Omission of the parentheses
If the parameter types are omitted, the parentheses around the
parameter list can be omitted:
UIView.animate(withDuration:0.4, 
    animations: { 
        self.myButton.frame.origin.y += 20 
    }, completion: { 
        finished in // * 
        print("finished: \(finished)") 
})
Omission of the in expression even when there are parameters
If the return type can be omitted, and if the parameter types are
already known to the compiler, you can omit the in expression
and refer to the parameters directly within the body of the
anonymous function by using the magic names $0, $1, and so on,
in order:
UIView.animate(withDuration:0.4, 
    animations: { 
        self.myButton.frame.origin.y += 20 
    }, completion: { 
        print("finished: \($0)") // * 
})
Omission of the parameter names
If the anonymous function body doesn’t need to refer to a
parameter, you can substitute an underscore for its name in the
parameter list in the in expression:
UIView.animate(withDuration:0.4, 
    animations: { 

--- Page 112 ---
        self.myButton.frame.origin.y += 20 
    }, completion: { 
        _ in // * 
        print("finished!") 
})
TIP
If an anonymous function takes parameters, you must acknowledge them
somehow. You can omit the in expression and use the parameters by the magic
names $0 and so on. Or you can keep the in expression and give the parameters
names or ignore them with underscores. But you can’t omit the in expression
and not use the parameters’ magic names! If you do, your code won’t compile.
Omission of the function argument label
If your anonymous function is the last argument being passed in
this function call — which will just about always be the case —
you can close the function call with a right parenthesis before this
last argument, and then put just the anonymous function body
without a label. This is called trailing closure syntax (I’ll explain
in a moment what a closure is):
UIView.animate(withDuration:0.4, 
    animations: { 
        self.myButton.frame.origin.y += 20 
    }) { // * 
        _ in 
        print("finished!") 
}
In that code, the completion: parameter is last, so the call can
pass the anonymous function argument outside the call’s
parentheses, using trailing closure syntax with no label.

--- Page 113 ---
But there’s a curious asymmetry in that particular example,
because this is a method that takes two function parameters. The a
nimations: parameter is an anonymous function too, but it still
sits inside the parentheses. New in Swift 5.3, that asymmetry is
resolved; now, multiple anonymous function arguments can be
expressed using trailing closure syntax. When you do that, the
first anonymous function takes no label; the remaining functions
do each have their labels, with no comma:
UIView.animate(withDuration:0.4) { // * 
    self.myButton3.frame.origin.y += 20 
} completion: { // * 
    _ in 
    print("finished") 
}
Omission of the calling function parentheses
If you use a trailing closure, and if the function you are calling
takes no parameters other than the function you are passing to it,
you can omit the empty parentheses from the call. This is the only
situation in which you can omit the parentheses from a function
call! To illustrate, I’ll declare and call a different function:
func doThis(_ f:() -> ()) { 
    f() 
} 
doThis { // no parentheses! 
    print("Howdy") 
}
Omission of the keyword return
If the anonymous function body consists of exactly one statement
consisting of returning a value with the keyword return, the

--- Page 114 ---
keyword return can be omitted (and in this situation, I like to do
so):
func greeting() -> String { 
    return "Howdy" 
} 
func performAndPrint(_ f:()->String) { 
    let s = f() 
    print(s) 
} 
performAndPrint { 
    greeting() // meaning: return greeting() 
}
When writing anonymous functions, you will frequently find yourself
taking advantage of all the omissions you are permitted. In addition,
you’ll sometimes shorten the layout of the code (though not the code
itself) by putting the whole anonymous function together with the
function call on one line. Thus, Swift code involving anonymous
functions can be extremely compact.
Here’s a typical example. We start with an array of Int values and
generate a new array consisting of all those values multiplied by 2, by
calling the map(_:) instance method. The map(_:) method of an
array takes a function that takes one parameter of the same type as the
array’s elements, and returns a new value; here, our array is made of
Int values, and we are passing to the map(_:) method a function that
takes one Int parameter and returns an Int. We could write out the
whole function, like this:
let arr = [2, 4, 6, 8] 
func doubleMe(i:Int) -> Int { 
    return i*2 

--- Page 115 ---
} 
let arr2 = arr.map(doubleMe) // [4, 8, 12, 16]
That, however, is not very Swifty. We don’t need the name doubleMe
for anything else, so this may as well be an anonymous function:
let arr = [2, 4, 6, 8] 
let arr2 = arr.map ({ 
    (i:Int) -> Int in 
    return i*2 
})
Now let’s abbreviate our anonymous function. Its parameter type is
known in advance, so we don’t need to specify that. Its return type is
known by inspection of the function body, so we don’t need to
specify that. There’s just one parameter and we are going to use it, so
we don’t need the in expression as long we refer to the parameter as
$0. Our function body consists of just one statement, and it is a return
statement, so we can omit return. And map(_:) doesn’t take any
other parameters, so we can omit the parentheses and follow the
name directly with a trailing closure:
let arr = [2, 4, 6, 8] 
let arr2 = arr.map {$0*2}
It doesn’t get any Swiftier than that!
Define-and-Call
A pattern that’s surprisingly common in Swift is to define an
anonymous function and call it, all in one move:

--- Page 116 ---
{ 
    // ... code goes here 
}()
Notice the parentheses after the curly braces! The curly braces define
an anonymous function body; the parentheses call that anonymous
function. I call this construct define-and-call.
Using define-and-call, an action can be taken at the point where it is
needed, rather than in a series of preparatory steps. Here’s a common
Cocoa situation where we create and configure an
NSMutableParagraphStyle and then use it as an argument in a call to
the NSMutableAttributedString method addAttribute(_:value:ra
nge:), like this:
let para = NSMutableParagraphStyle() 
para.headIndent = 10 
para.firstLineHeadIndent = 10 
// ... more configuration of para ... 
content.addAttribute( // content is an NSMutableAttributedString 
    .paragraphStyle, 
    value:para, 
    range:NSRange(location:0, length:1))
I find that code ugly. We don’t need para except to pass it as the val
ue: argument within the call to addAttribute(_:value:range:),
so it would be much nicer to create and configure it right there within
the call, as the value: argument itself. That sounds like an
anonymous function — except that the value: parameter is not a
function, but an NSMutableParagraphStyle object.

--- Page 117 ---
We can solve the problem by providing, as the value: argument, an
anonymous function that produces an NSMutableParagraphStyle
object and calling it so that it does produce an
NSMutableParagraphStyle object:
content.addAttribute( 
    .paragraphStyle, 
    value: { 
        let para = NSMutableParagraphStyle() 
        para.headIndent = 10 
        para.firstLineHeadIndent = 10 
        // ... more configuration of para ... 
        return para 
    }(), 
    range:NSRange(location:0, length:1))
I’ll demonstrate some further uses of define-and-call in Chapter 3.
Closures
Swift functions are closures. This means they can capture references
to external variables in scope within the body of the function. What
do I mean by that? Well, recall from Chapter 1 that code in curly
braces constitutes a scope, and this code can “see” variables and
functions declared in a surrounding scope. For example:
class Dog { 
    var whatThisDogSays = "woof" 
  
    func bark() { 
        print(self.whatThisDogSays) 
  
    } 
}

--- Page 118 ---
In that code:
The variable whatThisDogSays is external to the function: it is
declared outside the body of the function, and yet is in scope for
the body of the function, so that the code inside the body of the
function can see it.
The code inside the body of the function refers to the external
variable whatThisDogSays — it says, explicitly, whatThisDogSa
ys.
So far, so good; but we now know that the function bark can be
passed as a value. In effect, it can travel from one environment to
another. When it does, what happens to that reference to whatThisDo
gSays? Let’s find out:
func doThis(_ f : () -> ()) { 
    f() 
} 
let d = Dog() 
d.whatThisDogSays = "arf" 
let barkFunction = d.bark 
doThis(barkFunction) // arf
We run that code, and "arf" appears in the console!
Perhaps that result doesn’t seem very surprising to you. But think
about it. We do not directly call d.bark(). We make a Dog instance
and pass its bark function as a value into the function doThis. There,
it is called. Now, whatThisDogSays is an instance property of a
particular Dog. Inside the function doThis there is no whatThisDogS
ays. Indeed, inside the function doThis there is no Dog instance!

--- Page 119 ---
Nevertheless the call f() still works. The function d.bark, as it is
passed around, evidently carries the variable whatThisDogSays
along with itself.
But there’s more. I’ll change the example by moving the line where
we set d.whatThisDogSays to after we assign d.bark into our
variable barkFunction:
func doThis(_ f : () -> ()) { 
    f() 
} 
let d = Dog() 
let barkFunction = d.bark     
  
doThis(barkFunction) // woof  
  
d.whatThisDogSays = "arf"     
  
doThis(barkFunction) // arf   
What just happened?
We assigned d.bark to barkFunction, once and for all; after
that, we never changed barkFunction.
At that time, d.whatThisDogSays was "woof", so we passed bar
kFunction into doThis and got "woof".
We then changed d.whatThisDogSays to "arf". We didn’t
change barkFunction.
We passed barkFunction into doThis again, and this time we
got "arf"!
After creating both d and barkFunction, changing a property of the
Dog d changes the output of calling barkFunction! How can this be?

--- Page 120 ---
Evidently, after step 1, when d.bark has been assigned to barkFunct
ion, both our Dog variable d and the function barkFunction are
holding references to the same Dog instance. This is because d.bark,
which we assigned to barkFunction, refers to self, which is the
Dog instance. That’s what we mean when we say that a function is a
closure and that it captures external variables referred to in its body.
How Closures Improve Code
You can use the fact that functions are closures to make your code
more general, and hence more useful. To illustrate, here, once again,
is my earlier example of a function that accepts drawing instructions
and performs them to generate an image:
func imageOfSize(_ size:CGSize, _ whatToDraw:() -> ()) -> UIImage { 
    UIGraphicsBeginImageContextWithOptions(size, false, 0) 
    whatToDraw() 
    let result = UIGraphicsGetImageFromCurrentImageContext()! 
    UIGraphicsEndImageContext() 
    return result 
}
As you know, we can call imageOfSize with a trailing closure:
let image = imageOfSize(CGSize(width:45, height:20)) { 
    let p = UIBezierPath( 
        roundedRect: CGRect(x:0, y:0, width:45, height:20), 
        cornerRadius: 8) 
    p.stroke() 
}
That code, however, contains an annoying repetition. This is a call to
create an image of a given size consisting of a rounded rectangle of

--- Page 121 ---
that size. We are repeating the size; the pair of numbers 45,20
appears twice. That’s silly. Let’s prevent the repetition by putting the
size into a variable at the outset:
let sz = CGSize(width:45, height:20) 
let image = imageOfSize(sz) { 
    let p = UIBezierPath( 
        roundedRect: CGRect(origin:CGPoint.zero, size:sz), 
        cornerRadius: 8) 
    p.stroke() 
}
The variable sz, declared outside our anonymous function at a higher
level, is visible inside it. Thus we can refer to it inside the anonymous
function — and we do so. The anonymous function is just a function
body; it won’t be executed until imageOfSize calls it. Nevertheless,
when we refer to sz from inside the function body in the expression C
GRect(origin:CGPoint.zero, size:sz), we capture its value
now, because the function body is a closure. When imageOfSize
calls whatToDraw, and whatToDraw turns out to be a function whose
body refers to a variable sz, there’s no problem, even though there is
no sz anywhere in the neighborhood of imageOfSize.
Now let’s go further. So far, we’ve been hard-coding the size of the
desired rounded rectangle. Imagine, though, that creating images of
rounded rectangles of various sizes is something we do often. It
would make sense to package this code up as a function, where sz is
not a fixed value but a parameter; the function will then return the
image:

--- Page 122 ---
func makeRoundedRectangle(_ sz:CGSize) -> UIImage { 
    let image = imageOfSize(sz) { 
        let p = UIBezierPath( 
            roundedRect: CGRect(origin:CGPoint.zero, size:sz), 
            cornerRadius: 8) 
        p.stroke() 
    } 
    return image 
}
Incredibly, that works! The parameter sz that arrives into makeRound
edRectangle is no longer a hard-coded value; we don’t know what it
will be. Nevertheless, when makeRoundedRectangle is called, sz
will have a value, and the anonymous function captures sz, so when i
mageOfSize calls the anonymous function, sz inside that function
will have the sz value that was passed to makeRoundedRectangle.
Our code is becoming beautifully compact. To call makeRoundedRect
angle, supply a size; an image is returned. I can perform the call,
obtain the image, and display that image, all in one move, like this (s
elf.iv is a UIImageView in the interface):
self.iv.image = makeRoundedRectangle(CGSize(width:45, height:20))
Function Returning Function
But now let’s go even further! Instead of returning an image, our
function can return a function that makes rounded rectangles of the
specified size. If you’ve never seen a function returned as a value
from a function, you may now be gasping for breath. But a function,
after all, can be used as a value. We have already passed a function

--- Page 123 ---
into a function as an argument in the function call; now we are going
to receive a function from a function call as its result:
func makeRoundedRectangleMaker(_ sz:CGSize) -> () -> UIImage { 
  
    func f () -> UIImage { 
  
        let im = imageOfSize(sz) { 
            let p = UIBezierPath( 
                roundedRect: CGRect(origin:CGPoint.zero, size:sz), 
                cornerRadius: 8) 
            p.stroke() 
        } 
        return im 
    } 
    return f 
  
}
Let’s analyze that code slowly:
The declaration is the hardest part. What on earth is the type
(signature) of this function makeRoundedRectangleMaker? It is
(CGSize) -> () -> UIImage. That expression has two arrow
operators. To understand it, keep in mind that everything after
each arrow operator is the type of a returned value. So makeRound
edRectangleMaker is a function that takes a CGSize parameter
and returns a () -> UIImage. Okay, and what’s a () -> UIImag
e? We already know that: it’s a function that takes no parameters
and returns a UIImage. So makeRoundedRectangleMaker is a
function that takes a CGSize parameter and returns a function —
a function that itself, when called with no parameters, will return
a UIImage.
Now here we are in the body of the function makeRoundedRectan
gleMaker, and our first step is to declare a function (a function-
in-function, or local function) of precisely the type we intend to
return, namely, one that takes no parameters and returns a

--- Page 124 ---
UIImage. Here, we’re naming this function f. The way this
function works is simple and familiar: it calls imageOfSize,
passing it an anonymous function that makes an image of a
rounded rectangle (im) — and then it returns the image.
Finally, we return the function we just made (f). We have
fulfilled our contract: we said we would return a function that
takes no parameters and returns a UIImage, and we do so.
But perhaps you are still gazing open-mouthed at makeRoundedRecta
ngleMaker, wondering how you would ever call it and what you
would get if you did. Let’s try it:
let maker = makeRoundedRectangleMaker(CGSize(width:45, height:20))
What is the variable maker after that code runs? It’s a function — a
function that takes no parameters and that, when called, produces the
image of a rounded rectangle of size 45,20. You don’t believe me?
I’ll prove it — by calling the function that is now the value of maker:
let maker = makeRoundedRectangleMaker(CGSize(width:45, height:20)) 
self.iv.image = maker()
Now that you’ve gotten over your stunned surprise at the notion of a
function that produces a function as its result, turn your attention
once again to the implementation of makeRoundedRectangleMaker
and let’s analyze it again, a different way. Remember, I didn’t write
that function to show you that a function can produce a function. I
wrote it to illustrate closures! Let’s think about how the environment
gets captured:

--- Page 125 ---
func makeRoundedRectangleMaker(_ sz:CGSize) -> () -> UIImage { 
    func f () -> UIImage { 
        let im = imageOfSize(sz) { // * 
            let p = UIBezierPath( 
                roundedRect: CGRect(origin:CGPoint.zero, size:sz), // * 
                cornerRadius: 8) 
            p.stroke() 
        } 
        return im 
    } 
    return f 
}
The function f takes no parameters. Yet, twice within the function
body of f (I’ve marked the places with asterisk comments), there are
references to a size value sz. The body of the function f can see sz,
the parameter of the surrounding function makeRoundedRectangleMa
ker, because it is in a surrounding scope. The function f captures the
reference to sz at the time makeRoundedRectangleMaker is called,
and keeps that reference when f is returned and assigned to maker:
let maker = makeRoundedRectangleMaker(CGSize(width:45, height:20))
That is why maker is now a function that, when it is called, creates
and returns an image of the particular size 45,20 even though it itself
will be called with no parameters. The knowledge of what size of
image to produce has been baked into the function referred to by mak
er. Looking at it another way, makeRoundedRectangleMaker is a
factory for creating a whole family of functions similar to maker,
each of which produces an image of one particular size. That’s a
dramatic illustration of the power of closures.

--- Page 126 ---
Before I leave makeRoundedRectangleMaker, I’d like to rewrite it in
a Swiftier fashion. Within f, there is no need to create im and then
return it; we can return the result of calling imageOfSize directly:
func makeRoundedRectangleMaker(_ sz:CGSize) -> () -> UIImage { 
    func f () -> UIImage { 
        return imageOfSize(sz) { 
            let p = UIBezierPath( 
                roundedRect: CGRect(origin:CGPoint.zero, size:sz), 
                cornerRadius: 8) 
            p.stroke() 
        } 
    } 
    return f 
}
But there is no need to declare f and then return it either; it can be an
anonymous function and we can return it directly:
func makeRoundedRectangleMaker(_ sz:CGSize) -> () -> UIImage { 
    return { 
        return imageOfSize(sz) { 
            let p = UIBezierPath( 
                roundedRect: CGRect(origin:CGPoint.zero, size:sz), 
                cornerRadius: 8) 
            p.stroke() 
        } 
    } 
}
But our anonymous function consists of nothing but a return
statement; the anonymous function parameter to imageOfSize
consists of multiple statements, but the imageOfSize call itself is still
just one Swift statement. We can omit the keyword return (and we
could omit the remaining return too, but I prefer not to):

--- Page 127 ---
func makeRoundedRectangleMaker(_ sz:CGSize) -> () -> UIImage { 
    return { 
        imageOfSize(sz) { 
            let p = UIBezierPath( 
                roundedRect: CGRect(origin:CGPoint.zero, size:sz), 
                cornerRadius: 8) 
            p.stroke() 
        } 
    } 
}
Closure Setting a Captured Variable
The power that a closure gets through its ability to capture its
environment is even greater than I’ve shown so far. If a closure
captures a reference to a variable outside itself, and if that variable is
settable, then the closure can set the variable.
Let’s say I’ve declared this simple function. All it does is to accept a
function that takes an Int parameter, and to call that function with an
argument of 100:
func pass100 (_ f:(Int) -> ()) { 
    f(100) 
}
Now, look closely at this code and try to guess what will happen
when we run it:
var x = 0 
print(x) // ? 
func setX(newX:Int) { 
    x = newX 
} 

--- Page 128 ---
pass100(setX) 
print(x) // ?
The first print(x) call obviously produces 0. The second print(x)
call produces 100! The pass100 function has reached into my code
and changed the value of my variable x. That’s because the function s
etX that I passed to pass100 contains a reference to x; not only does
it contain it, but it captures it; not only does it capture it, but it sets its
value. That x is my x. pass100 was able to set my x just as readily as
I would have set it by calling setX directly.
Closure Preserving Captured Environment
When a closure captures its environment, it preserves that
environment even if nothing else does. Here’s an example calculated
to blow your mind — a function that modifies a function:
func countAdder(_ f: @escaping () -> ()) -> () -> () { 
    var ct = 0 
    return { 
        ct = ct + 1 
        print("count is \(ct)") 
        f() 
    } 
}
The function countAdder accepts a function as its parameter and
returns a function as its result. (I’ll explain the @escaping attribute in
the next section.) The function that it returns calls the function that it
accepts, with a little bit added: it increments a variable and reports the
result. So now try to guess what will happen when we run this code:

--- Page 129 ---
func greet () { 
    print("howdy") 
} 
let countedGreet = countAdder(greet) 
countedGreet() // ? 
countedGreet() // ? 
countedGreet() // ?
What we’ve done here is to take a function greet, which prints "how
dy", and pass it through countAdder. What comes out the other side
of countAdder is a new function, which we’ve named
countedGreet. We then call countedGreet three times. Here’s what
appears in the console:
count is 1 
howdy 
count is 2 
howdy 
count is 3 
howdy
Clearly, countAdder has added to the functionality of the function
that was passed into it the ability to report how many times it is
called. Now ask yourself: Where on earth is the variable that
maintains this count? Inside countAdder, it was a local variable ct.
But it isn’t declared inside the anonymous function that countAdder
returns. That’s deliberate! If it were declared inside the anonymous
function, we would be setting ct to 0 every time countedGreet is
called — we wouldn’t be counting. Instead, ct is initialized to 0 once
and then captured by the anonymous function. This variable is
preserved as part of the environment of countedGreet — it is outside

--- Page 130 ---
countedGreet in some mysterious environment-preserving world, so
that it can be incremented every time countedGreet is called.
Escaping Closures
If a function passed around as a value will be preserved for later
execution, rather than being called directly, it is a closure that
captures and preserves its environment over time. That’s called an
escaping closure. In some situations, the function’s type must be
explicitly marked @escaping. The compiler will detect violations of
this rule, so if you find the rule confusing, don’t worry about it; just
let the compiler enforce it for you.
This function is legal because it receives a function and calls it
directly:
func funcCaller(f:() -> ()) { 
    f() 
}
And this function is legal, even though it returns a function to be
executed later, because it also creates that function internally. The
function that it returns is an escaping closure, but the type of the
function’s returned value does not have to be marked as @escaping:
func funcMaker() -> () -> () { 
    return { print("hello world") } 
}
But this function is illegal. It receives a function as a parameter and
returns that function to be executed later:

--- Page 131 ---
func funcPasser(f:() -> ()) -> () -> () { // compile error 
    return f 
}
The solution is to mark the type of the incoming parameter f as @esc
aping, and the compiler will prompt you to do so:
func funcPasser(f:@escaping () -> ()) -> () -> () { 
    return f 
}
A secondary feature of escaping closures is that, when you refer to a
property or method of self within the function body, the compiler
may insist that you say self explicitly. That’s because such a
reference captures self, and the compiler wants you to acknowledge
this fact by saying self:
let f1 = funcPasser { 
    print(view.bounds) // compile error, because self.view is implied 
} 
let f2 = funcPasser { 
    print(self.view.bounds) // ok 
}
I’ll return to that point when I talk about memory management in
Chapter 5.
Curried Functions
Return once more to makeRoundedRectangleMaker:
func makeRoundedRectangleMaker(_ sz:CGSize) -> () -> UIImage { 
    return { 

--- Page 132 ---
        imageOfSize(sz) { 
            let p = UIBezierPath( 
                roundedRect: CGRect(origin:CGPoint.zero, size:sz), 
                cornerRadius: 8) 
            p.stroke() 
        } 
    } 
}
There’s something I don’t like about this method: the size of the
rounded rectangle that it creates is a parameter (sz), but the cornerR
adius of the rounded rectangle is hard-coded as 8. I’d like the ability
to pass a value for the corner radius as part of the call. I can think of
two ways to do that. One is to give makeRoundedRectangleMaker
itself another parameter:
func makeRoundedRectangleMaker(_ sz:CGSize, _ r:CGFloat) -> () -> UIImag
e { 
    return { 
        imageOfSize(sz) { 
            let p = UIBezierPath( 
                roundedRect: CGRect(origin:CGPoint.zero, size:sz), 
                cornerRadius: r) 
            p.stroke() 
        } 
    } 
}
And we would then call it like this:
let maker = makeRoundedRectangleMaker(CGSize(width:45, height:20), 8)
But there’s another way. The function that we are returning from mak
eRoundedRectangleMaker takes no parameters. Instead, it could take

--- Page 133 ---
the extra parameter:
func makeRoundedRectangleMaker(_ sz:CGSize) -> (CGFloat) -> UIImage { 
    return { r in 
        imageOfSize(sz) { 
            let p = UIBezierPath( 
                roundedRect: CGRect(origin:CGPoint.zero, size:sz), 
                cornerRadius: r) 
            p.stroke() 
        } 
    } 
}
Now makeRoundedRectangleMaker returns a function that, itself,
takes one parameter, so we must remember to supply that when we
call it:
let maker = makeRoundedRectangleMaker(CGSize(width:45, height:20)) 
self.iv.image = maker(8)
If we don’t need to conserve maker for anything, we can of course do
all that in one line — a function call that yields a function which we
immediately call to obtain our image:
self.iv.image = makeRoundedRectangleMaker(CGSize(width:45, height:20))
(8)
When a function returns a function that takes a parameter in this way,
it is called a curried function (after the computer scientist Haskell
Curry).
Function References and Selectors

--- Page 134 ---
When you want to refer to a function by name — perhaps in order to
pass it as argument to another function — you can often use its bare
name. That’s what I’ve been doing throughout this chapter, in
examples like this:
func whatToAnimate() { // self.myButton is a button in the interface 
    self.myButton.frame.origin.y += 20 
} 
func whatToDoLater(finished:Bool) { 
    print("finished: \(finished)") 
} 
UIView.animate(withDuration:0.4, 
    animations: whatToAnimate, completion: whatToDoLater) // *
A bare name like whatToAnimate or whatToDoLater is a function
reference. It consists of the base name alone, the part of the function’s
name that precedes the parentheses. The lack of parentheses makes it
clear that this is a reference, not a call. Use of the bare name as a
function reference is legal when it’s unambiguous: in this particular
context, there’s only one function called whatToDoLater in scope,
and I’m using its name as argument in a function call where the
parameter type is known (namely, (Bool) -> ()).
But now consider the following situation. Just as I can pass a function
as an argument, I can assign a function as a value to a variable. And
suppose I have two functions with the same name, one that takes a
parameter, and one that doesn’t:
class Dog { 
    func bark() { 
        print("woof") 
    } 

--- Page 135 ---
    func bark(_ loudly:Bool) { 
        if loudly { 
            print("WOOF") 
        } else { 
            self.bark() 
        } 
    } 
    func test() { 
        let barkFunction = bark // compile error 
        // ... 
    } 
}
That code won’t compile, because the bare name bark is ambiguous
in this context: which bark method does it refer to? To solve this
problem, Swift provides a notation allowing you to refer to a function
more precisely. This notation has two parts:
Full name
The full name of a Swift function is the base name along with
parentheses containing the external names of its parameters, each
followed by colon (and no commas or spaces). If the external
name of a parameter is suppressed, we represent its external name
as an underscore.
Signature
The signature of a Swift function may be appended to its bare
name (or full name) with the keyword as.
So, for example:
func say(_ s:String, times:Int) {

--- Page 136 ---
That method has full name say(_:times:) but may be referred to
using a bare name and signature as say as (String, Int) -> ().
In our bark example, use of the full name solves the problem if the
function to which we want a reference is the one that takes a
parameter:
class Dog { 
    func bark() { 
        // ... as before ... 
    } 
    func bark(_ loudly:Bool) { 
        // ... as before ... 
    } 
    func test() { 
        let barkFunction = bark(_:) // fine 
    } 
}
But use of the full name doesn’t solve the problem if the function to
which we want a reference is the one that takes no parameters,
because in that case the full name is the bare name, which is exactly
what’s ambiguous in this context. Use of the signature solves the
problem:
class Dog { 
    func bark() { 
        // ... as before ... 
    } 
    func bark(_ loudly:Bool) { 
        // ... as before ... 
    } 
    func test() { 
        let barkFunction = bark as () -> () // fine 

--- Page 137 ---
    } 
}
Obviously, an explicit signature is needed also when a function is
overloaded:
class Dog { 
    func bark() { 
    } 
    func bark(_ loudly:Bool) { 
    } 
    func bark(_ times:Int) { 
    } 
    func test() { 
        let barkFunction = bark(_:) // compile error 
    } 
}
Here, we have said that we want the bark that takes one parameter,
but there are two such bark functions, one whose parameter is a
Bool, the other whose parameter is an Int. The signature
disambiguates (and we can use the bare name):
let barkFunction = bark as (Int) -> () // "times", not "loudly"
Function Reference Scope
In the foregoing examples of function references, there was no need
to tell the compiler where the function is defined. That’s because the
function is already in scope at the point where the function reference
appears. If you can call the function without supplying further
information, you can form the function reference without supplying
further information.

--- Page 138 ---
However, a function reference can supply further information about
where a function is defined; and sometimes it must do so. This is
done by prefixing an instance or class to the function reference, using
dot-notation. There are situations where the compiler would force
you to use self to call a function; in those situations, you will have
to use self to refer to the function as well:
class Dog { 
    func bark() { 
    } 
    func bark(_ loudly:Bool) { 
    } 
    func test() { 
        let f = { 
            return self.bark(_:) // self required here 
        } 
    } 
}
To form a function reference to an instance method of another type,
you have two choices. If you have on hand an instance of that type,
you can use dot-notation with a reference to that instance:
class Cat { 
    func purr() { 
    } 
} 
class Dog { 
    let cat = Cat() 
    func test() { 
        let purrFunction = cat.purr 
    } 
}

--- Page 139 ---
The other possibility is to use the type with dot-notation (this works
even if the function is an instance method):
class Cat { 
    func purr() { 
    } 
} 
class Dog { 
    func bark() { 
    } 
    func test() { 
        let barkFunction = Dog.bark // legal but not necessary 
        let purrFunction = Cat.purr 
    } 
}
If you use the type with dot-notation and you need to disambiguate
the function reference by giving its signature, the signature must
describe the curried static/class version of the instance method (see
“The Secret Life of Instance Methods”):
class Cat { 
    func purr() { 
    } 
    func purr(_ loudly:Bool) { 
    } 
} 
class Dog { 
    func test() { 
        let purrFunction = Cat.purr as (Cat) -> () -> Void 
    } 
}
Selectors

--- Page 140 ---
In Objective-C, a selector is a kind of method reference. In iOS
programming, you might have to call a Cocoa method that wants a
selector as one of its parameters; typically, this parameter will be
named either selector: or action:. Usually, such a method also
requires that you provide a target (an object reference); the idea is
that the runtime can later call the method by turning the selector into
a message and sending that message to that target.
Unfortunately, this architecture can be extremely risky. The reason is
that to form the selector, it is necessary to construct a string
representing a method’s Objective-C name. If you construct that
string incorrectly, then when the time comes to send the message to
the target, the runtime will find that the target can’t handle that
message, because it has no such method, and the app comes to a
violent and premature halt, dumping into the console the dreaded
phrase “unrecognized selector.” Here’s a typical recipe for failure:
class ViewController : UIViewController { 
    @IBOutlet var button : UIButton! 
    func viewDidLoad() { 
        super.viewDidLoad() 
        self.button.addTarget( // prepare to crash! 
            self, action: "buttonPressed", for: .touchUpInside) 
    } 
    @objc func buttonPressed(_ sender: Any) { 
        // ... 
    } 
}
In that code, self.button is a button in the interface, and we are
configuring it by calling addTarget(action:for:), so that when the
button is tapped, our buttonPressed method will be called. But we

--- Page 141 ---
are configuring it incorrectly! Unfortunately, "buttonPressed" is
not the Objective-C name of our buttonPressed method; the correct
name would have been "buttonPressed:", with a colon. (I’ll
explain why in Appendix A.) Therefore, our app will crash when the
user taps that button.
The point is that if you don’t know the rules for forming a selector
string — or even if you do, but you make a typing mistake — an
“unrecognized selector” crash is likely to result. Humans are fallible,
and therefore “unrecognized selector” crashes have historically been
extremely common among iOS programmers. The Swift compiler,
however, is not fallible in this way. Therefore, Swift provides a way
to let the compiler form the selector for you, by means of #selector
syntax.
To ask the compiler to form an Objective-C selector for you, you use
#selector(...) with a function reference inside the parentheses.
We would rewrite our button action example like this:
class ViewController : UIViewController { 
    @IBOutlet var button : UIButton! 
    func viewDidLoad() { 
        super.viewDidLoad() 
        self.button.addTarget( 
            self, action: #selector(buttonPressed), for: .touchUpInside) 
    } 
    @objc func buttonPressed(_ sender: Any) { 
        // ... 
    } 
}
When you use that notation, two wonderful things happen:

--- Page 142 ---
The compiler validates the function reference
If your function reference isn’t valid, your code won’t even
compile. The compiler also checks that this function is exposed to
Objective-C; there’s no point forming a selector for a method that
Objective-C can’t see, as your app would crash if Objective-C
were to try to call such a method. To ensure Objective-C
visibility, the method may need to be marked with the @objc
attribute; the compiler will enforce this requirement.
The compiler forms the Objective-C selector for you
If your code compiles, the actual selector that will be passed into
this parameter is guaranteed to be correct. You might form the
selector incorrectly, but the compiler won’t! It is impossible that
the resulting selector should fail to match the method, and there is
no chance of an “unrecognized selector” crash.
Very rarely, you still might need to create a selector manually. To do
so, you can use a string, or you can instantiate Selector with the string
as argument — for example, Selector("woohoo:").
WARNING
You can still crash, even with #selector syntax, by sending an action message
to the wrong target. In the preceding example, if you changed self, the first
argument of the addTarget call, to self.button, you’d crash at runtime with
“unrecognized selector” — because the buttonPressed method is declared in
ViewController, not in UIButton. Unfortunately, the compiler won’t help you
with this kind of mistake.

--- Page 143 ---
Chapter 3. Variables and
Simple Types
A variable is a named “shoebox” whose contained value must be of a
single well-defined type. Every variable must be explicitly and
formally declared. To put a value into the shoebox, causing the
variable name to refer to that value, you assign the value to the
variable. The variable name becomes a reference to that value.
This chapter goes into detail about declaration and initialization of
variables. It then discusses all the primary built-in Swift simple types.
(I mean “simple” as opposed to collections; the primary built-in
collection types are discussed at the end of Chapter 4.)
Variable Scope and Lifetime
A variable not only gives its referent a name; it also, by virtue of
where it is declared, endows its referent with a particular scope
(visibility) and lifetime. (See “Scope and Lifetime”.) Assigning a
value to a variable is a way of ensuring that this value can be seen by
code that needs to see it and that it persists long enough to serve its
purpose. There are three distinct levels of variable scope and lifetime:
Global variables

--- Page 144 ---
A global variable, or simply a global, is a variable declared at the
top level of a Swift file. A global variable lives as long as the file
lives, which is as long as the program runs. A global variable is
visible everywhere (that’s what “global” means). It is visible to all
code within the same file, because it is at top level; any other
code in the same file is therefore at the same level or at a lower
contained level of scope. Moreover, it is visible (by default) to all
code within any other file in the same module, because Swift files
in the same module can automatically see one another, and hence
can see one another’s top levels:
// File1: 
let globalVariable = "global" 
class Dog { 
    func printGlobal() { 
        print(globalVariable) // * 
    } 
} 
// File2: 
class Cat { 
    func printGlobal() { 
        print(globalVariable) // * 
    } 
}
Properties
A property is a variable declared at the top level of an object type
declaration (an enum, struct, or class). There are two kinds of
properties: instance properties and static/class properties.
Instance properties
By default, a property is an instance property. Its value can
differ for each instance of this object type, as I explained in
Chapter 1. Its lifetime is the same as the lifetime of the
instance. An instance comes into existence through deliberate

--- Page 145 ---
instantiation of an object type; the subsequent lifetime of the
instance, and hence of its instance properties, depends
primarily on the lifetime of the variable to which the instance
itself is assigned.
Static/class properties
A property is a static/class property if its declaration is
preceded by the keyword static or class. (I’ll go into detail
about those terms in Chapter 4.) Its lifetime is the same as the
lifetime of the object type. If the object type is declared at the
top level of a file, the property lives as long as the program
runs.
A property is visible only by way of the object. An object’s
methods can see that object’s properties directly; such code can
refer to the property using dot-notation with self, and I always
do this as a matter of style, but self can usually be omitted
except for purposes of disambiguation. An instance property is
also visible (by default) to other code, provided the other code has
a reference to this instance; in that case, the property can be
referred to through dot-notation with the instance reference. A
static/class property is visible (by default) to other code that can
see the name of this object type; in that case, it can be referred to
through dot-notation with the object type:
// File1: 
class Dog { 
    static let staticProperty = "staticProperty" 
    let instanceProperty = "instanceProperty" 
    func printInstanceProperty() { 
        print(self.instanceProperty) // * 
    } 
} 
// File2: 
class Cat { 
    func printDogStaticProperty() { 

--- Page 146 ---
        print(Dog.staticProperty) // * 
    } 
    func printDogInstanceProperty() { 
        let d = Dog() 
        print(d.instanceProperty) // * 
    } 
}
Local variables
A local variable is a variable declared inside a function body. A
local variable lives only as long as its surrounding curly-braces
scope lives: it comes into existence when the path of execution
passes into the scope and reaches the variable declaration, and it
goes out of existence when the path of execution exits the scope.
Local variables are sometimes called automatic, to signify that
they come into and go out of existence automatically. A local
variable can be seen only by subsequent code within the same
scope (including a subsequent deeper scope within the same
scope):
class Dog { 
    func printLocalVariable() { 
        let localVariable = "local" 
        print(localVariable) // * 
    } 
}
Variable Declaration
A variable is declared with let or var:
With let, the variable becomes a constant — its value can never
be changed after the first assignment of a value.

--- Page 147 ---
With var, the variable is a true variable, and its value can be
changed by subsequent assignment.
A variable declaration is usually accompanied by initialization —
you use an equal sign to assign the variable a value, as part of the
declaration. That, however, is not a requirement; it is legal to declare
a variable without immediately initializing it.
What is not legal is to declare a variable without giving it a type. A
variable must have a type from the outset, and that type can never be
changed. A variable declared with var can have its value changed by
subsequent assignment, but the new value must conform to the
variable’s fixed type.
You can give a variable a type explicitly or implicitly:
Explicit variable type declaration
After the variable’s name in the declaration, add a colon and the
name of the type:
var x : Int
Implicit variable type by initialization
If you initialize the variable as part of the declaration, and if you
provide no explicit type, Swift will infer its type, based on the
value with which it is initialized:
var x = 1 // and now x is an Int

--- Page 148 ---
It is perfectly possible to declare a variable’s type explicitly and
assign it an initial value, all in one move:
var x : Int = 1
In that example, the explicit type declaration is superfluous, because
the type (Int) would have been inferred from the initial value.
Sometimes, however, providing an explicit type, even while also
assigning an initial value, is not superfluous. Here are the main
situations where that’s the case:
Swift’s inference would be wrong
A very common case in my own code is when I want to provide
the initial value as a numeric literal. Swift will infer either Int or
Double, depending on whether the literal contains a decimal
point. But there are a lot of other numeric types! When I mean
one of those, I will provide the type explicitly, like this:
let separator : CGFloat = 2.0
Swift can’t infer the type
Sometimes, the type of the initial value is completely unknown to
the compiler unless you tell it. A very common case involves
option sets (discussed in Chapter 4). This won’t compile:
var opts = [.autoreverse, .repeat] // compile error
The problem is that Swift doesn’t know the type of .autorevers
e and .repeat unless we tell it:
let opts : UIView.AnimationOptions = [.autoreverse, .repeat]

--- Page 149 ---
The programmer can’t infer the type
I frequently include a superfluous explicit type declaration as a
kind of note to myself. Here’s an example from my own code:
let duration : CMTime = track.timeRange.duration
In that code, track is an AVAssetTrack. Swift knows perfectly
well that the duration property of an AVAssetTrack’s timeRange
property is a CMTime. But I don’t! In order to remind myself of
that fact, I’ve shown the type explicitly.
TIP
Even if the compiler can infer a variable’s type correctly from its initial value,
such inference takes time. You can reduce compilation times by providing your
variable declarations with explicit types.
As I’ve already said, a variable doesn’t have to be initialized when it
is declared — even if the variable is a constant. It is legal to write
this:
let x : Int
Now x is an empty shoebox — an Int variable without an initial
value. You can assign this variable an initial value later. Since this
particular variable is a constant, that initial value will be its only
value from then on.
In the case of an instance property of an object (at the top level of an
enum, struct, or class declaration), that sort of thing is quite normal,

--- Page 150 ---
because the property can be initialized in the object’s initializer
function. (I’ll have more to say about that in Chapter 4.) For a local
variable, however, such behavior is unusual, and I strongly urge you
to avoid it. It isn’t a disaster — the Swift compiler will stop you from
trying to use a variable that has never been assigned a value — but
it’s not a good habit. A local variable should generally be initialized
as part of its declaration.
The exception that proves the rule is what we might call conditional
initialization. Sometimes, we don’t know a variable’s initial value
until we’ve performed some sort of conditional test. The variable
itself, however, can be declared only once; so it must be declared in
advance and conditionally initialized afterward. This sort of thing is
not unreasonable:
let timed : Bool 
if val == 1 { 
    timed = true 
} else { 
    timed = false 
}
That particular example can arguably be better expressed in other
ways (which I’ll come to in Chapter 5), but there are situations where
conditional initialization is the cleanest approach.
When a variable’s address is to be passed as argument to a function,
the variable must be declared and initialized beforehand, even if the
initial value is fake. Recall this example from Chapter 2:

--- Page 151 ---
var r : CGFloat = 0 
var g : CGFloat = 0 
var b : CGFloat = 0 
var a : CGFloat = 0 
c.getRed(&r, green: &g, blue: &b, alpha: &a)
After that code runs, our four CGFloat 0 values will have been
replaced; they were just momentary placeholders, to satisfy the
compiler.
On rare occasions, you’ll want to call a Cocoa method that returns a
value immediately and later uses that value in a function passed to
that same method. For example, Cocoa has a UIApplication instance
method declared like this:
func beginBackgroundTask( 
    expirationHandler handler: (() -> Void)? = nil) 
        -> UIBackgroundTaskIdentifier
beginBackgroundTask(expirationHandler:) returns an identifier
object, and will later call the expirationHandler: function passed
to it — a function in which you will want to use the identifier object
that was returned at the outset. Swift’s safety rules won’t let you
declare the variable that holds this identifier and use it in an
anonymous function all in the same statement:
let bti = UIApplication.shared.beginBackgroundTask { 
    UIApplication.shared.endBackgroundTask(bti) 
} // error: variable used within its own initial value
Therefore, you need to declare the variable beforehand; but then
Swift has another complaint:

--- Page 152 ---
var bti : UIBackgroundTaskIdentifier 
bti = UIApplication.shared.beginBackgroundTask { 
    UIApplication.shared.endBackgroundTask(bti) 
} // error: variable captured by a closure before being initialized
One solution is to declare the variable beforehand with a fake initial
value as a placeholder:
var bti : UIBackgroundTaskIdentifier = .invalid 
bti = UIApplication.shared.beginBackgroundTask { 
    UIApplication.shared.endBackgroundTask(bti) 
}
Computed Variable Initialization
Sometimes, you’d like to run several lines of code in order to
compute a variable’s initial value. A simple and compact way to
express this is with a define-and-call anonymous function (see
“Define-and-Call”). I’ll illustrate by rewriting an earlier example:
let timed : Bool = { 
    if val == 1 { 
        return true 
    } else { 
        return false 
    } 
}()
You can do the same thing when you’re initializing an instance
property. Here’s a class with an image (a UIImage) that I’m going to
need many times later on. It makes sense to create this image in
advance as a constant instance property of the class. To create it
means to draw it. That takes several lines of code. So I declare and

--- Page 153 ---
initialize the property by defining and calling an anonymous function,
like this (for my imageOfSize utility, see Chapter 2):
class RootViewController : UITableViewController { 
    let cellBackgroundImage : UIImage = { 
        return imageOfSize(CGSize(width:320, height:44)) { 
            // ... drawing goes here ... 
        } 
    }() 
    // ... rest of class goes here ... 
}
You might ask: Instead of a define-and-call initializer, why don’t I
declare an instance method and initialize the instance property by
calling that method? The reason is that that’s illegal:
class RootViewController : UITableViewController { 
    let cellBackgroundImage : UIImage = self.makeTheImage() // compile e
rror 
    func makeTheImage() -> UIImage { 
        return imageOfSize(CGSize(width:320, height:44)) { 
            // ... drawing goes here ... 
        } 
    } 
}
The problem is that, at the time of initializing the instance property,
there is no instance yet — the instance is what we are in the process
of creating. Therefore you can’t refer to self (implicitly or
explicitly) in a property declaration’s initializer. A define-and-call
anonymous function, however, is legal. But the define-and-call
anonymous function still can’t refer to self! I’ll provide a
workaround a little later in this chapter.

--- Page 154 ---
Computed Variables
The variables I’ve been describing so far in this chapter have all been
stored variables. The named shoebox analogy applies: a value can be
put into the shoebox by assigning it to the variable, and it then sits
there and can be retrieved later by referring to the variable, for as
long the variable lives.
But a variable in Swift can work in a completely different way: it can
be computed. This means that the variable, instead of having a value,
has functions. One function, the setter, is called when the variable is
assigned to. The other function, the getter, is called when the variable
is referred to. Here’s some code illustrating schematically the syntax
for declaring a computed variable:
var now : String { 
  
    get { 
  
        return Date().description 
  
    } 
    set { 
  
        print(newValue) 
  
    } 
}
The variable must be declared with var (not let). Its type must
be declared explicitly. The type is followed immediately by curly
braces.
The getter function is called get. There is no formal function
declaration; the word get is simply followed immediately by a
function body in curly braces.


--- Page 155 ---
The getter function must return a value of the same type as the
variable. When the getter is a single statement, it is legal to omit
the keyword return (starting in Swift 5.1).
The setter function is called set. There is no formal function
declaration; the word set is simply followed immediately by a
function body in curly braces.
The setter behaves like a function taking one parameter. By
default, this parameter arrives into the setter function body with
the local name newValue.
Here’s some code that illustrates the use of our computed variable.
You don’t treat it any differently than any other variable! To assign to
the variable, assign to it; to use the variable, use it. Behind the scenes,
though, the setter and getter functions are called:
now = "Howdy" // Howdy 
  
print(now) // 2019-06-26 17:03:30 +0000 
Assigning to now calls its setter. The argument passed into this
call is the assigned value; here, that’s "Howdy". That value arrives
in the set function as newValue. Our set function prints newVal
ue to the console.
Fetching now calls its getter. Our get function obtains the current
date-time and translates it into a string, and returns the string. Our
code then prints that string to the console.
There are a couple of variants on the basic syntax I’ve just illustrated:
The name of the set function parameter doesn’t have to be newVa
lue. To specify a different name, put it in parentheses after the
word set, like this:

--- Page 156 ---
set (val) { // now you can use "val" inside the set
ter function body
There doesn’t have to be a setter. If the setter is omitted, this
becomes a read-only variable. This is the computed variable
equivalent of a let variable: attempting to assign to it is a compile
error.
There must always be a getter! However, if there is no setter, the
word get and the curly braces that follow it can be omitted. This
is a legal declaration of a read-only variable (omitting the return
keyword):
var now : String { 
    Date().description 
}
Computed Properties
In real life, your main use of computed variables will nearly always
be as instance properties. Here are some common ways in which
computed properties are useful:
Façade for a longer expression
When a value can be readily calculated or obtained each time it is
needed, it often makes for simpler syntax to express it as a read-
only computed variable, which effectively acts as a shorthand for
a longer expression. Here’s an example from my own code:
var mp : MPMusicPlayerController { 
    MPMusicPlayerController.systemMusicPlayer 
} 

--- Page 157 ---
var nowPlayingItem : MPMediaItem? { 
    self.mp.nowPlayingItem 
}
No work is saved by these computed variables; each time we ask
for self.nowPlayingItem, we are fetching MPMusicPlayerCont
roller.systemMusicPlayer.nowPlayingItem. Still, the clarity
and convenience of the resulting code justifies the use of
computed variables here.
Façade for an elaborate calculation
A computed variable getter can encapsulate multiple lines of
code, in effect turning a method into a property. Here’s an
example from my own code:
var authorOfItem : String? { 
    guard let authorNodes = 
        self.extensionElements( 
            withXMLNamespace: "http://www.tidbits.com/dummy", 
            elementName: "app_author_name") 
        else {return nil} 
    guard let authorNode = authorNodes.last as? FPExtensionNode 
        else {return nil} 
    return authorNode.stringValue 
}
In that example, I’m diving into some parsed XML and extracting
a value. I could have declared this as a method func authorOfIt
em() -> String?, but a method expresses a process, whereas a
computed property characterizes it more intuitively as a thing.
Façade for storage
A computed variable can sit in front of one or more stored
variables, acting as a gatekeeper on how those stored variables are
set and fetched. This is comparable to an accessor method in

--- Page 158 ---
Objective-C. Commonly, a public computed variable is backed by
a private stored variable. The simplest possible storage façade
would do no more than get and set the private stored variable
directly:
private var _p : String = "" 
var p : String { 
    get { 
        self._p 
    } 
    set { 
        self._p = newValue 
    } 
}
That’s legal but pointless. A storage façade becomes useful when
it does other things while getting or setting the stored variable.
Here’s a more realistic example: a “clamped” setter. This is an Int
property to which only values between 0 and 5 can be assigned;
larger values are replaced by 5, and smaller values are replaced by
0:
private var _pp : Int = 0 
var pp : Int { 
    get { 
        self._pp 
    } 
    set { 
        self._pp = max(min(newValue,5),0) 
    } 
}
As the preceding examples demonstrate, a computed instance
property getter or setter can refer to other instance members. That’s
important, because in general the initializer for a stored property can’t

--- Page 159 ---
do that. The reason it’s legal for a computed property is that the getter
and setter functions won’t be called until the instance actually exists.
Property Wrappers
If we have several storage façade computed properties that effectively
do the same thing, we’re going to end up with a lot of repeated code.
Imagine implementing more than one Int property with a clamped
setter, as in the preceding section. It would be nice to move the
common functionality off into a single location. Starting in Swift 5.1,
we can do that, using a property wrapper.
A property wrapper is declared as a type marked with the @property
Wrapper attribute, and must have a wrappedValue computed
property. Here’s a property wrapper implementing the “clamped”
pattern:
@propertyWrapper struct Clamped { 
    private var _i : Int = 0 
    var wrappedValue : Int { 
        get { 
            self._i 
        } 
        set { 
            self._i = Swift.max(Swift.min(newValue,5),0) 
        } 
    } 
}
The result is that we can declare a computed property marked with a
custom attribute whose name is the same as that struct (@Clamped),
with no getter or setter:

--- Page 160 ---
@Clamped var p
Our property p doesn’t need to be initialized, because it’s a computed
property. And it doesn’t need a getter or a setter — indeed, in this
case it doesn’t even need a type declaration — because the wrappedV
alue computed property of the Clamped struct supplies them!
Behind the scenes, an actual Clamped instance has been created for
us. When we set self.p to some value through assignment, the
assignment passes through the Clamped instance’s wrappedValue
setter, and the resulting clamped value is stored in the Clamped
instance’s _i property. When we fetch the value of self.p, what we
get is the value returned from the Clamped instance’s wrappedValue
getter, which is the value stored in the Clamped instance’s _i
property.
Thanks to our property wrapper, we have encapsulated this computed
property pattern, which means we can now declare another @Clamped
property which will behave in just the same way. It’s also nice that
this pattern now has a name: the declaration @Clamped var tells us
what the behavior of this computed property will be.
(Believe it or not, I created the Clamped example before discovering
that the Swift language proposal for property wrappers uses the same
example!)
There’s considerably more to know about property wrappers, but I’ll
postpone further discussion to Chapter 5, after I’ve explained other

--- Page 161 ---
language features that will help you appreciate their power and
flexibility.
Setter Observers
Computed variables are not needed as a stored variable façade as
often as you might suppose. That’s because Swift has another feature,
which lets you inject functionality into the setter of a stored variable
— setter observers. These are functions that are called just before and
just after other code sets a stored variable.
The syntax for declaring a variable with a setter observer is very
similar to the syntax for declaring a computed variable; you can write
a willSet function, a didSet function, or both:
var s = "whatever" { 
  
    willSet { 
  
        print(newValue) 
  
    } 
    didSet { 
  
        print(oldValue) 
  
        // self.s = "something else" 
    } 
}
The variable must be declared with var (not let). It can be
assigned an initial value. It is then followed immediately by curly
braces.
The willSet function, if there is one, is the word willSet
followed immediately by a function body in curly braces. It is

--- Page 162 ---
called when other code sets this variable, just before the variable
actually receives its new value.
By default, the willSet function receives the incoming new
value as newValue. You can change this name by writing a
different name in parentheses after the word willSet. The old
value is still sitting in the stored variable, and the willSet
function can access it there.
The didSet function, if there is one, is the word didSet followed
immediately by a function body in curly braces. It is called when
other code sets this variable, just after the variable actually
receives its new value.
By default, the didSet function receives the old value, which has
already been replaced as the value of the variable, as oldValue.
You can change this name by writing a different name in
parentheses after the word didSet. The new value is already
sitting in the stored variable, and the didSet function can access
it there. Moreover, it is legal for the didSet function to set the
stored variable to a different value.
NOTE
Setter observer functions are not called when the stored variable is initialized or
when the didSet function changes the stored variable’s value. That would be
circular!
In real-life iOS programming, you’ll want the visible interface to
reflect the state of your objects. A setter observer is a simple but
powerful way to synchronize the interface with a property. In this
example, we have an instance property of a view class, determining

--- Page 163 ---
how much the view should be rotated; every time this property
changes, we change the interface to reflect it, setting self.transfor
m so that the view is rotated by that amount:
var angle : CGFloat = 0 { 
    didSet { 
        // modify interface to match 
        self.transform = CGAffineTransform(rotationAngle: self.angle) 
    } 
}
A computed variable can’t have setter observers. But it doesn’t need
them! There’s a setter function, so anything additional that needs to
happen during setting can be programmed directly into that setter
function. (But a property-wrapped computed variable can have setter
observers.)
Lazy Initialization
The term lazy is not a pejorative puritanical judgment; it’s a formal
description of a useful behavior. If a stored variable is assigned an
initial value as part of its declaration, and if it uses lazy initialization,
then the initial value is not actually evaluated and assigned until
running code accesses the variable’s value.
There are three types of variable that can be initialized lazily in Swift:
Global variables
Global variables are automatically lazy. This makes sense if you
ask yourself when they should be initialized. As the app launches,
files and their top-level code are encountered. It would make no

--- Page 164 ---
sense to initialize globals now, because the app isn’t even running
yet. Thus global initialization must be postponed to some moment
that does make sense. Therefore, a global variable’s initialization
doesn’t happen until other code first refers to that global. Under
the hood, this behavior is implemented in such a way as to make
initialization both singular (it can happen only once) and thread-
safe.
Static properties
Static properties are automatically lazy. They behave exactly like
global variables, and for basically the same reason. (There are no
stored class properties in Swift, so class properties can’t be
initialized and thus can’t have lazy initialization.)
Instance properties
An instance property is not lazy by default, but it may be made
lazy by marking its declaration with the keyword lazy. This
property must be declared with var, not let. The initializer for
such a property might never be evaluated, namely if code assigns
the property a value before any code fetches the property’s value.
Singleton
Lazy initialization is often used to implement singleton. Singleton is a
pattern where all code is able to get access to a single shared instance
of a certain class:
class MyClass { 
    static let shared = MyClass() 
}
Now other code can obtain a reference to MyClass’s singleton by
saying MyClass.shared. The singleton instance is not created until

--- Page 165 ---
the first time other code says MyClass.shared; subsequently, no
matter how many times other code may say MyClass.shared, the
instance returned is always that same instance. (That is not what
would happen if this were a computed read-only property whose
getter calls MyClass() and returns that instance; do you see why?)
Lazy Initialization of Instance Properties
Why might you want an instance property to be lazy? One reason is
obvious: the initial value might be expensive to generate, so you’d
like to avoid generating it unless it is actually needed. But there’s
another reason that turns out to be even more important: a lazy
initializer can do things that a normal initializer can’t.
In particular, a lazy initializer can refer to the instance. A normal
initializer can’t do that, because the instance doesn’t yet exist at the
time that a normal initializer would need to run (we’re in the middle
of creating the instance, so it isn’t ready yet). A lazy initializer, by
contrast, is guaranteed not to run until some time after the instance
has fully come into existence, so referring to the instance is fine. This
code would be illegal if the arrow property weren’t declared lazy:
class MyView : UIView { 
    lazy var arrow = self.arrowImage() // legal 
    func arrowImage () -> UIImage { 
        // ... big image-generating code goes here ... 
    } 
}
A very common idiom is to initialize a lazy instance property with a
define-and-call anonymous function whose code can refer to self:

--- Page 166 ---
lazy var prog : UIProgressView = { 
    let p = UIProgressView(progressViewStyle: .default) 
    p.alpha = 0.7 
    p.trackTintColor = UIColor.clear 
    p.progressTintColor = UIColor.black 
    p.frame = 
        CGRect(x:0, y:0, width:self.view.bounds.size.width, height:20) 
// legal 
    p.progress = 1.0 
    return p 
}()
There’s no lazy let for instance properties, so you can’t readily
make a lazy instance property read-only. That’s unfortunate, because
there are some common situations that would benefit from such a
feature.
Suppose we want to arm ourselves (self) with a helper property
holding an instance of a Helper class that needs a reference back to s
elf. We also want this one Helper instance to persist for the entire
lifetime of self. We can enforce that rule by making helper a let
property and initializing it in its declaration. But we can’t pass self
into the Helper instance at that point, because we can’t refer to self
in the property declaration.
We can solve the problem by declaring the helper property lazy, but
then it has to be a var property, meaning that, in theory, other code
can come along and replace this Helper with another. Of course, we’ll
try not to let that happen; but the point is that the expression lazy va
r fails to express and enforce this policy as an unbreakable contract.
(It may be possible to work around the issue by making helper a
computed property acting as a façade on storage — and we can even

--- Page 167 ---
encapsulate that pattern as a property wrapper — but even then we
can enforce our policy only at runtime, not at compile time the way l
et does.)
WARNING
Unlike automatically lazy global and static variables, an instance property
marked lazy does not initialize itself in a thread-safe way. When used in a
multithreaded context, lazy instance properties can cause multiple initialization
and even crashes.
Built-In Simple Types
Every variable, and every value, must have a type. But what types are
there? Up to this point, I’ve assumed the existence of some types,
such as Int and String, without formally telling you about them.
Here’s a survey of the primary simple types provided by Swift, along
with some instance methods, global functions, and operators that
apply to them. (Collection types will be discussed at the end of
Chapter 4.)
Bool
The Bool object type (a struct) has only two values, commonly
regarded as true and false (or yes and no). You can represent these
values using the literal keywords true and false, and it is natural to
think of a Bool value as being either true or false:
var selected : Bool = false

--- Page 168 ---
In that code, selected is a Bool variable initialized to false; it can
subsequently be set to false or true, and to no other values.
Because of its simple yes-or-no state, a Bool variable of this kind is
often referred to as a flag.
Cocoa methods very often expect a Bool parameter or return a Bool
value. For example, when your app launches, Cocoa calls a method in
your code declared like this:
func application(_ application: UIApplication, 
    didFinishLaunchingWithOptions 
    launchOptions: [UIApplication.LaunchOptionsKey : Any]?) 
    -> Bool {
You can do anything you like in that method; often, you will do
nothing. But you must return a Bool! And in real life, that Bool will
probably be true. A minimal implementation looks like this:
func application(_ application: UIApplication, 
    didFinishLaunchingWithOptions 
    launchOptions: [UIApplication.LaunchOptionsKey : Any]?) 
    -> Bool { 
        return true 
}
A Bool is useful in conditions; as I’ll explain in Chapter 5, when you
say if something, the something is the condition, and is a Bool
or an expression that evaluates to a Bool. When you compare two
values using the equality comparison operator ==, the result is a Bool
— true if they are equal to each other, false if they are not:
if meaningOfLife == 42 { // ...

--- Page 169 ---
(I’ll talk more about equality comparison in a moment, when we
come to discuss types that can be compared, such as Int and String.)
When preparing a condition, you will sometimes find that it enhances
clarity to store the Bool value in a variable beforehand:
let comp = self.traitCollection.horizontalSizeClass == .compact 
if comp { // ...
Observe that, when employing that idiom, we use the Bool variable c
omp directly as the condition. There is no need to test explicitly
whether a Bool equals true or false; the conditional expression
itself is already testing that. It is pointless to say if comp == true,
because if comp already means “if comp is true.”
Since a Bool can be used as a condition, a call to a function that
returns a Bool can be used as a condition. Here’s an example from
my own code. I’ve declared a function that returns a Bool to say
whether the cards the user has selected constitute a correct answer to
the puzzle:
func isCorrect(_ cells:[CardCell]) -> Bool { // ...
I can then use a call to isCorrect as a condition:
if self.isCorrect(cellsToTest) { // ...
Unlike many computer languages, nothing else in Swift is implicitly
coerced to or treated as a Bool. In C, for example, a boolean is
actually a number, and 0 is false. But in Swift, nothing is false but fa
lse, and nothing is true but true.

--- Page 170 ---
The type name, Bool, comes from the English mathematician George
Boole; Boolean algebra provides operations on logical values. Bool
values are subject to these same operations:
! (not)
The ! unary operator reverses the truth value of the Bool to which
it is applied as a prefix. If ok is true, !ok is false — and vice
versa.
&& (logical-and)
Returns true only if both operands are true; otherwise, returns f
alse. If the first operand is false, the second operand is not even
evaluated (avoiding possible side effects).
|| (logical-or)
Returns true if either operand is true; otherwise, returns false.
If the first operand is true, the second operand is not even
evaluated (avoiding possible side effects).
If a logical operation is complicated or elaborate, parentheses around
subexpressions can help clarify both the logic and the order of
operations.
A common situation is that we have a Bool stored in a var variable
somewhere, and we want to reverse its value — that is, make it true
if it is false, and false if it is true. The ! operator solves the
problem; we fetch the variable’s value, reverse it with !, and assign
the result back into the variable:
v.isUserInteractionEnabled = !v.isUserInteractionEnabled

--- Page 171 ---
That, however, is cumbersome and error-prone, so there’s a simpler
way — call the toggle method on the Bool variable:
v.isUserInteractionEnabled.toggle()
Numbers
The main numeric types are Int and Double — meaning that, left to
your own devices, those are the types you’ll generally use. Other
numeric types exist mostly for compatibility with the C and
Objective-C APIs that Swift needs to be able to talk to when you’re
programming iOS.
INT
The Int object type (a struct) represents an integer between Int.min
and Int.max inclusive. The actual values of those limits might
depend on the platform and architecture under which the app runs, so
don’t count on them to be absolute; in my testing at this moment, they
are –2 and 2–1 respectively (64-bit words).
The easiest way to represent an Int value is as a numeric literal. A
numeric literal without a decimal point is taken as an Int by default.
Internal underscores are legal; this is useful for making long numbers
readable. Leading zeroes are legal; this is useful for padding and
aligning values in your code.
You can write an Int literal using binary, octal, or hexadecimal digits.
To do so, start the literal with 0b, 0o, or 0x respectively. For example,
0x10 is decimal 16.
63 63

--- Page 172 ---
TIP
Negative numbers are stored in the two’s complement format (consult
Wikipedia if you’re curious). You can write a binary literal that looks like the
underlying storage, but to use it you must pass it through the Int(bitPatter
n:) initializer.
DOUBLE
The Double object type (a struct) represents a floating-point number
to a precision of about 15 decimal places (64-bit storage).
The easiest way to represent a Double value is as a numeric literal. A
numeric literal containing a decimal point is taken as a Double by
default. Internal underscores and leading zeroes are legal.
A Double literal may not begin with a decimal point (unlike C and
Objective-C). If the value to be represented is between 0 and 1, start
the literal with a leading 0.
You can write a Double literal using scientific notation. Everything
after the letter e is the exponent of 10. You can omit the decimal point
if the fractional digits would be zero. For example, 3e2 is 3 times 10
(300).
You can write a Double literal using hexadecimal digits. To do so,
start the literal with 0x. You can use exponentiation here too (and
again, you can omit the decimal point); everything after the letter p is
the exponent of 2. For example, 0x10p2 is decimal 64, because you
are multiplying 16 by 2.
2
2

--- Page 173 ---
There are static properties Double.infinity and Double.pi, and an
instance property isZero, among others.
NUMERIC COERCION
Coercion is the conversion of a value from one type to another, and
numeric coercion is the conversion of a value from one numeric type
to another. Swift doesn’t really have explicit coercion, but it has
something that serves the same purpose — instantiation. Swift
numeric types are supplied with initializers that take another numeric
type as parameter. To convert an Int explicitly into a Double,
instantiate Double with the Int in the parentheses. To convert a
Double explicitly into an Int, instantiate Int with the Double in the
parentheses; this will truncate the original value (everything after the
decimal point will be thrown away):
let i = 10 
let x = Double(i) 
print(x) // 10.0, a Double 
let y = 3.8 
let j = Int(y) 
print(j) // 3, an Int
When numeric values are assigned to variables or passed as
arguments to a function, Swift can perform implicit coercion of
literals only. This code is legal:
let d : Double = 10
But this code is not legal, because what you’re assigning is a variable
(not a literal) of a different type; the compiler will stop you:

--- Page 174 ---
let i = 10 
let d : Double = i // compile error
The problem is that i is an Int and d is a Double, and never the twain
shall meet. The solution is to coerce explicitly as you assign or pass
the variable:
let i = 10 
let d : Double = Double(i)
The same rule holds when numeric values are combined by an
arithmetic operation. Swift will perform implicit coercion of literals
only. The usual situation is an Int combined with a Double; the Int is
treated as a Double:
let x = 10/3.0 
print(x) // 3.33333333333333
But variables of different numeric types must be coerced explicitly so
that they are the same type if you want to combine them in an
arithmetic operation:
let i = 10 
let n = 3.0 
let x = i / n // compile error; you need to say Double(i)
These rules are evidently a consequence of Swift’s strict typing; but
(as far as I am aware) they constitute very unusual treatment of
numeric values for a modern computer language, and will probably
drive you mad in short order. The examples I’ve given so far were
easily solved, but things can become more complicated if an
arithmetic expression is longer, and the problem is compounded by

--- Page 175 ---
the existence of other numeric types that are needed for compatibility
with Cocoa, as I shall now proceed to explain.
OTHER NUMERIC TYPES
If you were using Swift in some isolated, abstract world, you could
probably do all necessary arithmetic with Int and Double alone. But
when you’re programming iOS, you encounter Cocoa, which is full
of other numeric types; and Swift has types that match every one of
them. In addition to Int, there are signed integer types of various sizes
— Int8, Int16, Int32, Int64 — plus the unsigned integer type UInt
along with UInt8, UInt16, UInt32, and UInt64. In addition to Double,
there is the lower-precision Float (32-bit storage, about 6 or 7 decimal
places of precision), the even lower-precision Float16 (new in Swift
5.3), and the extended-precision Float80 — plus, in the Core
Graphics framework, CGFloat (whose size can be that of Float or
Double, depending on the bitness of the architecture).
You may also encounter a C numeric type when trying to interface
with a C API. These types, as far as Swift is concerned, are just type
aliases, meaning that they are alternate names for another type: a
CDouble (corresponding to C’s double) is just a Double by another
name, a CLong (C’s long) is an Int, and so on. Many other numeric
type aliases will arise in various Cocoa frameworks; for example,
TimeInterval (Objective-C NSTimeInterval) is merely a type alias for
Double.
Recall that you can’t assign, pass, or combine values of different
numeric types using variables; you have to coerce those values
explicitly to the correct type. But now it turns out that you’re being

--- Page 176 ---
flooded by Cocoa with numeric values of many types! Cocoa will
often hand you a numeric value that is neither an Int nor a Double —
and you won’t necessarily realize this, until the compiler stops you
dead in your tracks for some sort of type mismatch. You must then
figure out what you’ve done wrong and coerce everything to the same
type.
Here’s a typical example from one of my apps. A slider in the
interface is a UISlider, whose minimumValue and maximumValue are
Floats. In this code, s is a UISlider, g is a UIGestureRecognizer, and
we’re trying to use the gesture recognizer to move the slider’s
“thumb” to wherever the user tapped within the slider:
let pt = g.location(in:s) 
  
let percentage = pt.x / s.bounds.size.width 
  
let delta = percentage * (s.maximumValue - s.minimumValue) // compile er
ror 
That won’t compile. Here’s why:
pt is a CGPoint, and therefore pt.x is a CGFloat.
Luckily, s.bounds.size.width is also a CGFloat, so the second
line compiles; percentage is now inferred to be a CGFloat.
We now try to combine percentage with s.maximumValue and
s.minimumValue — and they are Floats, not CGFloats. That’s a
compile error.
This sort of thing is not an issue in C or Objective-C, where there is
implicit coercion; but in Swift a CGFloat can’t be combined with
Floats. We must coerce explicitly:

--- Page 177 ---
let delta = Float(percentage) * (s.maximumValue - s.minimumValue)
The good news here is that if you can get enough of your code to
compile, Xcode’s Quick Help feature will tell you what type Swift
has inferred for a selected variable (Figure 3-1). This can assist you in
tracking down your issues with numeric types.
Figure 3-1. Quick Help displays a variable’s type
Another problem is that not every numeric value can be coerced to a
numeric value of a different type. In particular, integers of various
sizes can be out of range with respect to integer types of other sizes.
For example, Int8.max is 127, so attempting to assign a literal 128 or
larger to an Int8 variable is illegal. Fortunately, the compiler will stop
you in that case, because it knows what the literal is. But now
consider coercing a variable value of a larger integer type to an Int8:
let i : Int16 = 128 
let ii = Int8(i)
That code is legal — and will crash at runtime. One solution is to call
the numeric exactly: initializer; this is a failable initializer —
meaning, as I’ll explain in Chapter 4, that you won’t crash, but you’ll
have to add code to test whether the coercion succeeded (and you’ll
understand what the test would be when you’ve read the discussion of
Optionals later in this chapter):

--- Page 178 ---
let i : Int16 = 128 
let ii = Int8(exactly:i) 
if // ... test to learn whether ii holds a real Int8
Yet another solution is to call the clamping: initializer; it always
succeeds, because an out of range value is forced to fall within range:
let i : Int16 = 128 
let ii = Int8(clamping:i) // 127
(There is also a truncatingIfNeeded: initializer, but you probably
won’t need to know about it unless you are deliberately manipulating
integers as binary, so I won’t describe it here.)
When a floating-point type, such as a Double, is coerced to an integer
type, the stuff after the decimal point is thrown away first and then
the coercion is attempted. Int8(127.9) succeeds, because 127 is in
bounds.
ARITHMETIC OPERATIONS
Swift’s arithmetic operators are as you would expect; they are
familiar from other computer languages as well as from real
arithmetic:
+ (addition operator)
Add the second operand to the first and return the result.
- (subtraction operator)
Subtract the second operand from the first and return the result. A
different operator (unary minus), used as a prefix, looks the same;
it returns the additive inverse of its single operand. (There is, in

--- Page 179 ---
fact, also a unary plus operator, which returns its operand
unchanged.)
* (multiplication operator)
Multiply the first operand by the second and return the result.
/ (division operator)
Divide the first operand by the second and return the result. As in
C, division of one Int by another Int yields an Int; any remaining
fraction is stripped away. 10/3 is 3, not 3-and-one-third.
% (remainder operator)
Divide the first operand by the second and return the remainder.
The result can be negative, if the first operand is negative; if the
second operand is negative, it is treated as positive. For floating-
point operands, use a method such as remainder(dividingBy:).
Integers also have a quotientAndRemainder(dividingBy:)
method, which returns a tuple of two integers labeled quotient
and remainder. If the question is whether one integer evenly
divides another, calling isMultiple(of:) may be clearer than
checking for a zero remainder.
Integer types can be treated as binary bitfields and subjected to binary
bitwise operations:
& (bitwise-and)
A bit in the result is 1 if and only if that bit is 1 in both operands.
| (bitwise-or)
A bit in the result is 0 if and only if that bit is 0 in both operands.
^ (bitwise-or, exclusive)

--- Page 180 ---
A bit in the result is 1 if and only if that bit is not identical in both
operands.
~ (bitwise-not)
Precedes its single operand; inverts the value of each bit and
returns the result.
<< (shift left)
Shift the bits of the first operand leftward the number of times
indicated by the second operand.
>> (shift right)
Shift the bits of the first operand rightward the number of times
indicated by the second operand.
NOTE
Technically, the shift operators perform a logical shift if the integer is unsigned,
and an arithmetic shift if the integer is signed.
Integer overflow or underflow — for example, adding two Int values
so as to exceed Int.max — is a runtime error (your app will crash).
In simple cases the compiler will stop you, but you can get away with
it easily enough:
let i = Int.max - 2 
let j = i + 12/2 // crash
Under certain circumstances you might want to force such an
operation to succeed, so special overflow/underflow methods are

--- Page 181 ---
supplied. These methods return a tuple; I’ll show you an example
even though I haven’t discussed tuples yet:
let i = Int.max - 2 
let (j, over) = i.addingReportingOverflow(12/2)
Now j is Int.min + 3 (because the value has wrapped around from
Int.max to Int.min) and over is an enum reporting that overflow
occurred.
If you don’t care to hear about whether or not there was an
overflow/underflow, special arithmetic operators let you suppress the
error: &+, &-, &*.
You will frequently want to combine the value of an existing variable
arithmetically with another value and store the result in the same
variable. To do so, you will need to have declared the variable as a va
r:
var i = 1 
i = i + 7
As a shorthand, operators are provided that perform the arithmetic
operation and the assignment all in one move:
var i = 1 
i += 7
The shorthand (compound) assignment arithmetic operators are +=, -
=, *=, /=, %=, &=, |=, ^=, <<=, >>=.

--- Page 182 ---
Operation precedence is largely intuitive: for example, * has a higher
precedence than +, so x+y*z multiplies y by z first, and then adds the
result to x. Use parentheses to dictate precedence explicitly: (x+y)*z
performs the addition first.
Global functions from the Swift standard library include abs
(absolute value), max, and min:
let i = -7 
let j = 6 
print(abs(i)) // 7 
print(max(i,j)) // 6
Doubles are also stocked with mathematical methods. If d is a
Double, you can say d.squareRoot() or d.rounded(); if dd is also
a Double, you can say Double.maximum(d,dd). Other global
mathematical functions, such as trigonometric sin and cos, come
from the C standard libraries that are visible because you’ve imported
UIKit. Also, a Swift package called Swift Numerics
(https://github.com/apple/swift-numerics) unites all the floating-point
types under the Real protocol and supplies most of the mathematical
functions you could ever want.
Numeric types have a random(in:) static method allowing
generation of a random number. The parameter is a range
representing the bounds within which the random number should fall.
(Ranges are discussed later in this chapter.) This method is much
easier to use correctly than the C library methods such as arc4rando
m_uniform, which should be avoided:

--- Page 183 ---
// pick a number from 1 to 10 
let i = Int.random(in: 1...10)
COMPARISON
Numbers are compared using the comparison operators, which return
a Bool. The expression i==j tests whether i and j are equal; when i
and j are numbers, “equal” means numerically equal. So i==j is tru
e only if i and j are “the same number,” in exactly the sense you
would expect.
The comparison operators are:
== (equality operator)
Returns true if its operands are equal.
!= (inequality operator)
Returns false if its operands are equal.
< (less-than operator)
Returns true if the first operand is less than the second operand.
<= (less-than-or-equal operator)
Returns true if the first operand is less than or equal to the
second operand.
> (greater-than operator)
Returns true if the first operand is greater than the second
operand.
>= (greater-than-or-equal operator)

--- Page 184 ---
Returns true if the first operand is greater than or equal to the
second operand.
Curiously, you can compare values of different integer types, even
though you can’t combine them in an arithmetic operation:
let i:Int = 1 
let i2:UInt8 = 2 
let ok = i < i2 // true 
let ok2 = i == i2 // false 
let sum = i + i2 // error
Because of the way computers store numbers, equality comparison of
Double values may not succeed where you would expect. To give a
classic example, adding 0.1 to 0 ten times does not give the same
result as multiplying 0.1 by ten:
let f = 0.1 
var sum = 0.0 
for _ in 0..<10 { sum += f } 
let product = f * 10 
let ok = sum == product // false
Working around this sort of thing is not easy. The usual approach is to
check whether two values are sufficiently close to one another, but
this begs the question of what constitutes sufficient closeness. A
useful formula is:
let ok2 = sum >= product.nextDown && sum <= product.nextUp // true
String
The String object type (a struct) represents text. The simplest way to
represent a String value is with a literal, delimited by double quotes:

--- Page 185 ---
let greeting = "hello"
A Swift string is thoroughly modern; under the hood, it’s Unicode,
and you can include any character (such as an emoji) directly in a
string literal. If you don’t want to bother typing a Unicode character
whose codepoint you know, use the notation \u{...}, where what’s
between the curly braces is up to eight hex digits:
let leftTripleArrow = "\u{21DA}"
The backslash in that string representation is the escape character; it
means, “I’m not really a backslash; I indicate that the next character
gets special treatment.” Various nonprintable and ambiguous
characters are entered as escaped characters; the most important are:
\n
A Unix newline character
\t
A tab character
\"
A quotation mark (escaped to show that this is not the end of the
string literal)
\\
A backslash (escaped because a lone backslash is the escape
character)
Escaped quotation marks and backslashes can quickly make your
string literals ugly and illegible. The issue arises particularly in

--- Page 186 ---
contexts such as regular expression patterns. For example, the pattern
\b\d\d\b (a word consisting of two digits) must be written "\\b\\d
\\d\\b". But you can omit the escape character before quotes and
backslashes by surrounding your literal with one or more hash
characters (#); these are all identical strings:
let pattold = "\\b\\d\\d\\b" 
let pattnew = #"\b\d\d\b"# // same thing 
let pattnew2 = ##"\b\d\d\b"## // same thing
That’s called a raw string literal. The downside is that if you want to
use a backslash as an escape character in a raw string literal, you
must follow it with the same number of # characters you are using to
surround your literal. The string #"hello\nthere"# does not contain
a newline character (\n), but #"hello\#nthere"# does.
A string literal containing newline characters can be entered as
multiple lines (rather than a single-line expression containing \n
characters). This is called a multiline string literal. The rules are:
The multiline string literal must be delimited by a triple of double
quotes (""") at start and end.
No material may follow the opening delimiter on the same line.
No material other than whitespace may appear on the same line as
the closing delimiter.
The last implicit newline character before the closing delimiter is
ignored.
The indentation of the closing delimiter dictates the indentation of
the lines of text, which must be indented at least as far as the

--- Page 187 ---
closing delimiter (except for completely empty lines).
For example:
func f() { 
    let s = """ 
    Line 1 
        Line 2 
    Line 3 
    """ 
    // ... 
}
In that code, the string s consists of three lines of text; lines 1 and 3
start with no whitespace; line 2 starts with four spaces; and there are
two newline characters, namely after lines 1 and 2. To add a newline
after line 3, you could enter a blank line, or write it as an escaped \n.
Quotation marks do not have to be escaped. A line ending with a
backslash is joined with the following line. In this code, the string s
consists of just two lines of text; the second line consists of four
spaces followed by “Line 2 and this is still line 2”:
func f() { 
    let s = """ 
    Line "1" 
        Line 2 \ 
    and this is still Line 2 
    """ 
    // ... 
}
(You can surround a multiline string literal with # characters, making
a raw multiline string literal; but you are unlikely to do so.)

--- Page 188 ---
String interpolation permits you to embed any value that can be
output with print inside a string literal as a string, even if it is not
itself a string. The notation is escaped parentheses: \(...):
let n = 5 
let s = "You have \(n) widgets."
Now s is the string "You have 5 widgets." The example is not
very compelling, because we know what n is and could have typed 5
directly into our string; but imagine that we don’t know what n is!
Moreover, the stuff in escaped parentheses doesn’t have to be the
name of a variable; it can be almost any expression that evaluates as
legal Swift:
let m = 4 
let n = 5 
let s = "You have \(m + n) widgets."
String interpolation is legal inside a multiline string literal. It is also
legal inside a raw string literal surrounded with # characters, but then
the backslash must be followed by the same number of # characters,
to indicate that it is the escape character.
String interpolation syntax can be customized to accept additional
parameters, refining how the first parameter should be transformed.
Expressions of this form can be legal:
let s = "You have \(n, roman:true) widgets"
(I’m imagining that if n is 5, this would yield "You have V widget
s".) I’ll say more in Chapter 5 about how that is achieved. New in

--- Page 189 ---
iOS 14, the Logger class takes advantage of that kind of syntax
(Chapter 9).
To combine (concatenate) two strings, the simplest approach is to use
the + operator:
let s = "hello" 
let s2 = " world" 
let greeting = s + s2
This convenient notation is possible because the + operator is
overloaded: it does one thing when the operands are numbers
(numeric addition) and another when the operands are strings
(concatenation). As I’ll explain in Chapter 5, all operators can be
overloaded, and you can overload them to operate in some
appropriate way on your own types.
The + operator comes with a += assignment shortcut; naturally, the
variable on the left side must have been declared with var:
var s = "hello" 
let s2 = " world" 
s += s2
As an alternative to +=, you can call the append(_:) instance
method:
var s = "hello" 
let s2 = " world" 
s.append(s2)

--- Page 190 ---
Another way of concatenating strings is with the joined(separato
r:) method. You start with an array of strings to be concatenated, and
hand it the string that is to be inserted between all of them:
let s = "hello" 
let s2 = "world" 
let space = " " 
let greeting = [s,s2].joined(separator:space)
The comparison operators are also overloaded so that they work with
String operands. Two String values are equal (==) if they are, in the
natural sense, the same text. A String is less than another if it is
alphabetically prior.
Some additional convenient instance methods and properties are
provided. isEmpty returns a Bool reporting whether this string is the
empty string (""). hasPrefix(_:) and hasSuffix(_:) report
whether this string starts or ends with another string; "hello".hasPr
efix("he") is true. The uppercased and lowercased methods
provide uppercase and lowercase versions of the original string.
Coercion between a String and an Int is possible. To make a string
that represents an Int, it is sufficient to use string interpolation;
alternatively, use a String initializer taking the Int:
let i = 7 
let s = String(i) // "7"
Your string can also represent an Int in some other base; in the
initializer, supply a radix: argument expressing the base:

--- Page 191 ---
let i = 31 
let s = String(i, radix:16) // "1f"
A String that might represent a number can be coerced to a numeric
type; an integer type will accept a radix: argument expressing the
base. The coercion might fail, because the String might not represent
a number of the specified type; so the result is not a number but an
Optional wrapping a number (I haven’t talked about Optionals yet, so
you’ll have to trust me for now; failable initializers are discussed in
Chapter 4):
let s = "31" 
let i = Int(s) // Optional(31) 
let s2 = "1f" 
let i2 = Int(s2, radix:16) // Optional(31)
Similarly, you can coerce a Bool to a String, which will be "true" or
"false". Going the other way, you can coerce the string "true" to
the Bool true and the string "false" to the Bool false; again, this
is a failable initializer, and any other string will fail.
The length of a String, in characters, is given by its count property:
let s = "hello" 
let length = s.count // 5
This property is called count rather then length because a String
doesn’t really have a simple length. The String comprises a sequence
of Unicode codepoints, but multiple Unicode codepoints can combine
to form a single character; so, in order to know how many characters

--- Page 192 ---
are represented by such a sequence, we actually have to walk through
the sequence and resolve it into the characters that it represents.
You, too, can walk through a String’s characters. The simplest way is
with the for...in construct (see Chapter 5). What you get when you
do this are Character objects; I’ll talk more about Character objects
later:
let s = "hello" 
for c in s { 
    print(c) // print each Character on its own line 
}
At an even deeper level, you can decompose a String into its UTF-8
codepoints or its UTF-16 codepoints, using the utf8 and utf16
properties:
let s = "\u{BF}Qui\u{E9}n?" 
for i in s.utf8 { 
    print(i) // 194, 191, 81, 117, 105, 195, 169, 110, 63 
} 
for i in s.utf16 { 
    print(i) // 191, 81, 117, 105, 233, 110, 63 
}
There is also a unicodeScalars property representing a collection (a
String.UnicodeScalarView) of the String’s UTF-32 codepoints
expressed as UnicodeScalar structs. To illustrate, here’s a utility
function that turns a two-letter country abbreviation into an emoji
representation of its flag:
func flag(country:String) -> String { 
    let base : UInt32 = 127397 

--- Page 193 ---
    var s = "" 
    for v in country.unicodeScalars { 
        s.unicodeScalars.append(UnicodeScalar(base + v.value)!) 
    } 
    return String(s) 
} 
// and here's how to use it: 
let s = flag(country:"DE")
The curious thing is that there aren’t more methods for standard
string manipulation. How do you capitalize a string, or find out
whether a string contains a given substring? Most modern
programming languages have a compact, convenient way of doing
things like that; Swift doesn’t. The reason appears to be that missing
features are provided by the Foundation framework, to which you’ll
always be linked in real life (importing UIKit imports Foundation). A
Swift String is bridged to a Foundation NSString. This means that, to
a large extent, Foundation NSString properties and methods
magically spring to life whenever you are using a Swift String:
let s = "hello world" 
let s2 = s.capitalized // "Hello World"
The capitalized property comes from the Foundation framework;
it’s provided by Cocoa, not by Swift. It’s an NSString property; it
appears tacked onto String “for free.” Similarly, here’s how to locate
a substring of a string:
let s = "hello" 
let range = s.range(of:"ell") // Optional(Range(...)) [details omitted]

--- Page 194 ---
I haven’t explained yet what an Optional is or what a Range is (I’ll
talk about them later in this chapter), but that innocent-looking code
has made a remarkable round-trip from Swift to Cocoa and back
again: the Swift String s becomes an NSString, an NSString method
is called, a Foundation NSRange struct is returned, and the NSRange
is converted to a Swift Range and wrapped up in an Optional.
THE STRING–NSSTRING ELEMENT MISMATCH
Swift and Cocoa have different ideas of what the elements of a string are. The
Swift conception involves characters. The NSString conception involves UTF-
16 codepoints. Each approach has its advantages. The NSString way makes
for great speed and efficiency in comparison to Swift, which must walk the
string to investigate how the characters are constructed; but the Swift way gives
what you would intuitively think of as the right answer. To emphasize this
difference, a nonliteral Swift string has no length property; its analog to an
NSString’s length is its utf16.count.
Fortunately, the element mismatch doesn’t arise very often in practice; but it
can arise. Here’s a good test case:
let s = "Ha\u{030A}kon" 
print(s.count) // 5 
let length = (s as NSString).length // or: s.utf16.count 
print(length) // 6
We’ve created our string (the Norwegian name Håkon) using a Unicode
codepoint that combines with the previous codepoint to form a character with a
ring over it. Swift walks the whole string, so it normalizes the combination and
reports five characters. Cocoa just sees at a glance that this string contains six
16-bit codepoints.
Character and String Index

--- Page 195 ---
You are more likely to be interested in a string’s characters than its
codepoints. Codepoints are numbers, but what we naturally think of
as characters are effectively minimal strings: a character is a single
“letter” or “symbol” — formally, a grapheme. The equivalence
between numeric codepoints and symbolic graphemes is provided, in
Unicode, by the notion of a grapheme cluster. To embody this
equivalence, Swift provides the Character object type (a struct),
representing a single grapheme cluster.
A String (in Swift 4 and later) simply is a character sequence — quite
literally, a Sequence of the Character objects that constitute it. That is
why, as I mentioned earlier, you can walk through a string with fo
r...in to obtain the String’s Characters, one by one; when you do
that, you’re walking through the string qua character sequence:
let s = "hello" 
for c in s { 
    print(c) // print each Character on its own line 
}
It isn’t common to encounter Character objects outside of some
character sequence of which they are a part. There isn’t even a way to
write a literal Character. To make a Character from scratch, initialize
it from a single-character String:
let c = Character("h")
Similarly, you can pass a one-character String literal where a
Character is expected, and many examples in this section will do so.
By the same token, you can initialize a String from a Character:

--- Page 196 ---
let c = Character("h") 
let s = (String(c)).uppercased()
Characters can be compared for equality; “less than” means what you
would expect it to mean.
Formally, a String is both a Sequence of Characters and a Collection
of Characters. Sequence and Collection are protocols; I’ll discuss
protocols in Chapter 4, but what’s important for now is that a String
is endowed with methods and properties that it gets by virtue of being
a Sequence and a Collection.
A String has a first and last property; the resulting Character is
wrapped in an Optional because the string might be empty:
let s = "hello" 
let c1 = s.first // Optional("h") 
let c2 = s.last // Optional("o")
The firstIndex(of:) method locates the first occurrence of a given
character within the sequence and returns its index. Again, this is an
Optional, because the character might be absent:
let s = "hello" 
let firstL = s.firstIndex(of:"l") // Optional(2)
All Swift indexes are numbered starting with 0, so 2 means the third
character. The index value here, however, is not an Int; I’ll explain in
a moment what it is and what it’s good for.
A related method, firstIndex(where:), takes a function that takes a
Character and returns a Bool. This code locates the first character

--- Page 197 ---
smaller than "f":
let s = "hello" 
let firstSmall = s.firstIndex {$0 < "f"} // Optional(1)
Those methods are matched by lastIndex(of:) and lastIndex(wh
ere:).
A String has a contains(_:) method that returns a Bool, reporting
whether a certain character is present:
let s = "hello" 
let ok = s.contains("o") // true
Alternatively, contains(_:) can take a function that takes a
Character and returns a Bool. This code reports whether the target
string contains a vowel:
let s = "hello" 
let ok = s.contains {"aeiou".contains($0)} // true
The filter(_:) method, too, takes a function that takes a Character
and returns a Bool, effectively eliminating those characters for which
false is returned. Here, we delete all consonants from a string:
let s = "hello" 
let s2 = s.filter {"aeiou".contains($0)} // "eo"
The dropFirst and dropLast methods return, in effect, a new string
without the first or last character, respectively:
let s = "hello" 
let s2 = s.dropFirst() // "ello"

--- Page 198 ---
I say “in effect” because a method that extracts a substring returns, in
reality, a Substring instance. The Substring struct is an efficient way
of pointing at part of some original String, rather than having to
generate a new String. When we call s.dropFirst() on the string "h
ello", the resulting Substring points at the "ello" part of "hello",
which continues to exist; there is still only one string, and no new
string storage memory is required.
In general, the difference between a String and a Substring will make
little practical difference to you, because what you can do with a
String, you can usually do also with a Substring. Nevertheless, they
are different classes; this code won’t compile:
var s = "hello" 
let s2 = s.dropFirst() 
s = s2 // compile error
To pass a Substring where a String is expected, coerce the Substring
to a String explicitly:
var s = "hello" 
let s2 = s.dropFirst() 
s = String(s2)
You can coerce the other way, too, from a String to a Substring.
prefix(_:) and suffix(_:) extract a Substring of a given length
from the start or end of the original string:
var s = "hello" 
s = String(s.prefix(4)) // "hell"

--- Page 199 ---
split(_:) breaks a string up into an array, according to a function
that takes a Character and returns a Bool. In this example, I obtain the
words of a String, where a “word” is simplemindedly defined as a run
of Characters other than a space:
let s = "hello world" 
let arr = s.split {$0 == " "} // ["hello", "world"]
The result is actually an array of Substrings. If we needed to get
String objects, we could apply the map(_:) function and coerce them
all to Strings. I’ll talk about map(_:) in Chapter 4, so you’ll have to
trust me for now:
let s = "hello world" 
let arr = s.split {$0 == " "}.map {String($0)} // ["hello", "world"]
A String, qua character sequence, can also be manipulated similarly
to an array. For example, you can use subscripting to obtain the
character at a certain position. Unfortunately, this isn’t as easy as it
might be. What’s the second character of "hello"? This doesn’t
compile:
let s = "hello" 
let c = s[1] // compile error
The reason is that the indexes on a String are not Int values, but rather
a nested type, String.Index (actually a type alias for
String.CharacterView.Index). To make an object of this type is rather
tricky. Start with a String’s startIndex or endIndex, or with the
return value from firstIndex or lastIndex; you can then call the i
ndex(_:offsetBy:) method to derive the index you want:

--- Page 200 ---
let s = "hello" 
let ix = s.startIndex 
let ix2 = s.index(ix, offsetBy:1) 
let c = s[ix2] // "e"
The reason for this clumsy circumlocution is that Swift doesn’t know
where the characters of a character sequence are until it actually
walks the sequence; calling index(_:offsetBy:) is how you make
Swift do that.
To offset an index by a single position, you can obtain the next or
preceding index value with the index(after:) and index(before:)
methods. I could have written the preceding example like this:
let s = "hello" 
let ix = s.startIndex 
let c = s[s.index(after:ix)] // "e"
Another reason why it’s necessary to think of a string index as an
offset from the startIndex or endIndex is that those values may not
be what you think they are — in particular, when you’re dealing with
a Substring. Consider, once again, the following:
let s = "hello" 
let s2 = s.dropFirst()
Now s2 is "ello". What, then, is s2.startIndex (as an Int)? Not 0,
but 1 — because s2 is a Substring pointing into the original "hello",
where the index of the "e" is 1. Similarly, s2.firstIndex(of:"o")
is not 3, but 4, because the index value is reckoned with respect to the
original "hello".

--- Page 201 ---
Once you’ve obtained a desired character index value, you can use it
to modify the String. The insert(contentsOf:at:) method inserts
a string into a string:
var s = "hello" 
let ix = s.index(s.startIndex, offsetBy:1) 
s.insertContentsOf("ey, h", at: ix) // s is now "hey, hello"
Similarly, remove(at:) deletes a single character, and also returns
that character. (Manipulations involving longer character stretches
require use of a Range, which is the subject of the next section.)
On the other hand, a character sequence can be coerced directly to an
Array of Character objects — Array("hello") creates an array of
the characters "h", "e", and so on — and array indexes are Ints and
are easy to work with. Once you’ve manipulated the array of
Characters, you can coerce it directly to a String. I’ll give an example
in the next section (and I’ll discuss arrays, and say more about
collections and sequences, in Chapter 4).
Range
The Range object type (a struct) represents a pair of endpoints. There
are two operators for forming a Range literal; you supply a start value
and an end value, with one of the Range operators between them:
... (closed range operator)
The notation a...b means “everything from a up to b, including
b.”
..< (half-open range operator)

--- Page 202 ---
The notation a..<b means “everything from a up to but not
including b.”
Spaces around a Range operator are legal.
The types of a Range’s endpoints will typically be some kind of
number — most often, Ints:
let r = 1...3
If the end value is a negative literal, it has to be enclosed in
parentheses or preceded by whitespace:
let r = -1000 ... -1
A very common use of a Range is to loop through numbers with fo
r...in:
for ix in 1...3 { 
    print(ix) // 1, then 2, then 3 
}
There are no reverse Ranges: the start value of a Range can’t be
greater than the end value (the compiler won’t stop you, but you’ll
crash at runtime). In practice, you can use Range’s reversed()
method to iterate from a higher value to a lower one:
for ix in (1...3).reversed() { 
    print(ix) // 3, then 2, then 1 
}
In Chapter 5 I’ll show how to create a custom operator that
effectively generates a reverse Range.

--- Page 203 ---
You can also use a Range’s contains(_:) instance method to test
whether a value falls within given limits:
let ix = // ... an Int ... 
if (1...3).contains(ix) { // ...
For purposes of testing containment, a Range’s endpoints can be
Doubles:
let d = // ... a Double ... 
if (0.1...0.9).contains(d) { // ...
There are also methods for learning whether two ranges overlap, and
for clamping one range to another.
Another common use of a Range is to index into a sequence. Here’s
one way to get the second, third, and fourth characters of a String. As
I suggested at the end of the preceding section, if we coerce the
String to an Array of Character, we can then use an Int Range as an
index into that array, and coerce back to a String:
let s = "hello" 
let arr = Array(s) 
let result = arr[1...3] 
let s2 = String(result) // "ell"
A String is itself a sequence — a character sequence — so you can
use a Range to index directly into a String; but then it has to be a
Range of String.Index, which, as I’ve already pointed out, is rather
tricky to obtain. By manipulating String.Index values, you can form a
Range of the proper type and use it to extract a substring by
subscripting:

--- Page 204 ---
let s = "hello" 
let ix1 = s.index(s.startIndex, offsetBy:1) 
let ix2 = s.index(ix1, offsetBy:2) 
let s2 = s[ix1...ix2] // "ell"
The replaceSubrange(_:with:) method splices into a range,
modifying the string:
var s = "hello" 
let ix = s.startIndex 
let r = s.index(ix, offsetBy:1)...s.index(ix, offsetBy:3) 
s.replaceSubrange(r, with: "ipp") // s is now "hippo"
Similarly, you can delete a stretch of characters with the removeSubr
ange(_:) method:
var s = "hello" 
let ix = s.startIndex 
let r = s.index(ix, offsetBy:1)...s.index(ix, offsetBy:3) 
s.removeSubrange(r) // s is now "ho"
It is possible to omit one of the endpoints from a Range literal,
specifying a partial range. There are three kinds of partial range
expression, corresponding to three types of Range-like struct. To
illustrate, the following expressions are identical ways of specifying
the range of an entire String s:
let range1 = s.startIndex..<s.endIndex      // Range 
let range2 = ..<s.endIndex                  // PartialRangeUpTo 
let range3 = ...s.index(before: s.endIndex) // PartialRangeUpThrough 
let range4 = s.startIndex...                // PartialRangeFrom
If you need to convert a partial range to a range, call relative(to:).
In the preceding code, range1 and range2.relative(to:s) are

--- Page 205 ---
identical. But in general you won’t need to do that, because a partial
range literal can be used wherever you would use a range literal. For
instance, a partial range is a legal String subscript value:
let s = "hello" 
let ix2 = s.index(before: s.endIndex) 
let s2 = s[..<ix2] // "hell"
I’ll show further practical examples later on.
Tuple
A tuple is a lightweight custom ordered collection of multiple values.
As a type, it is expressed by surrounding the types of the contained
values with parentheses, separated by a comma. Here’s a declaration
for a variable whose type is a tuple of an Int and a String:
var pair : (Int, String)
The literal value of a tuple is expressed in the same way — the
contained values, surrounded with parentheses and separated by a
comma:
var pair : (Int, String) = (1, "Two")
Those types can be inferred, so there’s no need for the explicit type in
the declaration:
var pair = (1, "Two")
Tuples are a pure Swift language feature; they are not compatible
with Cocoa and Objective-C, so you’ll use them only for values that

--- Page 206 ---
Cocoa never sees. Within Swift, however, they have many uses. For
example, a tuple is an obvious solution to the problem that a function
can return only one value; a tuple is one value, but it contains
multiple values, so using a tuple as the return type of a function
permits that function to return multiple values.
Tuples come with numerous linguistic conveniences. You can assign
to a tuple of variable names as a way of assigning to multiple
variables simultaneously:
let ix: Int 
let s: String 
(ix, s) = (1, "Two")
That’s such a convenient thing to do that Swift lets you do it in one
line, declaring and initializing multiple variables simultaneously:
let (ix, s) = (1, "Two")
To ignore one of the assigned values, use an underscore to represent it
in the receiving tuple:
let pair = (1, "Two") 
let (_, s) = pair // now s is "Two"
Assigning variable values to one another through a tuple swaps them
safely:
var s1 = "hello" 
var s2 = "world" 
(s1, s2) = (s2, s1) // now s1 is "world" and s2 is "hello"

--- Page 207 ---
The enumerated method lets you walk a sequence with for...in
and receive, on each iteration, each successive element’s index
number along with the element itself; this double result comes to you
as — you guessed it — a tuple:
let s = "hello" 
for (ix,c) in s.enumerated() { 
    print("character \(ix) is \(c)") 
}
I also pointed out earlier that numeric instance methods such as addi
ngReportingOverflow return a tuple.
You can refer to the individual elements of a tuple directly, in two
ways. The first way is by index number, using a literal number (not a
variable value) as the name of a message sent to the tuple with dot-
notation:
let pair = (1, "Two") 
let ix = pair.0 // now ix is 1
If you have a var reference to a tuple, you can assign into it by the
same means:
var pair = (1, "Two") 
pair.0 = 2 // now pair is (2, "Two")
The second way to access tuple elements is to give them labels. The
notation is like that of function parameters, and must appear as part of
the explicit or implicit type declaration. Here’s one way to establish
tuple element labels:

--- Page 208 ---
let pair : (first:Int, second:String) = (1, "Two")
And here’s another way:
let pair = (first:1, second:"Two")
The labels are now part of the type of this value, and travel with it
through subsequent assignments. You can then use them as literal
messages, just like (and together with) the numeric literals:
var pair = (first:1, second:"Two") 
let x = pair.first // 1 
pair.first = 2 
let y = pair.0 // 2
The tuple generated by the enumerated method has labels offset
and element, so we can rewrite an earlier example like this:
let s = "hello" 
for t in s.enumerated() { 
    print("character \(t.offset) is \(t.element)") 
}
You can assign from a tuple without labels into a corresponding tuple
with labels (and vice versa):
let pair = (1, "Two") 
let pairWithNames : (first:Int, second:String) = pair 
let ix = pairWithNames.first // 1
You can also pass, or return from a function, a tuple without labels
where a corresponding tuple with labels is expected:

--- Page 209 ---
func tupleMaker() -> (first:Int, second:String) { 
    return (1, "Two") // no labels here 
} 
let ix = tupleMaker().first // 1
If you’re going to be using a certain type of tuple consistently
throughout your program, it might be useful to give it a type name.
To do so, define a type alias. In my LinkSame app, I have a Board
class describing and manipulating the game layout. The board is a
grid of Piece objects. I need a way to describe positions of the grid.
That’s a pair of integers, so I define my own type as a tuple:
class Board { 
    typealias Point = (x:Int, y:Int) 
    // ... 
}
The advantage of that notation is that it now becomes easy to use
Points throughout my code. Given a Point, I can fetch the
corresponding Piece:
func piece(at p:Point) -> Piece? { 
    let (i,j) = p 
    // ... error-checking goes here ... 
    return self.grid[i][j] 
}
Still, one should not overuse tuples. In a very real sense, they are not
a full-fledged type. Keep your tuples small, light, and temporary.

--- Page 210 ---
TIP
Void, the type of value returned by a function that doesn’t return a value, is
actually a type alias for an empty tuple. That’s why it is also notated as ().
Optional
The Optional object type (an enum) wraps another object of any type.
What makes an Optional optional is this: it might wrap another
object, but then again it might not. Think of an Optional as being
itself a kind of shoebox — a shoebox which can quite legally be
empty.
Let’s start by creating an Optional that does wrap an object. Suppose
we want an Optional wrapping the String "howdy". One way to create
it is with the Optional initializer:
var stringMaybe = Optional("howdy")
If we log stringMaybe to the console with print, we’ll see an
expression identical to the corresponding initializer: Optional("how
dy").
After that declaration and initialization, stringMaybe is typed, not as
a String, nor as an Optional plain and simple, but as an Optional
wrapping a String. This means that any other Optional wrapping a
String can be assigned to it — but not an Optional wrapping some
other type. This code is legal:

--- Page 211 ---
var stringMaybe = Optional("howdy") 
stringMaybe = Optional("farewell")
This code, however, is not legal:
var stringMaybe = Optional("howdy") 
stringMaybe = Optional(123) // compile error
Optional(123) is an Optional wrapping an Int, and you can’t assign
an Optional wrapping an Int where an Optional wrapping a String is
expected.
Optionals are so important to Swift that special syntax for working
with them is baked into the language. The usual way to make an
Optional is not to use the Optional initializer (though you can
certainly do that), but to assign or pass a value of some type to a
reference that is already typed as an Optional wrapping that type.
This seems as if it should not be legal — but it is. Once stringMaybe
is typed as an Optional wrapping a String, it is legal to assign a String
directly to it. The outcome is that the assigned String is wrapped in an
Optional for us, automatically:
var stringMaybe = Optional("howdy") 
stringMaybe = "farewell" // now stringMaybe is Optional("farewell")
We also need a way of typing something explicitly as an Optional
wrapping a String. Otherwise, we cannot declare a variable or
parameter with an Optional type. Formally, an Optional is a generic,
so an Optional wrapping a String is an Optional<String>. (I’ll
explain that syntax in Chapter 4.) However, you don’t have to write
that. The Swift language supports syntactic sugar for expressing an

--- Page 212 ---
Optional type: use the name of the wrapped type followed by a
question mark:
var stringMaybe : String?
Thus I don’t need to use the Optional initializer at all. I can type the
variable as an Optional wrapping a String and assign a String into it
for wrapping, all in one move:
var stringMaybe : String? = "howdy"
That, in fact, is the normal way to make an Optional in Swift.
Once you’ve got an Optional wrapping a particular type, you can use
it wherever an Optional wrapping that type is expected — just like
any other value. If a function expects an Optional wrapping a String
as its parameter, you can pass stringMaybe as the argument:
func optionalExpecter(_ s:String?) {} 
let stringMaybe : String? = "howdy" 
optionalExpecter(stringMaybe)
Moreover, where an Optional wrapping a certain type of value is
expected, you can pass a value of that wrapped type instead. That’s
because parameter passing is just like assignment: an unwrapped
value will be wrapped implicitly for you. If a function expects an
Optional wrapping a String, you can pass a String argument, which
will be wrapped into an Optional in the received parameter:
func optionalExpecter(_ s:String?) { 
    // ... here, s will be an Optional wrapping a String ... 
    print(s) 

--- Page 213 ---
} 
optionalExpecter("howdy") // console prints: Optional("howdy")
But you cannot do the opposite — you cannot use an Optional
wrapping a type where the wrapped type is expected. This won’t
compile:
func realStringExpecter(_ s:String) {} 
let stringMaybe : String? = "howdy" 
realStringExpecter(stringMaybe) // compile error
The error message reads: “Value of Optional type String? must be
unwrapped.” You’re going to be seeing that sort of message a lot in
Swift, so get used to it! If you want to use an Optional where the type
of thing it wraps is expected, you must unwrap the Optional — that
is, you must reach inside it and retrieve the actual thing that it wraps.
Now I’m going to talk about how to do that.
UNWRAPPING AN OPTIONAL
We have seen more than one way to wrap an object in an Optional.
But what about the opposite procedure? How do we unwrap an
Optional to get at the object wrapped inside it? One way is to use the
unwrap operator (or forced unwrap operator), which is a postfixed
exclamation mark:
func realStringExpecter(_ s:String) {} 
let stringMaybe : String? = "howdy" 
realStringExpecter(stringMaybe!)
In that code, the stringMaybe! syntax expresses the operation of
reaching inside the Optional stringMaybe, grabbing the wrapped

--- Page 214 ---
value, and substituting it at that point. Since stringMaybe is an
Optional wrapping a String, the thing inside it is a String. That is
exactly what the realStringExpecter function wants as its
parameter! stringMaybe is an Optional wrapping the String
"howdy", but stringMaybe! is the String "howdy".
If an Optional wraps a certain type, you cannot send it a message
expected by that type. You must unwrap it first. Let’s try to get an
uppercase version of stringMaybe:
let stringMaybe : String? = "howdy" 
let upper = stringMaybe.uppercased() // compile error
The solution is to unwrap stringMaybe to get at the String inside it.
We can do this directly, in place, using the unwrap operator:
let stringMaybe : String? = "howdy" 
let upper = stringMaybe!.uppercased()
If an Optional is to be used several times where the unwrapped type
is expected, and if you’re going to be unwrapping it with the unwrap
operator each time, your code can quickly start to look like the dialog
from a 1960s Batman comic. For example, an app’s window is an
Optional UIWindow property (self.window):
// self.window is an Optional wrapping a UIWindow 
self.window!.rootViewController = RootViewController() 
self.window!.backgroundColor = UIColor.white 
self.window!.makeKeyAndVisible()
That sort of thing soon gets old (or silly). One obvious alternative is
to assign the unwrapped value once to a variable of the wrapped type

--- Page 215 ---
and then use that variable:
// self.window is an Optional wrapping a UIWindow 
let window = self.window! 
// now window (not self.window) is a UIWindow, not an Optional 
window.rootViewController = RootViewController() 
window.backgroundColor = UIColor.white 
window.makeKeyAndVisible()
IMPLICITLY UNWRAPPED OPTIONAL
Swift provides another way of using an Optional where the wrapped
type is expected: you can declare the Optional type as being implicitly
unwrapped. An implicitly unwrapped Optional is an Optional, but the
compiler permits some special magic associated with it: its value can
be used directly where the wrapped type is expected. You can unwrap
an implicitly unwrapped Optional explicitly, but you don’t have to,
because it will be unwrapped for you, automatically, if you try to use
it where the wrapped type is expected. Moreover, Swift provides
syntactic sugar for expressing an implicitly unwrapped Optional type:
use the name of the wrapped type followed by an exclamation mark:
func realStringExpecter(_ s:String) {} 
var stringMaybe : String! = "howdy" 
realStringExpecter(stringMaybe) // no problem
Bear in mind that an implicitly unwrapped Optional is still an
Optional. It’s just a convenience. By declaring something as an
implicitly unwrapped Optional, you are asking the compiler, if you
happen to use this value where the wrapped type is expected, to
forgive you and to unwrap the value for you.

--- Page 216 ---
In reality, an implicitly unwrapped Optional type is not really a
distinct type; it is merely an Optional marked in a special way that
allows it to be used where the unwrapped type is expected. For this
reason, implicit unwrapping does not propagate by assignment.
Here’s a case in point. If self is a UIViewController, then self.vie
w is typed as UIView!. As a result, this expression is legal (assume v
is a UIView):
self.view.addSubview(v)
But this is not legal:
let mainview = self.view 
mainview.addSubview(v) // compile error
The problem is that, although self.view is an implicitly unwrapped
Optional wrapping a UIView, mainview is a normal Optional
wrapping a UIView, and so it would have to be unwrapped explicitly
before you could send it the addSubview message. Alternatively, you
could unwrap the implicitly unwrapped Optional explicitly at the
outset:
let mainview = self.view! 
mainview.addSubview(v)
In real life, the primary situation in which you’re likely to declare an
implicitly unwrapped Optional is when an instance property’s initial
value can’t be provided until after the instance itself is created. I’ll
give some examples at the end of this chapter.
THE KEYWORD NIL

--- Page 217 ---
I have talked so far about Optionals that contain a wrapped value. But
what about an Optional that doesn’t contain any wrapped value? Such
an Optional is, as I’ve already said, a perfectly legal entity; that,
indeed, is the whole point of Optionals.
You are going to need a way to ask whether an Optional contains a
wrapped value, and a way to specify an Optional without a wrapped
value. Swift makes both of those things easy, through the use of a
special keyword, nil:
To learn whether an Optional contains a wrapped value
Test the Optional for equality against nil. If the test succeeds, the
Optional is empty. An empty Optional is also reported in the
console as nil.
To specify an Optional with no wrapped value
Assign or pass nil where the Optional type is expected. The
result is an Optional of the expected type, containing no wrapped
value.
To illustrate:
var stringMaybe : String? = "Howdy" 
print(stringMaybe) // Optional("Howdy") 
if stringMaybe == nil { 
    print("it is empty") // does not print 
} 
stringMaybe = nil 
print(stringMaybe) // nil 
if stringMaybe == nil { 
    print("it is empty") // prints 
}

--- Page 218 ---
The keyword nil lets you express the concept, “an Optional
wrapping the appropriate type, but not actually containing any object
of that type.” Clearly, that’s very convenient magic; you’ll want to
take advantage of it. It is very important to understand, however, that
it is magic: nil in Swift is not a thing and is not a value. It is a
shorthand. It is natural to think and speak as if this shorthand were
real. I will often say that something “is nil.” But in reality, nothing
“is nil”; nil isn’t a thing. What I really mean is that this thing is
equatable with nil, because it is an Optional not wrapping anything.
(I’ll explain in Chapter 4 how nil, and Optionals in general, really
work.)
Because a variable typed as an Optional can be nil, Swift follows a
special initialization rule: a variable (var) typed as an Optional is
nil, automatically:
func optionalExpecter(_ s:String?) {} 
var stringMaybe : String? 
optionalExpecter(stringMaybe)
That code looks as if it should be illegal. We declared a variable stri
ngMaybe, but we never assigned it a value. Nevertheless we are now
passing it around as if it were an actual thing. That’s because it is an
actual thing. This variable has been implicitly initialized — to nil. A
variable (var) typed as an Optional is the only sort of variable that
gets implicit initialization in Swift.
We come now to perhaps the most important rule in all of Swift: You
cannot unwrap an Optional containing nothing (an Optional
equatable with nil). Such an Optional contains nothing; there’s

--- Page 219 ---
nothing to unwrap. Like Oakland, there’s no there there. In fact,
explicitly unwrapping an Optional containing nothing will crash your
program at runtime:
var stringMaybe : String? 
let s = stringMaybe! // crash
The crash message reads: “Fatal error: unexpectedly found nil while
unwrapping an Optional value.” Get used to it, because you’re going
to be seeing it a lot. This is an easy mistake to make. Unwrapping an
Optional that contains no value is, in fact, probably the most common
way to crash a Swift program. You should look upon this kind of
crash as a blessing. Very often, in fact, you will want to crash if your
Optional contains no value, because it should contain a value, and the
fact that it doesn’t indicates that you’ve made a mistake elsewhere.
In the long run, however, crashing is bad. To eliminate this kind of
crash, you need to ensure that your Optional contains a value, and
don’t unwrap it if it doesn’t! Ensuring that an Optional contains a
value before attempting to unwrap it is clearly a very important thing
to do. Accordingly, Swift provides several convenient ways of doing
it. I’ll describe some of them now, and I’ll discuss others in
Chapter 5.
One obvious approach is to test your Optional against nil explicitly
before you unwrap it:
var stringMaybe : String? 
// ... stringMaybe might be assigned a real value here ... 
if stringMaybe != nil { 
    let s = stringMaybe! 

--- Page 220 ---
    // ... 
}
But there’s a more elegant way, as I shall now explain.
OPTIONAL CHAINS
A common situation is that you want to send a message to the value
wrapped inside an Optional. You cannot send such a message to the
Optional itself. If you try to do so, you will get an error message from
the compiler:
let stringMaybe : String? = "howdy" 
let upper = stringMaybe.uppercased() // compile error
You must unwrap the Optional first, so that you can send that
message to the actual thing wrapped inside. Conveniently, you can
unwrap the Optional in place. I gave an example earlier:
let stringMaybe : String? = "howdy" 
let upper = stringMaybe!.uppercased()
That form of code is called an Optional chain. In the middle of a
chain of dot-notation, you have unwrapped an Optional.
However, if you unwrap an Optional that contains no wrapped object,
you’ll crash. So what if you’re not sure whether this Optional
contains a wrapped object? How can you send a message to the value
inside an Optional in that situation?
Swift provides a special shorthand for exactly this purpose. To send a
message safely to the value wrapped inside an Optional that might be

--- Page 221 ---
empty, you can unwrap the Optional optionally. To do so, unwrap the
Optional with the question mark postfix operator instead of the
exclamation mark:
var stringMaybe : String? 
// ... stringMaybe might be assigned a real value here ... 
let upper = stringMaybe?.uppercased()
That’s an Optional chain in which you used a question mark to
unwrap the Optional. By using that notation, you have unwrapped the
Optional optionally — meaning conditionally. The condition in
question is one of safety; a test for nil is performed for us. Our code
means: “If stringMaybe contains a String, unwrap it and send that
String the uppercased message. If it doesn’t (that is, if it equates to n
il), do not unwrap it and do not send it any messages!”
Such code is a double-edged sword. On the one hand, if stringMayb
e is nil, you won’t crash at runtime. On the other hand, if stringMay
be is nil, that line of code won’t do anything useful — you won’t get
any uppercase string.
But now there’s a new question. In that code, we initialized a variable
upper to an expression that involves sending the uppercased
message. Now it turns out that the uppercased message might not
even be sent. So what, exactly, is upper initialized to?
To handle this situation, Swift has a special rule. If an Optional chain
contains an optionally unwrapped Optional, and if this Optional chain
produces a value, that value is itself wrapped in an Optional. Thus, u
pper is typed as an Optional wrapping a String. This works

--- Page 222 ---
brilliantly, because it covers both possible cases. Let’s say, first, that s
tringMaybe contains a String:
var stringMaybe : String? 
stringMaybe = "howdy" 
let upper = stringMaybe?.uppercased()
After that code, upper is not a String; it is not "HOWDY". It is an
Optional wrapping "HOWDY".
On the other hand, if the attempt to unwrap the Optional fails, the
Optional chain can return nil instead:
var stringMaybe : String? 
let upper = stringMaybe?.uppercased()
After that code, upper is typed as an Optional wrapping a String, but
it wraps no string; its value is nil.
Unwrapping an Optional optionally in this way is elegant and safe;
even if stringMaybe is nil, we won’t crash at runtime. On the other
hand, we’ve ended up with yet another Optional on our hands! upper
is typed as an Optional wrapping a String, and in order to use that
String, we’re going to have to unwrap upper. And we don’t know
whether upper is nil, so we have exactly the same problem we had
before — we need to make sure that we unwrap upper safely, and
that we don’t accidentally unwrap an empty Optional.
Longer Optional chains are legal. No matter how many Optionals are
unwrapped in the course of the chain, if any of them is unwrapped
optionally, the entire expression produces an Optional wrapping the

--- Page 223 ---
type it would have produced if the Optionals were unwrapped
normally, and is free to fail safely at any point along the way:
// self is a UIViewController 
let f = self.view?.window?.rootViewController?.view?.frame
The frame property of a view is a CGRect. But after that code, f is
not a CGRect. It’s an Optional wrapping a CGRect. If any of the
optional unwrapping along the chain fails (because the Optional we
propose to unwrap is nil), f will be nil to indicate failure.
(Observe that the preceding code does not end up nesting Optionals;
it doesn’t produce a CGRect wrapped in an Optional wrapped in an
Optional, and so on, merely because there are multiple Optionals
being optionally unwrapped in the chain! However, it is possible, for
other reasons, to end up with an Optional wrapped in an Optional,
and I’ll call out some examples as we proceed.)
If a function call returns an Optional, you can unwrap the result and
use it. You don’t necessarily have to capture the result in order to do
that; you can unwrap it in place, by putting an exclamation mark or a
question mark after the function call (that is, after the closing
parenthesis). That’s really no different from what we’ve been doing
all along, except that instead of an Optional property or variable, this
is a function call that returns an Optional:
class Dog { 
    var noise : String? 
    func speak() -> String? { 
        return self.noise 
    } 

--- Page 224 ---
} 
let d = Dog() 
let bigname = d.speak()?.uppercased()
After that, don’t forget, bigname is not a String — it’s an Optional
wrapping a String.
You can also assign safely into an Optional chain. If any of the
optionally unwrapped Optionals in the chain turns out to be nil,
nothing happens:
// self is a UIViewController 
self.navigationController?.hidesBarsOnTap = true
A view controller might or might not have a navigation controller, so
its navigationController property is an Optional. In that code, we
are setting our navigation controller’s hidesBarsOnTap property
safely; if we happen to have no navigation controller, no harm is done
— because nothing happens.
When assigning into an Optional chain, if you also want to know
whether the assignment succeeded, you can capture the result of the
assignment as an Optional wrapping a Void and test it for nil:
let ok : Void? = self.navigationController?.hidesBarsOnTap = true
Now, if ok is not nil, self.navigationController was safely
unwrapped and the assignment succeeded.

--- Page 225 ---
TIP
The ! and ? postfix operators, which are used to unwrap an Optional, have
basically nothing to do with the ! and ? used with type names as syntactic sugar
for expressing Optional types (such as String? and `String!). The outward
similarity has confused many a beginner.
OPTIONAL MAP AND FLATMAP
When you want to do something to an Optional’s wrapped value
more elaborate than sending it a simple message, such as calling uppe
rcased(), while keeping the advantages of Optional chaining, Swift
provides a method that elegantly and safely permits you to do so: map
(_:). This is a method of Optional itself, so it’s fine to send it to an
Optional. The parameter is a function that you supply (usually an
anonymous function) that takes whatever type is wrapped in the
Optional; the unwrapped value is passed to this function, and now
you can manipulate it in any desired manner. The result of the
function is then wrapped as an Optional. If the original Optional was
nil, the whole thing produces nil, safely:
let s : String? = "howdy" 
let s2 = s.map {($0 + ", world").uppercased()}
In that example, we start with an Optional wrapping a String; we
append a string to the string, and uppercase the result. You can’t
apply the + operator to an Optional string, but inside the map function,
the string is not Optional. Afterward, s2 is an Optional wrapping a
String. If s had turned out to be nil, there would be no crash, and s2
would be set to nil as well.

--- Page 226 ---
The output Optional type doesn’t have to be the same as the input
Optional type. To illustrate, I’ll use a closely related Optional
method, flatMap(_:). Here’s an elegant way to coerce an Optional
String to an (Optional) Int:
let s : String? = // whatever 
let i = s.flatMap {Int($0)}
In that code, we attempt to unwrap an Optional String and coerce it to
an Int. The result is an Optional Int, which will be nil if s is nil, or
if s isn’t nil but the coercion fails because the string wrapped by s
doesn’t represent an integer.
That example also illustrates the difference between map and
flatMap. If the map function itself produces an Optional — as
coercing a String to an Int does — flatMap unwraps it before
wrapping the result in an Optional. map doesn’t do that, so if we had
used map here, we would have ended up with a double-wrapped
Optional (an Int??).
COMPARISON WITH OPTIONAL
In an equality comparison with something other than nil, an
Optional gets special treatment: the wrapped value, not the Optional
itself, is compared. This works:
let s : String? = "Howdy" 
if s == "Howdy" { // ... they _are_ equal!
That shouldn’t work — how can an Optional be the same as a String?
— but it does. Instead of comparing the Optional itself with "Howdy",

--- Page 227 ---
Swift automagically (and safely) compares its wrapped value (if there
is one) with "Howdy". If the wrapped value is "Howdy", the
comparison succeeds. If the wrapped value is not "Howdy", the
comparison fails. If there is no wrapped value (s is nil), the
comparison fails too — safely! You can compare s to nil or to a
String, and the comparison works correctly in all cases.
(This feature depends upon the wrapped type itself being usable with
==. This means that the wrapped type must adopt the Equatable
protocol; otherwise, the compiler will stop you from using == with an
Optional wrapping it. I’ll talk about protocols and Equatable in
Chapters 4 and 5.)
Direct comparison of Optionals does not work for an inequality
comparison, using the greater-than and less-than operators:
let i : Int? = 2 
if i < 3 { // compile error
To perform that sort of comparison, you can unwrap safely and
perform the comparison directly on the unwrapped value:
if i != nil && i! < 3 { // ... it _is_ less
WARNING
Do not compare an implicitly unwrapped Optional with anything; you can crash
at runtime.
WHY OPTIONALS?

--- Page 228 ---
Now that you know how to use an Optional, you are probably
wondering why to use an Optional. Why does Swift have Optionals at
all? What are they good for?
One important use of Optionals is to permit a value to be marked as
empty or erroneous. Many built-in Swift functions use an Optional
this way:
let arr = [1,2,3] 
let ix = arr.firstIndex(of:4) 
if ix == nil { // ...
Swift’s firstIndex(of:) method returns an Optional because the
object sought might not be present, in which case it has no index. The
type returned cannot be an Int, because there is no Int value that can
be taken to mean, “I didn’t find this object at all.” Returning an
Optional solves the problem neatly: nil means “I didn’t find the
object,” and otherwise the actual Int result is sitting there wrapped up
in the Optional.
Another purpose of Optionals is to provide interchange of object
values with Objective-C. In Objective-C, any object reference can be
nil. You need a way to send nil to Objective-C and to receive nil
from Objective-C. Swift Optionals provide your only way to do that.
Swift will typically assist you by a judicious use of appropriate types
in the Cocoa APIs. Consider a UIView’s backgroundColor property.
It’s a UIColor, but it can be nil, and you are allowed to set it to nil.
Thus, it is typed as UIColor?. You don’t need to work directly with
Optionals in order to set such a value! Remember, assigning the

--- Page 229 ---
wrapped type to an Optional is legal, as the assigned value will be
wrapped for you. You can set myView.backgroundColor to a
UIColor — or to nil. If you get a UIView’s backgroundColor, you
now have an Optional wrapping a UIColor, and you must be
conscious of that fact, for all the reasons I’ve already discussed: if
you’re not, surprising things can happen:
let v = UIView() 
let c = v.backgroundColor 
let c2 = c.withAlphaComponent(0.5) // compile error
You’re trying to send the withAlphaComponent message to c, as if it
were a UIColor. It isn’t a UIColor. It’s an Optional wrapping a
UIColor. Xcode will try to help you in this situation; if you use code
completion (Chapter 9) to enter the name of the withAlphaComponen
t method, Xcode will insert a question mark after c, (optionally)
unwrapping the Optional and giving you legal code:
let v = UIView() 
let c = v.backgroundColor 
let c2 = c?.withAlphaComponent(0.5)
In the vast majority of situations, however, a Cocoa object type will
not be marked as an Optional. That’s because, although in theory it
could be nil (because any Objective-C object reference can be nil),
in practice it won’t be. Swift saves you a step by treating the value as
the object type itself. This magic is performed by hand-tweaking the
Cocoa APIs (also called auditing). In the very first public version of
Swift (in June of 2014), all object values received from Cocoa were
typed as Optionals (usually implicitly unwrapped Optionals); but then
Apple embarked on the massive project of hand-tweaking the APIs to

--- Page 230 ---
eliminate Optionals that didn’t need to be Optionals, and that project
is now essentially complete.
Finally, an important use of Optionals is to defer initialization of an
instance property. If a variable (declared with var) is typed as an
Optional, it has a value even if you don’t initialize it — namely nil.
That comes in very handy in situations where you know something
will have a value, but not right away.
One way this can happen is that a property represents data that will
take time to acquire. In my Albumen app, as we launch, I create an
instance of my root view controller. I also want to gather a bunch of
data about the user’s music library and store that data in instance
properties of the root view controller instance. But gathering that data
will take time. Therefore I must instantiate the root view controller
first and gather the data later, because if we pause to gather the data
before instantiating the root view controller, the app will take too long
to launch — the delay will be perceptible, and we might even crash
(because iOS forbids long launch times). Therefore the data
properties are all typed as Optionals; they are nil until the data are
gathered, at which time they are assigned their “real” values:
class RootViewController : UITableViewController { 
    var albums : [MPMediaItemCollection]? // initialized to nil 
    // ... 
}
This approach has a second advantage: as with firstIndex, the
initial nil value of albums is a signal to the rest of my code that we
don’t yet have a real value. When my Albumen app launches, it

--- Page 231 ---
displays a table listing all the user’s music albums. At launch time,
however, that data has not yet been gathered. My table-display code
tests albums to see whether it’s nil and, if it is, displays an empty
table. After gathering the data, I tell my table to display its data
again. This time, the table-display code finds that albums is not nil,
but rather consists of actual data — and it now displays that data. The
use of an Optional allows one and the same value, albums, to store
the data or to state that there is no data.
Sometimes, a property’s value isn’t time-consuming to acquire, but it
still won’t be ready at initialization time. A common case in real life
is an outlet, which is a reference to something in your interface such
as a button:
class ViewController: UIViewController { 
    @IBOutlet var myButton: UIButton! // initialized to nil 
    // ... 
}
Ignore, for now, the @IBOutlet designation, which is an internal hint
to Xcode (as I’ll explain in Chapter 7). The important thing is that
this property, myButton, won’t have a value when our
ViewController instance first comes into existence, but shortly
thereafter the view controller’s view will be loaded and myButton
will be set so that it points to an actual UIButton object in the
interface. Therefore, the variable is typed as an implicitly unwrapped
Optional:
It’s an Optional because we need a placeholder value (namely
nil) for myButton when the ViewController instance first comes

--- Page 232 ---
into existence.
It’s implicitly unwrapped so that in our code, once self.myButto
n has been assigned a UIButton value, we can treat it as a
reference to an actual UIButton, passing through the Optional
without noticing that it is an Optional. Moreover, most of this
view controller’s code will run after the view is loaded and the
actual button is assigned to myButton, so the implicitly unwrapped
Optional is generally safe: code can confidently refer to myButton
as if it were a UIButton, without fear that it might be nil.
A shortcoming of this architecture is that our outlet property must be
declared with var, meaning that, in theory, other code can come
along later and replace this button reference with another. That is
usually undesirable. This is similar to the lack of lazy let discussed
earlier in this chapter — and you can work around the problem in a
similar way, namely with a property wrapper that allows the outlet
property’s value, initialized to nil, to be set only once thereafter.

--- Page 233 ---
Chapter 4. Object Types
In the preceding chapter, I discussed some built-in object types. But I
have not yet explained object types themselves. As I mentioned in
Chapter 1, Swift object types come in three flavors: enum, struct, and
class. What are the differences between them? And how would you
create your own object type?
In this chapter, I’ll describe first object types generally and then each
of the three flavors. Then I’ll explain three Swift ways of giving an
object type greater flexibility: protocols, generics, and extensions.
Finally, I’ll complete the survey of Swift’s main built-in types with
three umbrella types and three collection types.
Object Type Declarations and Features
Object types are declared with the flavor of the object type (enum, st
ruct, or class), the name of the object type (which should start with
a capital letter), and curly braces:
class Manny { 
} 
struct Moe { 
} 
enum Jack { 
}

--- Page 234 ---
The visibility of an object type to other code — its scope — depends
upon where its declaration appears (compare “Variable Scope and
Lifetime”):
Top level
Object types declared at the top level of a file will, by default, be
visible to all files in the same module. This is the usual place for
object type declarations.
Inside another type declaration
Sometimes it’s useful to declare a type inside the declaration of
another type, giving it a namespace. This is called a nested type.
Function body
An object type declared within the body of a function will exist
only inside the scope of the curly braces that surround it; such
declarations are legal but rare.
Declarations for any object type may contain within their curly braces
the following things:
Initializers
An object type is merely the type of an object. The purpose of
declaring an object type will usually (though not always) be so
that you can make an actual object — an instance — that has this
type. An initializer is a function, declared and called in a special
way, allowing you to do that.
Properties
A variable declared at the top level of an object type declaration
is a property.

--- Page 235 ---
By default, a property is an instance property. An instance
property is scoped to an instance: it is accessed through a
particular instance of this type, and its value can be different for
every instance of this type.
Alternatively, a property can be a static/class property. For an
enum or struct, it is declared with the keyword static; for a
class, it may instead be declared with the keyword class. It
belongs to the object type itself: it is accessed through the type,
and it has just one value, associated with the type.
Methods
A function declared at the top level of an object type declaration
is a method.
By default, a method is an instance method: it is called by sending
a message to a particular instance of this type. Inside an instance
method, self is the instance.
Alternatively, a method can be a static/class method. For an enum
or struct, it is declared with the keyword static; for a class, it
may be declared instead with the keyword class. It is called by
sending a message to the type. Inside a static/class method, self
is the type.
Subscripts
A subscript is a special kind of method, called by appending
square brackets to an instance reference or type name.
Object type declarations
An object type declaration can contain an object type declaration
— a nested type. From inside the containing object type, the
nested type is in scope; from outside the containing object type,
the nested type must be referred to through the containing object
type. The containing object type is a namespace for the nested
type.

--- Page 236 ---
Initializers
An initializer is a function for producing an instance of an object
type. Strictly speaking, it is a static/class method, because it is called
by talking to the object type. It is usually called by means of special
syntax: the name of the type is followed directly by parentheses, as if
the type itself were a function. When an initializer is called, a new
instance is created and returned as a result. You will usually do
something with the returned instance, such as assigning it to a
variable, in order to preserve it and work with it in subsequent code.
Suppose we have a Dog class:
class Dog { 
}
Then we can make a Dog instance like this:
Dog()
That code, however, though legal, is silly — so silly that it warrants a
warning from the compiler. We have created a Dog instance, but there
is no reference to that instance. Without such a reference, the Dog
instance comes into existence and then immediately vanishes in a
puff of smoke. The usual sort of thing is more like this:
let fido = Dog()
Now our Dog instance will persist as long as the variable fido
persists (see Chapter 3) — and the variable fido gives us a reference
to our Dog instance, so that we can use it.

--- Page 237 ---
Observe that Dog() calls an initializer even though our Dog class
doesn’t declare any initializers! The reason is that object types may
have implicit initializers. These are a convenience that save you the
trouble of writing your own initializers. But you can write your own
initializers, and you will often do so.
HOW TO WRITE AN INITIALIZER
An initializer is a kind of function, but its declaration syntax doesn’t
involve the keyword func or a return type. Instead, you use the
keyword init with a parameter list, followed by curly braces
containing the code. An object type can have multiple initializers,
distinguished by their parameters. A frequent use of the parameters is
to set the values of instance properties.
Here’s a Dog class with two instance properties, name (a String) and l
icense (an Int). We give these instance properties default values that
are effectively placeholders — an empty string and the number zero.
Then we declare three initializers, so that the caller can create a Dog
instance in three different ways: by supplying a name, by supplying a
license number, or by supplying both. In each initializer, the
parameters that are supplied are used to set the values of the
corresponding properties:
class Dog { 
    var name = "" 
    var license = 0 
    init(name:String) { 
        self.name = name 
    } 
    init(license:Int) { 
        self.license = license 

--- Page 238 ---
    } 
    init(name:String, license:Int) { 
        self.name = name 
        self.license = license 
    } 
}
In that code, in each initializer, I’ve given each parameter the same
name as the property to which it corresponds. There’s no reason to do
that apart from stylistic clarity. In the initializer function body, I can
distinguish the parameter from the property by using self explicitly
to access the property.
The result of that declaration is that I can create a Dog in three
different ways:
let fido = Dog(name:"Fido") 
let rover = Dog(license:1234) 
let spot = Dog(name:"Spot", license:1357)
But now I can’t create a Dog with no initializer parameters. I wrote
initializers, so my implicit initializer went away. This code is no
longer legal:
let puff = Dog() // compile error
Of course, I could make that code legal by explicitly declaring an
initializer with no parameters:
class Dog { 
    var name = "" 
    var license = 0 
    init() { 

--- Page 239 ---
    } 
    init(name:String) { 
        self.name = name 
    } 
    init(license:Int) { 
        self.license = license 
    } 
    init(name:String, license:Int) { 
        self.name = name 
        self.license = license 
    } 
}
Now, the truth is that we don’t need those four initializers, because an
initializer is a function, and a function’s parameters can have default
values. I can condense all that code into a single initializer, like this:
class Dog { 
    var name = "" 
    var license = 0 
    init(name:String = "", license:Int = 0) { 
        self.name = name 
        self.license = license 
    } 
}
I can still make an actual Dog instance in four different ways:
let fido = Dog(name:"Fido") 
let rover = Dog(license:1234) 
let spot = Dog(name:"Spot", license:1357) 
let puff = Dog()
Now comes the really interesting part. In my property declarations, I
can eliminate the assignment of default initial values (as long as I
declare explicitly the type of each property):

--- Page 240 ---
class Dog { 
    var name : String // no default value! 
    var license : Int // no default value! 
    init(name:String = "", license:Int = 0) { 
        self.name = name 
        self.license = license 
    } 
}
That code is legal (and common) — because an initializer initializes!
In other words, I don’t have to give my properties initial values in
their declarations, provided I give them initial values in all
initializers. That way, I am guaranteed that all my instance properties
have values when the instance comes into existence, which is what
matters. Conversely, an instance property without an initial value
when the instance comes into existence is illegal. A property must be
initialized either as part of its declaration or by every initializer, and
the compiler will stop you otherwise.
The Swift compiler’s insistence that all instance properties be
properly initialized is a valuable feature of Swift. (Contrast
Objective-C, where instance properties can go uninitialized — and
often do, leading to mysterious errors later.) Don’t fight the compiler;
work with it. The compiler will help you by giving you an error
message (“Return from initializer without initializing all stored
properties”) until all your initializers initialize all your instance
properties:
class Dog { 
    var name : String 
    var license : Int 
    init(name:String = "") { 

--- Page 241 ---
        self.name = name // compile error (do you see why?) 
    } 
}
Because setting an instance property in an initializer counts as
initialization, it is legal even if the instance property is a constant
declared with let:
class Dog { 
    let name : String 
    let license : Int 
    init(name:String = "", license:Int = 0) { 
        self.name = name 
        self.license = license 
    } 
}
In our artificial examples, we have been very generous with our
initializers: we are letting the caller instantiate a Dog without
supplying a name: argument or a license: argument. Usually,
however, the purpose of an initializer is just the opposite: we want to
force the caller to supply all needed information at instantiation time.
In real life, it is much more likely that our Dog class would look like
this:
class Dog { 
    let name : String 
    let license : Int 
    init(name:String, license:Int) { 
        self.name = name 
        self.license = license 
    } 
}

--- Page 242 ---
In that code, our Dog has a name property and a license property,
and values for these must be supplied at instantiation time (there are
no default values), and those values can never be changed thereafter
(the properties are constants). In this way, we enforce a rule that
every Dog must have a meaningful name and license. There is now
only one way to make a Dog:
let spot = Dog(name:"Spot", license:1357)
DEFERRED INITIALIZATION OF PROPERTIES
Sometimes there is no meaningful value that can be assigned to an
instance property during initialization. Perhaps the initial value of this
property will not be obtained until some time has elapsed after this
instance has come into existence. This situation conflicts with the
requirement that all instance properties be initialized either in their
declaration or through an initializer. You could circumvent the
problem by assigning a default initial value anyway; but this fails to
communicate to your own code the fact that this isn’t a “real” value.
A common solution, as I explained in Chapter 3, is to declare your
instance property as a var having an Optional type. An Optional has
a value, namely nil, signifying that no “real” value has been
supplied; and an Optional var is initialized to nil automatically.
Your code can test this instance property against nil and, if it is nil,
it won’t use the property. Later, the property will be given its “real”
value. Of course, that value is now wrapped in an Optional; but if you
declare this property as an implicitly unwrapped Optional, you can
use the wrapped value directly, without explicitly unwrapping it — as

--- Page 243 ---
if this weren’t an Optional at all — once you’re sure it is safe to do
so:
// this property will be set automatically when the nib loads 
@IBOutlet var myButton: UIButton! 
// this property will be set after time-consuming gathering of data 
var albums : [MPMediaItemCollection]?
REFERRING TO SELF
An initializer may refer to an already initialized instance property,
and may refer to an uninitialized instance property in order to
initialize it. Otherwise, an initializer may not refer to self, explicitly
or implicitly, until all instance properties have been initialized. This
rule guarantees that the instance is fully formed before it is used. This
code is illegal:
struct Cat { 
    var name : String 
    var license : Int 
    init(name:String, license:Int) { 
        self.name = name 
        meow() // too soon - compile error 
        self.license = license 
    } 
    func meow() { 
        print("meow") 
    } 
}
The call to the instance method meow is implicitly a reference to self
— it means self.meow(). The initializer can say that, but not until it
has fulfilled its primary contract of initializing all uninitialized
properties. The call to the instance method meow simply needs to be

--- Page 244 ---
moved down one line, so that it comes after both name and license
have been initialized.
DELEGATING INITIALIZERS
Initializers within an object type can call one another by using the
syntax self.init(...). An initializer that calls another initializer is
called a delegating initializer. When an initializer delegates, the other
initializer — the one that it delegates to — must completely initialize
the instance first, and then the delegating initializer can work with the
fully initialized instance, possibly setting again a var property that
was already set by the initializer that it delegated to.
A delegating initializer appears to be an exception to the rule against
saying self too early. But it isn’t, because it is saying self in order
to delegate — and delegating will cause all instance properties to be
initialized. In fact, the rules about a delegating initializer saying self
are even more stringent: a delegating initializer cannot refer to self
at all, not even to set a property, until after the call to the other
initializer. For example:
struct Digit { 
    var number : Int 
    var meaningOfLife : Bool 
    init(number:Int) { 
        self.number = number 
        self.meaningOfLife = false 
    } 
    init() { // this is a delegating initializer 
        self.init(number:42) 
        self.meaningOfLife = true 
    } 
}

--- Page 245 ---
A delegating initializer cannot set a constant property (a let
variable). That is because it cannot refer to the property until after it
has called the other initializer, and at that point the instance is fully
formed — initialization proper is over, and the door for initialization
of properties has closed. This property is a constant, it has been
initialized, and that’s that. The preceding code would be illegal if mea
ningOfLife were declared with let, because the second initializer is
a delegating initializer and cannot set a constant property.
Be careful not to delegate recursively! If you tell an initializer to
delegate to itself, or if you create a vicious circle of delegating
initializers, the compiler won’t stop you, but your running app will
hang. Don’t say this:
struct Digit { // do not do this! 
    var number : Int = 100 
    init(value:Int) { 
        self.init(number:value) 
    } 
    init(number:Int) { 
        self.init(value:number) 
    } 
}
FAILABLE INITIALIZERS
An initializer can return an Optional wrapping the new instance. In
this way, nil can be returned to signal failure. An initializer that
behaves this way is a failable initializer. To mark an initializer as
failable when declaring it, put a question mark after the keyword ini
t. If your failable initializer needs to return nil, explicitly write retu

--- Page 246 ---
rn nil. It is up to the caller to test the resulting Optional for
equivalence with nil, unwrap it, and so forth, as with any Optional.
Here’s a version of Dog with an initializer that returns an Optional,
returning nil if the name: or license: arguments are invalid:
class Dog { 
    let name : String 
    let license : Int 
    init?(name:String, license:Int) { 
        if name.isEmpty { 
            return nil 
        } 
        if license <= 0 { 
            return nil 
        } 
        self.name = name 
        self.license = license 
    } 
}
The resulting value is typed as an Optional wrapping a Dog, and the
caller will need to unwrap that Optional (if isn’t nil) before sending
any messages to it.
Cocoa and Objective-C conventionally return nil from initializers to
signal failure; the API for such initializers has been hand-tweaked as
a Swift failable initializer if initialization really might fail. For
example, the UIImage initializer init?(named:) is a failable
initializer, because there might be no image with the given name. The
resulting value is a UIImage?, and will typically have to be
unwrapped before using it.

--- Page 247 ---
(Most Objective-C initializers, however, are not bridged as failable
initializers, even though in theory any Objective-C initializer might
return nil. This is essentially the same hand-tweaking policy I
described in “Why Optionals?”.)
Properties
A property is a variable — one that happens to be declared at the top
level of an object type declaration. This means that everything said
about variables in Chapter 3 applies. A property has a fixed type; it
can be declared with var or let; it can be stored or computed; it can
have setter observers. An instance property can also be declared
lazy.
A stored instance property must be given an initial value. As I
explained a moment ago, this doesn’t have to happen through
assignment in the declaration; it can happen through initializer
functions instead. Setter observers are not called during initialization
of properties.
HOW PROPERTIES ARE ACCESSED
If a property is an instance property (the default), it can be accessed
only through an instance, and its value is separate for each instance.
To illustrate, let’s start once again with a Dog class:
class Dog { 
    let name : String 
    let license : Int 
    init(name:String, license:Int) { 
        self.name = name 
        self.license = license 

--- Page 248 ---
    } 
}
Our Dog class has a name instance property. Then we can make two
different Dog instances with two different name values, and we can
access each Dog instance’s name through the instance:
let fido = Dog(name:"Fido", license:1234) 
let spot = Dog(name:"Spot", license:1357) 
let aName = fido.name // "Fido" 
let anotherName = spot.name // "Spot"
A static/class property, on the other hand, is accessed through the
type, and is scoped to the type, which usually means that it is global
and unique. I’ll use a struct as an example:
struct Greeting { 
    static let friendly = "hello there" 
    static let hostile = "go away" 
}
Now code elsewhere can fetch the values of Greeting.friendly and
Greeting.hostile. That example is neither artificial nor trivial;
immutable static properties are a convenient and effective way to
supply your code with nicely namespaced constants.
PROPERTY INITIALIZATION AND SELF
A property declaration that assigns an initial value to the property
cannot fetch an instance property or call an instance method. Such
behavior would require a reference, explicit or implicit, to self; and
during initialization, there is no self yet — self is exactly what we
are in the process of initializing. Making this mistake can result in

--- Page 249 ---
some of Swift’s most perplexing compile error messages. This is
illegal (and removing the explicit references to self doesn’t make it
legal):
class Moi { 
    let first = "Matt" 
    let last = "Neuburg" 
    let whole = self.first + " " + self.last // compile error 
}
There are two common solutions in that situation:
Make this a computed property
A computed property can refer to self because the computation
won’t actually be performed until after self exists:
class Moi { 
    let first = "Matt" 
    let last = "Neuburg" 
    var whole : String { 
        self.first + " " + self.last 
    } 
}
Declare this property lazy
Like a computed property, a lazy property can refer to self
legally because that reference won’t be accessed until after self
exists:
class Moi { 
    let first = "Matt" 
    let last = "Neuburg" 

--- Page 250 ---
    lazy var whole = self.first + " " + self.last 
}
As I demonstrated in Chapter 3, a variable can be initialized as part of
its declaration using multiple lines of code by means of a define-and-
call anonymous function. If this variable is an instance property, and
if the function code refers to self, the variable must also be declared
lazy:
class Moi { 
    let first = "Matt" 
    let last = "Neuburg" 
    lazy var whole : String = { 
        var s = self.first 
        s.append(" ") 
        s.append(self.last) 
        return s 
    }() 
}
Unlike instance properties, static properties can be initialized with
reference to one another; the reason is that static property initializers
are lazy:
struct Greeting { 
    static let friendly = "hello there" 
    static let hostile = "go away" 
    static let ambivalent = friendly + " but " + hostile 
}
Notice the lack of self in that code. In static/class code, self means
the type itself. I like to use self explicitly wherever it would be
implicit, but here I can’t use it without arousing the ire of the
compiler (I regard this as a bug). To clarify the status of the terms fri

--- Page 251 ---
endly and hostile, I can use the type name (or the term Self, as I’ll
explain later in this chapter):
struct Greeting { 
    static let friendly = "hello there" 
    static let hostile = "go away" 
    static let ambivalent = Greeting.friendly + " but " + Greeting.hosti
le 
}
On the other hand, if I write ambivalent as a computed property, I
can use self:
struct Greeting { 
    static let friendly = "hello there" 
    static let hostile = "go away" 
    static var ambivalent : String { 
        self.friendly + " but " + self.hostile 
    } 
}
On the other other hand, I’m not allowed to use self when the initial
value is set by a define-and-call anonymous function (again, I regard
this as a bug):
struct Greeting { 
    static let friendly = "hello there" 
    static let hostile = "go away" 
    static var ambivalent : String = { 
        self.friendly + " but " + self.hostile // compile error 
    }() 
}
Methods

--- Page 252 ---
A method is a function — one that happens to be declared at the top
level of an object type declaration. This means that everything said
about functions in Chapter 2 applies.
By default, a method is an instance method. This means that it can be
accessed only through an instance. Within the body of an instance
method, self is the instance. To illustrate, let’s continue to develop
our Dog class:
class Dog { 
    let name : String 
    let license : Int 
    let whatDogsSay = "woof" 
    init(name:String, license:Int) { 
        self.name = name 
        self.license = license 
    } 
    func bark() { 
        print(self.whatDogsSay) 
    } 
    func speak() { 
        self.bark() 
        print("I'm \(self.name)") 
    } 
}
Now I can make a Dog instance and tell it to speak:
let fido = Dog(name:"Fido", license:1234) 
fido.speak() // woof I'm Fido
In my Dog class, the speak method calls the instance method bark
by way of self, and obtains the value of the instance property name
by way of self; and the bark instance method obtains the value of

--- Page 253 ---
the instance property whatDogsSay by way of self. This is because
instance code can use self to refer to this instance. Such code can
omit self if the reference is unambiguous; I could have written this:
func speak() { 
    bark() 
    print("I'm \(name)") 
}
But I never write code like that (except by accident). Omitting self,
in my view, makes the code harder to read and maintain; the loose
terms bark and name seem mysterious and confusing. Moreover,
sometimes self cannot be omitted (for a case in point, see “Escaping
Closures”), so it’s more consistent to use it always.
A static/class method is accessed through the type. Within the body
of a static/class method, self means the type:
struct Greeting { 
    static let friendly = "hello there" 
    static func beFriendly() { 
        print(self.friendly) 
    } 
}
And here’s how to call the static beFriendly method:
Greeting.beFriendly() // hello there
There is a kind of conceptual wall between static/class members, on
the one hand, and instance members on the other; even though they
may be declared within the same object type declaration, they inhabit

--- Page 254 ---
different worlds. A static/class method can’t refer to “the instance”
because there is no instance; thus, a static/class method cannot
directly refer to any instance properties or call any instance methods.
An instance method, on the other hand, can refer to the type, and can
thus access static/class properties and can call static/class methods.
Let’s return to our Dog class and grapple with the question of what
dogs say. Presume that all dogs say the same thing. We’d prefer,
therefore, to express whatDogsSay not at instance level but at class
level. This would be a good use of a static property. Here’s a
simplified Dog class that illustrates:
class Dog { 
    static var whatDogsSay = "woof" 
    func bark() { 
        print(Dog.whatDogsSay) 
    } 
}
Now we can make a Dog instance and tell it to bark:
let fido = Dog() 
fido.bark() // woof
(Instead of Dog.whatDogsSay, a Dog instance method can say Self.
whatDogsSay, as I’ll explain later in this chapter.)

--- Page 255 ---
THE SECRET LIFE OF INSTANCE METHODS
Here’s a secret: instance methods are actually static/class methods. This is
legal (but strange):
class MyClass { 
    var s = "" 
    func store(_ s:String) { 
        self.s = s 
    } 
} 
let m = MyClass() 
let f = MyClass.store(m) // what just happened!?
Even though store is an instance method, we are able to call it as a class
method — with a parameter that is an instance of this class! The reason is that
an instance method is actually a curried static/class method composed of two
functions — one function that takes an instance, and another function that
takes the parameters of the instance method. After that code, f is the second of
those functions, and can be called as a way of passing a parameter to the stor
e method of the instance m:
f("howdy") 
print(m.s) // howdy
Subscripts
A subscript is a method that is called by appending square brackets
containing arguments directly to a reference. You can use this feature
for whatever you like, but it is suitable particularly for situations
where this is an object type with elements that can be appropriately
accessed by key or by index number. I have already described (in
Chapter 3) the use of this syntax with strings, and it is familiar also

--- Page 256 ---
from dictionaries and arrays; you can use square brackets with strings
and dictionaries and arrays exactly because Swift’s String and
Dictionary and Array types declare subscript methods.
The syntax for declaring a subscript method is somewhat like a
function declaration and somewhat like a computed property
declaration. That’s no coincidence. A subscript is like a function in
that it can take parameters: arguments can appear in the square
brackets when a subscript method is called. A subscript is like a
computed property in that the call is used like a reference to a
property: you can fetch its value or you can assign into it.
To illustrate the syntax, here’s a struct that treats an integer as if it
were a digit sequence, returning a digit that can be specified by an
index number in square brackets; for simplicity, I’m deliberately
omitting any error-checking:
struct Digit { 
    var number : Int 
    init(_ n:Int) { 
        self.number = n 
    } 
    subscript(ix:Int) -> Int { 
  
  
        get { 
  
            let s = String(self.number) 
            return Int(String(s[s.index(s.startIndex, offsetBy:ix)]))! 
        } 
    } 
}
After the keyword subscript we have a parameter list stating
what parameters are to appear inside the square brackets. By

--- Page 257 ---
default, parameter names are not externalized; if you want a
parameter name to be externalized, your declaration must include
an external name before the internal name, even if they are the
same name — for example, subscript(ix ix:Int). This is
different from how external names work everywhere else in Swift
(and therefore I regard it as a bug in the language).
Then we have the type of value that is passed out (when the getter
is called) or in (when the setter is called); this is parallel to the
type declared for a computed property, except that (oddly) the
type is preceded by the arrow operator instead of a colon.
Finally, we have curly braces whose contents are exactly like
those of a computed property. You can have get and curly braces
for the getter, and set and curly braces for the setter. The setter
can be omitted (as here); in that case, the word get and its curly
braces can be omitted. If the getter consists of a single statement,
the keyword return can be omitted. The setter receives the new
value as newValue, but you can change that name by supplying a
different name in parentheses after the word set.
Here’s an example of calling the getter; the instance with appended
square brackets containing the arguments is used just as if you were
getting a property value:
var d = Digit(1234) 
let aDigit = d[1] // 2
Now I’ll expand my Digit struct so that its subscript method includes
a setter (and again I’ll omit error-checking):
struct Digit { 
    var number : Int 
    init(_ n:Int) { 
        self.number = n 

--- Page 258 ---
    } 
    subscript(ix:Int) -> Int { 
        get { 
            let s = String(self.number) 
            return Int(String(s[s.index(s.startIndex, offsetBy:ix)]))! 
        } 
        set { 
            var s = String(self.number) 
            let i = s.index(s.startIndex, offsetBy:ix) 
            s.replaceSubrange(i...i, with: String(newValue)) 
            self.number = Int(s)! 
        } 
    } 
}
And here’s an example of calling the setter; the instance with
appended square brackets containing the arguments is used just as if
you were setting a property value:
var d = Digit(1234) 
d[0] = 2 // now d.number is 2234
An object type can declare multiple subscript methods, distinguished
by their parameters.
Starting in Swift 5.1, a subscript can be a static/class method. I’ll
demonstrate later, when we talk about enums.
Starting in Swift 5.2, a subscript can have default parameter values. I
can declare my Digit subscript method like this (though I can’t think
why I’d want to):
subscript(ix:Int = 0) -> Int {

--- Page 259 ---
And then I can call it like this:
var d = Digit(1234) 
let aDigit = d[] // 1
Nested Object Types
An object type may be declared inside an object type declaration,
forming a nested type:
class Dog { 
    struct Noise { 
        static var noise = "woof" 
    } 
    func bark() { 
        print(Dog.Noise.noise) 
    } 
}
A nested object type is no different from any other object type, but
the rules for referring to it from the outside are changed; the
surrounding object type acts as a namespace, and must be referred to
explicitly in order to access the nested object type:
Dog.Noise.noise = "arf"
Here, the Noise struct is namespaced inside the Dog class. This
namespacing provides clarity: the name Noise does not float free, but
is explicitly associated with the Dog class to which it belongs.
Namespacing also allows more than one Noise type to exist, without
any clash of names. Swift built-in object types often take advantage
of namespacing; for example, the String struct is one of several
structs that contain an Index struct, with no clash of names.

--- Page 260 ---
A nested type can’t refer directly to the surrounding type’s instance
members, but it can refer directly to the surrounding type’s
static/class members:
class Dog { 
    static let sound = "ruff" 
    struct Noise { 
        static var noise = "woof" 
        func barkTheDog() { bark() } // compile error 
        var othernoise = sound // fine! 
    } 
    func bark() { 
        print(Dog.Noise.noise) 
    } 
}
In that example, code inside Noise cannot refer directly to Dog’s bar
k method, because it’s an instance method, which can be referred to
only by way of some specific instance of Dog. But code inside Noise
can refer directly to Dog’s sound static property. Moreover, it can do
so without explicit namespacing — that is, it doesn’t have to say Dog.
sound. In effect, the term sound is global in scope to the nested type.
Enums
An enum is an object type whose instances represent distinct
predefined alternative values. Think of it as a list of known
possibilities. An enum is the Swift way to express a set of constants
that are alternatives to one another. An enum declaration includes
case statements. Each case is the name of one of the alternatives. An
instance of an enum will represent exactly one alternative — one
case.

--- Page 261 ---
In my Albumen app, different instances of the same view controller
can list any of four different sorts of music library contents: albums,
playlists, podcasts, or audiobooks. The view controller’s behavior is
slightly different in each case. So I need a sort of four-way switch
that I can set once when the view controller is instantiated, saying
which sort of contents this view controller is to display. That sounds
like an enum!
Here’s the basic declaration for that enum; I call it Filter, because
each case represents a different way of filtering the contents of the
music library:
enum Filter { 
    case albums 
    case playlists 
    case podcasts 
    case books 
}
That enum doesn’t have an initializer. You can write an initializer for
an enum, as I’ll demonstrate in a moment; but there is a default mode
of initialization that you’ll probably use most of the time — the name
of the enum followed by dot-notation and one of the cases. Here’s
how to make an instance of Filter representing the albums case:
let type = Filter.albums
If the type is known in advance, you can omit the name of the enum;
the bare case must still be preceded by a dot:
let type : Filter = .albums

--- Page 262 ---
You can’t say .albums just anywhere out of the blue, because Swift
doesn’t know what enum it belongs to. But in that code, the variable
is explicitly declared as a Filter, so Swift knows what .albums
means. A similar thing happens when passing an enum instance as an
argument in a function call:
func filterExpecter(_ type:Filter) {} 
filterExpecter(.albums)
In the second line, I create an instance of Filter and pass it, all in one
move, without having to include the name of the enum. That’s
because Swift knows from the function declaration that a Filter is
expected here.
In real life, the space savings when omitting the enum name can be
considerable — especially because, when talking to Cocoa, the enum
type names are often long:
let v = UIView() 
v.contentMode = .center
A UIView’s contentMode property is typed as a
UIView.ContentMode enum. Our code is neater and simpler because
we don’t have to include the type name explicitly here; .center is
nicer than UIView.ContentMode.center. But either is legal.
Instances of an enum with the same case are regarded as equal. You
can compare an enum instance for equality against a case. Again, the
type of enum is known from the first term in the comparison, so the
second term can omit the enum name:

--- Page 263 ---
func filterExpecter(_ type:Filter) { 
    if type == .albums { 
        print("it is albums") 
    } 
} 
filterExpecter(.albums) // "it is albums"
Raw Values
Optionally, when you declare an enum, you can add a type
declaration. The cases then all carry with them a fixed (constant)
value of that type. The types attached to an enum in this way are
limited to numbers and strings, and the values assigned must be
literals.
If the type is an integer numeric type, the values can be implicitly
assigned, and will start at zero by default:
enum PepBoy : Int { 
    case manny 
    case moe 
    case jack 
}
In that code, .manny carries a value of 0, .moe carries of a value of 1,
and so on.
If the type is String, the implicitly assigned values are the string
equivalents of the case names:
enum Filter : String { 
    case albums 
    case playlists 
    case podcasts 

--- Page 264 ---
    case books 
}
In that code, .albums carries a value of "albums", and so on.
Regardless of the type, you can assign values explicitly as part of the
case declarations, like this:
enum Normal : Double { 
    case fahrenheit = 98.6 
    case centigrade = 37 
} 
enum PepBoy : Int { 
    case manny = 1 
    case moe // 2 implicitly 
    case jack = 4 
} 
enum Filter : String { 
    case albums = "Albums" 
    case playlists = "Playlists" 
    case podcasts = "Podcasts" 
    case books = "Audiobooks" 
}
The values carried by the cases are called their raw values. An enum
with a type declaration implicitly adopts the RawRepresentable
protocol, meaning that it implicitly has an init(rawValue:)
initializer and a rawValue property. (I’ll explain later what a protocol
is.) So you can retrieve a case’s assigned value as its rawValue:
let type = Filter.albums 
print(type.rawValue) // Albums

--- Page 265 ---
Having each case carry a fixed raw value can be quite useful. In my
Albumen app, the Filter cases really do have those String values, and
type is a Filter instance property of the view controller; when the
view controller wants to know what title string to put at the top of the
screen, it simply retrieves self.type.rawValue.
The raw value associated with each case must be unique within this
enum; the compiler will enforce this rule. Therefore, the mapping
works the other way: given a raw value, you can derive the case; in
particular, you can instantiate an enum that has raw values by using
its init(rawValue:) initializer:
let type = Filter(rawValue:"Albums")
However, the attempt to instantiate the enum in this way still might
fail, because you might supply a raw value corresponding to no case;
therefore, this is a failable initializer, and the value returned is an
Optional. In that code, type is not a Filter; it’s an Optional wrapping
a Filter. This might not be terribly important, however, because the
thing you are most likely to want to do with an enum is to compare it
for equality with a case of the enum; you can do that with an Optional
without unwrapping it. This code is legal and works correctly:
let type = Filter(rawValue:"Albums") 
if type == .albums { // ...

--- Page 266 ---
INFERENCE OF TYPE NAME WITH STATIC/CLASS MEMBERS
Just as you can use a dot and the name of an enum case where an instance of
that enum is expected, you can do the same thing when referring to a type’s
static/class member whose value is an instance of that type. For example,
UIColor has many class properties that produce a UIColor instance, so you can
omit UIColor where a UIColor is expected:
p.trackTintColor = .red // instead of UIColor.red
Similarly, suppose we have a struct Thing with static constants whose values
are Thing instances:
struct Thing : RawRepresentable { 
    let rawValue : Int 
    static let one : Thing = Thing(rawValue:1) 
    static let two : Thing = Thing(rawValue:2) 
}
Then we can refer to Thing.one as .one where a Thing instance is expected:
let thing : Thing = .one
Many Objective-C enums are bridged to Swift as that kind of struct, as I’ll
explain later in the chapter.
In the same way, when a type has a static/class method that produces an
instance of that type, the type name can be omitted when an instance of that
type is expected. Moreover, an initializer is such a method! Suppose Dog has
an initializer that expects a name: parameter, and dogExpecter is a function that
takes a Dog as its parameter:
struct Dog { 
    let name: String 
} 
func dogExpecter(_ dog: Dog) { 
    print(dog.name) 
}

--- Page 267 ---
Then we can create and pass a Dog to dogExpecter without using the term
Dog:
dogExpecter(.init(name:"Fido"))
That sort of thing is regarded as good Swift style.
Associated Values
The raw values discussed in the preceding section are fixed in the
enum’s declaration: a given case carries with it a certain raw value,
and that’s that. But there’s also a way to construct a case whose
constant value can be set when the instance is created. The attached
value here is called an associated value.
To write an enum with one or more cases taking an associated value,
do not declare any raw value type for the enum as a whole; instead,
you append to the name of the case an expression that looks very
much like a tuple — that is, parentheses containing a list of possibly
labeled types. Unlike a raw value, your choice of type is not limited.
Most often, a single value will be attached to a case, so you’ll write
parentheses containing a single type name. Here’s an example:
enum MyError { 
    case number(Int) 
    case message(String) 
    case fatal 
}
That code means that, at instantiation time, a MyError instance with
the .number case must be assigned an Int value, a MyError instance

--- Page 268 ---
with the .message case must be assigned a String value, and a
MyError instance with the .fatal case can’t be assigned any value.
Instantiation with assignment of a value is really a way of calling an
initialization function, so to supply the value, you pass it as an
argument in parentheses:
let err : MyError = .number(4)
This is an ordinary function call, so the argument doesn’t have to be a
literal:
let num = 4 
let err : MyError = .number(num)
TIP
At the risk of sounding like a magician explaining his best trick, I can now
reveal how an Optional works. An Optional is simply an enum with two cases:
.none and .some. If it is .none, it carries no associated value, and it equates to
nil. If it is .some, it carries the wrapped value as its associated value.
If a case’s associated value type has a label, that label must be used at
initialization time:
enum MyError2 { 
    case number(Int) 
    case message(String) 
    case fatal(n:Int, s:String) 
} 
let err : MyError2 = .fatal(n:-12, s:"Oh the horror")

--- Page 269 ---
By default, the == operator cannot be used to compare cases of an
enum if any case of that enum has an associated value:
if err == MyError.fatal { // compile error
But if you declare this enum explicitly as adopting the Equatable
protocol (discussed later in this chapter and in Chapter 5), the ==
operator starts working:
enum MyError : Equatable { // * 
    case number(Int) 
    case message(String) 
    case fatal 
}
That code won’t compile, however, unless all the associated types are
themselves Equatable. That makes sense; if we declare case pet(Do
g) and there is no way to know whether any two Dogs are equal,
there is obviously no way to know whether any two pet cases are
equal.
I’ll explain in Chapter 5 how to check the case of an instance of an
enum that has an associated value case, as well as how to extract the
associated value from an enum instance that has one.
Enum Case Iteration
It is often useful to have a list — that is, an array — of all the cases of
an enum. You could define this list manually as a static property of
the enum:

--- Page 270 ---
enum Filter : String { 
    case albums = "Albums" 
    case playlists = "Playlists" 
    case podcasts = "Podcasts" 
    case books = "Audiobooks" 
    static let cases : [Filter] = [.albums, .playlists, .podcasts, .book
s] 
}
That, however, is error-prone and hard to maintain; if, as you develop
your program, you modify the enum’s cases, you must remember to
modify the cases property to match. Instead, the list of cases can be
generated for you automatically. Simply have your enum adopt the
CaseIterable protocol (adoption of protocols is explained later in this
chapter); now the list of cases springs to life as a static property
called allCases:
enum Filter : String, CaseIterable { 
    case albums = "Albums" 
    case playlists = "Playlists" 
    case podcasts = "Podcasts" 
    case books = "Audiobooks" 
    // static allCases is now [.albums, .playlists, .podcasts, .books] 
}
I’ll put this feature to use in the next section.
Automatic generation of allCases is impossible if any of the enum’s
cases has an associated value, as it would then be unclear how that
case should be defined in the list.
Enum Initializers

--- Page 271 ---
An explicit enum initializer must do what default initialization does:
it must return a particular case of this enum. To do so, set self to the
case. In this example, I’ll expand my Filter enum so that it can be
initialized with a numeric argument:
enum Filter : String, CaseIterable { 
    case albums = "Albums" 
    case playlists = "Playlists" 
    case podcasts = "Podcasts" 
    case books = "Audiobooks" 
    init(_ ix:Int) { 
        self = Filter.allCases[ix] 
    } 
}
Now there are three ways to make a Filter instance:
let type1 = Filter.albums 
let type2 = Filter(rawValue:"Playlists")! 
let type3 = Filter(2) // .podcasts
In that example, we’ll crash in the third line if the caller passes a
number that’s out of range (less than 0 or greater than 3). If we want
to avoid that, we can make this a failable initializer and return nil if
the number is out of range:
enum Filter : String, CaseIterable { 
    case albums = "Albums" 
    case playlists = "Playlists" 
    case podcasts = "Podcasts" 
    case books = "Audiobooks" 
    init?(_ ix:Int) { 
        if !Filter.allCases.indices.contains(ix) { 
            return nil 
        } 

--- Page 272 ---
        self = Filter.allCases[ix] 
    } 
}
An enum can have multiple initializers. Enum initializers can
delegate to one another by saying self.init(...). The only
requirement is that, at some point in the chain of calls, self must be
set to a case; if that doesn’t happen, your enum won’t compile.
In this example, I improve my Filter enum so that it can be initialized
with a String raw value without having to say rawValue: in the call.
To do so, I declare a failable initializer with a string parameter that
delegates to the built-in failable rawValue: initializer:
enum Filter : String, CaseIterable { 
    case albums = "Albums" 
    case playlists = "Playlists" 
    case podcasts = "Podcasts" 
    case books = "Audiobooks" 
    init?(_ ix:Int) { 
        if !Filter.allCases.indices.contains(ix) { 
            return nil 
        } 
        self = Filter.allCases[ix] 
    } 
    init?(_ rawValue:String) { 
        self.init(rawValue:rawValue) 
    } 
}
Now there are four ways to make a Filter instance:
let type1 = Filter.albums 
let type2 = Filter(rawValue:"Playlists")! 

--- Page 273 ---
let type3 = Filter(2) 
let type4 = Filter("Audiobooks")!
Enum Properties
An enum can have instance properties and static properties, but
there’s a limitation: an enum instance property can’t be a stored
property. Computed instance properties are fine, however, and the
value of the property can vary by rule in accordance with the case of
self. In this example from my real code, I’ve associated an
MPMediaQuery (obtained by calling an MPMediaQuery factory class
method) with each case of my Filter enum, suitable for fetching the
songs of that type from the music library:
enum Filter : String { 
    case albums = "Albums" 
    case playlists = "Playlists" 
    case podcasts = "Podcasts" 
    case books = "Audiobooks" 
    var query : MPMediaQuery { 
        switch self { 
        case .albums: 
            return .albums() 
        case .playlists: 
            return .playlists() 
        case .podcasts: 
            return .podcasts() 
        case .books: 
            return .audiobooks() 
        } 
    } 
}
If an enum instance property is a computed variable with a setter,
other code can assign to this property. However, that code’s reference

--- Page 274 ---
to the enum instance itself must be a variable (var), not a constant (l
et). If you try to assign to an enum instance property through a let
reference to the enum, you’ll get a compile error.
For example, here’s a silly enum:
enum Silly { 
    case one 
    var sillyProperty : String { 
        get { "Howdy" } 
        set {} // do nothing 
    } 
}
It is then legal to say this:
var silly = Silly.one 
silly.sillyProperty = "silly"
But if silly were declared with let instead of var, trying to set sil
ly.sillyProperty would cause a compile error.
An enum static property can have a property wrapper, but an enum
instance property can’t, because that would imply storage of an
instance of the underlying @propertyWrapper type — and enums
have no stored instance properties.
Enum Methods
An enum can have instance methods (including subscripts) and static
methods. Writing an enum method is straightforward. Here’s an
example from my own code. In a card game, the cards draw

--- Page 275 ---
themselves as rectangles, ellipses, or diamonds. I’ve abstracted the
drawing code into an enum that draws itself as a rectangle, an ellipse,
or a diamond, depending on its case:
enum Shape { 
    case rectangle 
    case ellipse 
    case diamond 
    func addShape (to p: CGMutablePath, in r: CGRect) -> () { 
        switch self { 
        case .rectangle: 
            p.addRect(r) 
        case .ellipse: 
            p.addEllipse(in:r) 
        case .diamond: 
            p.move(to: CGPoint(x:r.minX, y:r.midY)) 
            p.addLine(to: CGPoint(x: r.midX, y: r.minY)) 
            p.addLine(to: CGPoint(x: r.maxX, y: r.midY)) 
            p.addLine(to: CGPoint(x: r.midX, y: r.maxY)) 
            p.closeSubpath() 
        } 
    } 
}
Earlier, I mentioned that a subscript can be a static method. That
gives me an idea for yet another way to make a Filter instance by
number:
enum Filter : String, CaseIterable { 
    case albums = "Albums" 
    case playlists = "Playlists" 
    case podcasts = "Podcasts" 
    case books = "Audiobooks" 
    static subscript(ix: Int) -> Filter { 
        Filter.allCases[ix] // warning, no range checking 

--- Page 276 ---
    } 
}
And now we can say:
let type = Filter[2] // podcasts
An enum instance method that modifies the enum itself must be
marked as mutating. For example, an enum instance method might
assign to an instance property of self; even though this is a
computed property, such assignment is illegal unless the method is
marked as mutating. The caller of a mutating instance method must
have a variable reference to the instance (var), not a constant
reference (let).
A mutating enum instance method can replace this instance with
another instance, by assigning another case to self. In this example,
I add an advance method to my Filter enum. The idea is that the
cases constitute a sequence, and the sequence can cycle. By calling a
dvance, I transform a Filter instance into an instance of the next case
in the sequence:
enum Filter : String, CaseIterable { 
    case albums = "Albums" 
    case playlists = "Playlists" 
    case podcasts = "Podcasts" 
    case books = "Audiobooks" 
    mutating func advance() { 
        let cases = Filter.allCases 
        var ix = cases.firstIndex(of:self)! 
        ix = (ix + 1) % cases.count 
        self = cases[ix] 

--- Page 277 ---
    } 
}
And here’s how to call it:
var type = Filter.books 
type.advance() // type is now Filter.albums
Observe that type is declared with var; if it were declared with let,
we’d get a compile error.
A subscript or computed property setter is considered mutating by
default and does not have to be specially marked. However, if a getter
sets another property as a side effect, it must be marked mutating ge
t.
Why Enums?
An enum is a switch whose states have names. There are many
situations where that’s a desirable thing. You could implement a
multistate value yourself; if there are five possible states, you could
use an Int whose values can be 0 through 4. But then you would have
to provide a lot of additional overhead, interpreting those numeric
values correctly and making sure that no other values are used. A list
of five named cases is much better!
Even when there are only two states, an enum is often better than,
say, a mere Bool, because the enum’s states have names. With a Bool,
you have to know what true and false signify in a particular usage;
with an enum, the name of the enum and the names of its cases tell
you its significance.

--- Page 278 ---
Moreover, you can store extra information in an enum’s associated
value or raw value.
In my LinkSame app, the user can play a real game with a timer or a
practice game without a timer. At various places in the code, I need to
know which type of game this is. The game types are the cases of an
enum:
enum InterfaceMode : Int { 
    case timed = 0 
    case practice = 1 
}
The current game type is stored in an instance property interfaceMo
de, whose value is an InterfaceMode. It’s easy to set the game type by
case name:
// ... initialize new game ... 
self.interfaceMode = .timed
And it’s easy to examine the game type by case name:
// notify of high score only if user is not just practicing 
if self.interfaceMode == .timed { // ...
And what are my InterfaceMode enum’s raw value integers for?
That’s the really clever part. They correspond to the segment indexes
of a UISegmentedControl in the interface! Whenever I change the in
terfaceMode property, a setter observer also selects the
corresponding segment of the UISegmentedControl (self.timedPra
ctice), simply by fetching the rawValue of the current enum case:

--- Page 279 ---
var interfaceMode : InterfaceMode = .timed { 
    willSet (mode) { 
        self.timedPractice?.selectedSegmentIndex = mode.rawValue 
    } 
}
Structs
A struct is the Swift object type par excellence. An enum, with its
fixed set of cases, is a reduced, specialized kind of object. A class, at
the other extreme, will often turn out to be overkill; it has some
features that a struct lacks (I’ll talk later about what they are), but if
you don’t need those features, a struct may be preferable.
Of more than two hundred object types declared in the Swift header,
maybe half a dozen are classes. A couple of dozen are enums. All the
rest are structs. A String is a struct. An Int is a struct. A Range is a
struct. An Array is a struct. And so on. That shows how powerful a
struct can be.
Struct Initializers
A struct that doesn’t have an explicit initializer and that doesn’t need
an explicit initializer — because it has no stored properties, or
because all its stored properties are assigned default values as part of
their declaration — automatically gets an implicit initializer with no
parameters, init(). For example:
struct Digit { 
    var number = 42 
}

--- Page 280 ---
That struct can be initialized by saying Digit(). But if you add any
explicit initializers of your own, you lose that implicit initializer:
struct Digit { 
    var number = 42 
    init(number:Int) { 
        self.number = number 
    } 
}
Now you can say Digit(number:42), but you can’t say Digit() any
longer. Of course, you can add an explicit initializer that does the
same thing:
struct Digit { 
    var number = 42 
    init() {} 
    init(number:Int) { 
        self.number = number 
    } 
}
Now you can say Digit() once again, as well as
Digit(number:42).
A struct that has stored properties and that doesn’t have an explicit
initializer automatically gets an implicit initializer derived from its
instance properties. This is called the memberwise initializer. For
example:
struct Test { 
    var number = 42 
    var name : String 
    let age : Int 

--- Page 281 ---
    let greeting = "Hello" 
}
That struct is legal, even though it seems we have not fulfilled the
contract requiring us to initialize all stored properties in their
declaration or in an initializer. The reason is that this struct
automatically has a memberwise initializer which does initialize all
its properties. Given that declaration, there are two ways to make a
Test instance:
let t1 = Test(number: 42, name: "matt", age: 65) 
let t2 = Test(name: "matt", age: 65)
The memberwise initializer includes number, name, and age, but not
greeting, because greeting is a let property that has already been
initialized before the initializer is called. number has been initialized
too, but it is a var property, so the memberwise initializer includes it
— but you can also omit it from your call to the memberwise
initializer, because it has been initialized already and therefore has a
default value.
(The ability to omit an initialized var property from a call to the
memberwise initializer was introduced in Swift 5.1.)
But if you add any explicit initializers of your own, or if any of the
properties involved are declared private, you lose the memberwise
initializer (though of course you can write an explicit initializer that
does the same thing).

--- Page 282 ---
All stored properties must be initialized either by direct initialization
in the declaration or by all initializers. If a struct has multiple explicit
initializers, they can delegate to one another by saying self.init
(...).
Struct Properties
A struct can have instance properties and static properties, which can
be stored or computed variables. If other code wants to set a property
of a struct instance, its reference to that instance must be a variable (v
ar), not a constant (let).
Here’s a Digit struct with a var number instance property:
struct Digit { 
    var number : Int 
    init(_ n:Int) { 
        self.number = n 
    } 
}
Then this is legal:
var d = Digit(123) 
d.number = 42
But if d were declared with let, trying to set d.number would cause
a compile error.
Struct Methods

--- Page 283 ---
A struct can have instance methods and static methods, including
subscripts. If an instance method sets a property, it must be marked as
mutating, and the caller’s reference to the struct instance must be a
variable (var), not a constant (let).
Here’s a new version of our Digit struct:
struct Digit { 
    private var number : Int 
    init(_ n:Int) { 
        self.number = n 
    } 
    mutating func changeNumberTo(_ n:Int) { 
        self.number = n 
        // or: self = Digit(n) 
    } 
}
Here we have a private number property, along with a public method
for setting it. We can then say this:
var d = Digit(123) 
d.changeNumberTo(42)
The changeNumberTo method must be declared mutating, and if d
were declared with let, trying to call d.changeNumberTo would
cause a compile error.
A subscript or computed property setter is considered mutating by
default and does not have to be specially marked. However, if a getter
sets another property as a side effect, it must be marked mutating ge
t.

--- Page 284 ---
A mutating instance method can replace this instance with another
instance, by setting self to a different instance of the same struct.
Struct as Namespace
I often use a degenerate struct as a handy namespace for constants. I
call such a struct “degenerate” because it consists entirely of static
members; I don’t intend to use this object type to make any instances.
Let’s say I’m going to be storing user preference information in
Cocoa’s UserDefaults. UserDefaults is a kind of dictionary: each item
is accessed through a key. The keys are typically strings. A common
programmer mistake is to write out these string keys literally every
time a key is used; if you then misspell a key name, there’s no penalty
at compile time, but your code will mysteriously fail to work
correctly. A better approach is to embody those keys as constant
strings and use the names of the strings; if you make a mistake typing
a name, the compiler can catch you. A struct with static members is a
great way to define constant strings and clump their names into a
namespace:
struct Default { 
    static let rows = "CardMatrixRows" 
    static let columns = "CardMatrixColumns" 
    static let hazyStripy = "HazyStripy" 
}
That code means that I can now refer to a UserDefaults key with a
name, such as Default.hazyStripy.

--- Page 285 ---
Classes
A class is similar to a struct, with the following key differences:
Reference type
Classes are reference types. This means, among other things, that
a class instance has two remarkable features that are not true of
struct or enum instances:
Mutability
A class instance is mutable in place. Even if your reference to
an instance of a class is a constant (let), you can change the
value of an instance property through that reference. An
instance method of a class never has to be marked mutating
(and cannot be).
Multiple references
When a given instance of a class is assigned to multiple
variables or passed as argument to a function, you get
multiple references to one and the same object.
Inheritance
A class can have a superclass. A class that has a superclass is a
subclass of that superclass, and inherits its superclass’s members.
Class types can form a hierarchical tree.
In Objective-C, classes are the only object type. Some built-in Swift
struct types are magically bridged to Objective-C class types, but
your custom struct types don’t have that magic. Thus, when
programming iOS with Swift, one reason for declaring a class, rather
than a struct, is as a form of interchange with Objective-C and Cocoa.

--- Page 286 ---
Value Types and Reference Types
A major difference between enums and structs, on the one hand, and
classes, on the other, is that enums and structs are value types,
whereas classes are reference types. I will now explain what that
means.
CLASS INSTANCES ARE MUTABLE
A value type is not mutable in place, even though it seems to be.
Consider a struct. A struct is a value type:
struct Digit { 
    var number : Int 
    init(_ n:Int) { 
        self.number = n 
    } 
}
Now, Swift’s syntax of assignment would lead us to believe that
changing a Digit’s number is possible:
var d = Digit(123) 
d.number = 42
But in reality, when you apparently mutate an instance of a value
type, you are actually replacing that instance with a different instance.
To see that this is true, add a setter observer:
var d : Digit = Digit(123) { // Digit is a struct 
    didSet { 
        print("d was set") 
    } 

--- Page 287 ---
} 
d.number = 42 // "d was set"
That explains why it is impossible to mutate a value type instance if
the reference to that instance is declared with let:
let d = Digit(123) // Digit is a struct 
d.number = 42 // compile error
Under the hood, this change would require us to replace the Digit
instance pointed to by d with another Digit instance — and we can’t
do that, because it would mean assigning into d, which is exactly
what the let declaration forbids.
That also explains why an instance method of a struct or enum that
sets a property of the instance must be marked explicitly with the mut
ating keyword. Such a method can potentially replace this object
with another, so the reference to the object must be var, not let.
But classes are not value types. They are reference types. A reference
to a class instance does not have to be declared with var in order to
set a var property through that reference:
class Dog { 
    var name : String = "Fido" 
} 
let rover = Dog() 
rover.name = "Rover" // fine
In the last line of that code, the class instance pointed to by rover is
being mutated in place. No implicit assignment to rover is involved,

--- Page 288 ---
and so the let declaration is powerless to prevent the mutation. A
setter observer on a Dog variable is not called when a property is set:
var rover : Dog = Dog() { // Dog is a class 
    didSet { 
        print("did set rover") 
    } 
} 
rover.name = "Rover" // nothing in console
The setter observer would be called if we were to set rover explicitly
(to another Dog instance), but it is not called merely because we
change a property of the Dog instance already pointed to by rover.
Exactly the same difference between a value type and a reference
type may be seen with a parameter of a function call. When we
receive an instance of a value type as a parameter into a function
body, the compiler will stop us in our tracks if we try to assign to its
instance property. This doesn’t compile:
func digitChanger(_ d:Digit) { // Digit is a struct 
    d.number = 42 // compile error 
}
But this does compile:
func dogChanger(_ d:Dog) { // Dog is a class 
    d.name = "Rover" 
}

--- Page 289 ---
MUTATING CAPTURED SELF
Here’s a Digit struct with some mutating methods:
struct Digit { 
    var number : Int 
    init(_ n:Int) { 
        self.number = n 
    } 
    mutating func changeNumberTo(_ n:Int) { 
        self.number = n 
    } 
    func otherFunction(_ f: ()->()) { 
    } 
    mutating func callAnotherFunction() { 
        otherFunction { 
            self.changeNumberTo(345) // * 
        } 
    } 
}
Whether that’s legal depends on whether otherFunction declares its function
parameter @escaping (“Escaping Closures”). If it does, the compiler will stop us:
func otherFunction(_ f: @escaping ()->()) { 
}
That change causes a compile error at the starred line: “Escaping closure
captures mutating self parameter.” Now that otherFunction is escaping, we
are threatening to mutate a persisting captured self at some later time. Digit is
a struct, so that would involve replacing the captured self with a different Digit
— and that’s incoherent. No such problem arises if Digit is a class, because the
persistent captured self can be mutated in place.
CLASS INSTANCE REFERENCES ARE POINTERS

--- Page 290 ---
With a reference type, there is a concealed level of indirection
between your reference to the instance and the instance itself; the
reference actually holds a pointer to the instance. This means that
when a class instance is assigned to a variable or passed as an
argument to a function or as the result of a function, you can wind up
with multiple references to the same object. That is not true of structs
and enums:
Struct or enum instance (value type)
When an enum instance or a struct instance is assigned or passed,
what is assigned or passed is essentially a new copy of that
instance.
Class instance (reference type)
When a class instance is assigned or passed, what is assigned or
passed is a reference to the same instance.
To prove it, I’ll assign one reference to another, and then mutate the
second reference — and then I’ll examine what happened to the first
reference. Let’s start with the struct:
var d = Digit(123) // Digit is a struct 
print(d.number) // 123 
var d2 = d // assignment! 
d2.number = 42 
print(d.number) // 123
In that code, we changed the number property of d2, a struct instance;
but nothing happened to the number property of d. Now let’s try the
class:

--- Page 291 ---
var fido = Dog() // Dog is a class 
print(fido.name) // Fido 
var rover = fido // assignment! 
rover.name = "Rover" 
print(fido.name) // Rover
In that code, we changed the name property of rover, a class instance
— and the name property of fido was changed as well! That’s
because, after the assignment in the third line, fido and rover refer
to one and the same instance.
The same thing is true of parameter passing. With a class instance,
what is passed is a reference to the same instance:
func dogChanger(_ d:Dog) { // Dog is a class 
    d.name = "Rover" 
} 
var fido = Dog() 
print(fido.name) // "Fido" 
dogChanger(fido) 
print(fido.name) // "Rover"
The change made to d inside the function dogChanger affected our
Dog instance fido! You can’t do that with an enum or struct instance
parameter — unless it’s an inout parameter — because the instance
is effectively copied as it is passed. But handing a class instance to a
function does not copy that instance; it is more like lending that
instance to the function.
ADVANTAGES OF VALUE TYPES VS. REFERENCE
TYPES

--- Page 292 ---
The ability to generate multiple references to the same instance is
significant particularly in a world of object-based programming,
where objects persist and can have properties that persist along with
them. If object A and object B are both long-lived, and if they both
have a Dog property where Dog is a class, and if they have each been
handed a reference to one and the same Dog instance, then either
object A or object B can mutate its Dog, and this mutation will affect
the other’s Dog. You can be holding on to an object, only to discover
that it has been mutated by someone else behind your back. If that
happens unexpectedly, it can put your program into an invalid state.
Class instances are also more complicated behind the scenes. Swift
has to manage their memory (as I’ll explain in detail in Chapter 12),
precisely because there can be multiple references to the same object;
this management can involve quite a bit of overhead.
On the whole, therefore, you should prefer a value type (such as a
struct) to a reference type (a class) wherever possible. Struct
instances are not shared between references, and so you are relieved
from any worry about such an instance being mutated behind your
back; moreover, under the hood, storage and memory management
are far simpler as well. Apple likes to say that value types are easier
to reason about. The Swift language itself will help you by imposing
value types in front of many Cocoa Foundation reference types.
Objective-C NSDate and NSData are classes, but Swift will steer you
toward using struct types Date and Data instead. (I’ll talk about these
types in detail in Chapter 10.)

--- Page 293 ---
But don’t get the wrong idea. Classes are not bad; they’re good! For
one thing, a class instance is very efficient to pass around, because all
you’re passing is a pointer. No matter how big and complicated a
class instance may be, no matter how many properties it may have
containing vast amounts of data, passing the instance is incredibly
fast and efficient.
And although a class may be a reference type, a particular class can
be implemented in such a way as to exhibit value semantics. Simply
put, a class’s API can refuse to mutate that class in place. Cocoa
NSString, NSArray, NSDictionary, NSDate, NSIndexSet,
NSParagraphStyle, and many more behave like this; they are
immutable by design. Two objects may hold a reference to the same
NSArray without fear that it will be mutated behind their backs, not
because it’s a value type (it isn’t) but because it’s immutable. In
effect, this architecture combines the ease of use of a value type with
the pointer efficiency of a reference type.
Moreover, there are many situations where the independent identity
of a class instance, no matter how many times it is referred to, is
exactly what you want. The extended lifetime of a class instance, as it
is passed around, can be crucial to its functionality and integrity. In
particular, only a class instance can successfully represent an
independent reality. A UIView needs to be a class, not a struct,
because an individual UIView instance, no matter how it gets passed
around, must continue to represent the same single real and persistent
view in your running app’s interface.

--- Page 294 ---
Still another reason for preferring a class over a struct or enum is
when you need recursive references. A value type cannot be
structurally recursive: a stored instance property of a value type
cannot be an instance of the same type. This code won’t compile:
struct Dog { // compile error 
    var puppy : Dog? 
}
More complex circular chains, such as a Dog with a Puppy property
and a Puppy with a Dog property, are similarly illegal. But if Dog is a
class instead of a struct, there’s no error. This is a consequence of the
nature of memory management of value types as opposed to
reference types.
TIP
An enum case’s associated value can be an instance of that enum, provided the
case (or the entire enum) is marked indirect:
enum Node { 
    case none(Int) 
    indirect case left(Int, Node) 
    indirect case right(Int, Node) 
    indirect case both(Int, Node, Node) 
}
Subclass and Superclass
Two classes can be subclass and superclass of one another. For
example, we might have a class Quadruped and a class Dog, with

--- Page 295 ---
Quadruped as the superclass of Dog. A class may have many
subclasses, but a class can have only one immediate superclass. I say
“immediate” because that superclass might itself have a superclass,
and so on until we get to the ultimate superclass, called the base
class, or root class. Thus there is a hierarchical tree of subclasses,
each group of subclasses branching from its superclass, and so on,
with a single class, the base class, at the top.
As far as the Swift language itself is concerned, there is no
requirement that a class should have any superclass, or, if it does have
a superclass, that it should ultimately be descended from any
particular base class. A Swift program can have many classes that
have no superclass, and it can have many independent hierarchical
subclass trees, each descended from a different base class.
Cocoa, however, doesn’t work that way. In Cocoa, there is effectively
just one base class — NSObject, which embodies all the functionality
necessary for a class to be a class in the first place — and all other
classes are subclasses, at some level, of that one base class. Cocoa
thus consists of one huge tree of hierarchically arranged classes, even
before you write a single line of code or create any classes of your
own.
We can imagine diagramming this tree as an outline. And in fact
Xcode will show you this outline (Figure 4-1): in an iOS project
window, choose View → Navigators → Show Symbol Navigator and
click Hierarchical, with the first and third icons in the filter bar
selected (filled). Now locate NSObject in the list; the Cocoa classes
are the part of the tree descending from it.

--- Page 296 ---
Figure 4-1. Part of the Cocoa class hierarchy as shown in Xcode
INHERITANCE
The reason for having a superclass–subclass relationship in the first
place is to allow related classes to share functionality. Suppose we
have a Dog class and a Cat class, and we are considering declaring a
walk method for both of them. We might reason that both a dog and a
cat walk in pretty much the same way, by virtue of both being
quadrupeds. So it might make sense to declare walk as a method of
the Quadruped class, and make both Dog and Cat subclasses of
Quadruped. When we do that, both Dog and Cat can be sent the walk
message, even if neither of them has a walk method, because each of
them has a superclass that does have a walk method. We say that a
subclass inherits the methods of its superclass.

--- Page 297 ---
To declare that a certain class is a subclass of a certain superclass, add
a colon and the superclass name after the class’s name in its
declaration:
class Quadruped { 
    func walk () { 
        print("walk walk walk") 
    } 
} 
class Dog : Quadruped {} 
class Cat : Quadruped {}
Now let’s prove that Dog has indeed inherited walk from Quadruped:
let fido = Dog() 
fido.walk() // walk walk walk
The walk message can be sent to a Dog instance just as if the walk
instance method were declared in the Dog class, even though the wal
k instance method is in fact declared in a superclass of Dog. That’s
inheritance at work.
TIP
A class declaration can prevent the class from being subclassed by preceding
the class declaration with the final keyword.
ADDITIONAL FUNCTIONALITY
The purpose of subclassing is not merely so that a class can inherit
another class’s methods; it’s so that it can also declare methods of its
own. Typically, a subclass consists of the methods inherited from its

--- Page 298 ---
superclass and then some. For example, dogs can bark, but
quadrupeds in general can’t. If we declare bark in the Dog class, and
walk in the Quadruped class, and make Dog a subclass of Quadruped,
then Dog inherits the ability to walk from the Quadruped class and
also knows how to bark:
class Quadruped { 
    func walk () { 
        print("walk walk walk") 
    } 
} 
class Dog : Quadruped { 
    func bark () { 
        print("woof") 
    } 
}
Again, let’s prove that it works:
let fido = Dog() 
fido.walk() // walk walk walk 
fido.bark() // woof
Within a class, it is a matter of indifference whether that class has an
instance method because that method is declared in that class or
because the method is declared in a superclass and inherited. A
message to self works equally well either way. In this code, we have
declared a barkAndWalk instance method that sends two messages to
self, without regard to where the corresponding methods are
declared (one is native to the subclass, one is inherited from the
superclass):

--- Page 299 ---
class Quadruped { 
    func walk () { 
        print("walk walk walk") 
    } 
} 
class Dog : Quadruped { 
    func bark () { 
        print("woof") 
    } 
    func barkAndWalk() { 
        self.bark() 
        self.walk() 
    } 
}
And here’s proof that it works:
let fido = Dog() 
fido.barkAndWalk() // woof walk walk walk
OVERRIDING
It is also permitted for a subclass to redefine a method inherited from
its superclass. For example, perhaps some dogs bark differently from
other dogs. We might have a class NoisyDog, for instance, that is a
subclass of Dog. Dog declares bark, but NoisyDog also declares bar
k, and defines it differently from how Dog defines it. This is called
overriding. The very natural rule is that if a subclass overrides a
method inherited from its superclass, then when the corresponding
message is sent to an instance of that subclass, it is the subclass’s
version of that method that is called.
In Swift, when you override something inherited from a superclass,
you must explicitly acknowledge this fact by preceding its declaration

--- Page 300 ---
with the keyword override:
class Quadruped { 
    func walk () { 
        print("walk walk walk") 
    } 
} 
class Dog : Quadruped { 
    func bark () { 
        print("woof") 
    } 
} 
class NoisyDog : Dog { 
    override func bark () { 
        print("woof woof woof") 
    } 
}
And let’s try it:
let fido = Dog() 
fido.bark() // woof 
let rover = NoisyDog() 
rover.bark() // woof woof woof
Observe that a subclass method by the same name as a superclass’s
method is not necessarily, of itself, an override. Recall that Swift can
distinguish two functions with the same name, provided they have
different signatures. Those are different functions, and so an
implementation of one in a subclass is not an override of the other in
a superclass. An override situation exists only when the subclass
redefines the same method that it inherits from a superclass — using
the same name, including the external parameter names, and the same
signature.

--- Page 301 ---
However, a method override need not have exactly the same signature
as the overridden method. In particular, in a method override, the type
of a parameter may be replaced with a superclass, or with an Optional
wrapping the superclass. If we have a Cat class and its Kitten
subclass, the following is legal:
class Dog { 
    func barkAt(cat:Kitten) {} 
} 
class NoisyDog : Dog { 
    override func barkAt(cat:Cat) {} 
    // or barkAt(cat:Cat?) 
}
Moreover, a parameter may be overridden with an Optional wrapping
its own type, and an Optional parameter may be overridden with an
Optional wrapping its wrapped type’s superclass:
class Dog { 
    func barkAt(cat:Cat) {} 
    // or barkAt(cat:Kitten) 
    // or barkAt(cat:Kitten?) 
} 
class NoisyDog : Dog { 
    override func barkAt(cat:Cat?) {} 
}
There are further rules along the same lines, but I won’t try to list
them all here; you probably won’t need to take advantage of them,
and in any case the compiler will tell you if your override is illegal.
Along with methods, a subclass also inherits its superclass’s
properties. Naturally, the subclass may also declare additional

--- Page 302 ---
properties of its own. It is possible to override an inherited property
(with some restrictions that I’ll talk about later).
I’ll have more to say about the implications of overriding when I talk
about polymorphism, later in this chapter.
TIP
A class declaration can prevent a class member from being overridden by a
subclass by preceding the member’s declaration with the final keyword.
THE KEYWORD SUPER
It often happens that we want to override something in a subclass and
yet access the thing overridden in the superclass. This is done by
sending a message to the keyword super. Our bark implementation
in NoisyDog is a case in point. What NoisyDog really does when it
barks is the same thing Dog does when it barks, but more times. We’d
like to express that relationship in our implementation of NoisyDog’s
bark. To do so, we have NoisyDog’s bark implementation send the b
ark message, not to self (which would be circular), but to super;
this causes the search for a bark instance method implementation to
start in the superclass rather than in our own class:
class Dog : Quadruped { 
    func bark () { 
        print("woof") 
    } 
} 
class NoisyDog : Dog { 
    override func bark () { 

--- Page 303 ---
        for _ in 1...3 { 
            super.bark() 
        } 
    } 
}
And it works:
let fido = Dog() 
fido.bark() // woof 
let rover = NoisyDog() 
rover.bark() // woof woof woof
TIP
A subscript function is a method. If a superclass declares a subscript, the
subclass can declare a subscript with the same signature, provided it designates
it with the override keyword. To call the superclass subscript implementation,
the subclass can use square brackets after the keyword super (e.g. super[3]).
Class Initializers
Initialization of a class instance is considerably more complicated
than initialization of a struct or enum instance, because of class
inheritance. The chief task of an initializer is to ensure that all
properties have an initial value, making the instance well-formed as it
comes into existence; and an initializer may have other tasks to
perform that are essential to the initial state and integrity of this
instance. A class, however, may have a superclass, which may have
properties and initializers of its own. Thus we must somehow ensure
that when a subclass is initialized, its superclass’s properties are

--- Page 304 ---
initialized and the tasks of its initializers are performed in good order,
in addition to those of the subclass itself.
Swift solves this problem coherently and reliably — and ingeniously
— by enforcing some clear and well-defined rules about what a class
initializer must do.
KINDS OF CLASS INITIALIZER
The rules begin with a distinction between the kinds of initializer that
a class can have:
Designated initializer
A class initializer, by default, is a designated initializer. A class
can be instantiated only through a call to one of its designated
initializers. A designated initializer must see to it that all stored
properties are initialized. It may not delegate to another initializer
in the same class; it is illegal for a designated initializer to use the
phrase self.init(...).
A class with any stored properties that are not initialized as part
of their declaration must have at least one explicit designated
initializer. A class with no stored properties, or with stored
properties all of which are initialized as part of their declaration,
and that has no explicit designated initializers, has an implicit
designated initializer init().
Convenience initializer
A convenience initializer is marked with the keyword convenien
ce. A convenience initializer is not how a class is instantiated; it
is merely a façade for a designated initializer. A convenience
initializer is a delegating initializer; it must contain the phrase sel
f.init(...), which must call a designated initializer in the same

--- Page 305 ---
class — or, if it calls another convenience initializer in the same
class, the chain of convenience initializers must end by calling a
designated initializer in the same class.
Here are some examples. This class has no stored properties, so it has
an implicit init() designated initializer:
class Dog { 
} 
let d = Dog()
This class’s stored properties have default values, so it has an implicit
init() designated initializer too:
class Dog { 
    var name = "Fido" 
} 
let d = Dog()
This class’s stored properties have default values, but it has no
implicit init() initializer because it has an explicit designated
initializer:
class Dog { 
    var name = "Fido" 
    init(name:String) {self.name = name} 
} 
let d = Dog(name:"Rover") // ok 
let d2 = Dog() // compile error
This class’s stored properties have default values, and it has an
explicit initializer, but it also has an implicit init() initializer
because its explicit initializer is a convenience initializer. Moreover,

--- Page 306 ---
the implicit init() initializer is a designated initializer, so the
convenience initializer can delegate to it:
class Dog { 
    var name = "Fido" 
    convenience init(name:String) { 
        self.init() 
        self.name = name 
    } 
} 
let d = Dog(name:"Rover") 
let d2 = Dog()
This class has stored properties without default values; it has an
explicit designated initializer, and all of those properties are
initialized in that designated initializer:
class Dog { 
    var name : String 
    var license : Int 
    init(name:String, license:Int) { 
        self.name = name 
        self.license = license 
    } 
} 
let d = Dog(name:"Rover", license:42)
This class is similar to the previous example, but it also has
convenience initializers forming a chain that ends with a designated
initializer:
class Dog { 
    var name : String 
    var license : Int 
    init(name:String, license:Int) { 

--- Page 307 ---
        self.name = name 
        self.license = license 
    } 
    convenience init(license:Int) { 
        self.init(name:"Fido", license:license) 
    } 
    convenience init() { 
        self.init(license:1) 
    } 
} 
let d = Dog()
Note that the rules about what else an initializer can say and when it
can say it, as I described them earlier in this chapter, are still in force:
A designated initializer cannot, except in order to initialize a
property (or to fetch the value of a property that is already
initialized), say self, implicitly or explicitly, until all of this
class’s properties have been initialized.
A convenience initializer is a delegating initializer, so it cannot
say self for any purpose until after it has called, directly or
indirectly, a designated initializer (and cannot set a constant
property at all).
SUBCLASS INITIALIZERS
Having defined and distinguished between designated initializers and
convenience initializers, we are ready for the rules about a subclass’s
initializers:
No declared initializers
If a subclass doesn’t have to have any initializers of its own, and
if it declares no initializers of its own, then its initializers consist

--- Page 308 ---
of the initializers inherited from its superclass. (A subclass thus
has no implicit init() initializer unless it inherits it from its
superclass.)
Convenience initializers only
If a subclass doesn’t have to have any initializers of its own, it is
eligible to declare convenience initializers, and these work
exactly as convenience initializers always do, because inheritance
supplies the designated initializers that the convenience
initializers must call by saying self.init(...).
Designated initializers
If a subclass declares any designated initializers of its own, the
entire game changes drastically. Now, no initializers are
inherited! The existence of an explicit designated initializer
blocks initializer inheritance. The only initializers the subclass
now has are the initializers that you explicitly write (with one
exception that I’ll mention later). This rule may seem surprising,
but I’ll justify it in an example later on.
Moreover, every designated initializer in the subclass now has an
extra requirement: it must call one of the superclass’s designated
initializers, by saying super.init(...). If it fails to do this, then
super.init() is called implicitly if possible, but I disapprove of
this feature (in my view, Swift should not indulge in secret
behavior, even if that behavior might be considered “helpful”).
At the same time, the rules about saying self continue to apply.
Thus, a subclass designated initializer must do these things in this
order:
1. It must ensure that all properties of this class (the subclass)
are initialized.
2. It must call super.init(...), and the initializer that it
calls must be a designated initializer.

--- Page 309 ---
3. Only then may this initializer say self for such purposes as
to call an instance method or to access an inherited property.
Designated and convenience initializers
If a subclass declares both designated and convenience
initializers, the convenience initializers in the subclass are still
subject to the rules I’ve already outlined. They must call self.in
it(...), calling a designated initializer directly or through a
chain of convenience initializers. There are no inherited
initializers, so the designated initializer must be explicitly
declared in the subclass.
Override initializers
A subclass may override initializers from its superclass:
An initializer whose parameters match a convenience
initializer of the superclass can be a designated initializer or a
convenience initializer, and is not marked override.
An initializer whose parameters match a designated initializer
of the superclass can be a designated initializer or a
convenience initializer, and must be marked override. An ov
erride designated initializer must still call some superclass
designated initializer (possibly even the one that it overrides)
with super.init(...).
If a subclass overrides all of its superclass’s designated
initializers, then the subclass inherits the superclass’s convenience
initializers. (This is the exception to the rule that if a subclass has
any designated initializers, no initializers are inherited.)
Failable initializers
If an initializer called by a failable initializer is failable, the
calling syntax does not change, and no additional test is needed

--- Page 310 ---
— if a failable initializer fails, the whole initialization process
will fail (and will be aborted) immediately.
There are some additional restrictions on failable initializers:
init can override init?, but not vice versa.
init? can call init.
init can call init? by saying init and unwrapping the result
with an exclamation mark (and if the init? fails, you’ll
crash).
At no time can a subclass initializer set a constant (let) property of a
superclass. This is because, by the time the subclass is allowed to do
anything other than initialize its own properties and call another
initializer, the superclass has finished its own initialization and the
door for initializing its constants has closed.
SUBCLASS INITIALIZER EXAMPLES
Your eyes may glaze over reading the subclass initializer rules, but
the most important rules are very easy to understand with the help of
some basic examples. We start with a subclass that has no explicit
initializers of its own:
class Dog { 
    var name : String 
    var license : Int 
    init(name:String, license:Int) { 
        self.name = name 
        self.license = license 
    } 
    convenience init(license:Int) { 
        self.init(name:"Fido", license:license) 
    } 

--- Page 311 ---
} 
class NoisyDog : Dog { 
}
Given that code, you can make a NoisyDog like this:
let nd1 = NoisyDog(name:"Fido", license:1) 
let nd2 = NoisyDog(license:2)
That code is legal, because NoisyDog inherits its superclass’s
initializers. However, you can’t make a NoisyDog like this:
let nd3 = NoisyDog() // compile error
That code is illegal. Even though a NoisyDog has no properties of its
own, it has no implicit init() initializer; its initializers are its
inherited initializers, and its superclass, Dog, has no implicit init()
initializer to inherit.
Now here is a subclass whose only explicit initializer is a
convenience initializer:
class Dog { 
    var name : String 
    var license : Int 
    init(name:String, license:Int) { 
        self.name = name 
        self.license = license 
    } 
    convenience init(license:Int) { 
        self.init(name:"Fido", license:license) 
    } 
} 
class NoisyDog : Dog { 
    convenience init(name:String) { 

--- Page 312 ---
        self.init(name:name, license:1) 
    } 
}
Observe how NoisyDog’s convenience initializer fulfills its contract
by calling self.init(...) to call a designated initializer — which it
happens to have inherited. Given that code, there are three ways to
make a NoisyDog, just as you would expect:
let nd1 = NoisyDog(name:"Fido", license:1) 
let nd2 = NoisyDog(license:2) 
let nd3 = NoisyDog(name:"Rover")
Next, here is a subclass that declares a designated initializer:
class Dog { 
    var name : String 
    var license : Int 
    init(name:String, license:Int) { 
        self.name = name 
        self.license = license 
    } 
    convenience init(license:Int) { 
        self.init(name:"Fido", license:license) 
    } 
} 
class NoisyDog : Dog { 
    init(name:String) { 
        super.init(name:name, license:1) 
    } 
}
NoisyDog’s explicit initializer is now a designated initializer. It
fulfills its contract by calling a designated initializer in super.

--- Page 313 ---
NoisyDog has now cut off inheritance of all initializers; the only way
to make a NoisyDog is like this:
let nd1 = NoisyDog(name:"Rover")
Earlier, I promised to justify the rule that adding a designated
initializer to a subclass cuts off initializer inheritance. That example
is a case in point. It would be terrible if the caller could bypass
NoisyDog’s designated initializer by using an inherited Dog
initializer instead. NoisyDog’s initializer enforces a rule that a
NoisyDog can only have a license value of 1; if you could say Nois
yDog(license:2), you’d bypass that rule. Here’s another example
that makes the same point a little more realistically:
class Dog { 
    let name : String 
    init(name:String) { 
        self.name = name 
    } 
} 
class RoverDog : Dog { 
    init() { 
        super.init(name:"Rover") 
    } 
} 
let fido = RoverDog(name:"Fido") // compile error
Clearly that last line needs to be an error; otherwise, a RoverDog
could be named Fido, undermining the point of the subclass.
Finally, here is a subclass that overrides its designated initializers:

--- Page 314 ---
class Dog { 
    var name : String 
    var license : Int 
    init(name:String, license:Int) { 
        self.name = name 
        self.license = license 
    } 
    convenience init(license:Int) { 
        self.init(name:"Fido", license:license) 
    } 
} 
class NoisyDog : Dog { 
    override init(name:String, license:Int) { 
        super.init(name:name, license:license) 
    } 
}
NoisyDog has overridden all of its superclass’s designated
initializers, so it inherits its superclass’s convenience initializers.
There are thus two ways to make a NoisyDog:
let nd1 = NoisyDog(name:"Rover", license:1) 
let nd2 = NoisyDog(license:2)
Those examples illustrate the main rules that you should keep in your
head. You probably don’t need to memorize the remaining rules,
because the compiler will enforce them, and will keep slapping you
down until you get them right.
REQUIRED INITIALIZERS
There’s one more thing to know about class initializers: a class
initializer may be preceded by the keyword required. This means
that a subclass may not lack this initializer. This, in turn, means that if

--- Page 315 ---
a subclass implements designated initializers, thus blocking
inheritance, it must override this initializer and mark the override req
uired. Here’s a (rather pointless) example:
class Dog { 
    var name : String 
    required init(name:String) { 
        self.name = name 
    } 
} 
class NoisyDog : Dog { 
    var obedient = false 
    init(obedient:Bool) { 
        self.obedient = obedient 
        super.init(name:"Fido") 
    } 
} // compile error
That code won’t compile. Dog’s init(name:) is marked required;
our code won’t compile unless we inherit or override init(name:) in
NoisyDog. But we cannot inherit it, because, by implementing the
NoisyDog designated initializer init(obedient:), we have blocked
inheritance. Therefore we must override it:
class Dog { 
    var name : String 
    required init(name:String) { 
        self.name = name 
    } 
} 
class NoisyDog : Dog { 
    var obedient = false 
    init(obedient:Bool) { 
        self.obedient = obedient 
        super.init(name:"Fido") 

--- Page 316 ---
    } 
    required init(name:String) { 
        super.init(name:name) 
    } 
}
Observe that our overridden required initializer is not marked with ov
erride, but is marked with required, guaranteeing that the
requirement continues drilling down to any further subclasses.
I have explained what declaring an initializer as required does, but I
have not explained why you’d need to do it. That’s another matter!
I’ll discuss it later in this chapter.
Class Deinitializer
A class can have a deinitializer. This is a function declared with the
keyword deinit followed by curly braces containing the function
body. You never call this function yourself; it is called by the runtime
when an instance of this class goes out of existence. If a class has a
superclass, the subclass’s deinitializer (if any) is called before the
superclass’s deinitializer (if any).
A deinitializer is a class feature only; a struct or enum has no
deinitializer. That’s because a class is a reference type (as I explained
earlier in this chapter). The idea is that you might want to perform
some cleanup. Another good use of a class’s deinit is to log to the
console to prove to yourself that your instance is going out of
existence in good order; I’ll take advantage of that when I discuss
memory management issues in Chapter 5.

--- Page 317 ---
Property observers are not called during deinit.
Class Properties
A subclass can override its inherited properties. The override must
have the same name and type as the inherited property, and must be
marked with override. (A property cannot have the same name as an
inherited property but a different type, as there is no way to
distinguish them.)
The chief restriction here is that an override property cannot be a
stored property. More specifically:
If the superclass property is writable (a stored property or a
computed property with a setter), the subclass’s override may
consist of adding setter observers to this property.
Alternatively, the subclass’s override may be a computed property.
In that case:
— If the superclass property is stored, the subclass’s computed
property override must have both a getter and a setter.
— If the superclass property is computed, the subclass’s computed
property override must have at least a getter, and:
If the superclass property has a setter, the override must
have a setter.
If the superclass property has no setter, the override can add
one.
The overriding property’s functions may refer to — and may read
from and write to — the inherited property, through the super

--- Page 318 ---
keyword.
Static/Class Members
A class can have static members, marked static, just like a struct or
an enum. It can also have class members, marked class. Both static
and class members are inherited by subclasses.
STATIC METHODS VS. CLASS METHODS
The chief difference between static and class methods, from the
programmer’s point of view, is that a static method cannot be
overridden; it is as if static were a synonym for class final.
Here, I’ll use a static method to express what dogs say:
class Dog { 
    static func whatDogsSay() -> String { 
        return "woof" 
    } 
    func bark() { 
        print(Dog.whatDogsSay()) 
    } 
}
A subclass now inherits whatDogsSay, but can’t override it. No
subclass of Dog may contain any implementation of a class method
or a static method whatDogsSay with this same signature.
Now I’ll use a class method to express what dogs say:
class Dog { 
    class func whatDogsSay() -> String { 
        return "woof" 

--- Page 319 ---
    } 
    func bark() { 
        print(Dog.whatDogsSay()) 
    } 
}
A subclass inherits whatDogsSay, and can override it, either as a
class method or as a static method:
class NoisyDog : Dog { 
    override class func whatDogsSay() -> String { 
        return "WOOF" 
    } 
}
STATIC PROPERTIES VS. CLASS PROPERTIES
The difference between static and class properties is similar to the
difference between static and class methods, but with an additional,
rather dramatic qualification: a static property can be stored, but a
class property must be a computed property.
Here, I’ll use a static class property to express what dogs say:
class Dog { 
    static var whatDogsSay = "woof" 
    func bark() { 
        print(Dog.whatDogsSay) 
    } 
}
A subclass inherits whatDogsSay, but can’t override it; no subclass of
Dog can declare a class or static property whatDogsSay.

--- Page 320 ---
Now I’ll use a class property to express what dogs say. It cannot be a
stored property, so I’ll have to use a computed property instead:
class Dog { 
    class var whatDogsSay : String { 
        return "woof" 
    } 
    func bark() { 
        print(Dog.whatDogsSay) 
    } 
}
A subclass inherits whatDogsSay and can override it either as a class
property or as a static property. But the rule about property overrides
not being stored is still in force, even if the override is a static
property:
class NoisyDog : Dog { 
    override static var whatDogsSay : String { 
        return "WOOF" 
    } 
}
Polymorphism
When a computer language has a hierarchy of types and subtypes, it
must resolve the question of what such a hierarchy means for the
relationship between the type of an object and the declared type of a
reference to that object. Swift obeys the principles of polymorphism.
In my view, it is polymorphism that turns an object-based language
into a full-fledged object-oriented language. We may summarize
Swift’s polymorphism principles:

--- Page 321 ---
Substitution
Wherever a certain type of object is expected, the actual object
may be a subtype of that type.
Internal identity
An object’s real type is a matter of its internal nature, regardless
of how that object is referred to.
To see what these principles mean in practice, imagine we have a
Dog class, along with its subclass, NoisyDog:
class Dog { 
} 
class NoisyDog : Dog { 
} 
let d : Dog = NoisyDog()
In that code:
The substitution rule says that the last line is legal: we can assign a
NoisyDog instance to a reference, d, that is typed as Dog.
The internal identity rule says that, under the hood, even though d
is typed as Dog, the instance that it refers to is a NoisyDog.
You may be asking: How is the internal identity rule manifested? If a
reference to a NoisyDog is typed as Dog, in what sense is this
“really” a NoisyDog? To illustrate, let’s examine what happens when
a subclass overrides an inherited method. I’ll redefine Dog and
NoisyDog to demonstrate:
class Dog { 
    func bark() { 

--- Page 322 ---
        print("woof") 
    } 
} 
class NoisyDog : Dog { 
    override func bark() { 
        for _ in 1...3 { 
            super.bark() 
        } 
    } 
}
Now consider the following code:
func tellToBark(_ d:Dog) { 
    d.bark() 
} 
var nd = NoisyDog() 
tellToBark(nd) // what will happen??????
That code is legal, because, by the substitution principle, we can pass
nd, typed as NoisyDog, where a Dog is expected. Now, inside the tel
lToBark function, d is typed as Dog. How will it react to being told
to bark? On the one hand, d is typed as Dog, and a Dog barks by
saying "woof" once. On the other hand, in our code, when tellToBa
rk is called, what is really passed is a NoisyDog instance, and a
NoisyDog barks by saying "woof" three times. What will happen?
Let’s find out:
func tellToBark(_ d:Dog) { 
    d.bark() 
} 
var nd = NoisyDog() 
tellToBark(nd) // woof woof woof

--- Page 323 ---
The result is "woof woof woof". The internal identity rule says that
what matters when a message is sent is not how the recipient of that
message is typed through this or that reference, but what that recipient
actually is. What arrives inside tellToBark is a NoisyDog,
regardless of the type of variable that holds it; thus, the bark message
causes this object to say "woof" three times.
Here’s another important consequence of polymorphism — the
meaning of the keyword self. Its meaning depends upon the type of
the actual instance — even if the word self appears in a superclass’s
code. For example:
class Dog { 
    func bark() { 
        print("woof") 
    } 
    func speak() { 
        self.bark() 
    } 
} 
class NoisyDog : Dog { 
    override func bark() { 
        for _ in 1...3 { 
            super.bark() 
        } 
    } 
}
What happens when we tell a NoisyDog to speak? The speak
method is declared in Dog, the superclass — not in NoisyDog. The s
peak method calls the bark method. It does this by way of the
keyword self. (I could have omitted the explicit reference to self
here, but self would still be involved implicitly, so I’m not cheating

--- Page 324 ---
by making self explicit.) There’s a bark method in Dog, and an
override of the bark method in NoisyDog. Which bark method will
be called? Let’s find out:
let nd = NoisyDog() 
nd.speak() // woof woof woof
The word self is encountered within the Dog class’s implementation
of speak. But what matters is not where the word self appears but
what it means. It means this instance. And the internal identity
principle tells us that this instance is a NoisyDog! Thus, it is
NoisyDog’s override of bark that is called when Dog’s speak says se
lf.bark().
Polymorphism applies to Optional types in the same way that it
applies to the type of thing wrapped by the Optional. Suppose we
have a reference typed as an Optional wrapping a Dog. You already
know that you can assign a Dog to it. Well, you can also assign a
NoisyDog, or an Optional wrapping a NoisyDog, and the underlying
wrapped object will maintain its integrity:
var d : Dog? 
d = Dog() 
d = NoisyDog() 
d = Optional(NoisyDog())
(The applicability of polymorphism to Optionals derives from a
special dispensation of the Swift language: Optionals are covariant.
I’ll talk more about that later in this chapter.)

--- Page 325 ---
Thanks to polymorphism, you can take advantage of subclasses to
add power and customization to existing classes. This is important
particularly in the world of iOS programming, where most of the
classes are defined by Cocoa and don’t belong to you. The
UIViewController class, for example, is defined by Cocoa; it has lots
of built-in methods that Cocoa will call, and these methods perform
various important tasks — but in a generic way. In real life, you’ll
make a UIViewController subclass, and you’ll override those
methods to do the tasks appropriate to your particular app. When you
do that:
It won’t bother Cocoa in the slightest, because (substitution
principle) wherever Cocoa expects to receive or to be talking to a
UIViewController, it will accept without question an instance of
your UIViewController subclass.
The substituted UIViewController subclass will also work as
expected, because (internal identity principle) whenever Cocoa
calls one of those UIViewController methods on your subclass, it
is your subclass’s override that will be called, and wherever a
UIViewController method refers to self, that will mean your
subclass.
I’ll talk more about subclassing Cocoa classes in Chapter 10.

--- Page 326 ---
TIP
Polymorphism is cool, but in the grand scheme of things it is also relatively
slow. It requires dynamic dispatch, meaning that the compiler can’t perform
certain optimizations, and that the runtime has to think about what a message to
a class instance means. You can reduce the need for dynamic dispatch by
declaring a class or a class member final or private. Or use a struct, if
appropriate; structs don’t need dynamic dispatch.
Casting
Here’s a conundrum. The Swift compiler, with its strict typing,
imposes severe restrictions on what messages can be sent to an object
reference. The messages that the compiler will permit to be sent to an
object reference depend upon the reference’s declared type. But the
internal identity principle of polymorphism says that, under the hood,
an object may have a real type that is different from its reference’s
declared type. Such an object may be capable of receiving certain
messages, but the compiler won’t permit us to send them.
To illustrate the problem, let’s give NoisyDog a method that Dog
doesn’t have:
class Dog { 
    func bark() { 
        print("woof") 
    } 
} 
class NoisyDog : Dog { 
    override func bark() { 
        super.bark(); super.bark() 
    } 

--- Page 327 ---
    func beQuiet() { 
        self.bark() 
    } 
}
In that code, we configure a NoisyDog so that we can tell it to beQui
et. Now look at what happens when we try to tell an object typed as
Dog to be quiet:
func tellToHush(_ d:Dog) { 
    d.beQuiet() // compile error 
} 
let nd = NoisyDog() 
tellToHush(nd)
Our code doesn’t compile. We can’t send the beQuiet message to the
reference d inside the function body, because it is typed as Dog —
and a Dog has no beQuiet method. But there is a certain irony here:
for once, we happen to know more than the compiler does — namely,
that this object is in fact a NoisyDog and does have a beQuiet
method! Our code would run correctly — because d really is a
NoisyDog — if only we could get our code to compile in the first
place. We need a way to say to the compiler, “Look, compiler, just
trust me: this thing is going to turn out to be a NoisyDog when the
program actually runs, so let me send it this message.”
There is in fact a way to do this — casting. To cast, you use a form of
the keyword as followed by the name of the type you claim
something really is.
Casting Down

--- Page 328 ---
Swift will not let you cast just any old type to any old other type —
you can’t cast a String to an Int — but it will let you cast a superclass
to a subclass. This is called casting down. When you cast down, the
form of the keyword as that you use is as! with an exclamation
mark. The exclamation mark reminds you that you are forcing the
compiler to do something it would rather not do:
func tellToHush(_ d:Dog) { 
    (d as! NoisyDog).beQuiet() 
} 
let nd = NoisyDog() 
tellToHush(nd)
That code compiles, and works. A useful way to rewrite the example
is like this:
func tellToHush(_ d:Dog) { 
    let d = d as! NoisyDog 
    d.beQuiet() 
    // ... other NoisyDog messages to d can go here ... 
} 
let nd = NoisyDog() 
tellToHush(nd)
The reason that way of rewriting the code is useful is in case we have
other NoisyDog messages to send to this object. Instead of casting
every time we want to send a message to it, we cast the object once to
its internal identity type, and assign it to a variable. Now that
variable’s type — inferred, in this case, from the cast — is the
internal identity type, and we can send multiple messages to the
variable.

--- Page 329 ---
Type Testing and Casting Down Safely
A moment ago, I said that the as! operator’s exclamation mark
reminds you that you are forcing the compiler’s hand. It also serves
as a warning: your code can now crash! The reason is that you might
be lying to the compiler. Casting down is a way of telling the
compiler to relax its strict type checking and to let you call the shots.
If you use casting to make a false claim, the compiler may permit it,
but you will crash when the app runs:
func tellToHush(_ d:Dog) { 
    let d = d as! NoisyDog // crash 
    d.beQuiet() 
} 
let d = Dog() 
tellToHush(d)
In that code, we told the compiler that this object would turn out to be
a NoisyDog, and the compiler obediently took its hands off and
allowed us to send the beQuiet message to it. But in fact, this object
was a Dog when our code ran, and so we ultimately crashed when the
cast failed because this object was not a NoisyDog.
To prevent yourself from lying accidentally, you can test the type of
an instance at runtime. One way to do that is with the keyword is.
You can use is in a condition; if the condition passes, then cast, in
the knowledge that your cast is safe:
func tellToHush(_ d:Dog) { 
    if d is NoisyDog { 
        let d = d as! NoisyDog 
        d.beQuiet() 

--- Page 330 ---
    } 
}
The result is that we won’t cast d to a NoisyDog unless it really is a
NoisyDog.
An alternative way to solve the same problem is to use Swift’s as?
operator. This casts down, but with the option of failure; therefore
what it casts to is (you guessed it) an Optional — and now we are on
familiar ground, because we know how to deal safely with an
Optional:
func tellToHush(_ d:Dog) { 
    let d = d as? NoisyDog // an Optional wrapping a NoisyDog 
    if d != nil { 
        d!.beQuiet() 
    } 
}
That doesn’t look much cleaner or shorter than our previous
approach. But remember that we can safely send a message to an
Optional by optionally unwrapping the Optional:
func tellToHush(_ d:Dog) { 
    let d = d as? NoisyDog // an Optional wrapping a NoisyDog 
    d?.beQuiet() 
}
Or, as a one-liner:
func tellToHush(_ d:Dog) { 
    (d as? NoisyDog)?.beQuiet() 
}

--- Page 331 ---
First we use the as? operator to obtain an Optional wrapping a
NoisyDog. Then we optionally unwrap that Optional and send a
message to it. If the original d wasn’t a NoisyDog, the Optional will
be nil and it won’t be unwrapped and no message will be sent.
Type Testing and Casting Optionals
The is, as!, and as? operators work with Optionals in the same way
that the equality comparison operators do (Chapter 3): they are
automatically applied to the object wrapped by the Optional.
Let’s start with is. Consider an Optional d ostensibly wrapping a
Dog (that is, d is a Dog? object). It might, in actual fact, be wrapping
either a Dog or a NoisyDog. To find out which it is, you might be
tempted to use is. But can you? After all, an Optional is neither a
Dog nor a NoisyDog — it’s an Optional! Nevertheless, Swift knows
what you mean; when the thing on the left side of is is an Optional,
Swift pretends that it’s the value wrapped in the Optional. This works
just as you would hope:
let d : Dog? = NoisyDog() 
if d is NoisyDog { // it is!
When using is with an Optional, the test fails in good order if the
Optional is nil. Our test really does two things: it checks whether the
Optional is nil, and if it is not, it then checks whether the wrapped
value is the type we specify.
What about casting? You can’t really cast an Optional to anything.
Nevertheless, Swift knows what you mean; you can use the as!

--- Page 332 ---
operator with an Optional. When the thing on the left side of as! is
an Optional, Swift treats it as the wrapped type. Moreover, the
consequence of applying the as! operator is that two things happen:
Swift unwraps first, and then casts. This code works, because d is
unwrapped to give us d2, which is a NoisyDog:
let d : Dog? = NoisyDog() 
let d2 = d as! NoisyDog 
d2.beQuiet()
That code, however, is not safe. You shouldn’t cast like that, without
testing first, unless you are very sure of your ground. If d were nil,
you’d crash in the second line because you’re trying to unwrap a nil
Optional. And if d were a Dog, not a NoisyDog, you’d still crash in
the second line when the cast fails. That’s why there’s also an as?
operator, which is safe — but yields an Optional:
let d : Dog? = NoisyDog() 
let d2 = d as? NoisyDog 
d2?.beQuiet()
In that code, we use as? to cast down from an Optional wrapping a
Dog (d) to an Optional wrapping a NoisyDog (d2). The operation is
safe, twice. If d is nil, d2 will be nil, safely. If d is not nil but
wraps a Dog, not a NoisyDog, the cast will fail, and d2 will be nil,
safely. If d wraps a NoisyDog, d2 wraps a NoisyDog. In the last line,
we unwrap d2 and send it a NoisyDog message — safely.
Bridging to Objective-C

--- Page 333 ---
Another way you’ll use casting is during a value interchange between
Swift and Objective-C when two types are equivalent. For example,
you can cast a Swift String to a Cocoa NSString, and vice versa.
That’s not because one is a subclass of the other, but because they are
bridged to one another; in a very real sense, they are the same type.
When you cast from String to NSString, you’re not casting down, and
what you’re doing is not dangerous, so you use the as operator, with
no exclamation mark or question mark.
In general, to cross the bridge from a Swift type to a bridged
Objective-C type, you will need to cast explicitly (except in the case
of a string literal):
let s : NSString = "howdy"         // string literal to NSString 
let s2 = "howdy" 
let s3 : NSString = s2 as NSString // String to NSString 
let i : NSNumber = 1 as NSNumber   // Int to NSNumber
That sort of code, however, is rather artificial. In real life, you won’t
be casting all that often, because the Cocoa API will present itself to
you in terms of Swift types. This is legal with no cast:
let name = "MyNib" // Swift String 
let vc = ViewController(nibName:name, bundle:nil)
The UIViewController class comes from Cocoa, and its nibName
property is an Objective-C NSString — not a Swift String. But you
don’t have to help the Swift String name across the bridge by casting,
because, in the Swift world, nibName: is typed as a Swift String
(actually, an Optional wrapping a String). The bridge, in effect, is
crossed later.

--- Page 334 ---
Similarly, no cast is required here:
let ud = UserDefaults.standard 
let s = "howdy" 
ud.set(s, forKey:"greeting")
You don’t have to help the Swift String s across the bridge by
casting, because the first argument of set(_:forKey:) is typed as a
Swift type, namely Any (actually, an Optional wrapping Any) — and
any Swift type can be used, without casting, where an Any is
expected. I’ll talk more about Any later in this chapter.
Coming back the other way, it is possible that you’ll receive from
Objective-C a value about whose real underlying type Swift has no
information. In that case, you’ll probably want to cast explicitly to the
underlying type — and now you are casting down, with all that that
implies. Here’s what happens when we go to retrieve the "howdy"
that we put into UserDefaults in the previous example:
let ud = UserDefaults.standard 
let test = ud.object(forKey:"greeting") as! String
When we call ud.object(forKey:), Swift has no type information;
the result is an Any (actually, an Optional wrapping Any). But we
know that this particular call should yield a string — because that’s
what we put in to begin with. So we can force-cast this value down to
a String — and it works. However, if ud.object(forKey:"greetin
g") were not a string (or if it were nil), we’d crash. If you’re not
sure of your ground, use is or as? to be safe.

--- Page 335 ---
Type References
This section talks about the ways in which Swift can refer to the type
of an object, other than saying the bare type literally.
From Instance to Type
Sometimes, what you’ve got is an instance, and you want to know its
type. This might be for no other reason than to log its type to the
console, for the sake of information or debugging; or you might need
to use the type as a value, as I’ll explain later.
For this purpose, you can use the global type(of:) function:
let d : Dog = NoisyDog() 
print(type(of:d)) // NoisyDog
As you would expect, the identity principle applies. We are not
asking how d, the variable, is typed; we’re asking what sort of object
the instance referred to by d really is. It’s typed as Dog, but it’s a
NoisyDog instance.
From self to Type
It is particularly important for an instance to be able to refer to its
own type. Quite commonly, this is in order to send a message to that
type. For instance, suppose an instance wants to send a class message
to its class. In an earlier example, a Dog instance method fetched a
Dog class property by sending a message to the Dog type, literally
using the word Dog:

--- Page 336 ---
class Dog { 
    class var whatDogsSay : String { 
        return "woof" 
    } 
    func bark() { 
        print(Dog.whatDogsSay) // woof 
    } 
}
The expression Dog.whatDogsSay seems clumsy and inflexible. Why
should we hard-code into Dog a knowledge of what type it is? It has
a type; it should just know what it is. We can refer to the current type
— the type of self — using the keyword Self (with a capital letter):
class Dog { 
    class var whatDogsSay : String { 
        return "woof" 
    } 
    func bark() { 
        print(Self.whatDogsSay) // woof 
    } 
}
Similarly, we wrote a Filter enum earlier in this chapter that accessed
its static allCases by saying Filter.allCases. We can say Self.a
llCases instead, and I prefer to do so; it’s prettier.
Saying Self instead of a type name isn’t just prettier; it’s more
powerful, because Self, like self, obeys polymorphism. Here are
Dog and its subclass, NoisyDog:
class Dog { 
    class var whatDogsSay : String { 
        return "woof" 

--- Page 337 ---
    } 
    func bark() { 
        print(Self.whatDogsSay) 
    } 
} 
class NoisyDog : Dog { 
    override class var whatDogsSay : String { 
        return "woof woof woof" 
    } 
}
Now watch what happens:
let nd = NoisyDog() 
nd.bark() // woof woof woof
If we tell a NoisyDog instance to bark, it says "woof woof woof".
The reason is that Self means, “The type that this object actually is,
right now.” We send the bark message to a NoisyDog instance. The b
ark implementation refers to Self; even though the bark
implementation is inherited from Dog, Self means the type of this
instance, which is a NoisyDog, and so Self is the NoisyDog class,
and it is NoisyDog’s version of whatDogsSay that is fetched.
(This use of Self was introduced in Swift 5.1. Before that, you had to
say type(of:self).)
Another important use of polymorphic Self is as a return type. To
show why this is valuable, I’ll introduce the notion of a factory
method.
Suppose our Dog class has a name instance property, and its only
initializer is init(name:). Let’s give our Dog class a class method m

--- Page 338 ---
akeAndName. We want this class method to create and return a named
Dog of whatever class we send the makeAndName message to. If we
say Dog.makeAndName(), we should get a Dog. If we say NoisyDog.
makeAndName(), we should get a NoisyDog. Well, we know how to
do that; just initialize polymorphic Self. It works in a class method
just as it works in an instance method:
class Dog { 
    var name : String 
    init(name:String) { 
        self.name = name 
    } 
    class func makeAndName() -> Dog { 
        let d = Self(name:"Fido") // compile error 
        return d 
    } 
} 
class NoisyDog : Dog { 
}
However, there’s a problem: that code doesn’t compile. The reason is
that the compiler is in doubt as to whether the init(name:)
initializer is implemented by every possible subtype of Dog. To
reassure it, we must declare that initializer with the required
keyword:
class Dog { 
    var name : String 
    required init(name:String) { // * 
        self.name = name 
    } 
    class func makeAndName() -> Dog { 
        let d = Self(name:"Fido") 
        return d 

--- Page 339 ---
    } 
} 
class NoisyDog : Dog { 
}
I promised earlier that I’d tell you why you might need to declare an
initializer as required; now I’m fulfilling that promise! The require
d designation reassures the compiler; every subclass of Dog must
inherit or reimplement init(name:), so it’s legal to call init(nam
e:) message on a type reference that might refer to Dog or some
subclass of Dog.
So now our code compiles, and we can call our function:
let d = Dog.makeAndName() // d is a Dog named Fido 
let d2 = NoisyDog.makeAndName() // d2 is a NoisyDog named Fido
That code works as expected. But now there’s another problem.
Although d2 is in fact a NoisyDog, it is typed as a Dog. That’s
because our makeAndName class method is declared as returning a
Dog. That isn’t what we want to declare. We want to declare that this
method returns an instance of the same type as the class to which the
makeAndName message was originally sent. In other words, we need a
polymorphic type declaration! That type is Self once again:
class Dog { 
    var name : String 
    required init(name:String) { 
        self.name = name 
    } 
    class func makeAndName() -> Self { // * 
        let d = Self(name:"Fido") 
        return d 

--- Page 340 ---
    } 
} 
class NoisyDog : Dog { 
}
The Self type is used as a return type in a method declaration to
mean “an instance of whatever type this is at runtime.” So when we
call NoisyDog.makeAndName() we get a NoisyDog typed as
NoisyDog.
Self also works for instance method declarations. Therefore, we can
write an instance method version of our factory method. Here, we
start with a Dog or a NoisyDog and tell it to have a puppy of the
same type as itself:
class Dog { 
    var name : String 
    required init(name:String) { 
        self.name = name 
    } 
    func havePuppy(name:String) -> Self { 
        return Self(name:name) 
    } 
} 
class NoisyDog : Dog { 
}
And here’s some code to test it:
let d = Dog(name:"Fido") 
let d2 = d.havePuppy(name:"Fido Junior") 
let nd = NoisyDog(name:"Rover") 
let nd2 = nd.havePuppy(name:"Rover Junior")

--- Page 341 ---
As expected, d2 is a Dog, but nd2 is a NoisyDog typed as NoisyDog.
Type as Value
In some situations, you may want to treat an object type as a value.
That is legal. An object type is itself an object, of a sort; it’s what
Swift calls a metatype. So an object type can be assigned to a variable
or passed as a parameter:
To declare that an object type is acceptable — as when declaring
the type of a variable or parameter — use dot-notation with the
name of the type and the keyword Type.
To use an object type as a value — as when assigning a type to a
variable or passing it as a parameter — hand the object to type(o
f:), or use dot-notation with the name of the type and the
keyword self. (In the latter case, the name of the type might be S
elf, in which case you’ll be saying Self.self!)
Here’s a function dogTypeExpecter that accepts a Dog type as its
parameter:
func dogTypeExpecter(_ whattype:Dog.Type) { 
}
And here’s an example of calling that function:
dogTypeExpecter(Dog.self)
Or you could call it like this:
let d = Dog() 
dogTypeExpecter(type(of:d))

--- Page 342 ---
The substitution principle applies, so you could call dogTypeExpecte
r like this:
dogTypeExpecter(NoisyDog.self)
Or like this:
let nd = NoisyDog() 
dogTypeExpecter(type(of:nd))
To illustrate more practically, I’ll rewrite our Dog factory method as a
global factory function that will accept a Dog type as a parameter and
will create an instance from that type. You can use a variable
reference to a type (a metatype) to instantiate that type, but you can’t
just append parentheses to a variable reference:
func dogMakerAndNamer(_ whattype:Dog.Type) -> Dog { 
    let d = whattype(name:"Fido") // compile error 
    return d 
}
Instead, you must explicitly send the reference an init(...)
message:
func dogMakerAndNamer(_ whattype:Dog.Type) -> Dog { 
    let d = whattype.init(name:"Fido") 
    return d 
}
And here’s how to call our function:
let d = dogMakerAndNamer(Dog.self) // d is a Dog named Fido 
let d2 = dogMakerAndNamer(NoisyDog.self) // d2 is a NoisyDog named Fido

--- Page 343 ---
Unfortunately, the global factory function dogMakerAndNamer,
displays the same problem we had before — it returns an object typed
as Dog, even if the underlying instance is in fact a NoisyDog. We
can’t return Self to solve the problem here, because there’s no type
for it to refer to. Swift does have a solution, however — generics. I’ll
discuss generic functions later in this chapter.
Summary of Type Terminology
All this terminology can get a bit confusing, so here’s a quick
summary:
type(of:)
Applied to an object: the polymorphic (internal) type of the
object, regardless of how a reference is typed.
Self
In a method body, or in a method declaration when specifying the
return type, this type or this instance’s type, polymorphically.
.Type
Appended to a type in a type declaration to specify that the type
itself (or a subtype) is expected.
.self
Sent to a type to generate a metatype, suitable for passing where a
type (.Type) is expected.
Comparing Types

--- Page 344 ---
Type references can be compared to one another. On the right side of
an == comparison, you can use the name of a type with .self; on the
right side of an is comparison, you can use the name of a type with .
Type. The difference, as you might expect, is that == tests for
absolutely identical types, whereas is permits subtypes.
In this artificial example, if the parameter whattype is Dog.self,
both equality and typology are true; if whattype is NoisyDog.se
lf, equality is false but typology is still true:
func dogTypeExpecter(_ whattype:Dog.Type) { 
    let equality = whattype == Dog.self 
    let typology = whattype is Dog.Type 
}
In that example, whattype might be replaced on the left side of the
comparisons by the result of a call to type(of:) (or by a type name
qualified by .self, though that would be pointless); and Dog.self
might be replaced on the right side of the == comparison by whattyp
e or the result of a call to type(of:). But neither whattype nor type
(of:) can appear on the right side of an is comparison; is requires a
literal type as its second operand.
In real life, however, comparing type references is a very rare thing to
do. Passing metatypes around is not Swifty, and comparing metatypes
is really not Swifty. In general, if you find yourself talking like that,
you should probably think of another way of doing whatever it is
you’re trying to do.
Protocols

--- Page 345 ---
A protocol is a way of expressing commonalities between otherwise
unrelated types. For example, a Bee object and a Bird object might
have features in common by virtue of the fact that both a bee and a
bird can fly. Thus, it might be useful to define a Flier type. The
question is: In what sense can both Bee and Bird be Fliers?
One possibility might be class inheritance. If Bee and Bird are both
classes, Flier could be the superclass of both Bee and Bird. However,
there may be other reasons why Flier can’t be the superclass of both
Bee and Bird. A Bee is an Insect; a Bird isn’t. Yet they both have the
power of flight — independently. We need a type that cuts across the
class hierarchy somehow, tying remote classes together.
Moreover, what if Bee and Bird are not both classes? In Swift, that’s
a real possibility. Important and powerful objects can be structs
instead of classes. But there is no hierarchy of superstructs and
substructs! How can a Bee struct and a Bird struct both be Fliers?
Swift solves this problem through the use of protocols. Protocols are
tremendously important in Swift; the Swift header defines over 60
protocols! Moreover, Objective-C has protocols as well, and Cocoa
makes heavy use of protocols; Swift protocols correspond roughly to
Objective-C protocols, and can interchange with them.
A protocol is an object type, but there are no protocol objects — you
can’t instantiate a protocol. A protocol declaration is just a
lightweight list of properties and methods. The properties have no
values, and the methods have no code! The idea is that a “real” object
type can formally declare that it belongs to a protocol type; this is

--- Page 346 ---
called adopting the protocol. An object type that adopts a protocol is
promising to implement the properties and methods listed by the
protocol. And it must keep that promise! This is called conforming to
the protocol.
Let’s say that being a Flier consists of no more than implementing a f
ly method. Then a Flier protocol could specify that there must be a f
ly method; to do so, it lists the fly method with no function body,
like this:
protocol Flier { 
    func fly() 
}
Any type — an enum, a struct, a class, or even another protocol —
can then adopt this protocol. To do so, it lists the protocol after a
colon after its name in its declaration. (If the adopter is a class with a
superclass, the protocol comes after a comma after the superclass
specification.)
Let’s say Bird is a struct. Then it can adopt Flier like this:
struct Bird : Flier { 
} // compile error
So far, so good. But that code won’t compile. The Bird struct has
promised to implement the features listed in the Flier protocol. Now
it must keep that promise! The fly method is the only requirement of
the Flier protocol. To satisfy that requirement, I’ll just give Bird an
empty fly method:

--- Page 347 ---
protocol Flier { 
    func fly() 
} 
struct Bird : Flier { 
    func fly() { 
    } 
}
That’s all there is to it. We’ve defined a protocol, and we’ve made a
struct adopt and conform to that protocol. Of course, in real life
you’ll probably want to make the adopter’s implementation of the
protocol’s methods do something; but the protocol says nothing about
that.
TIP
A protocol can also declare a method and provide its implementation, thanks to
protocol extensions, which I’ll discuss later in this chapter.
Why Protocols?
Perhaps at this point you’re wondering: So what? If we wanted a Bird
to know how to fly, why didn’t we just give Bird a fly method
without adopting any protocol? What difference does the protocol
make?
The answer has to do with types. A protocol, such as our Flier, is a
type. Therefore, I can use Flier as a type when declaring the type of a
variable or a function parameter:

--- Page 348 ---
func tellToFly(_ f:Flier) { 
    f.fly() 
}
Protocols thus give us another way of expressing the notion of type
and subtype — and polymorphism applies. By the substitution
principle, a Flier here could be an instance of any object type, as long
as it adopts the Flier protocol. It might be a Bird, it might be
something else; we don’t care. If it adopts the Flier protocol, it can be
passed where a Flier is expected; moreover, it must have a fly
method, because that’s exactly what it means to adopt the Flier
protocol! Therefore we can confidently send the fly message to this
object, and the compiler lets us do that.
The converse, however, is not true: an object with a fly method is
not automatically a Flier. It isn’t enough to obey the requirements of a
protocol; the object type must formally adopt the protocol. This code
won’t compile:
func tellToFly(_ f:Flier) { 
    f.fly() 
} 
struct Bee { 
    func fly() { 
    } 
} 
let b = Bee() 
tellToFly(b) // compile error
A Bee can be sent the fly message, qua Bee. But tellToFly doesn’t
take a Bee parameter; it takes a Flier parameter. Formally, a Bee is

--- Page 349 ---
not a Flier. To make a Bee a Flier, just declare formally that Bee
adopts the Flier protocol! This code does compile:
func tellToFly(_ f:Flier) { 
    f.fly() 
} 
struct Bee : Flier { 
    func fly() { 
    } 
} 
let b = Bee() 
tellToFly(b)
Adopting a Library Protocol
Enough of birds and bees; we’re ready for a real-life example! As
I’ve already said, the Swift standard library is chock full of protocols
already. Let’s make one of our own object types adopt one and watch
the powers of that protocol spring to life for us.
The CustomStringConvertible protocol requires that we implement a
description String property. If we do that, a wonderful thing
happens: when an instance of this type is used in string interpolation
or with print (or the po command in the console, or in the String
initializer init(describing:)), its description property value is
used automatically to represent it.
Recall the Filter enum, from earlier in this chapter. I’ll add a descrip
tion property to it:
enum Filter : String { 
    case albums = "Albums" 
    case playlists = "Playlists" 

--- Page 350 ---
    case podcasts = "Podcasts" 
    case books = "Audiobooks" 
    var description : String { return self.rawValue } 
}
But that isn’t enough, in and of itself, to give Filter the power of the
CustomStringConvertible protocol; to do that, we also need to adopt
the CustomStringConvertible protocol formally. There is already a
colon and a type in the Filter declaration, so an adopted protocol
comes after a comma:
enum Filter : String, CustomStringConvertible { 
    case albums = "Albums" 
    case playlists = "Playlists" 
    case podcasts = "Podcasts" 
    case books = "Audiobooks" 
    var description : String { return self.rawValue } 
}
We have now made Filter formally adopt the
CustomStringConvertible protocol. The CustomStringConvertible
protocol requires that we implement a description String property;
we do implement a description String property, so our code
compiles. Now we can interpolate a Filter into a string, or hand it
over to print, or coerce it to a String, and its description will be
used automatically:
let type = Filter.albums 
print("It is \(type)") // It is Albums 
print(type) // Albums 
let s = String(describing:type) // Albums

--- Page 351 ---
Behold the power of protocols. You can give any object type the
power of string conversion in exactly the same way.
Note that a type can adopt more than one protocol! The built-in
Double type adopts CustomStringConvertible, Hashable, Strideable,
and several other built-in protocols. To declare adoption of multiple
protocols, list them separated by a comma after the protocol name
and colon in the declaration (after the raw value type or superclass
type if there is one):
struct MyType : CustomStringConvertible, TextOutputStreamable, Strideabl
e { 
    // ... 
}
(Of course, that code won’t compile unless I also declare, in MyType,
any required properties and methods, so that MyType actually
conforms to those protocols.)
Protocol Type Testing and Casting
The operators for mediating between an object’s declared type and its
real type work when the declared type is a protocol type. Given a
protocol Flier that is adopted by both Bird and Bee, we can use the is
operator to test whether a particular Flier is in fact a Bird:
func isBird(_ f:Flier) -> Bool { 
    return f is Bird 
}
Similarly, as! and as? can be used to cast an object declared as a
protocol type down to its actual type. This is important to be able to

--- Page 352 ---
do, because the adopting object will typically be able to receive
messages that the protocol can’t receive. Let’s say that a Bird can get
a worm:
struct Bird : Flier { 
    func fly() { 
    } 
    func getWorm() { 
    } 
}
A Bird can fly qua Flier, but it can getWorm only qua Bird. You
can’t tell just any old Flier to get a worm:
func tellGetWorm(_ f:Flier) { 
    f.getWorm() // compile error 
}
But if this Flier is a Bird, clearly it can get a worm. That is exactly
what casting is all about:
func tellGetWorm(f:Flier) { 
    (f as? Bird)?.getWorm() 
}
Declaring a Protocol
Protocol declaration can take place only at the top level of a file. To
declare a protocol, use the keyword protocol followed by the name
of the protocol (which should start with a capital letter, as this is a
type). Then come curly braces which may contain declarations for
any of the following:

--- Page 353 ---
Properties
A property declaration in a protocol consists of var (not let), the
property name, a colon, its type, and curly braces containing the
word get or the words get set. In the former case, the adopter’s
implementation of this property can be writable, while in the
latter case, it must be: the adopter may not implement a get set
property as a read-only computed property or as a constant (let)
stored property.
To declare a static/class property, precede it with the keyword sta
tic. A class adopter is free to implement this as a class property.
Methods
A method declaration in a protocol is a function declaration
without a function body; it has no curly braces and no code. Any
object function type is legal, including init and subscript. (The
syntax for declaring a subscript in a protocol is the same as the
syntax for declaring a subscript in an object type, except that the
curly braces will contain get or get set.)
To declare a static/class method, precede it with the keyword sta
tic. A class adopter is free to implement this as a class method.
To permit an enum or struct adopter to declare a method mutatin
g, declare it mutating in the protocol. An adopter cannot add mut
ating if the protocol lacks it, but the adopter may omit mutating
if the protocol has it.
A protocol can itself adopt one or more protocols; the syntax is just as
you would expect — a colon after the protocol’s name in the
declaration, followed by a comma-separated list of the protocols it
adopts. In effect, this gives you a way to create an entire secondary
hierarchy of types! The Swift headers make heavy use of this.

--- Page 354 ---
A protocol that adopts another protocol may repeat the contents of the
adopted protocol’s curly braces, for clarity; but it doesn’t have to, as
this repetition is implicit. An object type that adopts a protocol must
satisfy the requirements of this protocol and all protocols that the
protocol adopts.
Protocol Composition
If the only purpose of a protocol is to combine other protocols by
adopting all of them, without adding any new requirements, you can
avoid formally declaring the protocol in the first place by specifying
the protocol combination on the fly. To do so, join the protocol names
with &. This is called protocol composition:
func f(_ x: CustomStringConvertible & CustomDebugStringConvertible) { 
}
That is a function declaration with a parameter whose type is
specified as being some object type that adopts both the
CustomStringConvertible protocol and the
CustomDebugStringConvertible protocol.
A type can also be specified as a composite of a class type and one or
more protocols. A case in point might look something like this:
protocol MyViewProtocol { 
    func doSomethingReallyCool() 
} 
class ViewController: UIViewController { 
    var v: (UIView & MyViewProtocol)? 
    func test() { 
        self.v?.doSomethingReallyCool() // a MyViewProtocol requirement 

--- Page 355 ---
        self.v?.backgroundColor = .red // a UIView property 
    } 
}
To be assigned to ViewController’s v property, an object would need
to be an instance of a UIView subclass that is also an adopter of
MyViewProtocol. In this way, we guarantee to the compiler that both
UIView messages and MyViewProtocol messages can be sent to a
ViewController’s v; otherwise, we’d have to type v as a
MyViewProtocol and then cast down to UIView in order to send it
UIView messages, even if we knew that v would in fact always be a
UIView.
There’s another way to accomplish the same thing; we can declare
MyViewProtocol itself in such a way that it can be adopted only by
UIView, as I shall now explain.
Class Protocols
A protocol declaration may include the name of a class after the
colon. This limits the types capable of adopting this protocol to that
class or its subclasses:
protocol MyViewProtocol : UIView { 
    func doSomethingReallyCool() 
} 
class ViewController: UIViewController { 
    var v: MyViewProtocol? // and therefore a UIView 
    func test() { 
        self.v?.doSomethingReallyCool() // a MyViewProtocol requirement 
        self.v?.backgroundColor = .red // a UIView property 
    } 
}

--- Page 356 ---
Here, MyViewProtocol can be adopted only by UIView or a UIView
subclass. This means that an object typed as MyViewProtocol can be
sent both MyViewProtocol messages and UIView messages, because
ex hypothesi a MyViewProtocol adopter must be a UIView.
To specify that a protocol can be adopted only by some class (and not
a struct or enum) without specifying what class it must be, use the
protocol type AnyObject, which every class type adopts (as I’ll
explain later):
protocol MyClassProtocol : AnyObject { 
    // ... 
}
An alternative notation is a where clause before the curly braces. I
have not yet talked about where clauses or the use of Self to signify
the protocol’s adopter, but I’ll show you the notation now anyway:
protocol MyViewProtocol where Self:UIView { 
    func doSomethingReallyCool() 
} 
protocol MyClassProtocol where Self:AnyObject { 
    // ... 
}
Instead of AnyObject after the colon following the name of the
protocol, you can use the keyword class. That notation predates
Swift 5 and may eventually be deprecated, but it is still legal as of
this writing:
protocol MyClassProtocol : class { 
    // ... 
}

--- Page 357 ---
A valuable byproduct of declaring a class protocol is that the
resulting type can take advantage of special memory management
features that apply only to classes. I haven’t discussed memory
management yet, but I’ll give an example anyway (and I’ll repeat it
when I talk about memory management in Chapter 5):
protocol SecondViewControllerDelegate : AnyObject { 
    func accept(data:Any) 
} 
class SecondViewController : UIViewController { 
    weak var delegate : SecondViewControllerDelegate? 
    // ... 
}
The keyword weak marks the delegate property as having special
memory management that applies only to class instances. The delega
te property is typed as a protocol, and a protocol might be adopted
by a struct or an enum type. So to satisfy the compiler that this object
will in fact be a class instance, and not a struct or enum instance, the
protocol is declared as a class protocol.
TIP
An @objc protocol is a class protocol, as class protocols are the only kind of
protocol Objective-C understands.
Optional Protocol Members
In Objective-C, a protocol member can be declared optional, meaning
that this member doesn’t have to be implemented by the adopter, but
it may be. Swift allows optional protocol members, but this feature is

--- Page 358 ---
solely for compatibility with Objective-C, and in fact is implemented
by Objective-C; it isn’t really a Swift feature at all. Therefore,
everything about an optional protocol member must be explicitly
exposed to Objective-C. The protocol declaration must be marked
with the @objc attribute, and an optional member’s declaration must
be marked with the keywords @objc optional:
@objc protocol Flier { 
    @objc optional var song : String {get} 
    @objc optional func sing() 
}
(I’ll explain in Chapter 10 how Objective-C implements optional
protocol members.)
Many Cocoa protocols have optional members. For example, your
iOS app will have an app delegate class that adopts the
UIApplicationDelegate protocol; this protocol has many methods, all
of them optional. That fact, however, will have no effect on how you
implement those methods; either you implement a method or you
don’t. (I’ll talk more about Cocoa protocols in Chapter 10, and about
delegate protocols in Chapter 11.)
An optional member is not guaranteed to be implemented by the
adopter, so Swift doesn’t know whether it’s safe to send a Flier either
the song message or the sing message. How Swift solves that
problem depends on whether this is an optional property or an
optional method.
OPTIONAL PROPERTIES

--- Page 359 ---
In the case of an optional property like song, Swift solves the
problem by wrapping its fetched value in an Optional. If the Flier
adopter doesn’t implement the property, the result is nil and no harm
done:
@objc protocol Flier { 
    @objc optional var song : String {get} 
} 
let f : Flier = Bird() 
let s = f.song // s is an Optional wrapping a String
This is one of those rare situations where you can wind up with a
double-wrapped Optional. If the value of the optional property song
were itself a String?, then fetching its value from a Flier would yield
a String??.
A curious limitation is that if a protocol declares an optional property
{get set}, you can’t set that property. If f is a Flier and song is
declared {get set}, you can’t set f.song:
@objc protocol Flier { 
    @objc optional var song : String? {get set} 
} 
let f : Flier = Bird() 
f.song = "tweet tweet" // compile error
The error message claims that f is immutable, which is blatantly
false. This is evidently a bug in the language. A workaround (pointed
out to me by Jordan Rose) is to use key path notation (which I’ll
explain in Chapter 5):
let f : Flier = Bird() 
f[keyPath: \.song] = "tweet tweet"

--- Page 360 ---
OPTIONAL METHODS
In the case of an optional method like sing, things are more
elaborate. If the method is not implemented, we must not be
permitted to call it in the first place. To handle this situation, the
method is typed as an Optional version of its declared type. To send
the sing message to a Flier, therefore, you must unwrap it. What you
are unwrapping is not the result of the method call; it’s the method
itself. In the method call, the unwrap operator must appear before the
parentheses!
The safe approach is to unwrap an optional method optionally, with a
question mark:
@objc protocol Flier { 
    @objc optional func sing() 
} 
let f : Flier = Bird() 
f.sing?()
The effect is to send the sing message to f only if this Flier adopter
implements sing. If this Flier adopter doesn’t implement sing,
nothing happens. You could have force-unwrapped the call — f.sin
g!() — but then your app would crash if the adopter doesn’t
implement sing.
If an optional method returns a value, that value is wrapped in an
Optional as well:
@objc protocol Flier { 
    @objc optional func sing() -> String 
}

--- Page 361 ---
If we now call sing?() on a Flier, the result is an Optional wrapping
a String:
let f : Flier = Bird() 
let s = f.sing?() // s is an Optional wrapping a String
If we force-unwrap the call — f.sing!() — the result is either a
String (if the adopter implements sing) or a crash (if it doesn’t).
Implicitly Required Initializers
Suppose that a protocol declares an initializer. And suppose that a
class adopts this protocol. By the terms of this protocol, this class and
any subclass it may ever have must implement this initializer.
Therefore, the class not only must implement the initializer, but also
must mark it as required. An initializer declared in a protocol is
implicitly required, and the class is forced to make that requirement
explicit.
Consider this simple example, which won’t compile:
protocol Flier { 
    init() 
} 
class Bird : Flier { 
    init() {} // compile error 
}
That code generates an elaborate but perfectly informative compile
error message: “Initializer requirement init() can only be satisfied
by a required initializer in non-final class Bird.” To compile our
code, we must designate our initializer as required:

--- Page 362 ---
protocol Flier { 
    init() 
} 
class Bird : Flier { 
    required init() {} 
}
Alternatively, if Bird were marked final, there would be no need to
mark its init as required, because this would mean that Bird
cannot have any subclasses — guaranteeing that the problem will
never arise in the first place.
In the above code, Bird is not marked as final, and its init is
marked as required. This, as I’ve already explained, means that any
subclass of Bird that implements any designated initializers — and
thus loses initializer inheritance — must implement the required
initializer and mark it required as well.
That fact is responsible for a strange and annoying feature of real-life
iOS programming with Swift. Let’s say you subclass the built-in
Cocoa class UIViewController — something that you are extremely
likely to do. And let’s say you give your subclass an initializer —
something that you are also extremely likely to do:
class ViewController: UIViewController { 
    init() { 
        super.init(nibName:"ViewController", bundle:nil) // compile erro
r 
    } 
}

--- Page 363 ---
That code won’t compile. The compile error says: “required
initializer init(coder:) must be provided by subclass of
UIViewController.”
What’s going on here? It turns out that UIViewController adopts a
protocol called NSCoding. And this protocol requires an initializer in
it(coder:). None of that is your doing; UIViewController and
NSCoding are declared by Cocoa, not by you. But that doesn’t
matter! This is the same situation I was just describing. Your
UIViewController subclass must either inherit init(coder:) or must
explicitly implement it and mark it required. Well, your subclass has
implemented a designated initializer of its own — thus cutting off
initializer inheritance. Therefore it must implement init(coder:)
and mark it required.
But that makes no sense if you are not expecting init(coder:) ever
to be called on your UIViewController subclass. You are being forced
to write an initializer for which you can provide no meaningful
functionality! Fortunately, Xcode’s Fix-it feature will offer to write
the initializer for you, like this:
required init?(coder: NSCoder) { 
    fatalError("init(coder:) has not been implemented") 
}
That code satisfies the compiler. (I’ll explain in Chapter 5 why it’s a
legal initializer even though it doesn’t fulfill an initializer’s contract.)
It also deliberately crashes if it is ever called — which is fine,
because ex hypothesi you don’t expect it ever to be called.

--- Page 364 ---
If, on the other hand, you do have functionality for this initializer,
you will delete the fatalError line and insert that functionality in its
place. A minimum meaningful implementation would be to call supe
r.init(coder:coder), but of course if your class has properties that
need initialization, you will need to initialize them first.
Not only UIViewController but lots of built-in Cocoa classes adopt
NSCoding. You will encounter this problem if you subclass any of
those classes and implement your own initializer. It’s just something
you’ll have to get used to.
Expressible by Literal
One of the wonderful things about Swift is that so many of its
features, rather than being built-in and accomplished by magic, are
exposed in the Swift header. Literals are a case in point. The reason
you can say 5 to express an Int whose value is 5, instead of formally
initializing Int by saying Int(5), is not because of magic (or at least,
not entirely because of magic). It’s because Int adopts a protocol,
ExpressibleByIntegerLiteral. Not only Int literals, but all literals
work this way. The following protocols are declared in the Swift
header:
ExpressibleByNilLiteral
ExpressibleByBooleanLiteral
ExpressibleByIntegerLiteral
ExpressibleByFloatLiteral
ExpressibleByStringLiteral

--- Page 365 ---
ExpressibleByExtendedGraphemeClusterLiteral
ExpressibleByUnicodeScalarLiteral
ExpressibleByArrayLiteral
ExpressibleByDictionaryLiteral
Your own object type can adopt an expressible by literal protocol as
well. This means that a literal can appear where an instance of your
object type is expected! Here we declare a Nest type that contains
some number of eggs (its eggCount):
struct Nest : ExpressibleByIntegerLiteral { 
    var eggCount : Int = 0 
    init() {} 
    init(integerLiteral val: Int) { 
        self.eggCount = val 
    } 
}
Because Nest adopts ExpressibleByIntegerLiteral, we can pass an Int
where a Nest is expected, and our init(integerLiteral:) will be
called automatically, causing a new Nest object with the specified eg
gCount to come into existence at that moment:
func reportEggs(_ nest:Nest) { 
    print("this nest contains \(nest.eggCount) eggs") 
} 
reportEggs(4) // this nest contains 4 eggs
Generics

--- Page 366 ---
A generic is a sort of placeholder for a type, into which an actual type
will be slotted later. In particular, there are situations where you want
to say that a certain same type is to be used in several places, without
specifying precisely what type this is to be. Swift generics allow you
to say that, without sacrificing or evading Swift’s fundamental strict
typing.
A motivating case in point arose earlier in this chapter, when we
wrote a global factory function for dogs:
func dogMakerAndNamer(_ whattype:Dog.Type) -> Dog { 
    let d = whattype.init(name:"Fido") 
    return d 
}
That works, but it isn’t quite what we’d like to say. This function’s
declared return type is Dog. So if we are passed a Dog subclass such
as NoisyDog as the parameter, we will instantiate that type (which is
good) but then return that instance typed as Dog (which is bad).
Instead, we’d like the type declared as the return type after the arrow
operator to be the same type that we were passed as a parameter in
the first line and that we instantiated in the second line — whatever
that type may be. Generics permit us to say that:
func dogMakerAndNamer<WhatType:Dog>(_:WhatType.Type) -> WhatType { 
  
  
    let d = WhatType.init(name:"Fido") 
  
    return d 
}
I haven’t yet explained the syntax, but you can see the point. The
angle brackets (<WhatType:Dog>) declare that the type WhatType is

--- Page 367 ---
a generic type — a placeholder — and that it stands for Dog or for
some subclass thereof. Then, WhatType is used in the course of the
declaration, in three places:
As the type passed in as parameter
As the type instantiated in the function body
As the declared type of the returned instance (after the arrow
operator)
The generic function specifies that WhatType is the same type
throughout, without having to specify exactly what type it is (beyond
the fact that it is Dog or a Dog subclass).
However, Swift has strict typing, so in order to let us call this
function, the compiler needs to know the real type that WhatType
stands for. But in fact it knows this from looking at the call itself! For
example:
let dog = dogMakerAndNamer(NoisyDog.self)
In that call, we pass NoisyDog.self as the parameter. That tells the
compiler what WhatType is! It is NoisyDog. In effect, the compiler
now substitutes NoisyDog for WhatType throughout the generic, like
this (pseudocode):
func dogMakerAndNamer(_:NoisyDog.Type) -> NoisyDog { 
    let d = NoisyDog.init(name:"Fido") 
    return d 
}

--- Page 368 ---
That process of substitution is called resolving (or specializing) the
generic. The type in question is unambiguously clear for this call to
our function, and the compiler is satisfied. And this resolution
extends beyond the generic itself. Now that the compiler knows that
this call to our function will return a NoisyDog instance, it can type
the variable initialized to the result of the call as a NoisyDog by
inference:
let dog = dogMakerAndNamer(NoisyDog.self) // dog is typed as NoisyDog
Let’s consider another case in point: an Optional. Any type of value
can be wrapped up in an Optional. Yet there is no doubt as to what
type is wrapped up in a particular Optional. How can this be? It’s
because Optional is a generic! Here’s how an Optional works.
I have already said that an Optional is an enum, with two cases: .non
e and .some. If an Optional’s case is .some, it has an associated value
— the value that is wrapped by this Optional. But what is the type of
that associated value? On the one hand, one wants to say that it can
be any type; that, after all, is why anything can be wrapped up in an
Optional. On the other hand, any particular Optional can wrap a
value only of some one specific known type. That sounds like a
generic! The declaration for the Optional enum in the Swift header
starts like this:
enum Optional<Wrapped> : ExpressibleByNilLiteral { 
    case none 
    case some(Wrapped) 
    init(_ some: Wrapped) 
    // ... 
}

--- Page 369 ---
The angle-bracket syntax <Wrapped> declares that Wrapped is a
placeholder. The rest of the enum declaration proceeds to use the
placeholder. Besides the case .none, there’s also a case .some, which
has an associated value — of type Wrapped. And there’s an
initializer, which takes a parameter — of type Wrapped. Thus, the
type with which we are initialized — whatever type that may be — is
type Wrapped, and therefore is the type associated with the .some
case.
And how will this placeholder be resolved? Well, when an Optional is
created, it will be initialized with an actual value of some definite
type:
let s = Optional("howdy")
We’re calling init(_ some: Wrapped), so "howdy" is being
supplied here as a Wrapped instance, resolving the generic as String.
The compiler now knows that Wrapped is String throughout this
particular Optional<Wrapped>; the declaration for this particular
Optional looks, in the compiler’s mind, like this (pseudocode):
enum Optional<String> { 
    case none 
    case some(String) 
    init(_ some: String) 
    // ... 
}
That is the pseudocode declaration of an Optional whose Wrapped
placeholder has been replaced everywhere with the String type. We

--- Page 370 ---
can summarize this by saying that s is an Optional<String>. In fact,
that is legal syntax! We can create the same Optional like this:
let s : Optional<String> = "howdy"
Generic Declarations
Here’s a list of places where generics, in one form or another, can be
declared in Swift:
Generic protocol with Self
In a protocol body, use of the keyword Self turns the protocol
into a generic. Self here is a placeholder meaning the type of the
adopter. Here’s a Flier protocol that declares a method that takes
a Self parameter:
protocol Flier { 
    func flockTogetherWith(_ f:Self) 
}
That means that if the Bird object type were to adopt the Flier
protocol, its implementation of flockTogetherWith would need
to declare its parameter as a Bird.
Generic protocol with associated type
A protocol can declare an associated type using an associatedty
pe statement. This turns the protocol into a generic; the associated
type name is a placeholder:
protocol Flier { 
    associatedtype Other 
    func flockTogetherWith(_ f:Other) 

--- Page 371 ---
    func mateWith(_ f:Other) 
}
An adopter will declare a particular type at some point where the
generic uses the associated type name, resolving the placeholder:
struct Bird : Flier { 
    func flockTogetherWith(_ f:Bird) {} 
    func mateWith(_ f:Bird) {} 
}
The Bird struct adopts the Flier protocol and declares the
parameter of flockTogetherWith as a Bird. That declaration
resolves Other to Bird for this particular adopter — and therefore
Bird must declare the parameter for mateWith as a Bird as well.
Generic functions
A function declaration can use a generic placeholder type for any
of its parameters, for its return type, and within its body. The
placeholder name is declared in angle brackets after the function
name:
func takeAndReturnSameThing<T> (_ t:T) -> T { 
    print(T.self) 
    return t 
}
The caller will use a particular type at some point where the
placeholder appears in the function declaration, resolving the
placeholder:
let thing = takeAndReturnSameThing("howdy")
Here, the type of the argument "howdy" used in the call resolves
T to String; therefore this call to takeAndReturnSameThing will

--- Page 372 ---
also return a String, and the variable capturing the result, thing,
is inferred to String as well.
Generic object types
An object type declaration can use a generic placeholder type
anywhere within its curly braces. The placeholder name is
declared in angle brackets after the object type name:
struct HolderOfTwoSameThings<T> { 
    var firstThing : T 
    var secondThing : T 
    init(thingOne:T, thingTwo:T) { 
        self.firstThing = thingOne 
        self.secondThing = thingTwo 
    } 
}
A user of this object type will use a particular type at some point
where the placeholder appears in the object type declaration,
resolving the placeholder:
let holder = HolderOfTwoSameThings(thingOne:"howdy", thingTwo:"getLo
st")
Here, the type of the thingOne argument, "howdy", used in the
initializer call, resolves T to String; therefore thingTwo must also
be a String, and the properties firstThing and secondThing are
Strings as well.
The angle brackets that declare a placeholder may declare multiple
placeholders, separated by a comma:
func flockTwoTogether<T, U>(_ f1:T, _ f2:U) {}

--- Page 373 ---
The two parameters of flockTwoTogether can now be resolved to
two different types (though they do not have to be different).
Inside a generic’s code, the generic placeholder is a type reference
standing for the resolved type, which can be interrogated using type
reference comparison, as described earlier in this chapter:
func takeAndReturnSameThing<T> (_ t:T) -> T { 
    if T.self is String.Type { 
        // ... 
    } 
    return t 
}
If we call takeAndReturnSameThing("howdy"), the condition will
be true. That sort of thing, however, is unusual; a generic whose
behavior depends on interrogation of the placeholder type may need
to be rewritten in some other way.
Contradictory Resolution Is Impossible
Because the use of a generic resolves the generic, a resolution that
would contradict itself is ruled out at compile time. This is one of the
most important features of generics: contradictory resolution is
impossible as a consequence of Swift’s strict typing. A generic
placeholder must be resolved consistently throughout the generic, or
it cannot be resolved at all.
To illustrate, I’ll return to an earlier example:
func dogMakerAndNamer<WhatType:Dog>(_:WhatType.Type) -> WhatType { 
    let d = WhatType.init(name:"Fido") 

--- Page 374 ---
    return d 
}
Now consider this code:
let d : NoisyDog = dogMakerAndNamer(Dog.self)
That code makes no sense. On the one hand, the parameter Dog.self
resolves WhatType to Dog. On the other hand, the explicit type of the
result d resolves WhatType to NoisyDog. Those two resolutions
contradict one another. The compiler knows this, and stops you in
your tracks:
let d : NoisyDog = dogMakerAndNamer(Dog.self) // compile error
Similarly, recall this example:
protocol Flier { 
    associatedtype Other 
    func flockTogetherWith(_ f:Other) 
    func mateWith(_ f:Other) 
}
The placeholder Other may be resolved to any type, but it must be the
same type. This is a legal adoption of Flier:
struct Bird : Flier { 
    func flockTogetherWith(_ f: String) {} 
    func mateWith(_ f:String) {} 
}
But this is not:

--- Page 375 ---
struct Bird : Flier { // compile error 
    func flockTogetherWith(_ f: String) {} 
    func mateWith(_ f:Int) {} 
}
The compiler stops you, complaining that Bird does not conform to
Flier.
Type Constraints
A generic declaration can limit the types that are eligible to be used
for resolving a particular placeholder. This is called a type constraint.
The simplest form of type constraint is to put a colon and a type name
after the placeholder’s name when it first appears. The type name
after the colon can be a class name or a protocol name:
Class name
A class name means that the type must be this class or a subclass
of this class.
Protocol name
A protocol name means that the type must be an adopter of this
protocol.
For a protocol associated type, the type constraint appears as part of
the associatedtype declaration:
protocol Flier { 
    func fly() 
} 
protocol Flocker { 
    associatedtype Other : Flier // * 

--- Page 376 ---
    func flockTogetherWith(f:Other) 
} 
struct Bird : Flocker, Flier { 
    func fly() {} 
    func flockTogetherWith(f:Bird) {} 
}
In that example, Flocker’s associated type Other is constrained to be
an adopter of Flier. Bird is an adopter of Flier; therefore it can also
adopt Flocker while specifying that the parameter type in its flockTo
getherWith implementation is Bird.
Observe that we could not have achieved the same effect without the
associated type, by declaring Flocker like this:
protocol Flocker { 
    func flockTogetherWith(f:Flier) 
}
That’s not the same thing! That requires that a Flocker adopter
specify the parameter for flockTogetherWith as Flier. We would
then have had to write Bird like this:
struct Bird : Flocker, Flier { 
    func fly() {} 
    func flockTogetherWith(f:Flier) {} 
}
The constrained associated type, on the other hand, requires that a
Flocker adopter specify the parameter for flockTogetherWith as
some Flier adopter (such as Bird).

--- Page 377 ---
For a generic function or a generic object type, the type constraint
appears in the angle brackets. The global function func dogMakerAn
dNamer<WhatType:Dog>, declared earlier in this chapter, is an
example; Dog is a class, so the constraint says that WhatType must be
Dog or a Dog subclass. Here’s another example, using a protocol as a
constraint:
func flockTwoTogether<T:Flier>(_ f1:T, _ f2:T) {}
In that example, Flier is a protocol, so the constraint says that T must
be a Flier adopter. If Bird and Insect both adopt Flier, this flockTwoT
ogether function can be called with two Bird arguments or with two
Insect arguments — but not with a Bird and an Insect, because T is
just one placeholder, signifying one Flier adopter type. And you can’t
call flockTwoTogether with two String parameters, because a String
is not a Flier.
A type constraint on a placeholder is often used to reassure the
compiler that some message can be sent to an instance of the
placeholder type. Let’s say we want to implement a function myMin
that returns the smallest from a list of the same type. Here’s a
promising implementation as a generic function, but there’s one
problem — it doesn’t compile:
func myMin<T>(_ things:T...) -> T { 
    var minimum = things.first! 
    for item in things.dropFirst() { 
        if item < minimum { // compile error 
            minimum = item 
        } 
    } 

--- Page 378 ---
    return minimum 
}
The problem is the comparison item < minimum. How does the
compiler know that the type T, the type of item and minimum, will be
resolved to a type that can in fact be compared using the less-than
operator in this way? It doesn’t, and that’s exactly why it rejects that
code. The solution is to promise the compiler that the resolved type of
T will in fact work with the less-than operator. The way to do that, it
turns out, is to constrain T to Swift’s built-in Comparable protocol:
func myMin<T:Comparable>(_ things:T...) -> T {
Now myMin compiles, because it cannot be called except by resolving
T to an object type that adopts Comparable and hence can be
compared with the less-than operator. Naturally, built-in object types
that you think should be comparable, such as Int, Double, String, and
Character, do in fact adopt the Comparable protocol! If you look in
the Swift headers, you’ll find that the built-in min global function is
declared in just this way, and for just this reason.
WARNING
A generic protocol type can be used only as a type constraint. If you try to use it
in any other way, you’ll get a compile error. This restriction can be quite
frustrating. The standard way of circumventing it is called type erasure; for an
excellent discussion, see http://robnapier.net/erasure.
Explicit Specialization

--- Page 379 ---
In the generic examples so far, the placeholder’s type has been
resolved mostly through inference. But there’s another way to
perform resolution: we can resolve the type manually. This is called
explicit specialization. In some situations, explicit specialization is
mandatory — namely, if the placeholder type cannot be resolved
through inference. There are two forms of explicit specialization:
Generic protocol with associated type
The adopter of a protocol can resolve an associated type manually
through a type alias defining the associated type as some explicit
type:
protocol Flier { 
    associatedtype Other 
} 
struct Bird : Flier { 
    typealias Other = String 
}
Generic object type
The user of a generic object type can resolve a placeholder type
manually using the same angle bracket syntax used to declare the
generic in the first place, with the type name in the angle
brackets:
class Dog<T> { 
    var name : T? 
} 
let d = Dog<String>()
You cannot explicitly specialize a generic function. One solution is to
make your generic function take a type parameter resolving the

--- Page 380 ---
generic. That’s what I did in my earlier dogMakerAndNamer example:
func dogMakerAndNamer<WhatType:Dog>(_:WhatType.Type) -> WhatType { 
    let d = WhatType.init(name:"Fido") 
    return d 
}
The parameter to dogMakerAndNamer is never used within the
function body, which is why it has no name (just an underscore). It
does, however, serve to resolve the generic!
Another approach is not to use a generic function in the first place.
Instead, declare a generic object type wrapping a nongeneric function
that uses the generic type’s placeholder. The generic type can be
explicitly specialized, resolving the placeholder in the function:
protocol Flier { 
    init() 
} 
struct Bird : Flier { 
    init() {} 
} 
struct FlierMaker<T:Flier> { 
    static func makeFlier() -> T { 
        return T() 
    } 
} 
let f = FlierMaker<Bird>.makeFlier() // returns a Bird
When a class is generic, you can subclass it, provided you resolve the
generic. You can do this either through a matching generic subclass
or by resolving the superclass generic explicitly. Here’s a generic
Dog:

--- Page 381 ---
class Dog<T> { 
    func speak(_ what:T) {} 
}
You can subclass it as a generic whose placeholder matches that of
the superclass:
class NoisyDog<T> : Dog<T> {}
That’s legal because the resolution of the NoisyDog placeholder T
will resolve the Dog placeholder T. The alternative is to subclass an
explicitly specialized Dog:
class NoisyDog : Dog<String> {}
In that case, a method override in the subclass can use the specialized
type where the superclass uses the generic:
class NoisyDog : Dog<String> { 
   override func speak(_ what:String) {} 
}
Generic Invariance
In general, a generic type specialized to a subtype is not polymorphic
with respect to the same generic type specialized to a supertype.
Suppose we have a simple generic Wrapper struct along with a Cat
class and its CalicoCat subclass:
struct Wrapper<T> { 
} 
class Cat { 
} 

--- Page 382 ---
class CalicoCat : Cat { 
}
Then you can’t assign a Wrapper specialized to CalicoCat where a
Wrapper specialized to Cat is expected:
let w : Wrapper<Cat> = Wrapper<CalicoCat>() // compile error
It appears that polymorphism is failing here — but it isn’t. The two
generic types, Wrapper<Cat> and Wrapper<CalicoCat>, are not
superclass and subclass. Rather, if this assignment were possible, we
would say that the types are covariant, meaning that the polymorphic
relationship between the specializations of the placeholders is applied
to the generic types themselves. Certain Swift built-in generic types
are covariant; Optional is a clear example! But, frustratingly,
covariance is not a general language feature; there’s no way for you
to specify that your generic types should be covariant.
One workaround is to have your generic placeholder constrained to a
protocol, and have your types adopt that protocol:
protocol Meower { 
    func meow() 
} 
struct Wrapper<T:Meower> { 
    let meower : T 
} 
class Cat : Meower { 
    func meow() { print("meow") } 
} 
class CalicoCat : Cat { 
}

--- Page 383 ---
Now it is legal to say:
let w : Wrapper<Cat> = Wrapper(meower:CalicoCat())
Associated Type Chains
When a generic placeholder is constrained to a generic protocol with
an associated type, you can refer to the associated type using dot-
notation: the placeholder name, a dot, and the associated type name.
Here’s an example. Imagine that in a game program, soldiers and
archers are enemies of one another. I’ll express this by subsuming a
Soldier struct and an Archer struct under a Fighter protocol that has
an Enemy associated type, which is itself constrained to be a Fighter:
protocol Fighter { 
    associatedtype Enemy : Fighter 
}
I’ll resolve that associated type manually for both the Soldier and the
Archer structs:
struct Soldier : Fighter { 
    typealias Enemy = Archer 
} 
struct Archer : Fighter { 
    typealias Enemy = Soldier 
}
Now I’ll create a generic struct to express the opposing camps of
these fighters:

--- Page 384 ---
struct Camp<T:Fighter> { 
}
Now suppose that a camp may contain a spy from the opposing camp.
What is the type of that spy? Well, if this is a Soldier camp, it’s an
Archer; and if it’s an Archer camp, it’s a Soldier. More generally,
since T is a Fighter, it’s the type of the Enemy of this adopter of
Fighter. I can express that as T.Enemy:
struct Camp<T:Fighter> { 
    var spy : T.Enemy? 
}
The result is that if, for a particular Camp, T is resolved to Soldier, T.
Enemy means Archer — and vice versa. We have created a correct
and inviolable rule for the type that a Camp’s spy must be. This
won’t compile:
var c = Camp<Soldier>() 
c.spy = Soldier() // compile error
We’ve tried to assign an object of the wrong type to this Camp’s spy
property. But this does compile:
var c = Camp<Soldier>() 
c.spy = Archer()
A generic protocol might have an associated type which is
constrained to a generic protocol that also has an associated type.
Therefore, longer chains of associated type names are possible. Let’s
give each type of Fighter a characteristic weapon: a soldier has a

--- Page 385 ---
sword, while an archer has a bow. I’ll make a Sword struct and a Bow
struct, and I’ll unite them under a Wieldable protocol:
protocol Wieldable { 
} 
struct Sword : Wieldable { 
} 
struct Bow : Wieldable { 
}
I’ll add a Weapon associated type to Fighter, which is constrained to
be a Wieldable, and once again I’ll resolve it manually for each type
of Fighter:
protocol Fighter { 
    associatedtype Enemy : Fighter 
    associatedtype Weapon : Wieldable 
} 
struct Soldier : Fighter { 
    typealias Weapon = Sword 
    typealias Enemy = Archer 
} 
struct Archer : Fighter { 
    typealias Weapon = Bow 
    typealias Enemy = Soldier 
}
Now let’s say that every Fighter has the ability to steal his enemy’s
weapon. I’ll give the Fighter generic protocol a steal(weapon:fro
m:) method. How can the Fighter generic protocol express the
parameter types in a way that causes its adopter to declare this
method with the proper types?

--- Page 386 ---
The from: parameter type is this Fighter’s Enemy. We already know
how to express that: it’s the placeholder plus dot-notation with the
associated type name. Here, the placeholder is the adopter of this
protocol — namely, Self. So the from: parameter type is Self.Enem
y. And what about the weapon: parameter type? That’s the Weapon
of that Enemy! So the weapon: parameter type is Self.Enemy.Weapo
n:
protocol Fighter { 
    associatedtype Enemy : Fighter 
    associatedtype Weapon : Wieldable 
    func steal(weapon:Self.Enemy.Weapon, from:Self.Enemy) 
}
(We could omit Self from that code, and it would compile and would
mean the same thing. But Self would still be the implicit start of the
chain, and I think explicit Self makes the meaning of the code
clearer.)
The result is that the following declarations for Soldier and Archer
correctly adopt the Fighter protocol, and the compiler approves:
struct Soldier : Fighter { 
    typealias Weapon = Sword 
    typealias Enemy = Archer 
    func steal(weapon:Bow, from:Archer) { 
    } 
} 
struct Archer : Fighter { 
    typealias Weapon = Bow 
    typealias Enemy = Soldier 
    func steal(weapon:Sword, from:Soldier) { 
    } 
}

--- Page 387 ---
Where Clauses
The most flexible way to express a type constraint is to add a where
clause. Before I tell you what a where clause looks like, I’ll tell you
where it goes:
For a generic function, a where clause may appear after the
signature declaration (after the parameter list, following the arrow
operator and return type if included).
For a generic type, a where clause may appear after the type
declaration, before the curly braces.
For a generic protocol, a where clause may appear after the
protocol declaration, before the curly braces.
For an associated type in a generic protocol, a where clause may
appear at the end of the associated type declaration.
Now let’s talk about the syntax of a where clause. It starts with the
keyword where. Then what? One possibility is a comma-separated
list of additional constraints on an already declared placeholder. You
already know that we can constrain a placeholder at the point of
declaration, using a colon and a type (which might be a protocol
composition):
func flyAndWalk<T: Flier> (_ f:T) {} 
func flyAndWalk2<T: Flier & Walker> (_ f:T) {} 
func flyAndWalk3<T: Flier & Dog> (_ f:T) {}
Using a where clause, we can move those constraints out of the angle
brackets. No new functionality is gained, but the resulting notation is
arguably neater:

--- Page 388 ---
func flyAndWalk<T> (_ f:T) where T: Flier {} 
func flyAndWalk2<T> (_ f:T) where T: Flier & Walker {} 
func flyAndWalk2a<T> (_ f:T) where T: Flier, T: Walker {} 
func flyAndWalk3<T> (_ f:T) where T: Flier & Dog {} 
func flyAndWalk3a<T> (_ f:T) where T: Flier, T: Dog {}
When a constraint on a placeholder is a generic protocol with an
associated type, you can use an associated type chain to impose
additional constraints on the associated type. This pseudocode shows
what I mean (I’ve omitted the content of the where clause, to focus
on what the where clause will be constraining):
protocol Flier { 
    associatedtype Other 
} 
func flockTogether<T> (_ f:T) where T:Flier, T.Other /* ... */ {}
In that pseudocode, the placeholder T is constrained to be a Flier —
and Flier is itself a generic protocol, with an associated type Other.
Therefore, whatever type resolves T will resolve Other. We can
proceed to constrain the types eligible to resolve T.Other — and this,
in turn, will further constrain the types eligible to resolve T.
Let’s fill in the blank in our pseudocode. What sort of restriction are
we allowed to impose here? One possibility is a colon expression, as
for any type constraint:
protocol Flier { 
    associatedtype Other 
} 
struct Bird : Flier { 
    typealias Other = String 
} 

--- Page 389 ---
struct Insect : Flier { 
    typealias Other = Bird 
} 
func flockTogether<T> (_ f:T) where T:Flier, T.Other:Equatable {}
Both Bird and Insect adopt Flier. The flockTogether function can
be called with a Bird argument, because a Bird’s Other associated
type is resolved to String, which adopts the built-in Equatable
protocol. But flockTogether can’t be called with an Insect
argument, because an Insect’s Other associated type is resolved to
Bird, which doesn’t adopt the Equatable protocol:
flockTogether(Bird()) // okay 
flockTogether(Insect()) // compile error
The other possibility is the equality operator == followed by a type or
an associated type chain, and the constrained type must then match it
exactly:
protocol Flier { 
    associatedtype Other 
} 
struct Bird : Flier { 
    typealias Other = String 
} 
struct Insect : Flier { 
    typealias Other = Int 
} 
func flockTwoTogether<T,U> (_ f1:T, _ f2:U) 
    where T:Flier, U:Flier, T.Other == U.Other {}
The flockTwoTogether function can be called with a Bird and a
Bird, and it can be called with an Insect and an Insect, but it can’t be

--- Page 390 ---
called with an Insect and a Bird, because they don’t resolve the Other
associated type to the same type.
The Swift header makes extensive use of where clauses with an ==
operator, especially as a way of restricting a sequence type. Take the
String append(contentsOf:) method, declared like this:
mutating func append<S>(contentsOf newElements: S) 
    where S:Sequence, S.Element == Character
The Sequence protocol has an Element associated type, representing
the type of the sequence’s elements. This where clause means that a
sequence of characters — but not a sequence of something else, such
as Int — can be concatenated to a String:
var s = "hello" 
s.append(contentsOf: Array(" world")) // "hello world" 
s.append(contentsOf: ["!" as Character, "?" as Character])
The Array append(contentsOf:) method is declared a little
differently:
mutating func append<S>(contentsOf newElements: S) 
    where S:Sequence, S.Element == Self.Element
An array is a sequence; its element type is its Element associated
type. The where clause means that you can append to an Array the
elements of any sort of Sequence, but only if they are the same kind
of element as the elements of this array. If the array consists of String
elements, you can add more String elements to it, but you can’t add
Int elements.

--- Page 391 ---
Actually, a sequence’s Element associated type is just a kind of
shorthand. In reality, a sequence has an Iterator associated type,
which is constrained to be an adopter of the generic IteratorProtocol,
which in turn has an associated type Element. So a sequence’s
element type is its Iterator.Element. But a generic protocol or its
associated type can have a where clause, and this can be used to
reduce the length of associated type chains:
protocol Sequence { 
    associatedtype Iterator : IteratorProtocol 
    associatedtype Element where Self.Element == Self.Iterator.Element 
    // ... 
}
As a result, wherever the Swift header would have to say Iterator.
Element, it can say simply Element instead.
Extensions
An extension is a way of injecting your own code into an object type
that has already been declared elsewhere; you are extending an
existing object type. You can extend your own object types; you can
also extend one of Swift’s object types or one of Cocoa’s object
types, in which case you are adding functionality to a type that
doesn’t belong to you!
Extension declaration can take place only at the top level of a file. To
declare an extension, put the keyword extension followed by the
name of an existing object type, then optionally a colon plus the
names of any protocols you want to add to the list of those adopted

--- Page 392 ---
by this type, and finally curly braces containing the usual things that
go inside an object type declaration — with some restrictions:
An extension can’t declare a stored property (but it can declare a
computed property).
An extension of a class can’t declare a designated initializer or a
deinitializer (but it can declare a convenience initializer).
An extension can’t override an existing member (but it can
overload an existing method), and a method declared in an
extension can’t be overridden.
In my real programming life, I sometimes extend a built-in Swift or
Cocoa type just to inject some missing functionality by expressing it
as a property or method.
For example, Cocoa’s Core Graphics framework has many useful
functions associated with the CGRect struct, and Swift already
extends CGRect to add some helpful properties and methods; but
there’s no shortcut for getting the center point (a CGPoint) of a
CGRect, something that in practice is often needed. I extend CGRect
to give it a center property:
extension CGRect { 
    var center : CGPoint { 
        return CGPoint(x:self.midX, y:self.midY) 
    } 
}
String ranges, as we’ve already seen, are hard to construct, because
they are a range of String.Index rather than Int. We can extend String
with methods that take an Int index and a count, yielding a Swift

--- Page 393 ---
Range; while we’re up, let’s permit a negative index, as most modern
languages do:
extension String { 
    func range(_ start:Int, _ count:Int) -> Range<String.Index> { 
        let i = self.index(start >= 0 ? 
            self.startIndex : 
            self.endIndex, offsetBy: start) 
        let j = self.index(i, offsetBy: count) 
        return i..<j 
    } 
}
An extension can declare a static or class member; this can be a good
way to slot a global function into an appropriate namespace. In one of
my apps, I find myself frequently using a certain color (a UIColor).
Instead of creating that color repeatedly, it makes sense to
encapsulate the instructions for generating it in a global function. But
instead of making that function completely global, I make it —
appropriately enough — a read-only static property of UIColor:
extension UIColor { 
    static var myGolden : UIColor { 
        return self.init( 
            red:1.000, green:0.894, blue:0.541, alpha:0.900 
        ) 
    } 
}
Now I can use that color throughout my code as UIColor.myGolden,
parallel to built-in class properties such as UIColor.red.

--- Page 394 ---
Extensions on one’s own object types can help to organize code. A
frequently used convention is to add an extension for each protocol
the object type needs to adopt, like this:
class ViewController: UIViewController { 
    // ... UIViewController method overrides go here ... 
} 
extension ViewController : UIPopoverPresentationControllerDelegate { 
    // ... UIPopoverPresentationControllerDelegate methods go here ... 
} 
extension ViewController : UIToolbarDelegate { 
    // ... UIToolbarDelegate methods go here ... 
}
An extension on your own object type can also be a way to spread
your definition of that object type over multiple files, if you feel that
several shorter files are better than one long file.
When you extend a Swift struct, a curious thing happens with
initializers: it becomes possible to declare an initializer and keep the
implicit initializers:
struct Digit { 
    var number : Int 
} 
extension Digit { 
    init() { 
        self.init(number:42) 
    } 
}
In that code, the explicit declaration of an initializer through an
extension did not cause us to lose the implicit memberwise initializer,
as would have happened if we had declared the same initializer inside

--- Page 395 ---
the original struct declaration. Now we can instantiate a Digit by
calling the explicitly declared initializer — Digit() — or by calling
the implicit memberwise initializer — Digit(number:7).
CLASS EXTENSIONS AND OVERRIDES
The rules about class extensions and overrides are more complicated than I’ve
stated. A native Swift method in an extension can neither override nor be
overridden, but then Objective-C comes along with its own rules and messes
everything up. Let’s say we have a class Dog and its subclass NoisyDog:
If we have an extension on Dog that declares a method, NoisyDog can
override it if the Dog extension method is exposed to Objective-C.
If we have a method in Dog, an extension on NoisyDog can override it if
Dog’s method is exposed to Objective-C and marked dynamic.
Things are made even messier by the existence of modules; if there’s a class
with a method in a module, an extension on that class in another module can
declare the same method, not overriding but effectively replacing it. No doubt
Apple will eventually straighten all this out.
Extending Protocols
When you extend a protocol, you can add methods and properties to
the protocol, just as for any object type. Unlike a protocol
declaration, these methods and properties are not mere requirements,
to be fulfilled by the adopter of the protocol; they are actual methods
and properties, to be inherited by the adopter of the protocol:
protocol Flier { 
} 
extension Flier { 
    func fly() { 
        print("flap flap flap") 

--- Page 396 ---
    } 
} 
struct Bird : Flier { 
}
Observe that Bird can now adopt Flier without implementing the fly
method. That’s because the Flier protocol extension supplies the fly
method! Bird inherits an implementation of fly:
let b = Bird() 
b.fly() // flap flap flap
Of course, an adopter can still provide its own implementation of a
method inherited from a protocol extension:
protocol Flier { 
} 
extension Flier { 
    func fly() { 
        print("flap flap flap") 
    } 
} 
struct Insect : Flier { 
    func fly() { 
        print("whirr") 
    } 
} 
let i = Insect() 
i.fly() // whirr
But be warned: this kind of inheritance is not polymorphic. The
adopter’s implementation is not an override; it is merely another
implementation. The internal identity rule does not apply; it matters
how a reference is typed:

--- Page 397 ---
let f : Flier = Insect() 
f.fly() // flap flap flap (!!)
Even though f is internally an Insect (as we can discover with the is
operator), the fly message is being sent to an object reference typed
as Flier, so it is Flier’s implementation of the fly method that is
called, not Insect’s implementation.
To get something that looks like polymorphic inheritance, we must
also declare fly as a requirement in the original protocol:
protocol Flier { 
    func fly() // * 
} 
extension Flier { 
    func fly() { 
        print("flap flap flap") 
    } 
} 
struct Insect : Flier { 
    func fly() { 
        print("whirr") 
    } 
}
Now an Insect maintains its internal integrity:
let f : Flier = Insect() 
f.fly() // whirr
Extending Generics
When you extend a generic type, the placeholder type names are
visible to your extension declaration. That’s good, because you might

--- Page 398 ---
need to use them; but it can make your code a little mystifying,
because you seem to be using an undefined type name out of the blue.
It might be a good idea to add a comment, to remind yourself what
you’re up to:
class Dog<T> { 
    var name : T? 
} 
extension Dog { 
    func sayYourName() -> T? { // T? is the type of self.name 
        return self.name 
    } 
}
A generic type extension declaration can include a where clause.
Similar to a generic constraint, this limits which resolvers of the
generic can call the code injected by this extension, and assures the
compiler that your code is legal for those resolvers.
For instance, recall this example from earlier in this chapter:
func myMin<T:Comparable>(_ things:T...) -> T { 
    var minimum = things.first! 
    for item in things.dropFirst() { 
        if item < minimum { 
            minimum = item 
        } 
    } 
    return minimum 
}
That’s a global function. I’d prefer to inject it into Array as a method.
I can do that with an extension. Array is a generic struct whose
placeholder type is called Element. To make this work, I need

--- Page 399 ---
somehow to bring along the Comparable type constraint that makes
this code legal; without it, as you remember, my use of the < operator
won’t compile. I can do that with a where clause on the extension:
extension Array where Element:Comparable { 
    func myMin() -> Element? { 
        var minimum = self.first 
        for item in self.dropFirst() { 
            if item < minimum! { 
                minimum = item 
            } 
        } 
        return minimum 
    } 
}
The where clause is a constraint guaranteeing that this array’s
elements adopt Comparable, so the compiler permits the use of the <
operator — and it doesn’t permit the myMin method to be called on an
array whose elements don’t adopt Comparable. The Swift standard
library makes heavy use of that sort of thing, and in fact Sequence
has a min method declared like myMin.
New in Swift 5.3, the where clause can be applied to the method
instead of the extension:
extension Array { 
    func myMin() -> Element? where Element:Comparable { 
        // ... 
    } 
}

--- Page 400 ---
The advantages are primarily organizational. In Swift 5.2 and before,
the only way for a generic type to restrict a method to one or more
constraints on the placeholder type was to put the method into an
extension with all of the constraints in the extension declaration:
struct MyStruct<T> { 
    // ... 
} 
extension MyStruct where T:Protocol1, T:Protocol2 { 
    func f() { 
        // ... 
    } 
}
In Swift 5.3, we can distribute the statement of the constraints in
whatever way seems clearest. We could write this:
extension MyStruct where T:Protocol1 { 
    func f() where T:Protocol2 { 
        // ... 
    } 
}
We could even forego the extension altogether:
struct MyStruct<T> { 
    // ... 
    func f() where T:Protocol1, T:Protocol2 { 
        // ... 
    } 
}
An extension with a where clause can also be used to express
conditional conformance to a protocol. The idea is that a generic type

--- Page 401 ---
should adopt a certain protocol only if something is true of its
placeholder type — and the extension then contains whatever is
needed to satisfy the protocol requirements when that’s the case.
In the standard library, conditional conformance fills what used to be
a serious hole in the Swift language. For example, an Array can
consist of Equatable elements, and in that case it is possible to
compare two arrays for equality:
let arr1 = [1,2,3] 
let arr2 = [1,2,3] 
if arr1 == arr2 { // ...
It’s clear what array equality should consist of: the two arrays should
consist of the same elements in the same order. The elements must be
Equatable so as to guarantee the meaningfulness of the notion “same
elements.”
Ironically, however, there was, before Swift 4.1, no way to compare
two arrays of arrays:
let arr1 = [[1], [2], [3]] 
let arr2 = [[1], [2], [3]] 
let arr1 == arr2 { // compile error before Swift 4.1
That’s because there was no coherent way to make Array itself
Equatable — because there was no way to assert that Array should be
Equatable only just in case its elements are Equatable. That’s
conditional conformance! Now that conditional conformance exists,
the standard library says:

--- Page 402 ---
extension Array : Equatable where Element : Equatable { 
    // ... 
}
And so comparing arrays of arrays becomes legal:
let arr1 = [[1], [2], [3]] 
let arr2 = [[1], [2], [3]] 
let arr1 == arr2 { // fine
Umbrella Types
Swift provides a few built-in types as general umbrella types, capable
of embracing multiple real types under a single heading.
Any
The Any type is the universal Swift umbrella type. Where an Any
object is expected, absolutely any object or function can be passed,
without casting:
func anyExpecter(_ a:Any) {} 
anyExpecter("howdy")     // a struct instance 
anyExpecter(String.self) // a struct type 
anyExpecter(Dog())       // a class instance 
anyExpecter(Dog.self)    // a class type 
anyExpecter(anyExpecter) // a function
Going the other way, if you want to type an Any object as a more
specific type, you will generally have to cast down. Such a cast is
legal for any specific object type or function type. A forced cast isn’t
safe, but you can easily make it safe, because you can also test an

--- Page 403 ---
Any object against any specific object type or function type. Here, an
ything is typed as Any:
if anything is String { 
    let s = anything as! String 
    // ... 
}
(In Chapter 5 I’ll introduce a more elegant syntax for casting down
safely.)
The Any umbrella type is the general medium of interchange between
Swift and the Cocoa Objective-C APIs. When an Objective-C object
type is nonspecific (id), it will appear to Swift as Any. Commonly
encountered examples are UserDefaults and key–value coding
(Chapter 10); these allow you to pass an object of indeterminate class
along with a string key name, and they allow you to retrieve an object
of indeterminate class by a string key name. That object is typed, in
Swift, as Any (or as an Optional wrapping Any, so that it can be nil):
let ud = UserDefaults.standard 
ud.set(Date(), forKey:"now") // Date to Any
The first parameter of UserDefaults set(_:forKey:) is typed as
Any.
When a Swift object is assigned or passed to an Any that acts as a
conduit to Objective-C, it crosses the bridge to Objective-C. If the
object’s type is not an Objective-C type (a class derived from
NSObject), it will be transformed in order to cross the bridge. If this
type is automatically bridged to an Objective-C class type, it becomes

--- Page 404 ---
that type; other types are boxed up in a way that allows them to
survive the journey into Objective-C’s world, even though Objective-
C can’t deal with them directly. (For full details, see Appendix A.)
To illustrate, suppose we have an Objective-C class Thing with a
method take1id:, declared like this:
- (void) take1id: (id) anid;
That appears to Swift as:
func take1id(_ anid: Any)
When we pass an object to take1Id(_:) as its parameter, it crosses
the bridge:
let t = Thing() 
t.take1id("howdy")  // String to NSString 
t.take1id(1)        // Int to NSNumber 
t.take1id(CGRect()) // CGRect to NSValue 
t.take1id(Date())   // Date to NSDate 
t.take1id(Bird())   // Bird (struct) to boxed type
Coming back the other way, if Objective-C hands you an Any object,
you will need to cast it down to its underlying type in order to do
anything useful with it:
let ud = UserDefaults.standard 
let d = ud.object(forKey:"now") 
if d is Date { 
    let d = d as! Date 
    // ... 
}

--- Page 405 ---
The result returned from UserDefaults object(forKey:) is typed as
Any — actually, as an Optional wrapping an Any, because
UserDefaults might need to return nil to indicate that no object
exists for that key. But you know that it’s supposed to be a date, so
you cast it down to Date.
AnyObject
AnyObject is an empty protocol with the special feature that all class
types conform to it automatically. Although Objective-C APIs present
Objective-C id as Any in Swift, Swift AnyObject is Objective-C id.
AnyObject is useful primarily when you want to take advantage of
the behavior of Objective-C id, as I’ll demonstrate in a moment.
A class type can be assigned directly where an AnyObject is
expected; to retrieve it as its original type, you’ll need to cast down:
class Dog { 
} 
let d = Dog() 
let anyo : AnyObject = d 
let d2 = anyo as! Dog
Assigning a nonclass type to an AnyObject requires casting (with as).
The bridge to Objective-C is then crossed immediately, as I described
for Any in the preceding section:
let s = "howdy" as AnyObject  // String to NSString to AnyObject 
let i = 1 as AnyObject        // Int to NSNumber to AnyObject 
let r = CGRect() as AnyObject // CGRect to NSValue to AnyObject 
let d = Date() as AnyObject   // Date to NSDate to AnyObject 
let b = Bird() as AnyObject   // Bird (struct) to boxed type to AnyObjec
t

--- Page 406 ---
SUPPRESSING TYPE CHECKING
Because AnyObject is Objective-C id, it can be used, like Objective-
C id, to suspend the compiler’s judgment as to whether a certain
message can be sent to an object. Thus, you can send a message to an
AnyObject without bothering to cast down to its real type.
You can’t send just any old message to an AnyObject; this is an
Objective-C feature, so the message must correspond to a class
member that meets one of the following criteria:
It is a member of an Objective-C class.
It is a member of your own Swift subclass of an Objective-C class.
It is a member of your own Swift extension of an Objective-C
class.
It is a member of a Swift class or protocol marked @objc.
This feature is fundamentally parallel to optional protocol members,
which I discussed earlier in this chapter. Let’s start with two classes:
class Dog { 
    @objc var noise : String = "woof" 
    @objc func bark() -> String { 
        return "woof" 
    } 
} 
class Cat {}
The Dog property noise and the Dog method bark are marked
@objc, so they are visible as potential messages to be sent to an

--- Page 407 ---
AnyObject. To prove it, I’ll type a Cat as an AnyObject and send it
one of those messages. Let’s start with the noise property:
let c : AnyObject = Cat() 
let s = c.noise
That code, amazingly, compiles. Moreover, it doesn’t crash when the
code runs! The noise property has been typed as an Optional
wrapping its original type. Here, that’s an Optional wrapping a String.
If the object typed as AnyObject doesn’t implement noise, the result
is nil and no harm done.
Now let’s try it with a method call:
let c : AnyObject = Cat() 
let s = c.bark?()
Again, that code compiles and is safe. If the Object typed as
AnyObject doesn’t implement bark, no bark() call is performed; the
method result type has been wrapped in an Optional, so s is typed as
String? and has been set to nil. If the AnyObject turns out to have a
bark method (because it’s a Dog), the result is an Optional wrapping
the returned String. If you call bark!() on the AnyObject instead, the
result will be a String, but you’ll crash if the AnyObject doesn’t
implement bark. Unlike an optional protocol member, you can even
send the message with no unwrapping. This is legal:
let c : AnyObject = Cat() 
let s = c.bark()

--- Page 408 ---
That’s just like force-unwrapping the call: the result is a String, but
it’s possible to crash.
TIP
Don’t make a habit of sending messages to an AnyObject; because it involves
dynamic lookup, it’s expensive at build time and expensive at runtime.
OBJECT IDENTITY
Sometimes, what you want to know is not what type an object is, but
whether an object itself is the particular object you think it is. This
problem can’t arise with a value type, but it can arise with a reference
type — in particular, with class instances.
Swift’s solution is the identity operator (===). Its operands are typed
as AnyObject?, meaning an object whose type is a class or an
Optional whose wrapped type is a class; it compares one object
reference with another. This is not a comparison of values, like the
equality operator (==); you’re asking whether two object references
refer to one and the same object. There is also a negative version (!=
=) of the identity operator.
A typical use case is that a class instance arrives from Cocoa, and you
need to know whether it is in fact a particular object to which you
already have a reference. For example, a Notification has an object
property that helps identify the notification (usually, it is the original
sender of the notification). We can use === to test whether this objec
t is a certain object to which we already have a reference. However, o

--- Page 409 ---
bject is typed as Any (actually, as an Optional wrapping Any), so
we must cast to AnyObject in order to take advantage of the identity
operator:
@objc func changed(_ n:Notification) { 
    let player = MPMusicPlayerController.applicationMusicPlayer 
    if n.object as AnyObject === player { 
        // ... 
    } 
}
AnyClass
AnyClass is the type of AnyObject. It corresponds to the Objective-C
Class type. It arises typically in declarations where a Cocoa API
wants to say that a class is expected. The UIView layerClass class
property is declared, in its Swift translation, like this:
class var layerClass : AnyClass {get}
That means that if you override this class property, you’ll implement
your getter to return a class (which will presumably be a CALayer
subclass):
override class var layerClass : AnyClass { CATiledLayer.self }
A reference to an AnyClass object behaves much like a reference to
an AnyObject object. You can send it any Objective-C message that
Swift knows about — any Objective-C class message. To
demonstrate, once again I’ll start with two classes:
class Dog { 
    @objc static var whatADogSays : String = "woof" 

--- Page 410 ---
} 
class Cat {}
Objective-C can see whatADogSays, and it sees it as a class property.
Therefore you can send whatADogSays to an AnyClass reference:
let c : AnyClass = Cat.self 
let s = c.whatADogSays
Collection Types
Swift, in common with most modern computer languages, has built-in
collection types Array and Dictionary, along with a third type, Set.
Array and Dictionary are sufficiently important that the language
accommodates them with some special syntax.
Array
An array (Array, a struct) is an ordered collection of object instances
(the elements of the array) accessible by index number, where an
index number is an Int numbered from 0. If an array contains four
elements, the first has index 0 and the last has index 3. A Swift array
cannot be sparse: if there is an element with index 3, there is also an
element with index 2 and so on.
The salient feature of Swift arrays is their strict typing. Unlike some
other computer languages, a Swift array’s elements must be uniform
— that is, the array must consist solely of elements of the same
definite type. Even an empty array must have a definite element type,
despite lacking elements at this moment. An array is itself typed in
accordance with its element type. Two arrays whose elements are of

--- Page 411 ---
different types are considered, themselves, to be of two different
types: an array of Int elements has a different type from an array of
String elements.
If all this reminds you of Optionals, it should. Like Optional, Array is
a generic. It is declared as Array<Element>, where the placeholder
Element is the type of a particular array’s elements. And, like
Optional types, Array types are covariant, meaning that they behave
polymorphically in accordance with their element types: if NoisyDog
is a subclass of Dog, then an array of NoisyDog can be used where an
array of Dog is expected.
To state an Array type, then, you need to state its element type. You
could explicitly resolve the generic placeholder; an array of Int
elements would be an Array<Int>. However, Swift offers syntactic
sugar using square brackets around the name of the element type, like
this: [Int]. That’s the syntax you’ll use most of the time.
A literal array is represented as square brackets containing a list of its
elements separated by a comma (and optional spaces): [1,2,3]. The
literal for an empty array is empty square brackets: [].
Array’s default initializer init(), called by appending empty
parentheses to the array’s type, yields an empty array of that type.
You can create an empty array of Int like this:
var arr = [Int]()
Alternatively, if a reference’s type is known in advance, the empty
array [] can be inferred to that type. So you can also create an empty

--- Page 412 ---
array of Int like this:
var arr : [Int] = []
If you’re starting with a literal array containing elements, you won’t
usually need to declare the array’s type, because Swift will infer it by
looking at the elements. Swift will infer that [1,2,3] is an array of
Int. If the array element types consist of a class and its subclasses,
like Dog and NoisyDog, Swift will infer the common superclass as
the array’s type. However, in some cases you will need to declare an
array reference’s type explicitly even while assigning a literal to that
array:
let arr : [Any] = [1, "howdy"]          // mixed bag 
let arr2 : [Flier] = [Insect(), Bird()] // protocol adopters
TIP
If an array variable is declared and initialized to a literal with many elements,
it’s a good idea to declare the variable’s type explicitly. This saves the compiler
from having to examine the entire array to decide its type, and makes
compilation faster.
Array also has an initializer whose parameter is a sequence. This
means that if a type is a sequence, you can split an instance of it into
the elements of an array. For example:
Array(1...3) generates the array of Int [1,2,3].
Array("hey") generates the array of Character ["h","e","y"].

--- Page 413 ---
Array(d), where d is a Dictionary, generates an array of tuples of
the key–value pairs of d.
Another Array initializer, init(repeating:count:), lets you
populate an array with the same value. In this example, I create an
array of 100 Optional strings initialized to nil:
let strings : [String?] = Array(repeating:nil, count:100)
That’s the closest you can get in Swift to a sparse array; we have 100
slots, each of which might or might not contain a string (and to start
with, none of them do).
Beware of using init(repeating:count:) with a reference type! If
Dog is a class, and you say let dogs = Array(repeating:Dog(),
count:3), you don’t have an array of three Dogs; you have an array
consisting of three references to one Dog. I’ll give a workaround
later.
ARRAY CASTING AND TYPE TESTING
When you assign, pass, or cast an array of a certain type to another
array type, you are really operating on the individual elements of the
array:
let arr : [Int?] = [1,2,3]
That code is actually syntactic sugar: assigning an array of Int where
an array of Optionals wrapping Int is expected constitutes a request
that each individual Int in the original array should be wrapped in an
Optional. And that is exactly what happens:

--- Page 414 ---
let arr : [Int?] = [1,2,3] 
print(arr) // [Optional(1), Optional(2), Optional(3)]
Similarly, suppose we have a Dog class and its NoisyDog subclass;
then this code is legal:
let dog1 : Dog = NoisyDog() 
let dog2 : Dog = NoisyDog() 
let arr = [dog1, dog2] 
let arr2 = arr as! [NoisyDog]
In the third line, we have an array of Dog. In the fourth line, we
apparently cast this array down to an array of NoisyDog — which
really means that we cast each individual Dog in the first array to a
NoisyDog. We can crash when we do that, but we won’t if each
element of the first array really is a NoisyDog.
The as? operator will cast an array to an Optional wrapping an array,
which will be nil if the requested cast cannot be performed for each
element individually:
let dog1 : Dog = NoisyDog() 
let dog2 : Dog = NoisyDog() 
let dog3 : Dog = Dog() 
let arr = [dog1, dog2] 
let arr2 = arr as? [NoisyDog] // Optional wrapping an array of NoisyDog 
let arr3 = [dog2, dog3] 
let arr4 = arr3 as? [NoisyDog] // nil
You can test each element of an array with the is operator by testing
the array itself. Given the array of Dog from the previous code, you
can say:

--- Page 415 ---
if arr is [NoisyDog] { // ...
That will be true if each element of the array is in fact a NoisyDog.
ARRAY COMPARISON
Array equality works just as you would expect: two arrays are equal
if they contain the same number of elements and all the elements are
pairwise equal in order. Of course, this presupposes that the notion
“equal” is meaningful for these elements:
let i1 = 1 
let i2 = 2 
let i3 = 3 
let arr : [Int] = [1,2,3] 
if arr == [i1,i2,i3] { // they are equal!
Two arrays don’t have to be of the same type to be compared against
one another for equality, but the test won’t succeed unless they do in
fact contain objects that are equal to one another. Here, I compare a
Dog array against a NoisyDog array; this is legal if equatability is
defined for two Dogs. (Dog might be an NSObject subclass; or you
might make Dog adopt Equatable, as I’ll explain in Chapter 5.) The
two arrays are in fact equal, because the dogs they contain are the
same dogs in the same order:
let nd1 = NoisyDog() 
let d1 = nd1 as Dog 
let nd2 = NoisyDog() 
let d2 = nd2 as Dog 
let arr1 = [d1,d2] // [Dog] 
let arr2 = [nd1,nd2] // [NoisyDog] 
if arr1 == arr2 { // they are equal!

--- Page 416 ---
ARRAYS ARE VALUE TYPES
Because an array is a struct, it is a value type, not a reference type.
This means that every time an array is assigned to a variable or
passed as argument to a function, it is effectively copied. I do not
mean to imply, however, that merely assigning or passing an array is
expensive, or that a lot of actual copying takes place every time. If
the reference to an array is a constant, clearly no copying is
necessary; and even operations that yield a new array derived from
another array, or that mutate an array, may be quite efficient. You just
have to trust that the designers of Swift have thought about these
problems and have implemented arrays efficiently behind the scenes.
Although an array is itself a value type, its elements might not be. If
an array of class instances is assigned to multiple variables, the result
is multiple references to the same instances.
ARRAY SUBSCRIPTING
The Array struct implements subscript methods to allow access to
elements using square brackets after a reference to an array. You can
use an Int inside the square brackets. If an array is referred to by a
variable arr, then arr[1] accesses the second element.
You can also use a Range of Int inside the square brackets. If arr is
an array, then arr[1...2] signifies the second and third elements.
Technically, an expression like arr[1...2] yields something called
an ArraySlice, which stands in relation to Array much as Substring
stands in relation to String (Chapter 3). It’s very similar to an array,
and in general you will probably pretend that an ArraySlice is an

--- Page 417 ---
array. You can subscript an ArraySlice in just the same ways you
would subscript an array. Nevertheless, they are not the same thing.
An ArraySlice is not a new array; it’s just a way of pointing into a
section of the original array. For this reason, its index numbers are
those of the original array:
let arr = ["manny", "moe", "jack"] 
let slice = arr[1...2] // ["moe", "jack"] 
print(slice[1]) // moe
The ArraySlice slice consists of two elements, "moe" and "jack",
of which "moe" is the first element. But these are not merely "moe"
and "jack" taken from the original array, but the "moe" and "jack"
in the original array. For this reason, their index numbers are not 0
and 1, but rather 1 and 2, just as in the original array. If you need to
extract a new array based on this slice, coerce the slice to an Array:
let arr2 = Array(slice) // ["moe", "jack"] 
print(arr2[1]) // jack
If the reference to an array is mutable (var, not let), then it’s
possible to assign to a subscript expression. This alters what’s in that
slot. Of course, what is assigned must accord with the type of the
array’s elements:
var arr = [1,2,3] 
arr[1] = 4 // arr is now [1,4,3]
If the subscript is a range, what is assigned must be a slice. You can
assign a literal array, because it will be coerced for you to an
ArraySlice; but if what you’re starting with is an array reference,

--- Page 418 ---
you’ll have to coerce it to a slice yourself. Such assignment can
change the length of the array being assigned to:
var arr = [1,2,3] 
arr[1..<2] = [7,8] // arr is now [1,7,8,3] 
arr[1..<2] = []    // arr is now [1,8,3] 
arr[1..<1] = [10]  // arr is now [1,10,8,3] (no element was removed!) 
let arr2 = [20,21] 
// arr[1..<1] = arr2 // compile error! You have to say this: 
arr[1..<1] = ArraySlice(arr2) // arr is now [1,20,21,10,8,3]
Subscripting an array with a Range is an opportunity to use partial
range notation. The missing value is taken to be the array’s first or
last index. If arr is [1,2,3], then arr[1...] is [2,3], and arr[...
1] is [1,2]. Similarly, you can assign into a range specified as a
partial range:
var arr = [1,2,3] 
arr[1...] = [4,5] // arr is now [1,4,5]
WARNING
It is a runtime error to access an element by an index number larger than the
largest element number or smaller than the smallest element number. If arr has
three elements, speaking of arr[-1] or arr[3] is not illegal linguistically, but
your program will crash.
NESTED ARRAYS
It is legal for the elements of an array to be arrays:
let arr = [[1,2,3], [4,5,6], [7,8,9]]

--- Page 419 ---
That’s an array of arrays of Int. Its type declaration, therefore, is [[In
t]]. (No law says that the contained arrays have to be the same
length; that’s just something I did for clarity.)
To access an individual Int inside those nested arrays, you can chain
subscripts:
let arr = [[1,2,3], [4,5,6], [7,8,9]] 
let i = arr[1][1] // 5
If the outer array reference is mutable, you can also write into a
nested array:
var arr = [[1,2,3], [4,5,6], [7,8,9]] 
arr[1][1] = 100
You can modify the inner arrays in other ways as well; for example,
you can insert additional elements into them.
Thanks to conditional conformance (discussed earlier in this chapter),
nested arrays can be compared with == as long as the inner array’s
elements are Equatable. If arr and arr2 are both [[Int]], you can
compare them by saying arr == arr2.
BASIC ARRAY PROPERTIES AND METHODS
An array is a Collection, which is itself a Sequence. If those terms
have a familiar ring, they should: the same is true of a String’s
underlying character sequence, which I discussed in Chapter 3. For
this reason, an array and a character sequence bear some striking
similarities to one another.

--- Page 420 ---
As a collection, an array’s count read-only property reports the
number of elements it contains. If an array’s count is 0, its isEmpty
property is true.
An array’s first and last read-only properties return its first and
last elements, but they are wrapped in an Optional because the array
might be empty and so these properties would need to be nil. (This
is one of those rare situations in Swift where you can wind up with an
Optional wrapping an Optional. Consider an array of Optionals
wrapping Ints, and what happens when you get its last property.)
An array’s largest accessible index is one less than its count. You
may find yourself calculating index values with reference to the coun
t; to refer to the last two elements of arr, you might say:
let arr = [1,2,3] 
let slice = arr[arr.count-2...arr.count-1] // [2,3]
Swift doesn’t adopt the modern convention of letting you use
negative indexes as a shorthand for that calculation. On the other
hand, for the common case where you want the last n elements of an
array, you can use the suffix(_:) method:
let arr = [1,2,3] 
let slice = arr.suffix(2) // [2,3]
Therefore, a neat way to obtain, say, the next-to-last element of an
array is to combine suffix with first:
let arr = [1,2,3] 
let nextToLast = arr.suffix(2).first // Optional(2)

--- Page 421 ---
Both suffix(_:) and its companion prefix(_:) yield ArraySlices,
and have the remarkable feature that there is no penalty for going out
of range:
let arr = [1,2,3] 
let slice = arr.suffix(10) // [1,2,3] (and no crash)
Instead of describing the size of the suffix or prefix by its count, you
can express the limit of the suffix or prefix by its index. And partial
range notation may provide yet another useful alternative:
let arr = [1,2,3] 
let slice = arr.suffix(from:1)     // [2,3] 
let slice2 = arr[1...]             // [2,3] 
let slice3 = arr.prefix(upTo:1)    // [1] 
let slice4 = arr.prefix(through:1) // [1,2]
An array’s startIndex property is 0, and its endIndex property is its
count. An array’s indices property is a half-open range whose
endpoints are the array’s startIndex and endIndex — that is, a
range accessing the entire array. Moreover, these values are Ints, so
you can use ordinary arithmetic operations on them:
let arr = [1,2,3] 
let slice = arr[arr.endIndex-2..<arr.endIndex] // [2,3]
But the startIndex, endIndex, and indices of an ArraySlice are
measured against the original array; after the previous code, slice.i
ndices is 1..<3, and slice.startIndex is 1.
The firstIndex(of:) method reports the index of the first
occurrence of an element in an array, but it is wrapped in an Optional

--- Page 422 ---
so that nil can be returned if the element doesn’t appear in the array.
In general, the comparison uses == behind the scenes to identify the
element being sought, and therefore the array elements must adopt
Equatable (otherwise the compiler will stop you):
let arr = [1,2,3] 
let ix = arr.firstIndex(of:2) // Optional wrapping 1
Alternatively, you can call firstIndex(where:), supplying your
own function that takes an element type and returns a Bool, and
you’ll get back the index of the first element for which that Bool is tr
ue. In this example, my Bird struct has a name String property:
let aviary = [Bird(name:"Tweety"), Bird(name:"Flappy"), Bird(name:"Lad
y")] 
let ix = aviary.firstIndex {$0.name.count < 5} // Optional(2)
If what you want is not the index but the object itself, the first(whe
re:) method returns it — wrapped, naturally, in an Optional. These
methods are matched by lastIndex(of:), lastIndex(where:), and
last(where:).
As a sequence, an array’s contains(_:) method reports whether it
contains an element. Again, you can rely on the == operator if the
elements are Equatable, or you can supply your own function that
takes an element type and returns a Bool:
let arr = [1,2,3] 
let ok = arr.contains(2) // true 
let ok2 = arr.contains {$0 > 3} // false

--- Page 423 ---
The starts(with:) method reports whether an array’s starting
elements match the elements of a given sequence of the same type.
Once more, you can rely on the == operator for Equatable elements,
or you can supply a function that takes two values of the element type
and returns a Bool stating whether they match:
let arr = [1,2,3] 
let ok = arr.starts(with:[1,2]) // true 
let ok2 = arr.starts(with:[1,-2]) {abs($0) == abs($1)} // true
The min and max methods return the smallest or largest element in an
array, wrapped in an Optional in case the array is empty. If the array
consists of Comparable elements, you can let the < operator do its
work; alternatively, you can call min(by:) or max(by:), supplying a
function that returns a Bool stating whether the smaller of two given
elements is the first:
let arr = [3,1,-2] 
let min = arr.min() // Optional(-2) 
let min2 = arr.min {abs($0)<abs($1)} // Optional(1)
If the reference to an array is mutable, the append(_:) and append(c
ontentsOf:) instance methods add elements to the end of it. The
difference between them is that append(_:) takes a single value of
the element type, while append(contentsOf:) takes a sequence of
the element type:
var arr = [1,2,3] 
arr.append(4) 
arr.append(contentsOf:[5,6]) 
arr.append(contentsOf:7...8) // arr is now [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8]

--- Page 424 ---
The + operator is overloaded to behave like append(contentsOf:)
(not append(_:)!) when the left-hand operand is an array, except that
it generates a new array, so it works even if the reference to the array
is a constant (let). If the reference to the array is mutable (var), you
can append to it in place with the += operator:
let arr = [1,2,3] 
let arr2 = arr + [4] // arr2 is now [1,2,3,4] 
var arr3 = [1,2,3] 
arr3 += [4] // arr3 is now [1,2,3,4]
If the reference to an array is mutable, the instance method insert(a
t:) inserts a single element at the given index. To insert multiple
elements at once, call the insert(contentsOf:at:) method.
Assignment into a range-subscripted array, which I described earlier,
is even more flexible.
If the reference to an array is mutable, the instance method remove(a
t:) removes the element at that index; the instance method removeLa
st removes the last element. These methods also return the value that
was removed from the array; you can ignore the returned value if you
don’t need it. These methods do not wrap the returned value in an
Optional, and accessing an out-of-range index will crash your
program. On the other hand, popLast does wrap the returned value in
an Optional, and is safe even if the array is empty.
Similar to removeLast and popLast are removeFirst and
popFirst. Alternate forms removeFirst(_:) and removeLast(_:)
allow you to specify how many elements to remove, but return no
value; they, too, can crash if there aren’t as many elements as you

--- Page 425 ---
specify. popFirst, remarkably, operates on a slice, not an array,
presumably for the sake of efficiency: all it has to do is increase the
slice’s startIndex, whereas with an array, the whole array must be
renumbered.
Even if the reference is not mutable, you can use the dropFirst and
dropLast methods to return a slice with the end element removed.
Again, you can supply a parameter stating how many elements to
drop. And again, there is no penalty for dropping too many elements;
you simply end up with an empty slice.
The joined(separator:) instance method starts with an array of
arrays. It extracts their individual elements, and interposes between
each sequence of extracted elements the elements of the separator:.
The result is an intermediate sequence called a JoinSequence, which
might have to be coerced further to an Array if that’s what you were
after:
let arr = [[1,2], [3,4], [5,6]] 
let joined = Array(arr.joined(separator:[10,11])) 
// [1, 2, 10, 11, 3, 4, 10, 11, 5, 6]
Calling joined() with no separator: is a way to flatten an array of
arrays. Again, it returns an intermediate sequence (or collection), so
you might want to coerce to an Array:
let arr = [[1,2], [3,4], [5,6]] 
let arr2 = Array(arr.joined()) 
// [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]

--- Page 426 ---
The split instance method breaks an array into an array of slices at
elements matching the parameter, if you call split(separator:), or
at elements that pass a specified test, if you call split(isSeparato
r:); in the latter, the parameter is a function that takes a value of the
element type and returns a Bool. The separator elements themselves
are eliminated:
let arr = [1,2,3,4,5,6] 
let arr2 = arr.split {$0.isMultiple(of:2)} // split at evens: [[1], [3], 
[5]]
The reversed instance method yields a new array whose elements
are in the opposite order from the original.
The sort and sorted instance methods respectively sort the original
array (if the reference to it is mutable) and yield a new sorted array
based on the original. Once again, you get two choices. If this is an
array of Comparable elements, you can let the < operator dictate the
new order. Alternatively, you can call sort(by:) or sorted(by:);
you supply a function that takes two parameters of the element type
and returns a Bool stating whether the first parameter should be
ordered before the second (just like min and max):
var arr = [4,3,5,2,6,1] 
arr.sort() // [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] 
arr.sort {$0 > $1} // [6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1]
In that last line, I provided an anonymous function. Alternatively, of
course, you can pass as argument the name of a declared function. In
Swift, comparison operators are the names of functions! Therefore, I
can do the same thing like this:

--- Page 427 ---
var arr = [4,3,5,2,6,1] 
arr.sort(by: >) // [6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1]
An interesting problem is subsorting an array. Suppose we have a
Person struct with a firstName and a lastName, and we have an
array of Persons:
var arr = [ 
    Person(firstName: "Manny", lastName: "Pep"), 
    Person(firstName: "Harpo", lastName: "Marx"), 
    Person(firstName: "Jack", lastName: "Pep"), 
    Person(firstName: "Groucho", lastName: "Marx") 
]
We wish to sort this array by last name, but if two Persons have the
same last name, they should be sorted by first name. In other words,
all Marx brothers should precede all Pep boys, and within those
groups, Groucho should precede Harpo, and Jack should precede
Manny.
Cocoa provides an elegant solution, NSSortDescriptor; but Swift has
no native equivalent (though there are proposals to introduce one).
We could write out an elaborate comparison function; but that’s an
invitation to make a mistake, and won’t scale if we’re subsorting on
many properties.
In a simple case like this one, where the comparison operator is the
same for all properties, there’s a trick: use tuples. It turns out that
tuples, by default, are comparable if their element types are
comparable, by a rule that a given element is compared only if all
preceding elements are equal. That’s exactly how we want to sort this

--- Page 428 ---
array! So we can sort the array in accordance with the corresponding
tuple:
arr.sort { 
    ($0.lastName, $0.firstName) < ($1.lastName, $1.firstName) 
}
The swapAt method accepts two Int index numbers and interchanges
those elements of a mutable array:
var arr = [1,2,3] 
arr.swapAt(0,2) // [3,2,1]
The shuffle and shuffled methods sort an array in random order,
while the randomElement method generates a valid index at random
and hands you the element at that index (wrapped in an Optional, in
case the array is empty).
ARRAY ENUMERATION AND TRANSFORMATION
An array is a sequence, and so you can enumerate it, inspecting or
operating with each element in turn. The simplest way is by means of
a for...in loop; I’ll have more to say about this construct in
Chapter 5:
let pepboys = ["Manny", "Moe", "Jack"] 
for pepboy in pepboys { 
    print(pepboy) // prints Manny, then Moe, then Jack 
}
Alternatively, you can use the forEach(_:) instance method. Its
parameter is a function that takes an element and returns no value.

--- Page 429 ---
Think of it as the functional equivalent of the imperative for...in
loop:
let pepboys = ["Manny", "Moe", "Jack"] 
pepboys.forEach {print($0)} // prints Manny, then Moe, then Jack
If you need the index numbers as well as the elements, call the enume
rated instance method and loop on the result; what you get on each
iteration is a tuple with labels offset and element:
let pepboys = ["Manny", "Moe", "Jack"] 
for (ix,pepboy) in pepboys.enumerated() { 
    print("Pep boy \(ix) is \(pepboy)") // Pep boy 0 is Manny, etc. 
} 
// or: 
pepboys.enumerated().forEach { 
    print("Pep boy \($0.offset) is \($0.element)") 
}
The allSatisfy(_:) method tells you whether all elements pass
some test; you supply a function that takes an element and returns a
Bool:
let pepboys = ["Manny", "Moe", "Jack"] 
let ok = pepboys.allSatisfy {$0.hasPrefix("M")} // false 
let ok2 = pepboys.allSatisfy {$0.hasPrefix("M") || $0.hasPrefix("J")} // 
true
Swift also provides some powerful array transformation instance
methods. Like forEach(_:) and allSatisfy(_:), these methods
enumerate the array for you, so that the loop is buried implicitly
inside the method call, making your code tighter and cleaner.

--- Page 430 ---
The filter(_:) instance method yields a new array, each element of
which is an element of the old array, in the same order; but some of
the elements of the old array may be omitted — they were filtered
out. What filters them out is a function that you supply; it accepts a
parameter of the element type and returns a Bool stating whether this
element should go into the new array:
let pepboys = ["Manny", "Moe", "Jack"] 
let pepboys2 = pepboys.filter {$0.hasPrefix("M")} // ["Manny", "Moe"]
If the function is effectively negative, and if the reference to the
collection is mutable, you should call removeAll(where:) rather
whan filter(_:):
var pepboys = ["Manny", "Jack", "Moe"] 
pepboys.removeAll {$0.hasPrefix("M")} // pepboys is now ["Jack"]
That’s better in general than saying pepboys.filter {!$0.hasPref
ix("M")} because of efficiencies achieved under the hood.
Similar to filter(_:) is prefix(while:). The difference is that pr
efix(while:) stops looping as soon as it encounters an element for
which the supplied function returns false; it returns the start of the
original array as a slice. The complement of prefix(while:) is drop
(while:); it stops where prefix(while:) stops, but it returns the
rest of the original array as a slice:
let pepboys = ["Manny", "Jack", "Moe"] 
let arr1 = pepboys.filter {$0.hasPrefix("M")} // ["Manny", "Moe"] 
let arr2 = pepboys.prefix {$0.hasPrefix("M")} // ["Manny"] 
let arr3 = pepboys.drop {$0.hasPrefix("M")} // ["Jack", "Moe"]

--- Page 431 ---
The map(_:) instance method yields a new array, each element of
which is the result of passing the corresponding element of the old
array through a function that you supply. This function accepts a
parameter of the element type and returns a result which may be of
some other type; Swift can usually infer the type of the resulting
array elements by looking at the type returned by the function.
Here’s how to multiply every element of an array by 2:
let arr = [1,2,3] 
let arr2 = arr.map {$0 * 2} // [2,4,6]
Here’s another example, to illustrate the fact that map(_:) can yield
an array with a different element type:
let arr = [1,2,3] 
let arr2 = arr.map {Double($0)} // [1.0, 2.0, 3.0]
Here’s a real-life example showing how neat and compact your code
can be when you use map(_:). In order to remove all the table cells
in a section of a UITableView, I have to specify the cells as an array
of IndexPath objects. If sec is the section number, I can form those
IndexPath objects individually like this:
let path0 = IndexPath(row:0, section:sec) 
let path1 = IndexPath(row:1, section:sec) 
// ...
Hmmm, I think I see a pattern here! I could generate my array of
IndexPath objects by looping through the row values using
for...in. But with map(_:), there’s a much tighter way to express

--- Page 432 ---
the same loop — namely, to loop through the range 0..<ct (where c
t is the number of rows in the section). Since map(_:) is a Collection
instance method, and a Range is itself a Collection, I can call map
(_:) directly on the range:
let paths = (0..<ct).map {IndexPath(row:$0, section:sec)}
The map(_:) method provides a neat alternative to init(repeatin
g:count:) with a reference type:
let dogs = Array(repeating:Dog(), count:3) // probably a mistake
You probably wanted an array of three Dogs. But if Dog is a class,
the array consists of three references to one and the same Dog
instance! Instead, generate the array using map(_:), like this:
let dogs = (0..<3).map {_ in Dog()}
The map(_:) method has a specialized companion, flatMap(_:).
Applied to an array, flatMap(_:) first calls map(_:), and then, if the
map function produces an array of arrays, flattens it. For instance,
[[1],[2]].flatMap {$0} is [1,2]. Here’s a more interesting
example:
let arr = [[1, 2], [3, 4]] 
let arr2 = arr.flatMap {$0.map {String($0)}} // ["1", "2", "3", "4"]
First our map function calls map(_:) to coerce the individual
elements of each inner array to a string, yielding an array of arrays of
String: [["1", "2"], ["3", "4"]]. Then flatMap(_:) flattens the
array of arrays, and we end up with a simple array of String.

--- Page 433 ---
Another specialized map(_:) companion is compactMap(_:).
(Before Swift 4.1, this was another form of flatMap(_:).) Given a
map function that produces an array of Optionals, compactMap(_:)
safely unwraps them by first eliminating any nil elements. This
neatly solves a type of problem that arises quite often. In particular,
we can coerce or cast an array safely by eliminating those elements
that can’t be coerced or cast.
Suppose I have a mixed bag of strings, some of which represent
integers. I’d like to coerce to Int those that can be coerced to Int, and
eliminate the others. Int coercion of a String yields an Optional, so
the compactMap(_:) lightbulb should go on in our heads:
let arr = ["1", "hey", "2", "ho"] 
let arr2 = arr.compactMap {Int($0)} // [1, 2]
First we map the original array to an array of Optionals wrapping Int,
by coercing: [Optional(1), nil, Optional(2), nil]. Then comp
actMap(_:) removes the nil elements and unwraps the remaining
elements, resulting in an array of Int.
The reduce instance method is a way of combining all the elements
of an array (actually, a sequence) into a single value. This value’s
type — the result type — doesn’t have to be the same as the array’s
element type. reduce takes two parameters:
You supply, as the second parameter, a function that takes two
parameters; the first is of the result type, the second is of the
element type, and the function’s result is your combination of
those two parameters, as the result type. That result, on each

--- Page 434 ---
iteration, becomes the function’s first parameter in the next
iteration, along with the next element of the array as the second
parameter. In this way, the output of combining pairs accumulates,
and the final accumulated value is the final output of the function.
However, that doesn’t explain where the first parameter for the
first iteration comes from. The answer is that you have to supply it
as the first parameter of the reduce call.
That will all be easier to understand with a simple example. Let’s
assume we’ve got an array of Int. Then we can use reduce to sum the
elements of the array. Here’s some pseudocode where I’ve left out the
first argument of the call, so that you can think about what it needs to
be:
let sum = arr.reduce(/* ... */) {$0 + $1}
Each pair of parameters will be added together to get the first
parameter ($0) on the next iteration. The second parameter on every
iteration ($1) is a successive element of the array. Clearly we are just
summing the elements, adding each element one by one to the
accumulated total. So the remaining question is: What should the first
element of the array be added to? We want the actual sum of all the
elements, no more and no less; so the first element of the array should
be added to 0:
let arr = [1, 4, 9, 13, 112] 
let sum = arr.reduce(0) {$0 + $1} // 139
The + operator is the name of a function of the required type, so
here’s another way to write the same thing:

--- Page 435 ---
let sum = arr.reduce(0, +)
There is also reduce(into:), which greatly improves efficiency
when the goal is to build a collection such as an array or a dictionary.
The into: argument is passed into your function as an inout
parameter, and persists through each iteration; instead of returning a
value, your function modifies it, and the final result is its final value.
Suppose we have an array of integers, and our goal is to “deal” them
into two piles consisting of the even elements and the odd elements
respectively. You can’t do that with a single call to map; you’d have to
cycle through the original array twice. With reduce(into:), both
target arrays are constructed while cycling through the original array
once:
let nums = [1,3,2,4,5] 
let result = nums.reduce(into: [[],[]]) { temp, i in 
    temp[i%2].append(i) 
} 
// result is now [[2, 4], [1, 3, 5]]
Swift’s array transformation methods are very powerful and very
useful. In real life, your code is likely to depend heavily on all of
these methods, especially filter, map, and reduce, alone or in
combination, nested or chained together.
SWIFT ARRAY AND OBJECTIVE-C NSARRAY
When you’re programming iOS, you import the Foundation
framework (or UIKit, which imports Foundation) and the Objective-
C NSArray type. Swift Array is bridged to Objective-C NSArray. The

--- Page 436 ---
most general medium of array interchange is [Any]; if an Objective-
C API specifies an NSArray, with no further type information, Swift
will see this as an array of Any. This reflects the fact that Objective-
C’s rules for what can be an element of an NSArray are looser than
Swift’s: the elements of an NSArray do not all have to be of the same
type. On the other hand, the elements of an Objective-C NSArray
must be Objective-C objects — that is, they must be class types.
Passing a Swift array to Objective-C is usually easy. Typically, you’ll
just pass the array, either by assignment or as an argument in a
function call:
let arr = [UIBarButtonItem(), UIBarButtonItem()] 
self.navigationItem.leftBarButtonItems = arr
The objects that you pass as elements of the array will cross the
bridge to Objective-C in the usual way:
let lay = CAGradientLayer() 
lay.locations = [0.25, 0.5, 0.75] // bridged to NSArray of NSNumber
CAGradientLayer’s locations property needs to be an array of
NSNumber. But we can pass an array of Double, because Double is
bridged to NSNumber, and so Objective-C receives an NSArray of
NSNumber.
To call an NSArray method on a Swift array, you may have to cast to
NSArray:
let arr = ["Manny", "Moe", "Jack"] 
let s = (arr as NSArray).componentsJoined(by:", ") 

--- Page 437 ---
// s is "Manny, Moe, Jack"
A Swift Array seen through a var reference is mutable, but an
NSArray isn’t mutable ever. For mutability in Objective-C, you need
an NSMutableArray, a subclass of NSArray. You can’t cast, assign, or
pass a Swift array as an NSMutableArray; you have to coerce. The
best way is to call the NSMutableArray initializer init(array:), to
which you can pass a Swift array directly. To convert back from an
NSMutableArray to a Swift array, you can cast:
var arr = ["Manny", "Moe", "Jack"] 
let arr2 = NSMutableArray(array:arr) 
arr2.remove("Moe") 
arr = arr2 as! [String]
Now let’s talk about what happens when an NSArray arrives from
Objective-C into Swift. There won’t be any problem crossing the
bridge: the NSArray will arrive safely as a Swift Array. But a Swift
Array of what?
Of itself, an NSArray carries no information about what type of
element it contains. Starting in Xcode 7, however, the Objective-C
language was modified so that the declaration of an NSArray,
NSDictionary, or NSSet — the three collection types that are bridged
to Swift — can include element type information. (Objective-C calls
this a lightweight generic.) Thus, for the most part, the arrays you
receive from Cocoa will be correctly typed.
For example, this elegant code was impossible in the bad old days
before Xcode 7:

--- Page 438 ---
let arr = UIFont.familyNames.map { 
    UIFont.fontNamesForFamilyName($0) 
}
The result is an array of arrays of String, listing all available fonts
grouped by family. That code is possible because both of those
UIFont class methods are seen by Swift as returning an array of
String. Before Xcode 7, however, those arrays were untyped, and
casting down to an array of String was up to you.
Nevertheless, lightweight generics are not omnipresent. You might
read an array from a .plist file stored on disk with NSArray’s
initializer init(contentsOf:); you might retrieve an array from
UserDefaults; you might even be dealing with an Objective-C API
that hasn’t been updated to use lightweight generics. In such a
situation, you’re going to end up with a plain vanilla NSArray or a
Swift array of Any. If that happens, you will usually want to cast
down or otherwise transform this array into an array of some specific
Swift type. Here’s an Objective-C class containing a method whose
return type of NSArray hasn’t been marked up with an element type:
@implementation Pep 
- (NSArray*) boys { 
    return @[@"Manny", @"Moe", @"Jack"]; 
} 
@end
To call that method and do anything useful with the result, it will be
necessary to cast that result down to an array of String. If I’m sure of
my ground, I can force the cast:

--- Page 439 ---
let p = Pep() 
let boys = p.boys() as! [String]
As with any cast, though, be sure you don’t lie! An Objective-C array
can contain more than one type of object. Don’t force such an array to
be cast down to a type to which not all the elements can be cast, or
you’ll crash when the cast fails; you’ll need a more deliberate
strategy (possibly involving compactMap) for eliminating or
otherwise transforming the problematic elements.
Dictionary
A dictionary (Dictionary, a struct) is an unordered collection of object
pairs. In each pair, the first object is the key; the second object is the
value. The idea is that you use a key to access a value. Keys are
usually strings, but they don’t have to be; the formal requirement is
that they be types that conform to the Hashable protocol.
For a type to be Hashable requires three things:
The type must be Equatable.
The type must implement an Int hashValue property.
The type’s implementation of equality and hashValue must be
such that equal keys have equal hash values. The protocol itself
cannot formally insist upon this rule, but that is what is needed for
hashability to be useful and well-behaved.
The hash values can then be used behind the scenes for rapid key
access. Most Swift standard types are Hashable; I’ll talk in Chapter 5
about how to make your own object types Hashable.

--- Page 440 ---
WARNING
Do not use mutable objects as keys. Mutating a key while it is in use will break
the dictionary (lookup will no longer work correctly).
As with arrays, a given dictionary’s types must be uniform. The key
type and the value type don’t have to be the same as one another, and
they often will not be. But within any dictionary, all keys must be of
the same type, and all values must be of the same type. Formally, a
dictionary is a generic, and its placeholder types are its key type and
its value type: Dictionary<Key,Value>. As with arrays, Swift
provides syntactic sugar for expressing a dictionary’s type, and that is
what you’ll usually use: [Key: Value]. That’s square brackets
containing a colon (and optional spaces) separating the key type from
the value type. This code creates an empty dictionary whose keys
(when they exist) will be Strings and whose values (when they exist)
will be Strings:
var d = [String:String]()
The colon is used also between each key and value in the literal
syntax for expressing a dictionary. The key–value pairs appear
between square brackets, separated by a comma, just like an array.
This code creates a dictionary by describing it literally (and the
dictionary’s type of [String:String] is inferred):
var d = ["CA": "California", "NY": "New York"]

--- Page 441 ---
TIP
If a dictionary variable is declared and initialized to a literal with many
elements, it’s a good idea to declare the variable’s type explicitly. This saves the
compiler from having to examine the entire dictionary to decide its type, and
makes compilation faster.
The literal for an empty dictionary is square brackets containing just a
colon: [:]. That notation can be used provided the dictionary’s type
is known in some other way. This is another way to create an empty
[String:String] dictionary:
var d : [String:String] = [:]
You can also initialize a dictionary from a sequence of key–value
tuples. This is useful particularly if you’re starting with two
sequences. Suppose we happen to have state abbreviations in one
array and state names in another:
let abbrevs = ["CA", "NY"] 
let names = ["California", "New York"]
We can combine those two arrays into a single array of tuples and call
init(uniqueKeysWithValues:) to generate a dictionary:
let tuples = (abbrevs.indices).map {(abbrevs[$0],names[$0])} 
let d = Dictionary(uniqueKeysWithValues: tuples) 
// ["NY": "New York", "CA": "California"]
There is actually a simpler way to form those tuples — the global zip
function, which takes two sequences and yields a sequence of tuples:

--- Page 442 ---
let tuples = zip(abbrevs, names) 
let d = Dictionary(uniqueKeysWithValues: tuples)
A nice feature of zip is that if one sequence is longer than the other,
the extra elements of the longer sequence are ignored — tuple
formation simply stops when the end of the shorter sequence is
reached. For example, one of the zipped sequences can be a partial
range; in theory the range is infinite, but in fact the end of the other
sequence ends the range as well:
let r = 1... 
let names = ["California", "New York"] 
let d = Dictionary(uniqueKeysWithValues: zip(r,names)) 
// [2: "New York", 1: "California"]
If the keys in the tuple sequence are not unique, you’ll crash at
runtime when init(uniqueKeysWithValues:) is called. To work
around that, you can use init(_:uniquingKeysWith:) instead. The
second parameter is a function taking two values — the existing
value for this key, and the new incoming value for the same key —
and returning the value that should actually be used for this key. I’ll
give an example later.
Another way to form a dictionary is init(grouping:by:). This is
useful for forming a dictionary whose values are arrays. You start
with a sequence of the elements of the arrays, and the initializer
clumps them into arrays for you, in accordance with a function that
generates the corresponding key from each value.
Suppose we have a list (states) of the 50 U.S. states in alphabetical
order as an array of strings, and we want to group them by the letter

--- Page 443 ---
they start with. Here’s a verbose strategy. We loop through the list to
construct two arrays (an array of String and an array of arrays of
String); we then zip those arrays together to form the dictionary:
var sectionNames = [String]() 
var cellData = [[String]]() 
var previous = "" 
for aState in states { 
    // get the first letter 
    let c = String(aState.prefix(1)) 
    // only add a letter to sectionNames when it's a different letter 
    if c != previous { 
        previous = c 
        sectionNames.append(c.uppercased()) 
        // and in that case also add new subarray to our array of subarr
ays 
        cellData.append([String]()) 
    } 
    cellData[cellData.count-1].append(aState) 
} 
let d = Dictionary(uniqueKeysWithValues: zip(sectionNames,cellData)) 
// ["H": ["Hawaii"], "V": ["Vermont", "Virginia"], ...
With init(grouping:by:), however, that becomes effectively a
one-liner:
let d = Dictionary(grouping: states) {$0.prefix(1).uppercased()}
DICTIONARY SUBSCRIPTING
Access to a dictionary’s contents is usually by subscripting. To fetch a
value by key, use the key as a subscript:
let d = ["CA": "California", "NY": "New York"] 
let state = d["CA"]

--- Page 444 ---
If you try to fetch a value through a nonexistent key, there is no error,
but Swift needs a way to report failure; to do so, by default, it returns
nil. This, in turn, implies that the value returned when you
successfully access a value through a key must be an Optional
wrapping the real value. After that code, therefore, state is not a
String — it’s an Optional wrapping a String! Forgetting this is a
common beginner mistake.
You can change that behavior by supplying your own default value
as part of the subscript. If the key isn’t found in the dictionary, the de
fault value is returned, and so there is no need for the returned value
to be wrapped in an Optional:
let d = ["CA": "California", "NY": "New York"] 
let state = d["MD", default:"N/A"] // state is a String (not an Optiona
l)
If the reference to a dictionary is mutable, you can also assign into a
key subscript expression. If the key already exists, its value is
replaced. If the key doesn’t already exist, it is created and the value is
attached to it:
var d = ["CA": "California", "NY": "New York"] 
d["CA"] = "Casablanca" 
d["MD"] = "Maryland" 
// d is now ["MD": "Maryland", "NY": "New York", "CA": "Casablanca"]
Instead of assigning into a subscript expression, you can call updateV
alue(_:forKey:); it has the advantage that it returns the old value.

--- Page 445 ---
As with fetching a value by key, you can supply a default value
when assigning into a key subscript expression. This can be a source
of great economy of expression. Consider the common task of
collecting a histogram: we want to know how many times each
element appears in a sequence:
let sentence = "how much wood would a wood chuck chuck" 
let words = sentence.split(separator: " ").map {String($0)}
Our goal is now to make a dictionary pairing each word with the
number of times it appears. A manual approach would be rather
laborious, along these lines:
var d = [String:Int]() 
for word in words { 
    let ct = d[word] 
    if ct != nil { 
        d[word]! += 1 
    } else { 
        d[word] = 1 
    } 
} 
// d is now ["how": 1, "wood": 2, "a": 1, "chuck": 2, "would": 1, "muc
h": 1]
With a default value, it’s effectively a one-liner:
var d = [String:Int]() 
words.forEach {d[$0, default:0] += 1}
Earlier, I promised to give an example of init(_:uniquingKeysWit
h:), so here it is, forming the same histogram in a silly but interesting

--- Page 446 ---
way; I start with a values array of ones, and sum the values whenever
a duplicate key is encountered:
let ones = Array(repeating: 1, count: words.count) 
let d = Dictionary(zip(words,ones)) {$0+$1}
By a kind of shorthand, assigning nil into a key subscript expression
removes that key–value pair if it exists:
var d = ["CA": "California", "NY": "New York"] 
d["NY"] = nil // d is now ["CA": "California"]
Alternatively, call removeValue(forKey:); it has the advantage that
it returns the removed value before it removes the key–value pair.
DICTIONARIES HAVE NO ORDER
Dictionaries are unordered. Whenever you probe a dictionary’s entire
contents — when you print them, when you cycle through them
with for...in, and so forth — each entry arrives in a completely
unpredictable order. If you run the same code as I do (indeed, even if
you run the same code as yourself on two different occasions), your
results may be ordered differently. This makes no difference to the
actual contents of the dictionary, which consists of particular keys,
each associated with a particular value. [2: "New York", 1: "Cali
fornia"] is actually the same dictionary as [1: "California", 2:
"New York"].
If you needed order to be meaningful, you were thinking of an array,
not a dictionary. To put it another way, you can have rapid access by
key or meaningful order with rapid access by index number, but not

--- Page 447 ---
both. For an ordered array of key-value pairs — with no subscripting
by key, no hashability requirement, and no guaranteed uniqueness of
keys — you can use a KeyValuePairs object, which is essentially an
array of tuples with labels key and value; it can be initialized from a
dictionary literal:
let pairs : KeyValuePairs = ["CA": "California", "NY": "New York"] 
print(pairs.count) // 2 
print(pairs[0]) // (key: "CA", value: "California") 
// to access by key, cycle through the array 
if let pair = pairs.first(where: {$0.key == "NY"}) { 
    let val = pair.value // New York 
}
DICTIONARY CASTING AND COMPARISON
As with arrays, a dictionary type is legal for casting down, meaning
that the individual elements will be cast down. Typically, only the
value types will differ:
let dog1 : Dog = NoisyDog() 
let dog2 : Dog = NoisyDog() 
let d = ["fido": dog1, "rover": dog2] 
let d2 = d as! [String : NoisyDog]
As with arrays, is can be used to test the actual types in the
dictionary, and as? can be used to test and cast safely.
Dictionary equality is like array equality. Key types are necessarily
Equatable, because they are Hashable. Value types are not necessarily
Equatable, but if they are, the == and != operators work as you would
expect.

--- Page 448 ---
BASIC DICTIONARY PROPERTIES AND
ENUMERATION
A dictionary has a count property reporting the number of key–value
pairs it contains, and an isEmpty property reporting whether that
number is 0.
A dictionary has a keys property reporting all its keys, and a values
property reporting all its values. These are effectively opaque structs
providing a specialized view of the dictionary itself. You can’t assign
one to a variable, or print it out, but you can work with them as
collections. For example, you can enumerate them with for...in
(though you should not expect them to arrive in any particular order,
as a dictionary is unordered):
var d = ["CA": "California", "NY": "New York"] 
for s in d.keys { 
    print(s) // NY, then CA (or vice versa) 
}
You can coerce them to an array:
var d = ["CA": "California", "NY": "New York"] 
var keys = Array(d.keys) // ["NY", "CA"] or ["CA", "NY"]
You can sort them, filter them, or map them (yielding an array); you
can take their min or max; you can reduce them; you can compare ke
ys of different dictionaries for equality:
let d : [String:Int] = ["one":1, "two":2, "three":3] 
let keysSorted = d.keys.sorted() // ["one", "three", "two"] 
let arr = d.values.filter {$0 < 2} // [1] 
let min = d.values.min() // Optional(1) 

--- Page 449 ---
let sum = d.values.reduce(0, +) // 6 
let ok = d.keys == ["one":1, "three":3, "two":2].keys // true
You can also enumerate a dictionary itself. Each iteration provides a
key–value tuple (arriving in no particular order, because a dictionary
is unordered):
var d = ["CA": "California", "NY": "New York"] 
for (abbrev, state) in d { 
    print("\(abbrev) stands for \(state)") 
}
The tuple members have labels key and value, so the preceding
example can be rewritten like this:
var d = ["CA": "California", "NY": "New York"] 
for pair in d { 
    print("\(pair.key) stands for \(pair.value)") 
}
You can extract a dictionary’s entire contents at once as an array of
key–value tuples (in an unpredictable order) by coercing the
dictionary to an array:
var d = ["CA": "California", "NY": "New York"] 
let arr = Array(d) 
// [(key: "NY", value: "New York"), (key: "CA", value: "California")]
When you apply filter to a dictionary, what you get is a dictionary.
In addition, there’s a mapValues method that yields a dictionary with
its values changed according to your map function:
let d = ["CA": "California", "NY": "New York"] 
let d2 = d.filter {$0.value > "New Jersey"}.mapValues {$0.uppercased()} 

--- Page 450 ---
// ["NY": "NEW YORK"]
There’s also a compactMapValues method that applies a map
function yielding an Optional and filters out any keys for which the
resulting value is nil.
You can combine two dictionaries with the merging(_:uniquingKey
sWith:) method — or, if your reference to the first dictionary is
mutable, you can call merge to modify it directly. The second
parameter is like the second parameter of init(_:uniquingKeysWit
h:), saying what the value should be in case the second dictionary
has a key matching an existing key in the first dictionary:
let d1 = ["CA": "California", "NY": "New York"] 
let d2 = ["MD": "Maryland", "NY": "New York"] 
let d3 = d1.merging(d2) {orig, _ in orig} 
// ["MD": "Maryland", "NY": "New York", "CA": "California"]
SWIFT DICTIONARY AND OBJECTIVE-C
NSDICTIONARY
The Foundation framework dictionary type is NSDictionary, and
Swift Dictionary is bridged to it. The untyped API characterization of
an NSDictionary will be [AnyHashable:Any]. (AnyHashable is a
type eraser struct, to cope with the possibility, legal in Objective-C,
that the keys may be of different Hashable types.)
Like NSArray element types, NSDictionary key and value types can
be marked in Objective-C using a lightweight generic. The most
common key type in a real-life Cocoa NSDictionary is NSString, so
you might well receive an NSDictionary typed as [String:Any].

--- Page 451 ---
Specific typing of an NSDictionary’s values is rare, because
dictionaries that you pass to and receive from Cocoa will often have
values of multiple types; it is not surprising to have a dictionary
whose keys are strings but whose values include a string, a number, a
color, and an array. For this reason, you will usually not cast down
the entire dictionary’s type; instead, you’ll work with the dictionary
as having Any values, and cast when fetching an individual value
from the dictionary. Since the value returned from subscripting a key
is itself an Optional, you will typically unwrap and cast the value as a
standard single move.
Here’s an example. A Cocoa Notification object comes with a userIn
fo property. It is an NSDictionary that might itself be nil, so the
Swift API characterizes it as [AnyHashable:Any]?. Let’s say I’m
expecting this dictionary to be present and to contain a "progress"
key whose value is an NSNumber containing a Double. My goal is to
extract that NSNumber and assign the Double that it contains to a
property, self.progress. Here’s one way to do that safely, using
optional unwrapping and optional casting (n is the Notification
object):
let prog = n.userInfo?["progress"] as? Double 
if prog != nil { 
    self.progress = prog! 
}
The variable prog is implicitly typed as an Optional wrapping a
Double. The code is safe, because if there is no userInfo dictionary,
or if it doesn’t contain a "progress" key, or if that key’s value isn’t a
Double, nothing happens, and prog will be nil. I then test prog to

--- Page 452 ---
see whether it is nil; if it isn’t, I know that it’s safe to force-unwrap
it, and that the unwrapped value is the Double I’m after.
(In Chapter 5 I’ll describe another syntax for accomplishing the same
goal, using conditional binding.)
Conversely, here’s a typical example of creating a dictionary and
handing it off to Cocoa. This dictionary is a mixed bag: its values are
a UIFont, a UIColor, and an NSShadow. Its keys are all strings,
which I obtain as constants from Cocoa. I form the dictionary as a
literal and pass it, all in one move, with no need to cast anything:
UINavigationBar.appearance().titleTextAttributes = [ 
    .font: UIFont(name: "ChalkboardSE-Bold", size: 20)!, 
    .foregroundColor: UIColor.darkText, 
    .shadow.: { 
        let shad = NSShadow() 
        shad.shadowOffset = CGSize(width:1.5,height:1.5) 
        return shad 
    }() 
]
As with NSArray and NSMutableArray, if you want Cocoa to mutate
a dictionary, you must coerce to NSDictionary’s subclass
NSMutableDictionary:
var d1 = ["NY":"New York", "CA":"California"] 
let d2 = ["MD":"Maryland"] 
let mutd1 = NSMutableDictionary(dictionary:d1) 
mutd1.addEntries(from:d2) 
d1 = mutd1 as! [String:String] 
// d1 is now ["MD": "Maryland", "NY": "New York", "CA": "California"]

--- Page 453 ---
Set
A set (Set, a struct) is an unordered collection of unique objects. Its
elements must be all of one type; it has a count and an isEmpty
property; it can be initialized from any sequence; you can cycle
through its elements with for...in (where the order of elements is
unpredictable).
The uniqueness of set elements is implemented by constraining their
type to be Hashable (and hence Equatable), just like the keys of a
dictionary, so that the hash values can be used behind the scenes for
rapid access. Checking whether a set contains a given element, which
you can do with the contains(_:) instance method, is very efficient
— far more efficient than doing the same thing with an array.
Therefore, if element uniqueness is acceptable (or desirable) and you
don’t need indexing or a guaranteed order, a set can be a much better
choice of collection than an array.
NOTE
The warnings in the preceding section apply: don’t store a mutable value in a
Set, and don’t expect Set values to be reported to you in any particular order. I’ll
talk in Chapter 5 about how to make your own types Hashable.
There are no set literals in Swift, but you won’t need them because
you can pass an array literal where a set is expected. There is no
syntactic sugar for expressing a set type, but the Set struct is a
generic, so you can express the type by explicitly specializing the
generic:

--- Page 454 ---
let set : Set<Int> = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
In that particular example there was no real need to specialize the
generic, as the Int type can be inferred from the array. However, when
setting a Set variable from a literal, it is more efficient to specialize
the generic. This saves the compiler the trouble of reading the whole
literal.
It sometimes happens (more often than you might suppose) that you
want to examine one element of a set as a kind of sample. Order is
meaningless, so it’s sufficient to obtain any element, such as the first
element. For this purpose, use the first instance property; it returns
an Optional, just in case the set is empty.
The distinctive feature of a set is the uniqueness of its objects. If an
object is added to a set and that object is already present, it isn’t
added a second time. Conversion from an array to a set and back to
an array is a quick and reliable way of uniquing the array — though
of course order is not preserved:
let arr = [1,2,1,3,2,4,3,5] 
let set = Set(arr) 
let arr2 = Array(set) // [5, 2, 3, 1, 4], perhaps
A set is a Collection and a Sequence. Like Array, Set has a map(_:)
instance method; it returns an array, but of course you can turn that
right back into a set if you need to:
let set : Set = [1,2,3,4,5] 
let set2 = Set(set.map {$0+1}) // Set containing 2, 3, 4, 5, 6

--- Page 455 ---
On the other hand, applying filter to a Set yields a Set directly:
let set : Set = [1,2,3,4,5] 
let set2 = set.filter {$0>3} // Set containing 4, 5
If the reference to a set is mutable, you can add an object to it with in
sert(_:); there is no penalty for trying to add an object that’s
already in the set, but the object won’t be added. insert(_:) also
returns a result, a tuple whose inserted element will be false if an
equivalent object was already present in the set. This result is usually
disregarded, but it can sometimes be useful; here, we use it to unique
an array while preserving its order:
var arr = ["Manny", "Manny", "Moe", "Jack", "Jack", "Moe", "Manny"] 
var temp = Set<String>() 
arr = arr.filter { temp.insert($0).inserted }
The other element of the tuple returned by insert(_:) is memberAft
erInsert. If inserted is true, this is simply the parameter of inser
t(_:). If inserted is false, however, it is the existing member of
the set that caused the insertion to fail because it is regarded as equal
to the parameter of insert(_:); this may be of interest because it
tells you why the insertion was rejected.
Instead of insert(_:), you can call update(with:); the difference
is that if you’re trying to add an object that already has an equivalent
in the set, the former doesn’t insert the new object, but the latter
always inserts, replacing the old object (if there is one) with the new
one.

--- Page 456 ---
You can remove an object and return it by specifying an equivalent
object with the remove(_:) method; it returns the object from the set,
wrapped in an Optional, or nil if the object was not present. You can
remove and return an arbitrary object from the set with removeFirst;
it crashes if the set is empty, so take precautions — or use popFirst,
which is safe.
Equality comparison (==) is defined for sets as you would expect; two
sets are equal if every element of each is equal to an element of the
other.
If the notion of a set evokes visions of Venn diagrams from
elementary school, that’s good, because sets have instance methods
giving you all those set operations you remember so fondly. The
parameter can be a set, or it can be any sequence, which will be
converted to a set; it might be an array, a range, or even a character
sequence:
intersection(_:), formIntersection(_:)
Yields the elements of this set that also appear in the parameter.
The first forms a new Set; the second is mutating.
union(_:), formUnion(_:)
Yields the elements of this set along with the (unique) elements of
the parameter. The first forms a new Set; the second is mutating.
symmetricDifference(_:), formSymmetricDifference(_:)
Yields the elements of this set that don’t appear in the parameter,
plus the (unique) elements of the parameter that don’t appear in
this set. The first forms a new Set; the second is mutating.

--- Page 457 ---
subtracting(_:), subtract(_:)
Yields the elements of this set except for those that appear in the
parameter. The first forms a new Set; the second is mutating.
isSubset(of:), isStrictSubset(of:)
isSuperset(of:), isStrictSuperset(of:)
Returns a Bool reporting whether the elements of this set are
respectively embraced by or embrace the elements of the
parameter. The “strict” variant yields false if the two sets consist
of the same elements.
isDisjoint(with:)
Returns a Bool reporting whether this set and the parameter have
no elements in common.
Here’s a real-life example of Set usage from one of my apps. I have a
lot of numbered pictures, of which we are to choose one randomly.
But I don’t want to choose a picture that has recently been chosen.
Therefore, I keep a list of the numbers of all recently chosen pictures.
When it’s time to choose a new picture, I convert the list of all
possible numbers to a Set, convert the list of recently chosen picture
numbers to a Set, and call subtracting(_:) to get a list of unused
picture numbers! Now I choose a picture number at random and add
it to the list of recently chosen picture numbers:
let ud = UserDefaults.standard 
let recents = ud.object(forKey: Defaults.recents) as? [Int] ?? [] 
var forbiddenNumbers = Set(recents) 
let legalNumbers = Set(1...PIXCOUNT).subtracting(forbiddenNumbers) 
let newNumber = legalNumbers.randomElement()! 
forbiddenNumbers.insert(newNumber) 
ud.set(Array(forbiddenNumbers), forKey:Defaults.recents)

--- Page 458 ---
OPTION SETS
An option set (OptionSet struct) is Swift’s way of treating a certain
type of Cocoa enumeration as a Swift struct. It is not, strictly
speaking, a Set; but it is deliberately set-like, sharing common
features with Set through the SetAlgebra protocol. An option set has
contains(_:), insert(_:), and remove(_:) methods, along with
all the various set operation methods.
The purpose of option sets is to help you grapple with Objective-C
bitmasks. A bitmask is an integer whose bits are used as switches
when multiple options are to be specified simultaneously. Bitmasks
are very common in Cocoa. In Objective-C, bitmasks are manipulated
through the arithmetic bitwise-or and bitwise-and operators. Such
manipulation can be mysterious and error-prone. But in Swift, thanks
to option sets, bitmasks can be manipulated easily through set
operations instead.
For example, when specifying how a UIView is to be animated, you
are allowed to pass an options: argument whose value comes from
the UIView.AnimationOptions enumeration, whose definition (in
Objective-C) begins:
typedef NS_OPTIONS(NSUInteger, UIViewAnimationOptions) { 
    UIViewAnimationOptionLayoutSubviews            = 1 << 0, 
    UIViewAnimationOptionAllowUserInteraction      = 1 << 1, 
    UIViewAnimationOptionBeginFromCurrentState     = 1 << 2, 
    UIViewAnimationOptionRepeat                    = 1 << 3, 
    UIViewAnimationOptionAutoreverse               = 1 << 4, 
    // ... 
};

--- Page 459 ---
Pretend that an NSUInteger is 8 bits (it isn’t, but let’s keep things
simple and short). Then this enumeration means that (in Swift) the
following name–value pairs are defined:
UIView.AnimationOptions.layoutSubviews          0b00000001 
UIView.AnimationOptions.allowUserInteraction    0b00000010 
UIView.AnimationOptions.beginFromCurrentState   0b00000100 
UIView.AnimationOptions.repeat                  0b00001000 
UIView.AnimationOptions.autoreverse             0b00010000
These values can be combined into a single value — a bitmask —
that you pass as the options: argument for your animation. All
Cocoa has to do to understand your intentions is to look to see which
bits in the value that you pass are set to 1. So, for example, 0b000110
00 would mean that UIView.AnimationOptions.repeat and UIVie
w.AnimationOptions.autoreverse are both true (and that the
others are all false).
The question is how to form the value 0b00011000 in order to pass it.
You could form it directly as a literal and set the options: argument
to UIView.AnimationOptions(rawValue:0b00011000); but that’s
not a very good idea, because it’s error-prone and makes your code
incomprehensible. In Objective-C, you’d use the arithmetic bitwise-
or operator, analogous to this Swift code:
let val = 
    UIView.AnimationOptions.autoreverse.rawValue | 
    UIView.AnimationOptions.repeat.rawValue 
let opts = UIView.AnimationOptions(rawValue: val)
That’s rather ugly! However, help is on the way: The
UIView.AnimationOptions type is an option set struct in Swift

--- Page 460 ---
(because it is marked as NS_OPTIONS in Objective-C), and therefore
can be treated much like a Set. Given a UIView.AnimationOptions
value, you can add an option to it using insert(_:):
var opts = UIView.AnimationOptions.autoreverse 
opts.insert(.repeat)
Alternatively, you can start with an array literal, just as if you were
initializing a Set:
let opts : UIView.AnimationOptions = [.autoreverse, .repeat]
TIP
To indicate that no options are to be set, pass an empty option set ([]) or, where
permitted, omit the options: parameter altogether.
Sometimes Cocoa hands you a bitmask, and you want to know
whether a certain bit is set. In this example from a UITableViewCell
subclass, the cell’s state comes to us as a bitmask; we want to know
about the bit indicating that the cell is showing its edit control. The
Objective-C way is to extract the raw values and use the bitwise-and
operator:
override func didTransition(to state: UITableViewCell.StateMask) { 
    let editing = UITableViewCell.StateMask.showingEditControl.rawValue 
    if state.rawValue & editing != 0 { 
        // ... the ShowingEditControl bit is set ... 
    } 
}

--- Page 461 ---
That’s a tricky formula, all too easy to get wrong. But in Swift this is
an option set, so the contains(_:) method tells you the answer:
override func didTransition(to state: UITableViewCell.StateMask) { 
    if state.contains(.showingEditControl) { 
        // ... the ShowingEditControl bit is set ... 
    } 
}
SWIFT SET AND OBJECTIVE-C NSSET
Swift’s Set type is bridged to Objective-C NSSet. The untyped
medium of interchange is Set<AnyHashable>. Coming back from
Objective-C, if Objective-C doesn’t know what this is a set of, you
would probably cast down as needed. As with NSArray, however,
NSSet can be marked up using lightweight generics to indicate its
element type, in which case no casting will be necessary:
override func touchesBegan(_ touches: Set<UITouch>, with event: UIEven
t?) { 
    let t = touches.first // an Optional wrapping a UITouch 
    // ... 
}

--- Page 462 ---
Chapter 5. Flow Control and
More
This chapter is a miscellany. I’ll start by describing Swift’s flow
control constructs for branching, looping, and jumping. Then, I’ll
summarize Swift’s privacy and introspection features, and talk about
how to override operators and how to create your own operators.
Next, I’ll explain some specialized aspects of Swift memory
management. Finally, I’ll survey some recently added Swift language
features: synthesized protocol implementations, key paths, instance as
function, dynamic members, property wrappers, custom string
interpolation, reverse generics, function builders, and Result.
Flow Control
A computer program has a path of execution through its code
statements. Normally, this path follows a simple rule: execute each
statement in succession. But there is another possibility. Flow control
can be used to make the path of execution skip some statements, or
go back and repeat some statements.
Flow control is what makes a computer program “intelligent.” By
testing in real time the truth value of a condition — an expression that
evaluates to a Bool and is thus true or false — the program decides

--- Page 463 ---
at that moment how to proceed. Flow control based on testing a
condition may be divided into two general types:
Branching
The code is divided into alternative chunks, like roads that
diverge in a wood, and the program is presented with a choice of
possible ways to go; the truth of a condition is used to determine
which chunk will actually be executed.
Looping
A chunk of code is marked off for possible repetition; the truth of
a condition is used to determine whether the chunk should be
executed, and then whether it should be executed again. Each
repetition is called an iteration.
The chunks of code in flow control, which I refer to as blocks, are
demarcated by curly braces. These curly braces constitute a scope
(Chapter 1). New local variables can be declared here, and go out of
existence automatically when the path of execution exits the curly
braces (Chapter 3). For a loop, this means that local variables come
into existence and go out of existence on each iteration. As with any
scope, code inside the curly braces can see the surrounding higher
scope.
Swift flow control is fairly simple, and by and large is similar to flow
control in C and related languages. There are two fundamental
syntactic differences between Swift and C, both of which make Swift
simpler and clearer:
A condition does not have to be wrapped in parentheses in Swift.

--- Page 464 ---
The curly braces can never be omitted in Swift.
Moreover, Swift adds some specialized flow control features to help
you grapple more conveniently with Optionals, and boasts a
particularly powerful form of switch statement.
Branching
Swift has two forms of branching: the if construct, and the switch
statement. I’ll also discuss conditional evaluation, a compact form of
if construct.
IF CONSTRUCT
The Swift branching construct with if is similar to C. Many
examples of if constructs have appeared already in this book. The
construct may be formally summarized as shown in Example 5-1.
Example 5-1. The Swift if construct
if condition { 
    statements 
} 
 
if condition { 
    statements 
} else { 
    statements 
} 
 
if condition { 
    statements 
} else if condition { 
    statements 
} else { 

--- Page 465 ---
    statements 
}
The third form, containing else if, can have as many else if
blocks as needed, and the final else block may be omitted.
Here’s a real-life if construct that lies at the heart of one of my apps:
// okay, we've tapped a tile; there are three cases 
if self.selectedTile == nil { // no selected tile: select and play this 
tile 
    self.select(tile:tile) 
    self.play(tile:tile) 
} else if self.selectedTile == tile { // selected tile tapped: deselect 
it 
    self.deselectAll() 
    self.player?.pause() 
} else { // there was a selected tile, another tile was tapped: swap the
m 
    self.swap(self.selectedTile, with:tile, check:true, fence:true) 
}
CONDITIONAL BINDING
In Swift, if can be followed immediately by a variable declaration
and assignment — that is, by let or var and a new local variable
name, possibly followed by a colon and a type declaration, then an
equal sign and a value:
if let var = val { 
    // the block 
}
This syntax, called a conditional binding, is actually a shorthand for
conditionally unwrapping an Optional. The assigned value (val) is

--- Page 466 ---
expected to be an Optional — the compiler will stop you if it isn’t —
and this is what happens:
If the Optional (val) is nil, the condition fails and the block is
skipped, with execution resuming after the block.
If the Optional is not nil, then:
1. The Optional is unwrapped.
2. The unwrapped value is assigned to the declared local
variable (var).
3. The block is executed with the local variable in scope. The
local variable is not in scope outside the block.
So a conditional binding safely passes an unwrapped Optional into a
block. The Optional is unwrapped, and the block is executed, only if
the Optional can be unwrapped.
It is perfectly reasonable for the local variable in a conditional
binding to have the same name as an existing variable in the
surrounding scope. It can even have the same name as the Optional
being unwrapped! There is then no need to make up a new name, and
inside the block the unwrapped value of the Optional neatly
overshadows the original Optional so that the latter can’t be accessed
accidentally.
Recall this code from Chapter 4, where I optionally unwrap a
Notification’s userInfo dictionary, attempt to fetch a value from the
dictionary using the "progress" key, and proceed only if that value
turns out to be an NSNumber that can be cast down to a Double:

--- Page 467 ---
let prog = n.userInfo?["progress"] as? Double 
if prog != nil { 
    self.progress = prog! 
}
We can rewrite that code more elegantly and compactly as a
conditional binding:
if let prog = n.userInfo?["progress"] as? Double { 
    self.progress = prog 
}
It is also possible to nest conditional bindings. To illustrate, I’ll
rewrite the previous example to use a separate conditional binding for
each Optional in the chain:
if let ui = n.userInfo { 
    if let prog = ui["progress"] as? Double { 
        self.progress = prog 
    } 
}
The result, if the chain involves many optional unwrappings, can be
somewhat verbose and the nest can become deeply indented — Swift
programmers like to call this the “pyramid of doom.” To help avoid
the indentation, successive conditional bindings can be combined into
a condition list, with each condition separated by a comma:
if let ui = n.userInfo, let prog = ui["progress"] as? Double { 
    self.progress = prog 
}

--- Page 468 ---
In that code, the assignment to prog won’t even be attempted if n.us
erInfo is nil; the assignment to ui fails and that’s the end.
Condition lists do not have to consist solely of conditional bindings.
They can include ordinary conditions. The important thing is the left-
to-right order of evaluation, which allows each condition to depend
upon the previous one. It would be possible (though not as elegant) to
rewrite the previous example like this:
if let ui = n.userInfo, let prog = ui["progress"], prog is Double { 
    self.progress = prog as! Double 
}
Nevertheless, I am not fond of this kind of extended condition list. I
actually prefer the pyramid of doom, where the structure reflects
perfectly the successive stages of testing. If I want to avoid the
pyramid of doom, I can usually use a sequence of guard statements
(“Guard”):
guard let ui = n.userInfo else {return} 
guard let prog = ui["progress"] as? Double else {return} 
self.progress = prog
SWITCH STATEMENT
A switch statement is a neater way of writing an extended if...else
if...else construct. In C (and Objective-C), a switch statement
contains hidden traps; Swift eliminates those traps, and adds power
and flexibility. As a result, switch statements are commonly used in
Swift (whereas they are relatively rare in my Objective-C code).

--- Page 469 ---
In a switch statement, the condition involves the comparison of
different possible values, called cases, against a single value, called
the tag. The case comparisons are performed successively in order.
As soon as a case comparison succeeds, that case’s code is executed
and the entire switch statement is exited. The schema is shown in
Example 5-2; there can be as many cases as needed, and the default
case can be omitted (subject to restrictions that I’ll explain in a
moment).
Example 5-2. The Swift switch statement
switch tag { 
case pattern1: 
    statements 
case pattern2: 
    statements 
default: 
    statements 
}
Here’s an actual example:
switch i { 
case 1: 
    print("You have 1 thingy!") 
case 2: 
    print("You have 2 thingies!") 
default: 
    print("You have \(i) thingies!") 
}
In that code, an Int variable i functions as the tag. The value of i is
first compared to the value 1. If it is 1, that case’s code is executed
and that’s all. If it is not 1, it is compared to the value 2. If it is 2, that

--- Page 470 ---
case’s code is executed and that’s all. If the value of i matches
neither of those, the default case’s code is executed.
In Swift, a switch statement must be exhaustive. This means that
every possible value of the tag must be covered by a case. The
compiler will stop you if you try to violate this rule. If you don’t want
to write every case explicitly, you must add a “mop-up” case that
covers all other cases; a common way to do that is to add a default
case. It’s easy to write an exhaustive switch when the tag is an enum
with a small number of cases, but when the tag is an Int, there is an
infinite number of possible cases, so a “mop-up” case must appear.
Each case’s code can consist of multiple statements; it doesn’t have to
be a single statement, like the cases in the preceding example.
However, it must consist of at least a single statement; it is illegal for
a Swift switch case to be empty. It is legal for the first (or only)
statement of a case’s code to appear on the same line as the case, after
the colon; I could have written the preceding example like this:
switch i { 
case 1: print("You have 1 thingy!") 
case 2: print("You have 2 thingies!") 
default: print("You have \(i) thingies!") 
}
The minimum single statement of case code is the keyword break;
used in this way, break acts as a placeholder meaning, “Do nothing.”
It is very common for a switch statement to include a default (or
other “mop-up” case) consisting of nothing but the keyword break;

--- Page 471 ---
in this way, you exhaust all possible values of the tag, but if the value
is one that no case explicitly covers, you do nothing.
Now let’s focus on the comparison between the tag value and the case
value. In the preceding example, it works like an equality comparison
(==); but that isn’t the only possibility. In Swift, a case value is
actually a special expression called a pattern, and the pattern is
compared to the tag value using a “secret” pattern-matching operator,
~=. The more you know about the syntax for constructing a pattern,
the more powerful your case values and your switch statements will
be.
A pattern can include an underscore (_) to absorb all values without
using them. An underscore case is thus an alternative form of “mop-
up” case:
switch i { 
case 1: 
    print("You have 1 thingy!") 
case _: 
    print("You have many thingies!") 
}
A pattern can include a declaration of a local variable name (an
unconditional binding) to absorb all values and use the actual value.
This is yet another alternative form of “mop-up” case:
switch i { 
case 1: 
    print("You have 1 thingy!") 
case let n: 

--- Page 472 ---
    print("You have \(n) thingies!") 
}
When the tag is a Comparable, a case can include a Range; the test
involves sending the Range the contains message:
switch i { 
case 1: 
    print("You have 1 thingy!") 
case 2...10: 
    print("You have \(i) thingies!") 
default: 
    print("You have more thingies than I can count!") 
}
A Range pattern can be an opportunity to use partial range syntax:
switch i { 
case ..<0: 
    print("i is negative, namely \(i)") 
case 1...: 
    print("i is positive, namely \(i)") 
case 0: 
    print("i is 0") 
default:break 
}
When the tag is an Optional, a case can test it against nil. Moreover,
appending ? to a case pattern safely unwraps an Optional tag.
Presume that i is an Optional wrapping an Int:
switch i { 
case 1?: 
    print("You have 1 thingy!") 
case let n?: 
    print("You have \(n) thingies!") 

--- Page 473 ---
case nil: break 
}
When the tag is a Bool, a case can test it against a condition. Thus, by
a clever perversion, you can use the cases to test any conditions you
like by using true as the tag; a switch statement becomes a genuine
substitute for an extended if...else if construct. In this example
from my own code, I could have used if...else if, but a switch
statement seems cleaner:
func position(for bar: UIBarPositioning) -> UIBarPosition { 
    switch true { 
    case bar === self.navbar:  return .topAttached 
    case bar === self.toolbar: return .bottom 
    default:                   return .any 
    } 
}
A pattern can include a where clause adding a condition to limit the
truth value of the case. This is often, though not necessarily, used in
combination with a binding; the condition can refer to the variable
declared in the binding:
switch i { 
case let j where j < 0: 
    print("i is negative, namely \(j)") 
case let j where j > 0: 
    print("i is positive, namely \(j)") 
case 0: 
    print("i is 0") 
default:break 
}

--- Page 474 ---
A pattern can include the is operator to test the tag’s type. In this
example, we have a Dog class and its NoisyDog subclass, and d is
typed as Dog:
switch d { 
case is NoisyDog: 
    print("You have a noisy dog!") 
case _: 
    print("You have a dog") 
}
A pattern can include a cast with the as (not as?) operator. Typically,
you’ll combine this with a binding that declares a local variable;
despite the use of unconditional as, the value is conditionally cast
and, if the cast succeeds, the local variable carries the cast value into
the case code. Again, d is typed as Dog, which has a NoisyDog
subclass; assume that Dog implements bark and that NoisyDog
implements beQuiet:
switch d { 
case let nd as NoisyDog: 
    nd.beQuiet() 
case let d: 
    d.bark() 
}
You can also use as (not as?) to cast down the tag (and possibly
unwrap it) conditionally as part of a test against a specific match. In
this example, i might be an Any or an Optional wrapping an Any:
switch i { 
case 0 as Int: 
    print("It is 0") 

--- Page 475 ---
default:break 
}
You can perform multiple tests at once by expressing the tag as a
tuple and wrapping the corresponding tests in a tuple. The case passes
only if every test in the case tuple succeeds against the corresponding
member of the tag tuple. In this example, we start with a dictionary d
typed as [String:Any]. Using a tuple, we can safely attempt to fetch
and cast two values at once:
switch (d["size"], d["desc"]) { 
case let (size as Int, desc as String): 
    print("You have size \(size) and it is \(desc)") 
default:break 
}
When a tag is an enum, the cases can be cases of the enum. A switch
statement is thus an excellent way to handle an enum. Here’s the
Filter enum from Chapter 4:
enum Filter { 
    case albums 
    case playlists 
    case podcasts 
    case books 
}
And here’s a switch statement, where the tag, type, is a Filter; no
mop-up is needed, because I’ve exhausted the cases:
switch type { 
case .albums: 
    print("Albums") 
case .playlists: 

--- Page 476 ---
    print("Playlists") 
case .podcasts: 
    print("Podcasts") 
case .books: 
    print("Books") 
}
TIP
If an enum comes from Objective-C (or C) or the Swift standard library, an
exhaustive switch over it might get you a warning from the compiler that the
enum “may have additional unknown values.” I’ll explain what that means, and
what to do about it, in Appendix A.
A switch statement provides a way to extract an associated value
from an enum case. Recall this enum from Chapter 4:
enum MyError { 
    case number(Int) 
    case message(String) 
    case fatal 
}
If a case of the enum has an associated value, a tuple of patterns after
the matched case name is applied to the associated value. If a pattern
is a binding variable, it captures the associated value. The let (or
var) can appear inside the parentheses or after the case keyword; this
code illustrates both alternatives:
switch err { 
case .number(let theNumber): 
    print("It is a number: \(theNumber)") 
case let .message(theMessage): 

--- Page 477 ---
    print("It is a message: \(theMessage)") 
case .fatal: 
    print("It is fatal") 
}
If the let (or var) appears after the case keyword, I can add a where
clause:
switch err { 
case let .number(n) where n > 0: 
    print("It's a positive error number \(n)") 
case let .number(n) where n < 0: 
    print("It's a negative error number \(n)") 
case .number(0): 
    print("It's a zero error number") 
default:break 
}
If I don’t want to extract the error number but just want to match
against it, I can use some other pattern inside the parentheses:
switch err { 
case .number(1...): 
    print("It's a positive error number") 
case .number(..<0): 
    print("It's a negative error number") 
case .number(0): 
    print("It's a zero error number") 
default:break 
}
This same pattern also gives us yet another way to deal with an
Optional tag. An Optional, as I explained in Chapter 4, is in fact an
enum. It has two cases, .none and .some, where the wrapped value is
the .some case’s associated value. But now we know how to extract

--- Page 478 ---
the associated value! We can rewrite yet again the earlier example
where i is an Optional wrapping an Int:
switch i { 
case .none: break 
case .some(1): 
    print("You have 1 thingy!") 
case .some(let n): 
    print("You have \(n) thingies!") 
}
To combine switch case tests (with an implicit logical-or), separate
them with a comma:
switch i { 
case 1,3,5,7,9: 
    print("You have a small odd number of thingies") 
case 2,4,6,8,10: 
    print("You have a small even number of thingies") 
default: 
    print("You have too many thingies for me to count") 
}
In this example, i is declared as an Any:
switch i { 
case is Int, is Double: 
    print("It's some kind of number") 
default: 
    print("I don't know what it is") 
}
A comma can even combine patterns that declare binding variables,
provided they declare the same variable of the same type (err is our
MyError once again):

--- Page 479 ---
switch err { 
case let .number(n) where n > 0, let .number(n) where n < 0: 
    print("It's a nonzero error number \(n)") 
case .number(0): 
    print("It's a zero error number") 
default:break 
}
Another way of combining cases is to jump from one case to the next
by using a fallthrough statement. When a fallthrough statement
is encountered, the current case code is aborted immediately and the
next case code runs unconditionally. The test of the next case is not
performed, so the next case can’t declare any binding variables,
because they would never be set. It is not uncommon for a case to
consist entirely of a fallthrough statement:
switch pep { 
case "Manny": fallthrough 
case "Moe": fallthrough 
case "Jack": 
    print("\(pep) is a Pep boy") 
default: 
    print("I don't know who \(pep) is") 
}
IF CASE
When all you want to do is extract an associated value from one
enum case, a full switch statement may seem a bit heavy-handed. The
lightweight if case construct lets you use in a condition the same
sort of pattern syntax you’d use in a case of a switch statement. The
structural difference is that, whereas a switch case pattern is
compared against a previously stated tag, an if case pattern is

--- Page 480 ---
followed by an equal sign and then the tag. In this code, err is our
MyError enum once again:
if case let .number(n) = err { 
    print("The error number is \(n)") 
}
The condition starting with case can be part of a longer comma-
separated condition list:
if case let .number(n) = err, n < 0 { 
    print("The negative error number is \(n)") 
}
CONDITIONAL EVALUATION
An interesting problem arises when you’d like to decide on the fly
what value to use — for example, what value to assign to a variable.
This seems like a good use of a branching construct. You can, of
course, declare the variable first without initializing it, and then set it
from within a subsequent branching construct. It would be nice,
however, to use a branching construct as the variable’s value. Here, I
try (and fail) to write a variable assignment where the equal sign is
followed directly by a branching construct:
let title = switch type { // compile error 
case .albums: 
    "Albums" 
case .playlists: 
    "Playlists" 
case .podcasts: 
    "Podcasts" 
case .books: 

--- Page 481 ---
    "Books" 
}
There are languages that let you talk that way, but Swift is not one of
them. However, an easy workaround does exist — use a define-and-
call anonymous function, as I suggested in Chapter 2:
let title : String = { 
    switch type { 
    case .albums: 
        return "Albums" 
    case .playlists: 
        return "Playlists" 
    case .podcasts: 
        return "Podcasts" 
    case .books: 
        return "Books" 
    } 
}()
In the special case where a value can be decided by a two-pronged
condition, Swift provides the C ternary operator (?:). Its scheme is:
condition ? exp1 : exp2
If the condition is true, the expression exp1 is evaluated and the
result is used; otherwise, the expression exp2 is evaluated and the
result is used. You can use the ternary operator while performing an
assignment, using this schema:
let myVariable = condition ? exp1 : exp2
What myVariable gets initialized to depends on the truth value of the
condition.

--- Page 482 ---
I use the ternary operator heavily in my own code. Here’s an
example:
cell.accessoryType = 
    ix.row == self.currow ? .checkmark : .disclosureIndicator
The context needn’t be an assignment; here, we’re deciding what
value to pass as a function argument:
context.setFillColor(self.hilite ? purple.cgColor : beige.cgColor)
The ternary operator can also be used to determine the receiver of a
message. In this example, one of two UIViews will have its
background color set:
(self.firstRed ? v1 : v2).backgroundColor = .red
In Objective-C, there’s a collapsed form of the ternary operator that
allows you to test a value against nil. If it is nil, you get to supply a
substitute value. If it isn’t nil, the tested value itself is used. In Swift,
the analogous operation would involve testing an Optional: if the
tested Optional is nil, use the substitute value; if it isn’t nil, unwrap
the Optional and use the unwrapped value. Swift has such an operator
— the ?? operator (called the nil-coalescing operator).
Here’s a real-life example from my own code:
func tableView(_ tv: UITableView, numberOfRowsInSection sec: Int) -> Int 
{ 
    return self.titles?.count ?? 0 
}

--- Page 483 ---
In that example, self.titles is of type [String]?. If it’s not nil, I
want to unwrap the array and return its count. But if it is nil, there is
no data and no table to display — but I must return some number, so
clearly I want to return zero. The nil-coalescing operator lets me
express all that very neatly.
The nil-coalescing operator together with the Optional map(_:)
method neatly solves a class of problem where your goal is to process
the wrapped value of an Optional or, if it is nil, to assign some
default value. Suppose our goal is to produce a string expressing the
index of target within arr if it is present, or "NOT FOUND" if it is
not. This works, but it’s ugly:
let arr = ["Manny", "Moe", "Jack"] 
let target = // some string 
let pos = arr.firstIndex(of:target) 
let s = pos != nil ? String(pos!) : "NOT FOUND"
Here’s a more elegant way:
let arr = ["Manny", "Moe", "Jack"] 
let target = // some string 
let s = arr.firstIndex(of:target).map {String($0)} ?? "NOT FOUND"
Expressions using ?? can be chained:
let someNumber = i1 as? Int ?? i2 as? Int ?? 0
That code tries to cast i1 to an Int and use that Int. If that fails, it tries
to cast i2 to an Int and use that Int. If that fails, it gives up and uses
0.

--- Page 484 ---
Loops
The usual purpose of a loop is to repeat a block of code with some
simple difference on each iteration. This difference will typically
serve also as a signal for when to stop the loop. Swift provides two
basic loop structures: while loops and for loops.
WHILE LOOPS
A while loop comes in two forms, schematized in Example 5-3.
Example 5-3. The Swift while loop
while condition { 
    statements 
} 
 
repeat { 
    statements 
} while condition
The chief difference between the two forms is the timing of the test.
In the second form, the condition is tested after the block has
executed — meaning that the block will be executed at least once.
Usually, the code inside the block will change something that alters
the environment and hence the value of the condition, eventually
bringing the loop to an end. Here’s a typical example from my own
code (movenda is an array):
while self.movenda.count > 0 { 
    let p = self.movenda.removeLast() 
    // ... 
}

--- Page 485 ---
Each iteration removes an element from movenda, so eventually its co
unt, evaluated in the condition, falls to 0 and the loop is no longer
executed; execution then proceeds to the next line after the closing
curly braces.
In its first form, a while loop’s condition can involve a conditional
binding of an Optional. This provides a compact way of safely
unwrapping an Optional and looping until the Optional is nil; the
local variable containing the unwrapped Optional is in scope inside
the curly braces. My previous code can be rewritten more compactly:
while let p = self.movenda.popLast() { 
    // ... 
}
Here’s an example of repeat...while from my own code. In my
LinkSame app, if there are no legal moves, we pick up all the cards,
shuffle them, and redeal them into the same positions. It’s possible
that when we do that, there will still be no legal moves. So we do it
again until there is a legal move:
repeat { 
    var deck = self.gatherUpCards() 
    deck.shuffle() 
    self.redeal(deck) 
} while self.legalPath() == nil
Similar to the if case construct, while case lets you use a switch
case pattern. In this rather artificial example, we have an array of
various MyError enums:

--- Page 486 ---
let arr : [MyError] = [ 
    .message("ouch"), .message("yipes"), .number(10), .number(-1), .fata
l 
]
We can extract the .message associated string values from the start
of the array, like this:
var i = 0 
while case let .message(message) = arr[i]  { 
    print(message) // "ouch", then "yipes"; then the loop stops 
    i += 1 
}
FOR LOOPS
The Swift for loop is schematized in Example 5-4.
Example 5-4. The Swift for loop
for variable in sequence { 
    statements 
}
With a for loop, you cycle through (enumerate) a sequence. The
sequence must be an instance of a type that adopts the Sequence
protocol. An Array is a Sequence. A Dictionary is a Sequence. A Set
is a Sequence. A String is a Sequence. A Range is a Sequence (as
long as it is a range of something that comes in discrete steps, like
Int). Those, and sequences derived from them, are the things to which
you will regularly apply for...in.
On each iteration, a successive element of the sequence is used to
initialize the variable. The variable is local to the block; it is in scope

--- Page 487 ---
inside the curly braces, and is not visible outside them. The variable
is implicitly declared with let; it is immutable by default. If you
need to assign to or mutate the variable within the block, write for v
ar.
A common use of for loops is to iterate through successive numbers.
This is easy in Swift, because you can readily create a sequence of
numbers on the fly — a Range:
for i in 1...5 { 
    print(i) // 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 
}
A Sequence has a makeIterator method that yields an iterator object
adopting IteratorProtocol. According to this protocol, the iterator has
a mutating next method that returns the next object in the sequence
wrapped in an Optional, or nil if there is no next object. Under the
hood, for...in is repeatedly calling the next method in a while
loop. The previous code actually works like this:
var iterator = (1...5).makeIterator() 
while let i = iterator.next() { 
    print(i) // 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 
}
Sometimes you may find that writing out the while loop explicitly in
that way makes the loop easier to control and to customize.
When you cycle through a sequence with for...in, what you’re
actually cycling through is a copy of the sequence. That means it’s
safe to mutate the sequence while you’re cycling through it:

--- Page 488 ---
var s : Set = [1,2,3,4,5] 
for i in s { 
    if i.isMultiple(of:2) { 
        s.remove(i) 
    } 
} // s is now [1,3,5]
That may not be the most elegant way to remove all even numbers
from the Set s, but it’s not illegal or dangerous.
Not only is the sequence a copy; if the variable type is a value type
(“Value Types and Reference Types”), the variable is a copy. So even
if you mutate the variable (which is legal if you say for var), the
original sequence’s elements are unaffected. Here’s a Dog that’s a
struct, not a class:
struct Dog { 
    var name : String 
    init(_ n:String) { 
        self.name = n 
    } 
}
We cycle through an array of Dogs, uppercasing their names:
var dogs : [Dog] = [Dog("rover"), Dog("fido")] 
for var dog in dogs { 
    dog.name = dog.name.uppercased() 
}
But nothing useful happens; dogs still consists of Dogs named "rove
r" and "fido". If the Sequence is also a Collection, one workaround
is to cycle through its indices instead, so that you can assign back
into the original array:

--- Page 489 ---
var dogs : [Dog] = [Dog("rover"), Dog("fido")] 
for ix in dogs.indices { 
    dogs[ix].name = dogs[ix].name.uppercased() 
}
Now dogs consists of Dogs named "ROVER" and "FIDO".
As I explained in Chapter 4, you may encounter an array coming
from Objective-C whose elements will need to be cast down from
Any. If your goal is to iterate through that array, you can cast down as
part of the sequence specification:
let p = Pep() // p.boys() is an array of Any 
for boy in p.boys() as! [String] { 
    // ... 
}
The sequence enumerated method yields a succession of tuples in
which each element of the original sequence (labeled element) is
preceded by its index number (labeled offset). In this example from
my real code, tiles is an array of UIViews and centers is an array
of CGPoints saying where those views are to be positioned:
for (i,v) in self.tiles.enumerated() { 
    v.center = self.centers[i] 
}
A for...in construct can take a where clause, allowing you to skip
some values of the sequence:
for i in 0...10 where i.isMultiple(of:2) { 
    print(i) // 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 
}

--- Page 490 ---
Like if case and while case, there’s also for case, permitting a
switch case pattern to be used in a for loop. The tag is each
successive value of the sequence, so no assignment operator is used.
To illustrate, let’s start again with an array of MyError enums:
let arr : [MyError] = [ 
    .message("ouch"), .message("yipes"), .number(10), .number(-1), .fata
l 
]
Here we cycle through the whole array, extracting only the .number
associated values:
for case let .number(i) in arr { 
    print(i) // 10, -1 
}
Another common use of for case is to cast down conditionally,
picking out only those members of the sequence that can be cast
down safely. Let’s say I want to hide all subviews that happen to be
buttons:
for case let b as UIButton in self.boardView.subviews { 
    b.isHidden = true 
}
A sequence also has instance methods, such as map(_:),
filter(_:), and reversed; you can apply these to hone the
sequence through which we will cycle. In this example, I count
backward by even numbers:
let range = (0...10).reversed().filter {$0.isMultiple(of:2)} 
for i in range { 

--- Page 491 ---
    print(i) // 10, 8, 6, 4, 2, 0 
}
Yet another approach is to generate the sequence by calling global
functions such as stride(from:through:by) or stride(from:to:b
y:). These are applicable to adopters of the Strideable protocol, such
as numeric types and anything else that can be incremented and
decremented. Which form you use depends on whether you want the
sequence to include the final value. The by: argument can be
negative:
for i in stride(from: 10, through: 0, by: -2) { 
    print(i) // 10, 8, 6, 4, 2, 0 
}
For maximum flexibility, you can use the global sequence function
to generate your sequence by rule. It takes two parameters — an
initial value, and a generation function that returns the next value
based on what has gone before. In theory, the sequence generated by
the sequence function can be infinite in length — though this is not a
problem, because the resulting sequence is “lazy,” meaning that an
element isn’t generated until you ask for it. In reality, you’ll use one
of two techniques to limit the result:
Return nil
The generation function can limit the sequence by returning nil
to signal that the end has been reached:
let seq = sequence(first:1) {$0 >= 10 ? nil : $0 + 1} 
for i in seq { 

--- Page 492 ---
    print(i) // 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10 
}
Stop requesting elements
You can request just a piece of the infinite sequence — for
example, by cycling through the sequence for a while and then
stopping, or by taking a finite prefix:
let seq = sequence(first:1) {$0 + 1} 
for i in seq.prefix(5) { 
    print(i) // 1,2,3,4,5 
}
The sequence function comes in two forms:
sequence(first:next:)
Initially hands first into the next: function and subsequently
hands the previous result of the next: function into the next:
function, as illustrated in the preceding examples.
sequence(state:next:)
This form is more general: it repeatedly hands state into the nex
t: function as an inout parameter; the next: function is
expected to set that parameter, using it as a scratchpad, in addition
to returning the next value in the sequence.
An obvious illustration of the second form is the Fibonacci series:
let fib = sequence(state:(0,1)) { (pair: inout (Int,Int)) -> Int in 
    let n = pair.0 + pair.1 
    pair = (pair.1,n) 
    return n 
} 
for i in fib.prefix(10) { 

--- Page 493 ---
    print(i) // 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89 
}
TIP
Any sequence can be made “lazy” by asking for its lazy property. This can be a
source of efficiency if you’re going to be looping through the sequence
(explicitly or implicitly) and potentially short-circuiting the loop; there’s no
point generating more elements of the sequence than the loop will actually
process, and that is what lazy prevents. Importantly, laziness propagates
through a chain of sequence operations. I’ll give an example in the next section.

--- Page 494 ---
TRAILING CLOSURES AND FLOW CONTROL BLOCKS
Trailing closures do not play well with subsequent flow control blocks; therefore
parentheses are sometimes needed where generally they would not be. The
closing curly brace of the trailing closure, followed by the opening curly brace of
the block, upsets the compiler:
for i in arr.map {$0*2} { // warning 
    print(i) 
}
To silence the warning, wrap the trailing closure in parentheses:
for i in arr.map ({$0*2}) { 
    print(i) 
}
In this example, the curly braces are not adjacent, but you get the warning
anyway:
if arr.map {$0*2}.first == 4 { // warning
Again, parentheses are the simplest solution:
if arr.map ({$0*2}).first == 4 {
Jumping
Although branching and looping constitute the bulk of the decision-
making flow of code execution, sometimes they are insufficient to
express the logic of what needs to happen next. It can be useful to
interrupt your code’s progress completely and jump to a different
place within it. In this section, I’ll list Swift’s modes of jumping.

--- Page 495 ---
These are all controlled forms of early exit from the current flow of
code.
RETURN
You already know one form of early exit: the return statement. One
function calls another, which may call another, and so on, forming a
call stack. When a return statement is encountered, execution of this
function is aborted and the path of execution jumps to the point
where the call was made in the function one level up the call stack.
SHORT-CIRCUITING AND LABELS
Swift has several ways of short-circuiting the flow of branch and loop
constructs:
fallthrough
A fallthrough statement in a switch case aborts execution of the
current case code and immediately begins executing the code of
the next case. There must be a next case or the compiler will stop
you.
continue
A continue statement in a loop construct aborts execution of the
current iteration and proceeds to the next iteration:
In a while loop, continue means to perform immediately the
conditional test.
In a for loop, continue means to proceed immediately to the
next iteration if there is one.
break

--- Page 496 ---
A break statement aborts the current construct and proceeds after
the end of the construct:
In a loop, break aborts the loop.
In a switch case, break aborts the entire switch construct.
When constructs are nested, you may need to specify which construct
you mean when you say continue or break. Therefore, Swift
permits you to put a label before the start of an if construct, a switch
statement, a while loop, or a for loop (or a do block, which I’ll
describe later). The label is an arbitrary name followed by a colon.
You can then use that label name in a continue statement or a break
statement within the labeled construct at any depth, to specify that
this is the construct you are referring to.
To illustrate, here’s a simple struct for generating prime numbers:
struct Primes { 
    static var primes = [2] 
    static func appendNextPrime() { 
        next: for i in (primes.last!+1)... { 
            let sqrt = Int(Double(i).squareRoot()) 
            for prime in primes.lazy.prefix(while: {$0 <= sqrt}) { 
                if i.isMultiple(of: prime) { 
                    continue next 
                } 
            } 
            primes.append(i) 
            return 
        } 
    } 
}

--- Page 497 ---
The algorithm is crude — it could be optimized further — but it’s
effective and straightforward. The struct maintains a list of the primes
we’ve found so far, and appendNextPrime basically just looks at
each successive larger integer i to see whether any of the primes
we’ve already found (prime) divides it. If so, i is not a prime, so we
want to go on to the next i. But if we merely say continue, we’ll
jump to the next prime, not to the next i. The label solves the
problem.
(That example also demonstrates lazy. We want to keep prefix(whi
le:_) from working harder than it has to; there’s no point extracting
all the primes less than the square root of i in advance, because the
loop might be short-circuited. So we make primes lazy, which makes
prefix(while:_) lazy, and so a prime is tested as a divisor of i
only if it has to be.)
THROWING AND CATCHING ERRORS
Sometimes a situation arises where further coherent progress is
impossible: the entire operation in which we are engaged has failed.
It can then be desirable to abort the current scope, and possibly the
current function, and possibly even the function that called that
function, and so on, exiting to some point where we can acknowledge
this failure and proceed in good order in some other way.
For this purpose, Swift provides a mechanism for throwing and
catching errors. In keeping with its usual insistence on safety and
clarity, Swift imposes strict conditions on the use of this mechanism,
and the compiler will ensure that you adhere to them.

--- Page 498 ---
An error, in this sense, is a kind of message, presumably indicating
what went wrong. This message is passed up the nest of scopes and
function calls as part of the error-handling process, and the code that
recovers from the failure can read it. In Swift, an error must be an
object of a type that adopts the Error protocol, which has just two
requirements: a String _domain property and an Int _code property.
The purpose of those properties is to help errors cross the bridge
between Swift and Objective-C; in real life, they are hidden and you
will be unaware of them. The Error object will be one of the
following:
A Swift type that adopts Error
As soon as a Swift type formally declares adoption of the Error
protocol, it is ready to be used as an error object; the protocol
requirements are magically fulfilled for you behind the scenes.
Typically, this type will be an enum, with different cases
distinguishing different kinds of possible failure, perhaps with
raw values or associated types to carry further information.
NSError
NSError is Cocoa’s class for communicating the nature of a
problem; Swift extends NSError to adopt Error and bridges them
to one another. If your call to a Cocoa method generates a failure,
Cocoa will send you an NSError instance typed as an Error.
There are two stages of the error mechanism to consider:
Throwing an error
Throwing an error aborts the current path of execution and hands
an error object to the error mechanism.

--- Page 499 ---
Catching an error
Catching an error receives that error object from the error
mechanism and responds in good order, with the path of
execution resuming after the point of catching. In effect, we have
jumped from the throwing point to the catching point.
To throw an error, use the keyword throw followed by an error
object. That’s all it takes! The current block of code is immediately
aborted, and the error mechanism takes over. However, to ensure that
the throw command is used coherently, Swift imposes a rule that you
can say throw only in a context where the error will be caught. What
is such a context?
The primary context for throwing and catching an error is the do...c
atch construct. This consists of a do block and one or more catch
blocks. It is legal to throw in the do block; an accompanying catch
block can then be fed any errors thrown from within the do block.
The do...catch construct’s schema looks like Example 5-5.
Example 5-5. The Swift do...catch construct
do { 
    statements // a throw can happen here 
} catch errortype { 
    statements 
} catch { 
    statements 
}
A single do block can be accompanied by multiple catch blocks.
Catch blocks are like the cases of a switch statement, and will usually
have the same logic: first, you might have specialized catch blocks,

--- Page 500 ---
each of which is designed to handle some limited set of possible
errors; finally, you might (and usually will) have a general catch
block that acts as the default, mopping up any errors that were not
caught by any of the specialized catch blocks.
In fact, the syntax used by a catch block to specify what sorts of error
it catches is the pattern syntax used by a case in a switch statement!
Imagine that this is a switch statement, and that the tag is the error
object. Then the matching of that error object to a particular catch
block is performed just as if you had written case instead of catch.
Typically, when the Error is an enum, a specialized catch block will
state at least the enum that it catches, and possibly also the case of
that enum; it can have a binding, to capture the enum or its associated
type; and it can have a where clause to limit the possibilities still
further.
To illustrate, I’ll start by defining a couple of errors:
enum MyFirstError : Error { 
    case firstMinorMistake 
    case firstMajorMistake 
    case firstFatalMistake 
} 
enum MySecondError : Error { 
    case secondMinorMistake(i:Int) 
    case secondMajorMistake(s:String) 
    case secondFatalMistake 
}
And here’s a do...catch construct designed to demonstrate some of
the different ways we can catch different errors in different catch
blocks:

--- Page 501 ---
do { 
    // throw can happen here 
} catch MyFirstError.firstMinorMistake, MyFirstError.firstMajorMistake { 
    // catches MyFirstError.firstMinorMistake 
    // also catches MyFirstError.firstMajorMistake 
} catch let err as MyFirstError { 
    // catches other case(s) of MyFirstError 
} catch MySecondError.secondMinorMistake(let i) where i < 0 { 
    // catches e.g. MySecondError.secondMinorMistake(i:-3) 
} catch { 
    // catches everything else 
}
Now let’s talk about how the error object makes its way into each of
the catch blocks:
Catch block with pattern
In a catch block with an accompanying pattern, it is up to you to
capture in the pattern any desired information about the error. If
you want the error itself to travel as a variable into the catch
block, you’ll need a binding in the pattern.
Catch block with “mop-up” binding
A catch block whose pattern is only a binding catches any error
under that name; catch let mistake is a “mop-up” catch block
that catches any error as a variable called mistake.
Bare catch block
In a “mop-up” catch block with no accompanying pattern (that is,
the bare word catch and no more), the error arrives into the block
automatically as a variable called error.
Let’s look again at the previous example, but this time we’ll note
whether and how the error object arrives into each catch block:

--- Page 502 ---
do { 
    // throw can happen here 
} catch MyFirstError.firstMinorMistake { 
    // no error object 
    // but we know it's either MyFirstError.firstMinorMistake 
    // or MyFirstError.firstMajorMistake 
} catch let err as MyFirstError { 
    // MyFirstError arrives as err 
} catch MySecondError.secondMinorMistake(let i) where i < 0 { 
    // only i arrives, but we know it's MySecondError.secondMinorMistake 
} catch { 
    // error object arrives as error 
}
So much for the do...catch construct. But there’s something else
that can happen to a thrown error; instead of being caught directly, it
can percolate up the call stack, leaving the current function and
arriving at the point where this function was called. In this situation,
the error won’t be caught here, at the point of throwing; it needs to be
caught further up the call stack. This can happen in one of two ways:
Throw without a corresponding catch
A do...catch construct might lack a “mop-up” catch block.
Then a throw inside the do block might not be caught here.
Throw outside a do block
A throw might occur outside of any immediate do...catch
construct.
However, a thrown error must be caught somehow. We therefore need
a way to say to the compiler: “Look, I understand that it looks like
this throw is not happening in a context where it will be caught, but
that’s only because you’re not looking far enough up the call stack. If

--- Page 503 ---
you do look up far enough, you’ll see that a throw at this point is
eventually caught.” And there is a way to say that! Use the throws
keyword in a function declaration.
If you mark a function with the throws keyword, then its entire body
becomes a legal place for throwing. The syntax for declaring a throw
s function is that the keyword throws appears immediately after the
parameter list (and before the arrow operator, if there is one):
enum NotLongEnough : Error { 
    case iSaidLongIMeantLong 
} 
func giveMeALongString(_ s:String) throws { 
    if s.count < 5 { 
        throw NotLongEnough.iSaidLongIMeantLong 
    } 
    print("thanks for the string") 
}
The addition of throws to a function declaration creates a distinct
function type. The type of giveMeALongString is not (String) ->
(), but rather (String) throws -> (). If a function receives as
parameter a function that can throw, that parameter’s type needs to be
specified accordingly:
func receiveThrower(_ f:(String) throws -> ()) { 
    // ... 
}
That function can now be called with giveMeALongString as
argument:

--- Page 504 ---
func callReceiveThrower() { 
    receiveThrower(giveMeALongString) 
}
An anonymous function, if necessary, can include the keyword throw
s in its in expression, in the same place where it would appear in a
normal function declaration. But this is not necessary if, as is usually
the case, the anonymous function’s type is known by inference:
func receiveThrower(_ f:(String) throws -> ()) { 
    // ... 
} 
func callReceiveThrower() { 
    receiveThrower { 
        s in // can say "s throws in", but not required 
        if s.count < 5 { 
            throw NotLongEnough.iSaidLongIMeantLong 
        } 
        print("thanks for the string") 
    } 
}
So now we know that throws functions exist. But there’s more. Swift
imposes some requirements on the caller of a throws function:
The caller of a throws function must precede the function call
with the keyword try. This keyword acknowledges, to the
programmer and to the compiler, that this function can throw.
The function call must be made in a place where throwing is legal!
A function called with try can throw, so saying try is just like
saying throw: you must say it either in the do block of a do...cat
ch construct or in the body of a throws function.

--- Page 505 ---
Swift also provides two variants of try that you will often use as a
shorthand:
try!
If you are very sure that a throws function will in fact not throw,
then you can call it with the keyword try! instead of try. This
relieves you of all further responsibility: you can say try!
anywhere, without catching the possible throw. But be warned: if
you’re wrong, and this function does throw when your program
runs, your program can crash at that moment, because you have
allowed an error to percolate, uncaught, all the way up to the top
of the call stack.
try?
Like try!, you can use try? anywhere; but, like a do...catch
construct, try? catches the throw if there is one, without
crashing. If there’s a throw, you don’t receive any error
information, as you would with a do...catch construct; but try?
tells you if there was a throw, by returning nil. Thus, try? is
useful particularly in situations where you’re calling a throws
function that returns a value. If there’s a throw, try? returns nil.
If there’s no throw, try? wraps the returned value in an Optional.
Commonly, you’ll unwrap that Optional safely in the same line
with a conditional binding.
To illustrate, here’s an artificial test method that can either throw or
return a String:
func canThrowOrReturnString(shouldThrow:Bool) throws -> String { 
    enum Whoops : Error { 
        case oops 
    } 
    if shouldThrow { 

--- Page 506 ---
        throw Whoops.oops 
    } 
    return "Howdy" 
}
We can call that method with try inside a do...catch construct:
do { 
    let s = try self.canThrowOrReturnString(shouldThrow: true) 
    print(s) 
} catch { 
    print(error) 
}
At the other extreme, we can call that method with try! anywhere,
but if the method throws, we’ll crash:
let s = try! self.canThrowOrReturnString(shouldThrow: false) 
print(s)
In between, we can call our method with try? anywhere. If the
method doesn’t throw, we’ll receive a String wrapped in an Optional;
if it does throw, we won’t crash and we’ll receive nil (but no error
information):
if let s = try? self.canThrowOrReturnString(shouldThrow: true) { 
    print(s) 
} else { 
    print("failed") 
}
Just as with an Optional chain, if a throws function returns no value,
the return type from try? is Void? — and you can capture that and

--- Page 507 ---
compare it against nil to learn whether there was an error. In this
example, canThrowButReturnsNoValue throws but returns no value:
let ok : Void? = try? self.canThrowButReturnsNoValue()
Now, if ok is not nil, no error was thrown.
RETHROWS
A function that receives a throws function parameter, and that calls that function
(with try), and that doesn’t throw for any other reason, may itself be marked as
rethrows instead of throws. The difference is that when a rethrows function is
called, the caller can pass as argument a function that does not throw, and in
that case the call doesn’t have to be marked with try (and the calling function
doesn’t have to be marked with throws):
func receiveThrower(_ f:(String) throws -> ()) rethrows { 
    try f("ok?") 
} 
func callReceiveThrower() { // no throws needed 
    receiveThrower { s in // no try needed 
        print("thanks for the string!") 
    } 
}
An initializer can throw — that is, the initializer’s declaration is
marked throws. So in designing an initializer, when should you
prefer a failable initializer (init?) and when should you prefer a
throwing initializer (init...throws)? No hard and fast rule can be
given; it depends on your overall design goals. In general, init?
implies simple failure to create an instance, whereas throws implies
that there is useful information to be gleaned by studying the error.

--- Page 508 ---
Even if your own code never uses the keyword throw explicitly,
you’re still very likely, in real life, to call Cocoa methods that are
marked with throws. (For the details of how the error mechanism
works in Objective-C and how this is bridged to the Swift throws
mechanism, see Appendix A.) Objective-C will be supplying an
NSError; this class is bridged to Swift Error. Swift helps you cross
the bridge by giving Error a localizedDescription property,
allowing you to read NSError’s localizedDescription. Moreover,
you can catch a specific NSError by its name. The name you’ll use is
the NSError domain, and optionally (with dot-notation) the Cocoa
name of its code.
For example, NSString initWithContentsOfFile:encoding:erro
r: appears to Swift as:
init(contentsOfFile path: String, encoding enc: String.Encoding) throws
So let’s say we call that initializer, and we want specifically to catch
the error thrown when there is no such file. This NSError’s domain,
according to Cocoa, is "NSCocoaErrorDomain". Its code is 260, for
which Cocoa provides the name NSFileReadNoSuchFileError (I
found that out by looking in the FoundationErrors.h header file in
Objective-C). The Swift Foundation overlay translates those into
CocoaError and .fileReadNoSuchFile respectively, so we can catch
the error like this:
do { 
    let f = // path to some file, maybe 
    let s = try String(contentsOfFile: f) 
    // ... if successful, do something with s ... 
} catch CocoaError.fileReadNoSuchFile { 

--- Page 509 ---
    print("no such file") 
} catch { 
    print(error) 
}
Objective-C sees a Swift error coherently as well. By default, it
receives a Swift error as an NSError whose domain is the name of the
Swift object type. If the Swift object type is an enum, the NSError’s c
ode is the index number of its case; otherwise, the code is 1. When
you want to provide Objective-C with a fuller complement of
information, make your error type adopt one or both of these
protocols:
LocalizedError
Adopts Error, adding three optional properties: errorDescriptio
n (NSError localizedDescription), failureReason (NSError
localizedFailureReason), and recoverySuggestion (NSError
localizedRecoverySuggestion). Observe that these are Strin
g? properties; declaring them as simple String rather than
Optional fails to communicate the information to Objective-C,
and is a common mistake.
CustomNSError
Adopts Error, adding three properties with default
implementations: errorDomain, errorCode, and
errorUserInfo, which Objective-C will see as the NSError’s do
main, code, and userInfo.

--- Page 510 ---
TIP
Later in this chapter, I’ll talk about a new Swift 5 feature, the Result enum, that
lets you deal elegantly with errors in an asynchronous context.
NESTED SCOPES
When a local variable needs to exist only for a few lines of code, you
might like to define an artificial scope — a custom nested scope, at
the start of which you can introduce your local variable, and at the
end of which that variable will be permitted to go out of scope,
destroying its value automatically. Swift does not permit you to use
bare curly braces to do this. Instead, use a bare do block without a ca
tch.
Here’s a rewrite of our earlier code (Chapter 4) for uniquing an array
while keeping its order:
var arr = ["Manny", "Manny", "Moe", "Jack", "Jack", "Moe", "Manny"] 
do { 
    var temp = Set<String>() 
    arr = arr.filter { temp.insert($0).inserted } 
}
The only purpose of temp is to act as a “helper” for this one filter
call. So we embed its declaration and the filter call in a bare do
block; that way, temp is in a lower scope that doesn’t clutter up our
local namespace, and as soon as the filter call is over, we exit the
block and temp is destroyed.

--- Page 511 ---
Another use of a bare do block is to implement the simplest form of
early exit. The do block gives you a scope to jump out of; now you
can label the do block and break to that label:
out: do { 
    // ... 
    if somethingBadHappened { 
        break out 
    } 
    // we won't get here if somethingBadHappened 
}
DEFER STATEMENT
A defer statement applies to the scope in which it appears, such as a
function body, a while block, an if construct, a do block, and so on.
Wherever you say defer, curly braces surround it somehow; the
defer block will be executed when the path of execution leaves those
curly braces. Leaving the curly braces can involve reaching the last
line of code within the curly braces, or any of the forms of early exit
described earlier in this section.
To see one reason why this is useful, consider the following pair of
commands:
self.view.window?.isUserInteractionEnabled = false
Stops all user touches from reaching any view of the application.
self.view.window?.isUserInteractionEnabled = true
Restores the ability of user touches to reach views of the
application.

--- Page 512 ---
It can be valuable to turn off user interactions at the start of some
slightly time-consuming operation and then turn them back on after
that operation, especially when, during the operation, the interface or
the app’s logic will be in some state where the user’s tapping a
button, say, could cause things to go awry. It is not uncommon for a
method to be constructed like this:
func doSomethingTimeConsuming() { 
    self.view.window?.isUserInteractionEnabled = false 
    // ... do stuff ... 
    self.view.window?.isUserInteractionEnabled = true 
}
All well and good — if we can guarantee that the only path of
execution out of this function will be by way of that last line. But
what if we need to return early from this function? Our code now
looks like this:
func doSomethingTimeConsuming() { 
    self.view.window?.isUserInteractionEnabled = false 
    // ... do stuff ... 
    if somethingHappened { 
        return 
    } 
    // ... do more stuff ... 
    self.view.window?.isUserInteractionEnabled = true 
}
Oops! We’ve just made a terrible mistake. By providing an additional
path out of our doSomethingTimeConsuming function, we’ve created
the possibility that our code might never encounter the call to set isU
serInteractionEnabled to true. We might leave our function by
way of the return statement — and the user will then be left unable to

--- Page 513 ---
interact with the interface. Obviously, we need to add another isUser
InteractionEnabled = true call inside the if construct, just before
the return statement. But as we continue to develop our code, we
must remember, if we add further ways out of this function, to add
yet another isUserInteractionEnabled = true call for each of
them. This is madness!
The defer statement solves the problem. It lets us specify once what
should happen when we leave this scope, no matter how. Our code
now looks like this:
func doSomethingTimeConsuming() { 
    defer { 
        self.view.window?.isUserInteractionEnabled = true 
    } 
    self.view.window?.isUserInteractionEnabled = false 
    // ... do stuff ... 
    if somethingHappened { 
        return 
    } 
    // ... do more stuff ... 
}
The isUserInteractionEnabled = true call in the defer block
will be executed, not where it appears, but before the return
statement, or before the last line of the method — whichever path of
execution ends up leaving the function. The defer statement says:
“Eventually, and as late as possible, be sure to execute this code.” We
have ensured the necessary balance between turning off user
interactions and turning them back on again. Most uses of the defer
statement will probably come under this same rubric: you’ll use it to
balance a command or restore a disturbed state.

--- Page 514 ---
Observe that in the preceding code, I placed the defer statement very
early in its surrounding scope. This placement is important because a
defer statement is itself a command. If a defer statement is not
actually encountered by the path of execution before we exit from the
surrounding scope, its block won’t be executed. For this reason,
always place your defer statement as close to the start of its
surrounding block as you can, to ensure that it will in fact be
encountered.
When a defer statement changes a value that is returned by a return
statement, the return happens first and the defer statement happens
second. In other words, defer effectively lets you return a value and
then change it. This example comes from Apple’s own code (in the
documentation, demonstrating how to write a struct that can adopt the
Sequence protocol):
struct Countdown: Sequence, IteratorProtocol { 
    var count: Int 
    mutating func next() -> Int? { 
        if count == 0 { 
            return nil 
        } else { 
            defer { count -= 1 } 
            return count 
        } 
    } 
}
That code returns the current value of count and then decrements cou
nt, ready for the next call to the next method. Without defer, we’d
decrement count and then return the decremented value, which is not
what’s wanted.

--- Page 515 ---
If the current scope has multiple defer blocks pending, they will be
called in the reverse of the order in which they were originally
encountered. In effect, there is a defer stack; each successive defer
statement, as it is encountered, pushes its code onto the top of the
stack, and exiting the scope in which a defer statement appeared pops
that code and executes it.
ABORTING THE WHOLE PROGRAM
Aborting the whole program is an extreme form of flow control; the
program stops dead in its tracks. In effect, you have deliberately
crashed your own program. This is an unusual thing to do, but it can
be useful as a way of raising a very red flag: you don’t really want to
abort, so if you do abort, things must be so bad that you’ve no choice.
One way to abort is by calling the global function fatalError. It
takes a String parameter permitting you to provide a message to
appear in the console. I’ve already given this example:
required init?(coder: NSCoder) { 
    fatalError("init(coder:) has not been implemented") 
}
That code says, in effect, that execution should never reach this point.
We have declared init(coder:) just because it is required, and we
need to satisfy the compiler; but we have no real implementation of i
nit(coder:), and we do not expect to be initialized this way. If we
are initialized this way, something has gone very wrong, and we want
to crash, because our program has a serious bug.

--- Page 516 ---
An initializer containing a fatalError call does not have to initialize
any properties. This is because fatalError is declared as returning
the special Never enum type, which causes the compiler to abandon
any contextual requirements. Similarly, a function that returns a value
does not have to return any value if a fatalError call is
encountered.
You can abort conditionally by calling the assert function. Its first
parameter is a condition — something that evaluates as a Bool. If the
condition is false, we will abort; the second parameter is a String
message to appear in the console if we do abort. The idea here is that
you are making a bet (an assertion) that the condition is true — a bet
that you feel so strongly about that if the condition is false, there’s a
serious bug in your program and you want to crash so you can learn
of this bug and fix it.
By default, assert works only when you’re developing your
program. When your program is to be finalized and made public, you
throw a different build switch, telling the compiler that assert
should be ignored. In effect, the conditions in your assert calls are
then disregarded; they are all seen as true. This means that you can
safely leave assert calls in your code. By the time your program
ships, of course, none of your assertions should be failing; any bugs
that caused them to fail should already have been ironed out.
The disabling of assertions in shipping code is performed in an
interesting way. The condition parameter is given an extra layer of
indirection by declaring it as an @autoclosure function. This means
that, even though the parameter is not in fact a function, the compiler

--- Page 517 ---
will wrap it in a function; the runtime won’t call that function unless
it has to. In shipping code, the runtime will not call that function.
This mechanism averts expensive and unnecessary evaluation: an ass
ert condition test may involve side effects, but the test won’t even be
performed when assertions are turned off in your shipping program.
In addition, Swift provides the assertionFailure function. It’s like
an assert that always fails — and, like an assert, it doesn’t fail in
your shipping program where assertions are turned off. It’s a
convenient synonym for assert(false), as a way of assuring
yourself that your code never goes where it’s never supposed to go.
precondition and preconditionFailure are similar to assert and
assertionFailure, except that they do fail even in a shipping
program.
GUARD
When your code needs to decide whether to exit early, Swift provides
a special syntax — the guard construct. In effect, a guard construct is
an if construct where you exit early if the condition fails. Its form is
shown in Example 5-6.
Example 5-6. The Swift guard construct
guard condition else { 
    statements 
    exit 
}
A guard construct consists solely of a condition and an else block.
The else block must jump out of the current scope, by any of the

--- Page 518 ---
means that Swift provides, such as return, break, continue, throw,
or fatalError — anything that guarantees to the compiler that, in
case of failure of the condition, execution absolutely will not proceed
within the block that contains the guard construct.
Because the guard construct guarantees an exit on failure of the
condition, the compiler knows that the condition has succeeded after
the guard construct if we do not exit. An elegant consequence is that
a conditional binding in the condition is in scope after the guard
construct, without introducing a further nested scope:
guard let s = optionalString else {return} 
// s is now a String (not an Optional)
For the same reason, a guard construct’s conditional binding can’t
use, on the left side of the equal sign, a name already declared in the
same scope. This is illegal:
let s = // ... some Optional 
guard let s = s else {return} // compile error
The reason is that guard let, unlike if let and while let, doesn’t
declare the bound variable for a nested scope; it declares it for this
scope. We can’t declare s here because s has already been declared in
the same scope.
In my own code, it’s not uncommon to have a series of guard
constructs, one after another. This may seem a rather clunky and
imperative mode of expression, but I’m fond of it nevertheless. It’s a
nice alternative to a single elaborate if construct, or to the “pyramid

--- Page 519 ---
of doom” that I discussed earlier; and it looks like exactly what it is, a
sequence of gates through which the code must pass in order to
proceed further. Here’s an actual example from my real-life code:
@objc func tapField(_ g: Any) { 
    // g must be a gesture recognizer 
    guard let g = g as? UIGestureRecognizer else {return} 
    // and the gesture recognizer must have a view 
    guard g.view != nil else {return} 
    // okay, now we can proceed... 
}
It’s often possible to combine multiple guard statement conditions
into a single condition list:
@objc func tapField(_ g: Any) { 
    // g must be a gesture recognizer 
    // and the gesture recognizer must have a view 
    guard let g = g as? UIGestureRecognizer, g.view != nil 
        else {return} 
    // okay, now we can proceed... 
}
A guard construct will also come in handy in conjunction with try?.
Let’s presume we can’t proceed unless String(contentsOfFile:)
succeeds. Then we can call it like this:
let f = // path to some file, maybe 
guard let s = try? String(contentsOfFile: f) else {return} 
// s is now a String (not an Optional)
There is also a guard case construct, forming the logical inverse of
if case. To illustrate, we’ll use our MyError enum once again:

--- Page 520 ---
guard case let .number(n) = err else {return} 
// n is now the extracted number
guard case helps to solve an interesting problem. Suppose we have
a function whose returned value we want to check in a guard
statement:
guard howMany() > 10 else {return}
All well and good; but suppose also that in the next line we want to
use the value returned from that function. We don’t want to call the
function again; it might be time-consuming and it might have side
effects. We want to capture the result of calling the function and pass
that captured result on into the subsequent code. But we can’t do that
with guard let, because that requires an Optional, and our function
howMany doesn’t return an Optional.
What should we do? guard case to the rescue:
guard case let output = howMany(), output > 10 else {return} 
// now output is in scope
Privacy
Privacy (also known as access control) refers to the explicit
modification of the normal scope rules. I gave an example in
Chapter 1:
class Dog { 
    var name = "" 
    private var whatADogSays = "woof" 
    func bark() { 

--- Page 521 ---
        print(self.whatADogSays) 
    } 
}
The intention here is to limit how other objects can see the Dog
property whatADogSays. It is a private property, intended primarily
for the Dog class’s own internal use: a Dog can speak of self.whatA
DogSays, but other objects should not be aware that it even exists.
Swift has five levels of privacy:
internal
The default rule is that declarations are internal, meaning that
they are globally visible within the containing module. That is
why Swift files within the same module can see one another’s
top-level contents automatically, with no effort on your part.
(That’s different from C and Objective-C, where files can’t see
each other at all unless you explicitly show them to one another
through include or import statements.)
fileprivate (narrower than internal)
A thing declared fileprivate is visible only within its
containing file. Two object types declared in the same file can see
one another’s members declared fileprivate, but code in other
files cannot see those members.
private (even narrower than fileprivate)
A thing declared private is visible only within its containing
curly braces. In effect, the visibility of an object type’s member
declared private is limited to code within this type declaration.
(A private declaration at the top level of a file is equivalent to f
ileprivate.)

--- Page 522 ---
public (wider than internal)
A thing declared public is visible even outside its containing
module. Another module must first import this module before it
can see anything at all. But even when another module has
imported this module, it still won’t be able to see anything in this
module that hasn’t been explicitly declared public. If you don’t
write any modules, you might never need to declare anything pub
lic. If you do write a module, you must declare something publi
c, or your module is useless.
open (even wider than public)
If a class is declared open, code in another module can subclass
it; it can’t do that if the class is declared merely public. If an
open class member is declared open, code in another module that
subclasses this class can override this member; it can’t do that if
the member is declared merely public.
Private and Fileprivate
Declaring something private restricts its visibility. In this way, you
specify by inversion what the public API of this object is. Here’s an
example from my own code:
class CancelableTimer: NSObject { 
    private var q = DispatchQueue(label: "timer") 
    private var timer : DispatchSourceTimer! 
    private var firsttime = true 
    private var once : Bool 
    private var handler : () -> () 
    init(once:Bool, handler:@escaping () -> ()) { 
        // ... 
    } 
    func start(withInterval interval:Double) { 
        // ... 

--- Page 523 ---
    } 
    func cancel() { 
        // ... 
    } 
}
The initializer init(once:handler:) and the start(withInterva
l:) and cancel methods, which are not marked private, are this
class’s public API. They say, “Please feel free to call me!” The
properties, however, are all private; no other code can see them,
either to get them or to set them. They are purely for the internal use
of the methods of this class. They maintain state, but it is not a state
that any other code needs to know about.
Privacy is not magically violated by the existence of a special object
relationship. Even a subclass cannot see its superclass’s private
members. (This comes as a surprise to those coming from a language
with a protected privacy level.) You can work around this by
declaring the class and its subclass in the same file and declaring
those members fileprivate instead of private.
A nested type can see the private members of the type in which it is
nested. This makes sense, because the outer type is a surrounding
scope; the nested type sees what everything else inside this type sees.
An extension can see the private members of the type it extends,
provided the type and the extension are in the same file:
class Dog { 
    private var whatADogSays = "woof" 
} 
extension Dog { 

--- Page 524 ---
    func speak() { 
        print(self.whatADogSays) // ok 
    } 
}
In effect, an extension sees its type’s private as meaning filepriva
te. This lets you break up a type into extensions without being forced
to raise the type’s private members to fileprivate just so the
extensions can see them.
It may be that on some occasions you will want to draw a distinction
between the privacy of a variable regarding setting and its privacy
regarding getting. To draw this distinction, place the word set in
parentheses after its own privacy declaration. private(set) var my
Var means that the setting of this variable is restricted, but says
nothing about the getting of this variable, which is left at the default.
Similarly, you can say public private(set) var myVar to make
getting this variable public, while setting this variable is kept private.
The existence of Objective-C adds complications. Things marked @ob
jc can be marked private without harm; Objective-C can still see
them. (That includes things marked @IBAction and @IBOutlet,
which imply @objc.) But your implementation of a member defined
by an Objective-C protocol cannot be marked private without
hiding it from Objective-C. In particular, optional methods defined by
a Cocoa protocol must be at least internal (the default), or Cocoa
won’t be able to find them and won’t call them. You are forced to
expose these methods to other files in your module, as if they were
part of this class’s public API, even though you would probably
prefer not to.

--- Page 525 ---
Public and Open
If you write a module, you’ll need to specify at least some object type
declaration as public; otherwise, code that imports your module
won’t be able to see that type. Other declarations that are not declared
public are internal, meaning that they are private to the module.
Judicious use of public declarations configures the public API of
your module.
The members of a public object type are not, themselves,
automatically public. If you want a method to be public, you have to
declare it public. This is an excellent default behavior, because it
means that these members are not shared outside the module unless
you want them to be. (As Apple puts it, you must “opt in to
publishing” object members.)
In my Zotz app, which is a card game, the files declaring object types
for creating and portraying cards and for combining them into a deck
are bundled into a framework called ZotzDeck. A framework is a
module. The idea is for these files to be able to see one another freely
while limiting access from the rest of my app. Many of the ZotzDeck
types, such as Card and Deck, are declared public. Many utility
object types, however, are not; the classes within the ZotzDeck
module can see and use them, but code outside the module doesn’t
need to be aware of them. Moreover, the Card class is declared publi
c but its initializer is not, because the public way to get cards is by
initializing a Deck; the initializer for Deck is declared public, so you
can do that.

--- Page 526 ---
TIP
If the only initializer for a public type is implicit, code in another module can’t
see it and cannot create an instance of this type. If you want other code to be
able to create an instance of this type, you must declare the initializer explicitly
and make it public.
The open access level draws a further distinction. It is applicable only
to classes and to members of open classes. A public class can’t be
subclassed in another module that can see this class; an open class
can. A public member of an open class that has been subclassed in
another module can’t be overridden in that subclass; an open member
can.
Privacy Rules
There is an extensive set of rules for ensuring that the privacy level of
related things is coherent. Here are some of them:
A variable can’t be public if its type is private, because other code
wouldn’t be able to use such a variable.
A subclass can’t be public unless the superclass is public.
A subclass can change an overridden member’s access level, but it
cannot even see its superclass’s private members unless they are
declared in the same file together.
And so on. I could proceed to list all the rules, but I won’t. There is
no need for me to enunciate them formally. They are spelled out in
great detail in the Swift manual, which you can consult if you need
to. In general, you probably won’t need to; the privacy rules make

--- Page 527 ---
intuitive sense, and you can rely on the compiler to help you with
useful error messages if you violate one.
Introspection
Swift provides limited ability to introspect an object, letting an object
display the names and values of its properties. This feature is
intended for debugging, not for use in your program’s logic. For
example, you can use it to modify the way your object is displayed in
the Xcode Debug pane.
To introspect an object, use it as the reflecting: parameter when
you instantiate a Mirror. The Mirror’s children will then be name–
value tuples describing the original object’s properties. Here’s a Dog
class with a description property that takes advantage of
introspection. Instead of hard-coding a list of the class’s instance
properties, we introspect the instance to obtain the names and values
of the properties. This means that we can later add more properties
without having to modify our description implementation:
struct Dog : CustomStringConvertible { 
    var name = "Fido" 
    var license = 1 
    var description : String { 
        var desc = "Dog (" 
        let mirror = Mirror(reflecting:self) 
        for (k,v) in mirror.children { 
            desc.append("\(k!): \(v), ") 
        } 
        return desc.dropLast(2) + ")" 
    } 
}

--- Page 528 ---
If we now instantiate Dog and print that instance, this is what we
see in the console:
Dog (name: Fido, license: 1)
The main use of Mirror is to generate the console output for the Swift
dump function (or the po command when debugging). By adopting the
CustomReflectable protocol, we can take charge of what a Mirror’s c
hildren are. To do so, we implement the customMirror property to
return our own custom Mirror object whose children property we
have configured as a collection of name–value tuples.
In this (silly) example, we implement customMirror to supply
altered names for our properties:
struct Dog : CustomReflectable { 
    var name = "Fido" 
    var license = 1 
    var customMirror: Mirror { 
        let children : [Mirror.Child] = [ 
            ("ineffable name", self.name), 
            ("license to kill", self.license) 
        ] 
        let m = Mirror(self, children:children) 
        return m 
    } 
}
The outcome is that when our code says dump(Dog()), our custom
property names are displayed:
* Dog 
  - ineffable name : "Fido" 
  - license to kill : 1

--- Page 529 ---
Operators
Swift operators such as + and > are not magically baked into the
language. They are, in fact, functions; they are explicitly declared and
implemented just like any other function. That is why, as I pointed
out in Chapter 4, the term + can be passed as the second parameter in
a reduce call; reduce expects a function taking two parameters and
returning a value whose type matches that of the first parameter, and
+ is in fact the name of such a function. It also explains how Swift
operators can be overloaded for different types of operand. You can
use + with numbers, strings, or arrays — with a different meaning in
each case — because Swift functions can be overloaded; there are
multiple declarations of the + function, and Swift is able to determine
from the parameter types which + function you are calling.
These facts are not merely an intriguing behind-the-scenes
implementation detail. They have practical implications for you and
your code. You are free to overload existing operators to apply to
your object types. You can even invent new operators! In this section,
we’ll do both.
First we’ll talk about how operators are declared. Clearly there is
some sort of syntactical hanky-panky (a technical computer science
term), because you don’t call an operator function in the same way as
a normal function. You don’t say +(1,2); you say 1+2. Even so, 1
and 2 in that second expression are the parameters to a + function
call. How does Swift know that the + function uses this special
syntax?

--- Page 530 ---
To see the answer, look in the Swift header:
infix operator + : AdditionPrecedence
That is an operator declaration. An operator declaration announces
that this symbol is an operator, and specifies how many parameters it
has and what the usage syntax will be in relation to those parameters.
The really important part is the stuff before the colon: the keyword op
erator, preceded by an operator type — here, infix — and followed
by the name of the operator. The types are:
infix
This operator takes two parameters and appears between them.
prefix
This operator takes one parameter and appears before it.
postfix
This operator takes one parameter and appears after it.
The term after the colon in an operator declaration is the name of a
precedence group. Precedence groups dictate the order of operations
when an expression contains multiple operators. I’m not going to go
into the details of how precedence groups are defined. The Swift
header declares about a dozen precedence groups, and you can easily
see how those declarations work. You will probably have no need to
declare a new precedence group; you’ll just look for an operator
similar to yours and copy its precedence group (or omit the colon and
the precedence group from your declaration).

--- Page 531 ---
An operator is also a function, so you also need a function declaration
stating the type of the parameters and the result type of the function.
Again, the Swift header shows us an example:
func +(lhs: Int, rhs: Int) -> Int
That is one of many declarations for the + function in the Swift
header. In particular, it is the declaration for when the parameters are
both Int. In that situation, the result is itself an Int. (The local
parameter names lhs and rhs, which don’t affect the special calling
syntax, presumably stand for “left-hand side” and “right-hand side.”)
An operator declaration must appear at the top level of a file. The
corresponding function declaration may appear either at the top level
of a file or at the top level of a type declaration; in the latter case, it
must be marked static. If the operator is a prefix or postfix
operator, the function declaration must start with the word prefix or
postfix; the default is infix and can be omitted.
We now know enough to override an operator to work with an object
type of our own! As a simple example, imagine a Vial full of
bacteria:
struct Vial { 
    var numberOfBacteria : Int 
    init(_ n:Int) { 
        self.numberOfBacteria = n 
    } 
}

--- Page 532 ---
When two Vials are combined, you get a Vial with all the bacteria
from both of them. So the way to add two Vials is to add their
bacteria:
extension Vial { 
    static func +(lhs:Vial, rhs:Vial) -> Vial { 
        let total = lhs.numberOfBacteria + rhs.numberOfBacteria 
        return Vial(total) 
    } 
}
And here’s code to test our new + operator override:
let v1 = Vial(500_000) 
let v2 = Vial(400_000) 
let v3 = v1 + v2 
print(v3.numberOfBacteria) // 900000
In the case of a compound assignment operator, the first parameter is
the thing being assigned to. Therefore, to implement such an operator,
the first parameter must be declared inout. Let’s do that for our Vial
class:
extension Vial { 
    static func +=(lhs:inout Vial, rhs:Vial) { 
        let total = lhs.numberOfBacteria + rhs.numberOfBacteria 
        lhs.numberOfBacteria = total 
    } 
}
Here’s code to test our += override:
var v1 = Vial(500_000) 
let v2 = Vial(400_000) 

--- Page 533 ---
v1 += v2 
print(v1.numberOfBacteria) // 900000
Next, let’s invent a completely new operator. As an example, I’ll
inject an operator into Int that raises one number to the power of
another. As my operator symbol, I’ll use ^^ (I’d like to use ^ but it’s
already in use for something else). For simplicity, I have omitted
error-checking for edge cases (such as exponents less than 1):
infix operator ^^ 
extension Int { 
    static func ^^(lhs:Int, rhs:Int) -> Int { 
        var result = lhs 
        for _ in 1..<rhs {result *= lhs} 
        return result 
    } 
}
That’s all it takes! Here’s some code to test it:
print(2^^2) // 4 
print(2^^3) // 8 
print(3^^3) // 27
Here’s another example. I’ve already illustrated the use of Range’s re
versed method to allow iteration from a higher value to a lower one.
That works, but I find the notation unpleasant. There’s an asymmetry
with how you iterate up; the endpoints are in the wrong order, and
you have to remember to surround a literal range with parentheses:
let r1 = 1..<10 
let r2 = (1..<10).reversed()

--- Page 534 ---
Let’s define a custom operator that calls reversed() for us:
infix operator >>> : RangeFormationPrecedence 
func >>><Bound>(maximum: Bound, minimum: Bound) 
    -> ReversedCollection<Range<Bound>> 
    where Bound : Strideable { 
        return (minimum..<maximum).reversed() 
}
Now our expressions can be more symmetrical and compact:
let r1 = 1..<10 
let r2 = 10>>>1
The Swift manual lists the special characters that can be used as part
of a custom operator name:
/ = - + ! * % < > & | ^ ? ~
An operator name can also contain many other symbol characters
(that is, characters that can’t be mistaken for some sort of
alphanumeric) that are harder to type; see the manual for a formal list.
Memory Management
Swift memory management is handled automatically, and you will
usually be unaware of it. Objects come into existence when they are
instantiated and go out of existence as soon as they are no longer
needed. Nevertheless, there are some memory management issues of
which you must be conscious.
Memory Management of Reference Types

--- Page 535 ---
Memory management of reference type objects (“Value Types and
Reference Types”) is quite tricky under the hood; I’ll devote
Chapter 12 to a discussion of the underlying mechanism. Swift
normally does all the work for you, but trouble can arise when two
class instances have references to one another. When that’s the case,
you can have a retain cycle which will result in a memory leak,
meaning that the two instances never go out of existence. Some
computer languages solve this sort of problem with a periodic
“garbage collection” phase that detects retain cycles and cleans them
up, but Swift doesn’t do that; you have to fend off retain cycles
manually.
One way to test for and observe a memory leak is to implement a
class’s deinit. This method is called when the instance goes out of
existence. If the instance never goes out of existence, deinit is never
called. That’s a bad sign, if you were expecting that the instance
should go out of existence.
Here’s an example. First, I’ll make two class instances and watch
them go out of existence:
func testRetainCycle() { 
    class Dog { 
        deinit { 
            print("farewell from Dog") 
        } 
    } 
    class Cat { 
        deinit { 
            print("farewell from Cat") 
        } 
    } 

--- Page 536 ---
    let d = Dog() 
    let c = Cat() 
} 
testRetainCycle() // farewell from Cat, farewell from Dog
When we run that code, both “farewell” messages appear in the
console. We created a Dog instance and a Cat instance, but the only
references to them are automatic (local) variables inside the testRet
ainCycle function. When execution of that function’s body comes to
an end, all automatic variables are destroyed; that is what it means to
be an automatic variable. There are no other references to our Dog
and Cat instances that might make them persist, and so they are
destroyed in good order.
Now I’ll change that code by giving the Dog and Cat objects
references to each other:
func testRetainCycle() { 
    class Dog { 
        var cat : Cat? 
        deinit { 
            print("farewell from Dog") 
        } 
    } 
    class Cat { 
        var dog : Dog? 
        deinit { 
            print("farewell from Cat") 
        } 
    } 
    let d = Dog() 
    let c = Cat() 
    d.cat = c // create a... 
    c.dog = d // ...retain cycle 

--- Page 537 ---
} 
testRetainCycle() // nothing in console
When we run that code, neither “farewell” message appears in the
console. The Dog and Cat objects have references to one another.
Those are strong references (also called persisting references). A
strong reference sees to it that as long as our Dog has a reference to a
particular Cat, that Cat will not be destroyed, and vice versa. That’s a
good thing, and is a fundamental principle of sensible memory
management. The bad thing is that the Dog and the Cat have strong
references to one another. That’s a retain cycle! Neither the Dog
instance nor the Cat instance can be destroyed, because neither of
them can “go first” — it’s like Alphonse and Gaston who can never
get through the door because each requires the other to precede him.
The Dog can’t be destroyed first because the Cat has a strong
reference to it, and the Cat can’t be destroyed first because the Dog
has a strong reference to it.
These objects are now leaking. Our code is over; both d and c are
gone. There are no further references to either of these objects;
neither object can ever be referred to again. No code can mention
them; no code can reach them. But they live on, floating, useless, and
taking up memory.

--- Page 538 ---
NOTE
The term “retain cycle” is based on the retain command, which is used in
Objective-C to form a strong reference. You can’t say retain in Swift, so
Apple often refers to this kind of cycle as a strong reference cycle. But a strong
reference cycle is a retain cycle — the compiler is in fact inserting retain
commands under the hood — and I’ll continue calling it a retain cycle.
WEAK REFERENCES
One solution to a retain cycle is to mark the problematic reference as
weak. This means that the reference is not a strong reference. It is a
weak reference. The object referred to can now go out of existence
even while the referrer continues to exist. Of course, this might
present a danger, because now the object referred to may be
destroyed behind the referrer’s back. But Swift has a solution for that,
too: only an Optional reference can be marked as weak. That way, if
the object referred to is destroyed behind the referrer’s back, the
referrer will see something coherent, namely nil. Also, the reference
must be a var reference, precisely because it can change
spontaneously to nil.
This code breaks the retain cycle and prevents the memory leak:
func testRetainCycle() { 
    class Dog { 
        weak var cat : Cat? 
        deinit { 
            print("farewell from Dog") 
        } 
    } 
    class Cat { 

--- Page 539 ---
        weak var dog : Dog? 
        deinit { 
            print("farewell from Cat") 
        } 
    } 
    let d = Dog() 
    let c = Cat() 
    d.cat = c 
    c.dog = d 
} 
testRetainCycle() // farewell from Cat, farewell from Dog
I’ve gone overboard in that code. To break the retain cycle, there’s no
need to make both Dog’s cat and Cat’s dog weak references; making
just one of the two a weak reference is sufficient to break the cycle.
That, in fact, is the usual solution when a retain cycle threatens. One
of the pair will typically be more of an “owner” than the other; the
one that is not the “owner” will have a weak reference to its “owner.”
Value types are not subject to the same memory management issues
as reference types, but a value type can still be involved in a retain
cycle with a class instance. In my retain cycle example, if Dog is a
class and Cat is a struct, we still get a retain cycle. The solution is the
same: make Cat’s dog a weak reference. (You can’t make Dog’s cat a
weak reference if Cat is a struct; only a reference to a class type can
be declared weak.)
Do not use weak references unless you have to! Memory
management is not to be toyed with lightly. Nevertheless, there are
real-life situations in which weak references are the right thing to do,
even when no retain cycle appears to threaten. The delegation pattern
(Chapter 11) is a typical case in point; an object typically has no

--- Page 540 ---
business owning (retaining) its delegate. And a view controller @IBOu
tlet property is usually weak, because it refers to a subview already
owned by its own superview.
UNOWNED REFERENCES
There’s another Swift solution for retain cycles. Instead of marking a
reference as weak, you can mark it as unowned. This approach is
useful in special cases where one object absolutely cannot exist
without a reference to another, but where this reference need not be a
strong reference.
Let’s pretend that a Boy may or may not have a Dog, but every Dog
must have a Boy — and so I’ll give Dog an init(boy:) initializer.
The Dog needs a reference to its Boy, and the Boy needs a reference
to his Dog if he has one; that’s potentially a retain cycle:
func testUnowned() { 
    class Boy { 
        var dog : Dog? 
        deinit { 
            print("farewell from Boy") 
        } 
    } 
    class Dog { 
        let boy : Boy 
        init(boy:Boy) { self.boy = boy } 
        deinit { 
            print("farewell from Dog") 
        } 
    } 
    let b = Boy() 
    let d = Dog(boy: b) 
    b.dog = d 

--- Page 541 ---
} 
testUnowned() // nothing in console
We can solve this by declaring Dog’s boy property unowned:
func testUnowned() { 
    class Boy { 
        var dog : Dog? 
        deinit { 
            print("farewell from Boy") 
        } 
    } 
    class Dog { 
        unowned let boy : Boy // * 
        init(boy:Boy) { self.boy = boy } 
        deinit { 
            print("farewell from Dog") 
        } 
    } 
    let b = Boy() 
    let d = Dog(boy: b) 
    b.dog = d 
} 
testUnowned() // farewell from Boy, farewell from Dog
An advantage of an unowned reference is that it doesn’t have to be an
Optional and it can be a constant (let). But an unowned reference is
also genuinely dangerous, because the object referred to can go out of
existence behind the referrer’s back, and an attempt to use that
reference will cause a crash, as I can demonstrate by this rather
forced code:
var b = Optional(Boy()) 
let d = Dog(boy: b!) 
b = nil // destroy the Boy behind the Dog's back 
print(d.boy) // crash

--- Page 542 ---
Clearly you should use unowned only if you are absolutely certain
that the object referred to will outlive the referrer.
STORED ANONYMOUS FUNCTIONS
A particularly insidious kind of retain cycle arises when an instance
property holds a function referring to the instance:
class FunctionHolder { 
    var function : (() -> ())? 
    deinit { 
        print("farewell from FunctionHolder") 
    } 
} 
func testFunctionHolder() { 
    let fh = FunctionHolder() 
    fh.function = { 
        print(fh) 
    } 
} 
testFunctionHolder() // nothing in console
Oops! I’ve created a retain cycle, by referring, inside the anonymous
function, to the object that is holding a reference to it. Because
functions are closures, the FunctionHolder instance fh, declared
outside the anonymous function, is captured by the anonymous
function as a strong reference when the anonymous function says pri
nt(fh). But the anonymous function has also been assigned to the fu
nction property of the FunctionHolder instance fh, and that’s a
strong reference too. So that’s a retain cycle: the FunctionHolder
persistently refers to the function, which persistently refers to the
FunctionHolder.

--- Page 543 ---
In this situation, I cannot break the retain cycle by declaring the func
tion property as weak or unowned. Only a reference to a class type
can be declared weak or unowned, and a function is not a class. I must
declare the captured value fh inside the anonymous function as weak
or unowned instead.
Swift provides an ingenious syntax for doing that. At the very start of
the anonymous function body, you put square brackets containing a
comma-separated list of any problematic references that will be
captured from the surrounding environment, each preceded by weak
or unowned. This is called a capture list. If you have a capture list,
you must follow it with the keyword in if there’s no in expression
already:
class FunctionHolder { 
    var function : (() -> ())? 
    deinit { 
        print("farewell from FunctionHolder") 
    } 
} 
func testFunctionHolder() { 
    let fh = FunctionHolder() 
    fh.function = { 
        [weak fh] in // * 
        print(fh) 
    } 
} 
testFunctionHolder() // farewell from FunctionHolder
This syntax solves the problem. But marking a reference as weak in a
capture list has a mild side effect that you will need to be aware of:
the reference passes into the anonymous function as an Optional. This
is good, because it means that if the object referred to goes out of

--- Page 544 ---
existence behind our back, the value of the Optional is nil. But of
course you must also adjust your code accordingly, unwrapping the
Optional as needed in order to use it. The usual technique is to
perform the weak–strong dance: you unwrap the Optional once, right
at the start of the function, in a conditional binding:
fh.function = { 
    [weak fh] in  // weak 
    guard let fh = fh else { return } 
    print(fh)     // strong (and not Optional) 
}
The conditional binding let fh = fh elegantly accomplishes three
goals:
It unwraps the Optional version of fh that arrived into the
anonymous function.
It declares another fh that is a normal (strong) reference. So if the
unwrapping succeeds, this new fh will persist for the rest of this
scope.
It causes the second fh to overshadow the first fh (because they
have the same name). So it is impossible after the guard statement
to refer accidentally to the weak Optional fh.
Now, it happens that, in this particular example, there is no way the
FunctionHolder instance fh can go out of existence while the
anonymous function lives on. There are no other references to the
anonymous function; it persists only as a property of fh. Therefore I
can avoid some behind-the-scenes bookkeeping overhead, as well as
the weak–strong dance, by declaring fh as unowned in my capture list
instead of weak. In real life, my own most frequent use of unowned is

--- Page 545 ---
precisely in this context. Very often, the reference marked as unowned
in the capture list will be self.
There’s another way to write a capture list: you can capture a value
and assign it to a constant name. Here’s an example from my own
code (without explanation of the context):
self.undoer.registerUndo(withTarget: self) { 
    [oldCenter = self.center] myself in 
    myself.setCenterUndoably(oldCenter) 
}
That code declares a constant oldCenter and sets its value to self.c
enter. This avoids capturing self, because self never appears in
the anonymous function, explicitly or implicitly; instead, the value of
a property of self is captured directly, and that value is what passes
into the anonymous function. Not only does this prevent a retain
cycle, but also it avoids closure semantics; the value of self.center
is evaluated now, when registerUndo is called, rather than later,
when the anonymous function is called (at which time the value of se
lf.center may have changed).
Recall, from Chapter 2, that the compiler forces you to say self
explicitly when you refer to a property or method of self within the
function body of an escaping closure. Now we can see why: you are
threatening to form a retain cycle involving self, and the compiler
wants to make sure you realize that. Of course, you’re probably not
going to form a retain cycle! But the compiler can’t check for that;
once the closure is escaping, anything could happen:

--- Page 546 ---
let f1 = funcPasser { 
    print(view.bounds) // compile error, because self.view is implied 
} 
let f2 = funcPasser { 
    print(self.view.bounds) // ok 
}
Many people don’t like saying self, though; and if this anonymous
function implies self many times, it may be objectionable to have to
say self explicitly many times. New in Swift 5.3, there’s a stylistic
alternative: if you put [self] in the capture list, that satisfies the
compiler, and you don’t have to write self as the implicit target in
the function body:
let f3 = funcPasser { [self] in 
    print(view.bounds) // ok in Swift 5.3 
}
Above all, don’t panic. Beginners may be tempted to backstop all
their anonymous functions with [weak self]. That’s wrong. Only a
stored function can raise even the possibility of a retain cycle. Merely
passing a function does not introduce such a possibility, especially if
the function being passed will be called immediately. And even if a
function is stored, if it is stored elsewhere, it might not imply a retain
cycle. Always confirm that you actually have a retain cycle before
concerning yourself with how to prevent it.
Consider the standard expression of an animation, which I discussed
in Chapter 2:
UIView.animate(withDuration:0.4) { 
    self.myButton3.frame.origin.y += 20 

--- Page 547 ---
} completion: { _ in 
    self.someMethod() 
}
No one should be using [weak self] in these anonymous functions.
There’s no retain cycle, because the anonymous functions are not
being retained by self (the view controller). Moreover, the view
controller is not going to go out of existence while the animation is
proceeding. In fact, capturing the view controller as self in the body
of the anonymous function actually prevents it from going out of
existence while the animation is proceeding — and that’s good!
Extending the lifetime of an object, such as self, long enough for an
anonymous function to be called at some future time, is a useful thing
to do. (In fact, it’s so useful that Swift provides a way to do it without
explicitly capturing the object in the anonymous function: there’s a
global function, withExtendedLifetime, for precisely that purpose.)
MEMORY MANAGEMENT OF PROTOCOL-TYPED
REFERENCES
Only a reference to an instance of a class type can be declared weak
or unowned. A reference to an instance of a struct or enum type
cannot be so declared, because its memory management doesn’t work
the same way (and is not subject to retain cycles). A reference that is
declared as a protocol type, therefore, has a problem. A reference
typed as a protocol that might be adopted by a struct or an enum
cannot be declared weak or unowned. You can only declare a
protocol-typed reference weak or unowned if the compiler knows that
only a class can adopt it. You can assure the compiler of that by
making the protocol a class protocol.

--- Page 548 ---
In this code, SecondViewControllerDelegate is a protocol that I’ve
declared. This code won’t compile unless
SecondViewControllerDelegate is declared as a class protocol:
class SecondViewController : UIViewController { 
    weak var delegate : SecondViewControllerDelegate? 
    // ... 
}
Here’s the actual declaration of SecondViewControllerDelegate; it is
declared as a class protocol, and that’s why the preceding code is
legal:
protocol SecondViewControllerDelegate : AnyObject { 
    func accept(data:Any) 
}
A protocol declared in Objective-C is implicitly marked as @objc and
is a class protocol. This declaration from my real-life code is legal:
weak var delegate : WKScriptMessageHandler?
WKScriptMessageHandler is a protocol declared by Cocoa (in
particular, by the Web Kit framework), so only a class can adopt
WKScriptMessageHandler, and the compiler is satisfied that the dele
gate variable will be an instance of a class — and the reference can
be treated as weak.
Exclusive Access to Value Types
Even value types can have memory management issues. In particular,
a struct and its members might be directly accessed simultaneously,

--- Page 549 ---
which could lead to unpredictable results. Fortunately, the compiler
will usually stop you before such an issue can arise.
To illustrate, imagine that we have a Person struct with a firstName
string property. Now let’s write a function that takes both a Person
and a string as inout parameters:
func change(_ p:inout Person, _ s:inout String) {}
So far so good; but now imagine calling that function with both a
Person and that same Person’s firstName as the parameters:
var p = Person(firstName: "Matt") 
change(&p, &p.firstName) // compile error
The compiler will stop you from doing that, with this message:
“Overlapping accesses to p, but modification requires exclusive
access.” The problem is that the single function change is being
given direct access to the memory of both the struct and a member of
that struct, simultaneously. We are threatening to alter the struct in
some unpredictable way. This dangerous situation is forbidden; the
compiler enforces exclusive access when a struct is being modified.
You may encounter that error message from the compiler under
surprising circumstances:
let c = UIColor.purple 
var components = Array(repeating: CGFloat(0), count: 4) 
c.getRed(&components[0], green: &components[1], 
    blue: &components[2], alpha: &components[3]) // compile error

--- Page 550 ---
That code was legal in Swift 3 and before; in Swift 4 and later, it
isn’t. No exclusive access problem is evident to the untrained eye;
you just have to take the compiler’s word for it. One workaround is to
take control of memory access yourself, silencing the compiler:
components.withUnsafeMutableBufferPointer { ptr -> () in 
    c.getRed(&ptr[0], green: &ptr[1], blue: &ptr[2], alpha: &ptr[3]) 
}
It might be better to write a UIColor extension that assembles the
array without any simultaneous memory access to multiple elements
of the array:
extension UIColor { 
    func getRedGreenBlueAlpha() -> [CGFloat] { 
        var (r,g,b,a) = (CGFloat(0),CGFloat(0),CGFloat(0),CGFloat(0)) 
        self.getRed(&r, green: &g, blue: &b, alpha: &a) 
        return [r,g,b,a] 
    } 
}
Sometimes the compiler can’t see the issue coming, and you’ll crash
at runtime instead:
var i = 0 
func tweak(_ ii:inout Int) { 
    print(i) // legal, but crash 
} 
tweak(&i)
In that code, tweak is accessing i in two ways simultaneously. On the
one hand, i is being passed into tweak as an inout parameter. On the
other hand, tweak is reaching out directly to i (which is in scope).

--- Page 551 ---
Even though tweak never actually modifies i and never mentions its
own inout parameter ii, that’s a simultaneous access, and is
forbidden.
Miscellaneous Swift Language Features
This chapter is a miscellany, and this section is a miscellany within a
miscellany. It surveys some “advanced” Swift language features that
have been added relatively recently. The reason for postponing the
discussion to this point is in part to avoid cluttering up the earlier
exposition and in part to ensure that you know enough to understand
the subject matter.
Synthesized Protocol Implementations
A few protocols built into the Swift standard library have the ability
to synthesize implementations of their own requirements. Such a
protocol can supply code behind the scenes so that an object that
adopts the protocol will satisfy the protocol’s requirements
automatically.
EQUATABLE
Equatable is one such protocol. That’s good, because making your
custom type adopt Equatable is often a really useful thing to do.
Equatable adoption means that the == operator can be used to check
whether two instances of this type are equal. The only requirement of
the Equatable protocol is that you do, in fact, define == for your type.
Using our Vial struct from earlier in this chapter, let’s first do that
manually:

--- Page 552 ---
struct Vial { 
    var numberOfBacteria : Int 
    init(_ n:Int) { 
        self.numberOfBacteria = n 
    } 
} 
extension Vial : Equatable { 
    static func ==(lhs:Vial, rhs:Vial) -> Bool { 
        return lhs.numberOfBacteria == rhs.numberOfBacteria 
    } 
}
Now that Vial is an Equatable, not only can it be compared with ==,
but also lots of methods that need an Equatable parameter spring to
life. For example, Vial becomes a candidate for use with methods
such as firstIndex(of:):
let v1 = Vial(500_000) 
let v2 = Vial(400_000) 
let arr = [v1,v2] 
let ix = arr.firstIndex(of:v1) // Optional wrapping 0
What’s more, the complementary inequality operator != has sprung to
life for Vial automatically! That’s because it’s already defined for any
Equatable in terms of the == operator.
Our implementation of == for Vial was easy to write, but that’s
mostly because this struct has just one property. As soon as you have
multiple properties, implementing == manually, though theoretically
trivial, becomes tedious and possibly hard to maintain. This is just the
kind of task computers are good at! You’re likely going to want to
define == in terms of the equality of all your type’s properties
simultaneously; well, Swift will implement == automatically in

--- Page 553 ---
exactly that way. All we have to do is declare adoption of Equatable,
like this:
struct Vial : Equatable { 
    var numberOfBacteria : Int 
    init(_ n:Int) { 
        self.numberOfBacteria = n 
    } 
}
That code compiles, even though we now have no implementation of
==. That’s because the implementation has been synthesized for us.
Behind the scenes, two Vial objects are now equal just in case their n
umberOfBacteria are equal — which is exactly the implementation
we supplied when we wrote the code explicitly.
For Equatable synthesis to operate, the following requirements must
be met:
Our object type is a struct or an enum.
We have adopted Equatable, not in an extension.
We have not supplied an implementation of the == operator.
All of our struct’s stored property types are themselves Equatable.
For an enum, the requirement here is that, if the enum has associated
values, the types of those associated values must be Equatable. The
synthesized == implementation will then say that two instances of our
enum are equal if they are the same case and, if that case has an
associated value, the associated values are equal for both instances.

--- Page 554 ---
Recall that our MyError enum in Chapter 4 couldn’t be used with the
== operator until we explicitly declared it Equatable:
enum MyError : Equatable { 
    case number(Int) 
    case message(String) 
    case fatal 
}
(If an enum has no associated values, then it is already effectively
Equatable and there is no need to adopt Equatable explicitly.)
If you don’t like the synthesized implementation of == (perhaps
because there is a property that you don’t want involved in the
definition of equality), all you have to do is write your own,
explicitly. You lose the convenience of automatic synthesis, but
you’re no worse off than you were before automatic synthesis
existed.
Let’s say we have a Dog struct with a name property and a license
property and a color property. And let’s say we think two Dogs are
equal just in case they have the same name and license; we don’t care
whether the colors are the same. Then we just have to write the
implementation of == ourselves, omitting color from the calculation:
struct Dog : Equatable { 
    let name : String 
    let license : Int 
    let color : UIColor 
    static func ==(lhs:Dog,rhs:Dog) -> Bool { 
        return lhs.name == rhs.name && lhs.license == rhs.license 
    } 
}

--- Page 555 ---
HASHABLE
Another protocol that performs synthesis of its own implementation
is Hashable. Recall that a type must be Hashable to be used in a Set
or as the key type of a Dictionary. A struct whose properties are all
Hashable, or an enum whose associated values are all Hashable, can
conform to Hashable merely by declaring that it adopts Hashable.
Hashable requires that its adopter, in addition to being Equatable,
have a hashValue Int property; the idea is that two equal objects
should have equal hash values. The implicit implementation
combines the hashValue of the Hashable members to produce a hash
Value for the object itself. That’s good, because you would surely
have no idea how to do that for yourself. Writing your own hash
function is a very tricky business! Thanks to this feature, you don’t
have to.
But suppose you don’t like the synthesized implementation of hashVa
lue. Then you will have to calculate the hashValue yourself.
Luckily, Swift 4.2 introduced a way to do that. You ignore hashValu
e, and instead implement the hash(into:) method. There is then no
need to implement hashValue, because it is autogenerated based on
the result of hash(into:). In this method, you are handed a Hasher
object; you call hash(into:) with that object on every property that
you want included in the hash calculation — and omit the ones you
don’t. For hashability to work properly in a Dictionary or Set, these
should be the very same properties you’ve included in the Equatable
calculation of ==.
So, for our Dog struct, we could write:

--- Page 556 ---
struct Dog : Hashable { // and therefore Equatable 
    let name : String 
    let license : Int 
    let color : UIColor 
    static func ==(lhs:Dog,rhs:Dog) -> Bool { 
        return lhs.name == rhs.name && lhs.license == rhs.license 
    } 
    func hash(into hasher: inout Hasher) { 
        name.hash(into:&hasher) 
        license.hash(into:&hasher) 
    } 
}
Other protocols, alas, do not provide the same convenience. If we
want our Vial struct to be Comparable, we must implement <
explicitly. (And when we do, the other three comparison operators
spring to life automatically as well.)
COMPARABLE
New in Swift 5.3, the Comparable protocol does provide a
synthesized implementation — but only for an enum, and only if the
enum has no raw value. The order of the cases is the order in which
they are declared; if a case has an associated value, it must be of a
Comparable type, so that if two instances of the enum have the same
case, they can be ordered by their associated value:
enum Planet : Comparable { 
    case mercury 
    case venus 
    case earth 
    case mars 
    case asteroid(String) 
    case jupiter 
} 

--- Page 557 ---
// let's test it! 
let test1 = Planet.mercury < Planet.venus // true 
let test2 = Planet.jupiter > Planet.asteroid("Ceres") // true 
let test3 = Planet.asteroid("Ceres") < Planet.asteroid("Vesta") // true
Key Paths
Key paths, a language feature introduced in Swift 4, effectively stand
in relation to properties the way function references stand in relation
to function calls — they are a way of storing a reference to a property
without actually accessing the property.
Suppose we have a Person struct with a firstName String property
and a lastName String property, and that we want to access one of
these properties on a Person p, without knowing until runtime which
property we are to access. We might write something like this:
var getFirstName : Bool = // ... 
let name : String = { 
    if getFirstName { 
        return p.firstName 
    } else { 
        return p.lastName 
    } 
}()
That’s not altogether atrocious, but it’s hardly elegant. If we do the
same sort of thing in several places, the same choice must somehow
be repeated in each of those places — and the more choices there are,
the more elaborate our code must be each time.
Key paths solve the problem by permitting us to encapsulate the
notion of accessing a particular property of a type, such as Person’s f

--- Page 558 ---
irstName or lastName, without actually performing the access. That
notion is expressed as an instance; therefore, we can store it as a
variable, or pass it as a function parameter. That instance then acts as
a token that we can use to access the actual property on an actual
instance of that type at some future time.
The literal notation for constructing a key path is:
\Type.property.property...
We start with a backslash. Then we have the name of a type, which
may be omitted if the type can be inferred from the context. Then we
have a dot followed by a property name — and this may be repeated
if that property’s type itself has a property that we will want to
access, and so on.
In our simple case, we might store the notion of accessing a particular
property as a key path variable, like this:
var prop = \Person.firstName
To perform the actual access, start with a reference to a particular
instance and fetch its keyPath: subscript:
let whatname = p[keyPath:prop]
If p is a Person with a firstName of "Matt" and a lastName of "Neu
burg", then whatname is now "Matt". Moreover, whatname is
inferred to be a String, because the key path carries within itself

--- Page 559 ---
information about the type of the property that it refers to (it is a
generic).
Now imagine substituting a different key path for the value of prop:
var prop = \Person.firstName 
// ... time passes ... 
prop = \.lastName // inferred as \Person.lastName
That substitution is legal, because both firstName and lastName are
Strings. Instantly, throughout our program, all occurrences of the
Person [keyPath:prop] subscript take on a new meaning!
If the property referenced by a key path is writable and you have a
writable object reference, then you can also set into the keyPath:
subscript on that object, changing the value of the property:
p[keyPath:prop] = "Ethan"
Here’s a practical example where my own code takes advantage of
key paths. One of my apps is a version of a well-known game
involving a deck of 81 cards, where every card has four attributes
(color, number, shape, and fill), each of which can have three possible
values. (81 is 3.) The player’s job is to spot three cards obeying the
following rule: each attribute has either the same value for all three
cards or a different value for each of the three cards. The problem is
to express that rule succinctly.
For the four card attributes, I use enums with Int raw values. This
allows me to represent any attribute as a common type (Int). I express
4

--- Page 560 ---
those raw values as computed properties, and I vend a list of all four
computed properties as an array of key paths (attributes):
struct Card { 
    let itsColor : Color 
    let itsNumber : Number 
    let itsShape : Shape 
    let itsFill : Fill 
    var itsColorRaw : Int { return itsColor.rawValue } 
    var itsNumberRaw : Int { return itsNumber.rawValue } 
    var itsShapeRaw : Int { return itsShape.rawValue } 
    var itsFillRaw : Int { return itsFill.rawValue } 
    static let attributes : [KeyPath<Card, Int>] = [ 
        \.itsColorRaw, \.itsNumberRaw, \.itsShapeRaw, \.itsFillRaw 
    ] 
    // ... 
}
Now I can express the rule clearly and elegantly:
func isValidTriple(_ cards:[Card]) -> Bool { 
    func evaluateOneAttribute(_ n:[Int]) -> Bool { 
        let allSame = (n[0] == n[1]) && (n[1] == n[2]) 
        let allDiff = (n[0] != n[1]) && (n[1] != n[2]) && (n[2] != n[0]) 
        return allSame || allDiff 
    } 
    return Card.attributes.allSatisfy {attribute in 
        evaluateOneAttribute(cards.map {$0[keyPath:attribute]}) // wow! 
    } 
}
Starting in Swift 5.2, a keypath literal can be used wherever a
function is expected that takes that object’s type as its sole parameter
and produces that property’s type as its result. That sentence is
enough to make one’s head swim, but the idea is quite simple.

--- Page 561 ---
Consider our Person with a firstName and a lastName String
property. If you have an array of Person, you can extract a list of first
names using map, like this:
let names = arrayOfPersons.map {$0.firstName}
Well, now you can use a keypath literal instead:
let names = arrayOfPersons.map (\.firstName)
That’s more than mere syntactic sugar; the point is that \.firstName
acts as the name of a function. Here’s a more surprising case in point:
let f : (Person) -> String = \Person.firstName
Instance as Function
Sometimes a type’s primary job is to contain or represent a function.
In those situations, it makes for cleaner code if we can treat an
instance of that type as a function. The ability to do that was
introduced in Swift 5.2.
Before I explain, I’ll give an example. (This particular example
comes more or less directly from Apple.) Imagine I have a struct
Adder, whose job is to store a base value and add it to any addend we
care to supply:
let add3 = Adder(3) 
let sum = add3(4) 
print(sum) // 7

--- Page 562 ---
That code, and indeed the entire concept of Adder, should remind you
of the notion of a function as a factory for other functions (see
“Function Returning Function”). In the second line, we treat add3 as
a function that takes an Int and returns another Int, namely the first
Int with 3 added to it. But here’s the thing: add3 is not a function! It
is an instance of a struct. We are treating an instance as a function.
The implementation, behind the scenes, is simple. If a type declares
an instance method named callAsFunction, you can “call” an
instance of that type as if it were a function: the “call” is routed to the
callAsFunction method. Here’s Adder:
struct Adder { 
    let base: Int 
    init(_ base:Int) { 
        self.base = base 
    } 
    func callAsFunction(_ addend:Int) -> Int { 
        return self.base + addend 
    } 
}
So when we create an Adder instance named add3 and then say add3
(4), it is exactly the same as if we had said add3.callAsFunction
(4).
The function notation in add3(4) is mere syntactic sugar. But it’s
very nice syntactic sugar, because it reflects the truth more
compactly. To be sure, we could have given Adder an add method
that performs the addition, or a makeAdder method that produces a
function that performs the addition:

--- Page 563 ---
struct Adder { 
    let base: Int 
    init(_ base:Int) { 
        self.base = base 
    } 
    func add(_ addend:Int) -> Int { 
        return self.base + addend 
    } 
    // or: 
    func makeAdder() -> (Int) -> Int { 
        return { addend in self.base + addend } 
    } 
}
Either of those would have been just fine. But the job of Adder is to
act like a function, so rather than having it contain or produce that
function, we can use callAsFunction to let an Adder effectively be
that function.
You can give your type multiple callAsFunction overloads,
distinguished in the usual way by parameter types, parameter labels,
or both. In this way, a single instance can behave as if it were itself an
overloaded function.
Dynamic Membership
Dynamic membership was introduced in Swift 4.2, with additional
features in Swift 5. It allows you to do two things:
Access a nonexistent property (a dynamic property) of an instance
or type.
Treat a reference to an instance as the name of a nonexistent
function (a dynamic function).

--- Page 564 ---
Before I explain, I’ll give an example. Imagine I have a class Flock
that acts as a gatekeeper to a dictionary. I proceed to talk to a Flock
instance like this:
let flock = Flock() 
flock.chicken = "peep" 
flock.partridge = "covey" 
// flock's dictionary is now ["chicken": "peep", "partridge": "covey"] 
if let s = flock.partridge { 
    print(s) // covey 
} 
flock(remove:"partridge") 
// flock's dictionary is now ["chicken": "peep"]
That’s surprising, because Flock has no chicken property and no par
tridge property, and it is not the name of a function with a remove:
parameter. So why am I able to talk that way?
Here’s how the implementation works:
Dynamic properties
The type must be marked @dynamicMemberLookup, and must
declare a subscript taking a single parameter that is either a
string or a key path and has an external name dynamicMember.
The subscript return type is up to you, and you can have multiple
overloads distinguished by the return type. When other code
accesses a nonexistent property of this type, the corresponding
subscript function — the getter or, if there is one, the setter — is
called with the name of the property as parameter.
Dynamic functions
The type must be marked @dynamicCallable, and must declare
either or both of these methods, where the type T is up to you:

--- Page 565 ---
dynamicallyCall(withArguments:[T])
Other code uses an instance as a function name and calls it
with a variadic parameter of type T. The variadic becomes an
array. If T is Int, and the caller says myObject(1,2), then this
method is called with parameter [1,2].
dynamicallyCall(withKeywordArguments:KeyValuePairs<St
ring, T>)
Other code uses an instance as a function name and calls it
with labeled arguments of type T. The label–value pairs
become string–T pairs; if a label is missing, it becomes an
empty string. If T is String, and the caller says myObject(lab
el:"one", "two"), then this method is called with parameter
["label":"one", "":"two"].
So here’s the implementation of Flock. Its dynamic properties are
turned into dictionary keys, and it can be called as a function with a
"remove" label to remove a key:
@dynamicMemberLookup 
@dynamicCallable 
class Flock { 
    var d = [String:String]() 
    subscript(dynamicMember s:String) -> String? { 
        get { d[s] } 
        set { d[s] = newValue } 
    } 
    func dynamicallyCall(withKeywordArguments kvs:KeyValuePairs<String, 
String>) { 
        if kvs.count == 1 { 
            if let (key,val) = kvs.first { 
                if key == "remove" { 
                    d[val] = nil 
                } 
            } 

--- Page 566 ---
        } 
    } 
}
As originally conceived, dynamic membership is not intended for
general use; its primary purpose is to prepare Swift for future
interoperability with languages like Ruby, and perhaps to permit
domain-specific languages. It is, after all, constitutionally opposed to
the spirit of Swift: dynamism means that the compiler’s validity
checking is thrown away.
On the other hand, @dynamicMemberLookup with a subscript that
takes a key path is Swift-like, because the validity of a given key path
is checked at compile time. This feature is good particularly for
forwarding messages to a wrapped value. Here’s a Kennel struct that
wraps a Dog:
struct Dog { 
    let name : String 
    func bark() { print("woof") } 
} 
@dynamicMemberLookup 
struct Kennel { 
    let dog : Dog 
    subscript(dynamicMember kp:KeyPath<Dog,String>) -> String { 
        self.dog[keyPath:kp] 
    } 
}
If k is a Kennel instance, we can now fetch k.name as a way of
fetching k.dog.name. An attempt to say k.nickname, however, won’t
even compile; key paths maintain validity checking.

--- Page 567 ---
Property Wrappers
The idea of property wrappers, as you’ll recall from Chapter 3, is that
commonly used computed property getter and setter patterns can be
encapsulated into a type with a wrappedValue computed property:
@propertyWrapper struct MyWrapper { 
    // ... 
    var wrappedValue : SomeType { 
        get { /*...*/ } 
        set { /*...*/ } 
    } 
}
You can then declare your computed property using the property
wrapper type name as a custom attribute:
@MyWrapper var myProperty
The result is that, behind the scenes, a MyWrapper instance is created
for you, and when your code gets or sets the value of myProperty, it
is the getter or setter of this MyWrapper instance that is called.
In real life, your property wrapper’s purpose will almost certainly be
to act as a façade for access to a stored instance property, declared
inside the property wrapper’s type. This alone makes the property
wrapper worth the price of admission, because now your main code is
not cluttered with private stored properties acting as the backing store
for computed properties; the stored properties are hidden in the
property wrapper instances.

--- Page 568 ---
To introduce the syntax, I’ll start with a property wrapper that acts as
a façade for storage, and no more:
@propertyWrapper struct Facade<T> { 
    private var _p : T 
    init(wrappedValue:T) { 
        self._p = wrappedValue 
    } 
    var wrappedValue : T { 
        get { 
            return self._p 
        } 
        set { 
            self._p = newValue 
        } 
    } 
}
That’s a fairly normal-looking struct. It’s a generic so that our
property declaration can be of any type. The only special feature here
is the initializer. The rule is that if you declare an init(wrappedValu
e:) initializer, it will be called automatically with the value to which
the property is initialized:
@Facade var p = "test"
Here, the property wrapper’s generic is resolved to String, and its ini
t(wrappedValue:) initializer is called with parameter "test". You
can call other initializers instead, by treating the custom attribute
name as a type name (which, of course, is just what it is) and putting
parentheses after it. Suppose our property wrapper declares an
initializer with no external parameter name:

--- Page 569 ---
init(_ val:T) { 
    self._p = val 
}
Then we can call that initializer by declaring our property like this:
@Facade("test") var p
More practically, here’s a generalized version of the Clamped
property wrapper from Chapter 3; we accept any Comparable type
(so that min and max are available), and we accept (and require)
initialization with a minimum and maximum to clamp to:
@propertyWrapper struct Clamped<T:Comparable> { 
    private var _i : T 
    private let min : T 
    private let max : T 
    init(wrappedValue: T, min:T, max:T) { 
        self._i = wrappedValue 
        self.min = min 
        self.max = max 
    } 
    var wrappedValue : T { 
        get { 
            self._i 
        } 
        set { 
            self._i = Swift.max(Swift.min(newValue,self.max),self.min) 
        } 
    } 
}
And here’s how to use it:
@Clamped(min:-7, max:7) var i = 0 
@Clamped(wrappedValue:0, min:-7, max:7) var ii

--- Page 570 ---
Those declarations are equivalent, but the first is more natural; behind
the scenes, the value with which we initialize the property is routed to
the wrappedValue: parameter of the property wrapper initializer.
As I’ve said, when you declare a property with a property wrapper
attribute, an actual property wrapper instance is generated. That
instance is accessible to our code under the same name as the
computed property with underscore (_) prefixed to it. In the case of
our @Facade property p, if we set p to "howdy" and then say print(_
p), the console says Facade<String>(_p: "howdy"). You might
use this feature for debugging, or to expose additional public
members of the struct. This underscore-prefixed variable is declared
with var, so you can even assign to it a property wrapper instance
that you’ve initialized manually.
The property wrapper may also vend a value that can be referred to
elsewhere by prefixing a dollar sign ($) to the property name. It does
this by declaring a projectedValue property (this will usually be a
computed property). You might use this to expose some useful
secondary object. That’s how the SwiftUI @State attribute works. It
is a property wrapper (one of several that are commonly used in
SwiftUI). The State property wrapper struct has a projectedValue
computed property whose getter returns the State struct’s binding
property. That property is a Binding, so when you use your @State
property’s $ name, you get a Binding (see Chapter 13).

--- Page 571 ---
TIP
Be careful not to cause a name clash! If you declare a @Facade property p, you
can’t declare a property _p in the same scope, because that’s the name of the
synthesized property wrapper instance. (The same issue does not arise for the $
name, because a variable name can’t start with $.)
Property wrappers are a brilliant addition to Swift, and can be of
practical value immediately. For instance, I’ve pointed out already
that deferred initialization of an instance property using an Optional
(“Deferred initialization of properties”) entails an architectural flaw:
the property must be declared with var. Property wrappers can’t
change that, but they can prevent further assignment at runtime:
@propertyWrapper struct DeferredConstant<T> { 
    private var _value: T? = nil 
    var wrappedValue: T { 
        get { 
            if _value == nil { 
                fatalError("not yet initialized") 
            } 
            return _value! 
        } 
        set { 
            if _value == nil { 
                _value = newValue 
            } 
        } 
    } 
}
Suppose we now declare an outlet as a DeferredConstant:

--- Page 572 ---
@IBOutlet @DeferredConstant var myButton: UIButton!
The result is that after a real button from the interface is assigned to m
yButton, subsequent code that tries to assign a different value to myB
utton will fail silently.
TIP
Despite the name, property wrappers can be applied to global variables. They
cannot be applied to local variables, but that may become possible in the future.
Custom String Interpolation
Starting in Swift 5, string interpolation syntax can be customized.
The example I imagined in Chapter 3 is an expression such as "You h
ave \(n, roman:true) widgets", where n is an Int; the idea is
that, if n is 5, this would yield "You have V widgets", expressing
the Int in Roman numerals instead of Arabic notation. This would be
an odd goal to accomplish through string interpolation, but it
demonstrates the syntax; so let’s implement that example.
To implement string interpolation, you need an adopter of the
ExpressibleByStringLiteral protocol that also adopts the
ExpressibleByStringInterpolation protocol. This might be some
custom type of your own, but in most situations you’ll just use the
built-in type that already adopts both of these protocols — String. "Y
ou have \(n, roman:true) widgets" is a String, and it already
implements string interpolation.

--- Page 573 ---
That makes our job easy: all we have to do is customize String’s
already existing implementation of string interpolation. That
implementation hinges on two methods, appendInterpolation and
appendLiteral. The overall string is broken into segments, the
interpolations (appendInterpolation) and the other parts (appendL
iteral), and those methods are called; our job is to assemble them
into a single object. String is already doing that job, and we don’t
need to modify the way it implements appendLiteral; we just need
to modify the way it implements appendInterpolation.
To help us do that, there’s another protocol,
DefaultStringInterpolation. We extend this protocol to inject a version
of appendInterpolation that takes our interpolated type — in this
case, Int — along with any additional parameters. Our
implementation should perform any necessary transformations to get
a String, and then call the default appendInterpolation(_:).
Here’s an Int method toRoman() that yields an Optional String (Int
values of 0 or less will return nil, to indicate that they can’t be
expressed in Roman numerals):
extension Int { 
    func toRoman() -> String? { 
        guard self > 0 else { return nil } 
        let rom = ["M","CM","D","CD","C","XC","L","XL","X","IX","V","I
V","I"] 
        let ar = [1000,900,500,400,100,90,50,40,10,9,5,4,1] 
        var result = "" 
        var cur = self 
        for (c, num) in zip(rom, ar) { 
            let div = cur / num 
            if (div > 0) { 

--- Page 574 ---
                for _ in 0..<div { result += c } 
                cur -= num * div 
            } 
        } 
        return result 
    } 
}
Our interpolated type is Int, and we want to add one parameter, roma
n:, a Bool. So our extension of DefaultStringInterpolation will inject
an implementation of appendInterpolation like this:
extension DefaultStringInterpolation { 
    mutating func appendInterpolation(_ i: Int, roman: Bool) { 
        if roman { 
            if let r = i.toRoman() { 
                self.appendInterpolation(r) 
                return 
            } 
        } 
        self.appendInterpolation(i) 
    } 
}
For a practical example of custom string interpolation in action, take
a look at the Logger struct, introduced in Swift 5.3 as a Swifty
wrapper for OSLog (Chapter 9). Its methods take string literals, but
the parameter here is not a String; it is a special OSLogMessage
struct that adopts ExpressibleByStringLiteral and
ExpressibleByStringInterpolation and performs the interpolation at
runtime, with custom interpolation parameters, by way of an
OSLogInterpolation struct that adopts StringInterpolationProtocol.
Reverse Generics

--- Page 575 ---
Starting in Swift 5.1 and iOS 13, a function return type can be
specified as a subtype of some supertype without stating what
subtype it is. The syntax is the keyword some followed by the
supertype. Suppose we have a protocol P and a struct S that adopts it:
protocol P {} 
struct S : P {}
Then we can declare a function that returns a P adopter without
specifying what adopter it is, by saying some P:
func f() -> some P { 
    return S() 
}
A computed property getter (or a subscript getter) is a function, so a
computed property can also be declared a some P:
var p : some P { S() }
A stored variable cannot be declared a some P explicitly, but it can be
a some P by inference:
var p2 = f() // now p2 is typed as some P
In those examples, the type actually being returned is S — and the
compiler knows this by inference. But users of f and p know only
that the type is an unspecified adopter of P. For this reason, this is
sometimes called a reverse generic (or an opaque type). Instead of
you declaring a placeholder and helping the compiler resolve it, the
compiler has already resolved it and hides that resolution behind the
placeholder.

--- Page 576 ---
A reverse generic some P is different from declaring the returned
type as P. For one thing, in some situations you can’t declare the
returned type as P — as when P is a generic protocol. (A generic
protocol, you remember, can be used only as a type constraint.) But
more important, if f declared its return type as P, then it could return
any P adopter on any occasion. That’s not the case with some P; f
returns an S and can return only an S. The compiler uses strict typing
to enforce this — but the external declaration hides what exactly the
compiler is enforcing. If there are two P adopters, S and S2, then a so
me P resolved to S has the same underlying type as another some P
resolved to S, but it does not have the same type as a some P resolved
to S2. This should remind you of a regular generic: an Optional<Str
ing> is a different type from an Optional<Int>.
As a result, a some type plays well with a generic in a way that an
ordinary supertype would not. Suppose we have a Named protocol
and an adopter of that protocol:
protocol Named { 
    var name : String {get set} 
} 
struct Person : Named { 
    var name : String 
}
And suppose we have a generic function that uses this protocol as a
type constraint:
func haveSameName<T:Named>(_ named1:T, _ named2:T) -> Bool { 
    return named1.name == named2.name 
}

--- Page 577 ---
Obviously, you can hand two Person objects to this generic function,
because they resolve the generic placeholder T the same way:
let matt = Person(name: "Matt") 
let ethan = Person(name: "Ethan") 
let ok = haveSameName(matt,ethan) // fine
But you couldn’t do that with two Named objects, because they might
or might not represent the same adopting type:
let named1 : Named = Person(name: "Matt") 
let named2 : Named = Person(name: "Ethan") 
let ok = haveSameName(named1, named2) // compile error
Now suppose we have a function namedMaker that makes a some Nam
ed out of a String:
func namedMaker(_ name: String) -> some Named { 
    return Person(name:name) 
}
You, the user of namedMaker, do not necessarily know what Named
adopter is produced by namedMaker. But you do know that every call
to namedMaker produces the same type of Named adopter! The
compiler knows this too, and it also knows what type of Named
adopter namedMaker produces. Therefore you might write this, and
the compiler will allow it:
let named1 = namedMaker("Matt") 
let named2 = namedMaker("Ethan") 
let ok = haveSameName(named1, named2) // fine

--- Page 578 ---
The main place you are likely to encounter some is when using
SwiftUI or some other domain-specific language or library that wants
to vend specific types while masking them under some common
identity. (You are less likely to use some in your own code, though I
suppose it could be useful for masking types in one area of your code
from visibility in another area.)
For example, in SwiftUI a View’s body is typed as some View. You
are shielded from the underlying complexities of compound view
types, such as:
VStack<TupleView<(Text, HStack<TupleView<(Image, Image)>>)>>
At the same time, the compiler knows that that is the type of this
View’s body, and therefore behind the scenes SwiftUI can reason
coherently about this view.
Function Builders
Swift 5.1 introduced the ability to intercept a function passed to
another function, capture its parameters and content, and transform
them by way of a function builder to get a different function that is
actually passed. This complex and highly specialized feature is aimed
at enabling Swift to embrace domain-specific languages — the chief
such language, at the moment, being SwiftUI. You can say this in
SwiftUI:
VStack { 
    Text("Hello") 
    Text("World") 
}

--- Page 579 ---
That doesn’t look like legal Swift, so what’s going on? Well, VStack
is a type, and we are creating an instance of that type. We call an
initializer to instantiate VStack. This particular initializer takes a
function as its content: parameter. We could write this as VStack(c
ontent:f), but instead we use trailing closure syntax; the curly
braces embrace the body of an anonymous function. This body is
now handed off to a function builder, which detects its structure and
transforms it into something that is legal Swift (and that creates a
VStack instance consisting of two Texts). The entire look and feel of
SwiftUI code rests on this mechanism.
Result
A frustrating problem arises when you want to throw an error in a
context where this is forbidden. To see what I mean, consider a
function that does some networking:
func doSomeNetworking(completion:@escaping (Data) -> ()) { 
    URLSession.shared.dataTask(with: myURL) { data, _, err in 
        if let data = data { 
            completion(data) 
        } 
        if let err = err { 
            throw err // compile error 
        } 
    }.resume() 
}
In doSomeNetworking, we get some data from across the internet by
calling resume on a URLSession’s dataTask, supplying an
anonymous function to be called when either data arrives or we get
an error. These are handed to us as separate Optional parameters: an

--- Page 580 ---
Optional wrapping a Data (data), and an Optional wrapping an Error
(err). If the data arrives, data won’t be nil, and we hand it back to
whoever called doSomeNetworking by calling a completion
function that takes a Data object. If there’s an error, data will be nil
and err won’t be. The question is: now what? We’re not allowed to
throw err; we’re not in a throwing context, and there’s no place for
the thrown error to percolate up to; the dataTask anonymous
function isn’t a throws function, and even if it were, we’d be talking
to the URLSession, not to the caller of doSomeNetworking.
One option is to respond to the error somehow right here in the
anonymous function. Often, though, what we’d really like to do is to
hand the error back to the caller of doSomeNetworking. One way to
do that is to give the completion function another parameter,
perpetuating the separate Optional parameters that were foisted upon
us by Objective-C:
func doSomeNetworking(completion:@escaping (Data?, Error?) -> ()) { 
    URLSession.shared.dataTask(with: myURL) { data, _, err in 
        completion(data, err) 
    }.resume() 
}
But here’s a cleaner solution — a type that expresses the notion of
data-or-error in a single object. It’s a generic enum called Result, with
a success case and a failure case, each of them carrying an
associated value which is the data or error, respectively:
func doSomeNetworking(completion:@escaping (Result<Data,Error>) -> ()) { 
    URLSession.shared.dataTask(with: myURL) { data, _, err in 
        if let data = data { 

--- Page 581 ---
            completion(.success(data)) 
        } 
        if let err = err { 
            completion(.failure(err)) 
        } 
    }.resume() 
}
The really cool part is that Result provides an initializer that lets us
express ourselves in a much more Swifty way: we can return the data
or throw the error, just as we would if we weren’t in this
asynchronous situation:
func doSomeNetworking(completion:@escaping (Result<Data,Error>) -> ()) { 
    URLSession.shared.dataTask(with: myURL) { data, _, err in 
        let result = Result<Data,Error> { 
            if let err = err { 
                throw err 
            } 
            return data! 
        } 
        completion(result) 
    }.resume() 
}
And things work the same way at the caller’s end. We call the Result
object’s get method, which is a throws function. Either this gives us
the data or else it throws:
self.doSomeNetworking { result in 
    do { 
        let data = try result.get() 
        // do something with the data 
    } catch { 
        // respond to the error 

--- Page 582 ---
    } 
}
That summarizes the most important aspects of the Result enum;
there’s more to know, but you can explore further on your own if you
need to.

--- Page 583 ---
Part II. IDE
By now, you’re doubtless anxious to jump in and start writing an app.
To do that, you need a solid grounding in the tools you’ll be using.
The heart and soul of those tools can be summed up in one word:
Xcode. In this part of the book we explore Xcode, the IDE (integrated
development environment) in which you’ll be programming iOS.
Xcode is a big program, and writing an app involves coordinating a
lot of pieces; this part of the book will help you become comfortable
with Xcode. Along the way, we’ll generate a simple working app
through some hands-on tutorials.
Chapter 6 tours Xcode and explains the architecture of the project,
the collection of files from which an app is generated.
Chapter 7 is about nibs. A nib is a file containing a drawing of
your interface. Understanding nibs — how they work and how
they relate to your code — is crucial to your use of Xcode and to
development of just about any Cocoa app.
Chapter 8 pauses to discuss the Xcode documentation and other
sources of information on the API.
Chapter 9 explains editing your code, testing and debugging your
code, and the various steps you’ll take on the way to submitting
your app to the App Store. You’ll probably want to skim this
chapter quickly at first, returning to it as a detailed reference later
while developing and submitting an actual app.

--- Page 585 ---
Chapter 6. Anatomy of an
Xcode Project
Xcode is the application used to develop an iOS app. An Xcode
project is the source for an app; it’s the entire collection of files and
settings used to construct the app. To create, develop, and maintain an
app, it helps to know how to manipulate and navigate an Xcode
project. You’ll want to be familiar with Xcode, and you’ll need to
know about the nature and structure of Xcode projects and how
Xcode shows them to you. That’s the subject of this chapter.
Xcode is a powerful, complex, and very large program. Our survey
will chart a safe, restricted, and essential path, focusing on aspects of
Xcode that you most need to understand immediately, and resolutely
ignoring everything else.
NOTE
The term “Xcode” is used in two ways. It’s the name of the application in which
you edit and build your app, and it’s the name of an entire suite of utilities that
accompanies it; in the latter sense, Instruments and the Simulator are part of
Xcode. This ambiguity should generally present little difficulty.
New Project

--- Page 586 ---
Even before you’ve written any code, an Xcode project is quite
elaborate. To see this, let’s make a new, essentially “empty” project;
you’ll find that it isn’t empty at all.
1. Start up Xcode and choose File → New → Project.
2. The “Choose a template” dialog appears. The template is your
project’s initial set of files and settings. When you pick a
template, you’re really picking an existing folder full of files;
this folder is hidden deep inside the Xcode bundle, and will
essentially be copied, with a few values filled in, to create your
project.
In this case, select iOS; under Application, select the App
template. Click Next.
3. You are now asked to provide a name for your project (Product
Name). Let’s call our new project Empty Window.
As Xcode copies the template folder, it’s going to insert the
project’s name in several places, including using it as the name
of the app. Whatever you type at this moment is something
you’ll be seeing throughout your project. You are not locked
into the name of your project forever, though, and there’s a
separate setting allowing you to change the name of the app that
your project produces. (I’ll talk later about name changes; see
“Renaming Parts of a Project”.)
Spaces are legal in the project name, the app name, and the
various names of files and folders that Xcode will generate
automatically; and in the few places where spaces are
problematic (such as the bundle identifier, which I’ll discuss in
a moment), the name you type as the Product Name will have
its spaces converted to hyphens. But do not use any other
punctuation in your project name! Such punctuation can cause
Xcode features to break in subtle ways.

--- Page 587 ---
4. Ignore the Team pop-up menu for now; I’ll discuss its
significance in Chapter 9. Ignore the Organization Name as
well; it is used only in some automatically generated code
comments.
5. Note the Organization Identifier field. The first time you create
a project, this field will be blank, and you should fill it in. The
goal here is to create a unique string identifying you or your
organization. The convention is to start the organization
identifier with com. and to follow it with a string (possibly with
multiple dot-components) that no one else is likely to use.
Every app on a device or submitted to the App Store needs a
unique bundle identifier. Your app’s bundle identifier, which is
shown in gray below the organization identifier, will consist by
default of the organization identifier plus a version of the
project’s name; if you choose a unique organization identifier
and give every project a unique name within your personal
world, the bundle identifier will uniquely identify this project
and the app that it produces. (You will be able to change the
bundle identifier manually later if necessary.)
6. The Interface pop-up menu should say Storyboard, not SwiftUI.
(The Life Cycle pop-up menu will then automatically be set to
UIKit App Delegate.)
7. The Language pop-up menu lets you choose between Swift and
Objective-C. This choice is not positively binding; it dictates
the initial structure and code of the project template, but you are
free to add Swift files to an Objective-C project, or Objective-C
files to a Swift project. You can even start with an Objective-C
project and decide later to convert it completely to Swift. (See
“Bilingual Targets”.) For now, choose Swift.
8. For this example project, make sure Use Core Data and Include
Tests are not checked. Click Next.

--- Page 588 ---
9. You’ve now told Xcode how to construct your project.
Basically, it’s going to copy a template folder from somewhere
deep within the Xcode application bundle. But you need to tell
it where to copy this template folder to. That’s why Xcode is
now presenting a Save dialog with a Create button. You are to
specify the location of a folder that is about to be created — the
project folder for this project. The project folder can go just
about anywhere, and you can move it after creating it. I usually
create new projects on the Desktop.
10. Xcode also offers, through a checkbox, to create a Git
repository for your project. (You might need to click Options to
see the checkbox.) In real life, this can be a great convenience
(see Chapter 9), but for now, uncheck that checkbox. (If you see
an Add To pop-up menu, leave it at the default, “Don’t add to
any project or workspace.”) Click Create.
The Empty Window project folder is created on disk (on the
Desktop, if that’s the location you just specified), and the
project window for the Empty Window project opens in Xcode.
The project we’ve just created is a working project; it really does
build an iOS app called Empty Window. To see this, you can actually
build the app — and run it! The scheme and destination in the project
window’s toolbar will be listed as Empty Window and some model of
iPhone. (The scheme and destination are actually pop-up menus, so
you can click them to change their values if needed.) Choose Product
→ Run. After some delay, the Simulator application opens and
displays your app running — an empty white screen.

--- Page 589 ---
NOTE
To build a project is to compile its code and assemble the compiled code,
together with various resources, into the actual app. Typically, if you want to
know whether your code compiles and your project is consistently and correctly
constructed, you’ll build the project (Product → Build). To run a project is to
launch the built app, in the Simulator or on a connected device; if you want to
know whether your code works as expected, you’ll run the project (Product →
Run), which automatically builds first if necessary.
The Project Window
An Xcode project embodies a lot of information about what files
constitute the project and how they are to be used when building the
app, such as:
The source files (your code) that are to be compiled
Any .storyboard or .xib files, graphically expressing interface
objects to be instantiated as your app runs
Any resources, such as icons, images, or sound files, that are to be
part of the app
All settings (instructions to the compiler, to the linker, and so on)
that are to be obeyed as the app is built
Any frameworks that the code will need when it runs
A single Xcode project window presents all of this information, lets
you access, edit, and navigate your code, and reports the progress and
results of such procedures as building or debugging an app and more.
This window displays a lot of information and embodies a lot of

--- Page 590 ---
functionality! A project window is powerful and elaborate; learning
to navigate and understand it takes time. Let’s pause to explore this
window and see how it is constructed.
A project window has four main parts (Figure 6-1):
Figure 6-1. The project window

--- Page 591 ---
1. On the left is the Navigator pane. Show and hide it with View
→ Navigators → Show/Hide Navigator (Command-0) or with
the button at the left end of the toolbar.
2. In the middle is the Editor pane (or simply “editor”). This is the
main area of a project window. A project window nearly always
displays an Editor pane.
3. On the right is the Inspectors pane. Show and hide it with View
→ Inspectors → Show/Hide Inspectors (Command-Option-0)
or with the button at the right end of the toolbar.
4. At the bottom is the Debug pane. Show and hide it with View
→ Debug Area → Show/Hide Debug Area (Command-Shift-
Y).
NOTE
All Xcode keyboard shortcuts can be customized; see the Key Bindings pane of
the Preferences window. Keyboard shortcuts that I cite are the defaults.
The Navigator Pane
The Navigator pane is the column of information at the left of the
project window. Among other things, it’s your primary mechanism
for controlling what you see in the main area of the project window
(the editor). An important use pattern for Xcode is: you select
something in the Navigator pane, and that thing is displayed in the
editor.
It is possible to toggle the visibility of the Navigator pane (View →
Navigators → Hide/Show Navigator, or Command-0); you might

--- Page 592 ---
hide the Navigator pane temporarily to maximize your screen real
estate (especially on a smaller monitor). You can change the
Navigator pane’s width by dragging the vertical line at its right edge.
New in Xcode 12, if the project window is being displayed fullscreen
with the Navigator pane hidden, you can display the Navigator pane
by hovering the mouse at the left side of the screen.
The Navigator pane can display nine different sets of information;
there are actually nine navigators. These are represented by the nine
icons across its top; to switch among them, use these icons or their
keyboard shortcuts (Command-1, Command-2, and so on). If the
Navigator pane is hidden, pressing a navigator’s keyboard shortcut
both shows the Navigator pane and switches to that navigator.
Depending on your settings in the Behaviors pane of Xcode’s
preferences, a navigator might show itself automatically when you
perform a certain action. For example, when you build your project,
if warning messages or error messages are generated, the Issue
navigator may appear. This automatic behavior will not prove
troublesome, because it is usually the behavior you want, and if it
isn’t, you can change it; plus you can easily switch to a different
navigator at any time.
Let’s begin experimenting immediately with the various navigators:
Project navigator (Command-1)
Click here for basic navigation through the files that constitute
your project (Figure 6-2). For example, in the Empty Window
folder (the folder-like things in the Project navigator are actually

--- Page 593 ---
called groups), click AppDelegate.swift to view its code in the
editor.
At the top of the Project navigator, with a blue Xcode icon, is the
Empty Window project itself; click it to view the settings
associated with your project and its targets. Don’t change
anything here without knowing what you’re doing!
The filter bar at the bottom of the Project navigator lets you limit
what files are shown; when there are many files, this is great for
quickly reaching a file with a known name. For example, try
typing “delegate” in the filter bar search field. Don’t forget to
remove your filter when you’re done experimenting.
WARNING
Once you’ve filtered a navigator, it stays filtered until you remove the filter —
even if you close the project! A common mistake is to filter a navigator, forget
that you’ve done so, fail to notice the filter (because you’re looking at the
navigator itself, not down at the bottom where the filter bar is), and wonder,
“Hey, where did all my files go?”
Figure 6-2. The Project navigator

--- Page 594 ---
Source Control navigator (Command-2)
The Source Control navigator helps you manipulate how your
project’s files are handled through version control. I’ll discuss
version control in Chapter 9.
Symbol navigator (Command-3)
A symbol is a name, typically the name of a class or method. The
Symbol navigator lists symbols available to your code. Among
other things, this can be useful for navigating. For example,
highlight the first two icons in the filter bar (so that they are
filled), twist open the class listings, and see how quickly you can
reach your code’s implementation of SceneDelegate’s sceneDidB
ecomeActive(_:) method.
Try highlighting the filter bar icons in various ways to see how
the contents of the Symbol navigator change. Type in the search
field in the filter bar to limit what appears in the Symbol
navigator; for example, try typing “active” in the search field, and
see what happens.
Find navigator (Command-4)
This is a powerful search facility for finding text globally in your
project. You can also summon the Find navigator with Find →
Find in Project (Command-Shift-F). The words above the search
field show what options are currently in force; they are pop-up
menus, so click one to change the options. This is a powerful
intelligent search that can filter on how a term is used. Try
searching for “delegate” among References; then change it to
search among Definitions (Figure 6-3). Click a search result to
jump to it in your code.
Below the search field, at the left, is the current search scope.
This limits what files will be searched. Click it to reveal the
search scopes. You can create or edit a “smart” scope (for

--- Page 595 ---
example, search only .swift files), and you can limit the search to
one or more groups (folders).
You can type in the other search field, the one in the filter bar at
the bottom, to limit further which search results are displayed.
(I’m going to stop calling your attention to the filter bar now;
every navigator has it in some form.)
Figure 6-3. The Find navigator
Issue navigator (Command-5)
You’ll need this navigator primarily when your code has issues.
This doesn’t refer to emotional instability; it’s Xcode’s term for
warning and error messages emitted when you build your project.
The Issue navigator can also display certain runtime issues (such
as leaks, as I’ll explain in Chapter 9).
To see the Issue navigator in action, let’s give your code a
buildtime issue. Navigate to the file AppDelegate.swift, and in the
blank line after the last comment at the top of the file’s contents,
above the import line, type howdy. Build the project (Command-
B). Switch to the Issue navigator if it doesn’t appear
automatically; in its Buildtime pane, it displays some error
messages, showing that the compiler is unable to cope with this
illegal word appearing in an illegal place. Click an issue to see it
within its file. In your code, issue banners appear to the right of

--- Page 596 ---
lines containing issues; the compiler can even underline the
troublesome spot within a line. But it’s always a good idea to look
at the Issue navigator as well, because it may contain additional
useful information.
Now that you’ve made Xcode miserable, select “howdy” and
delete it; save and build again, and your issues will be gone. If
only real life were this easy!
You can create a custom buildtime issue, either a compile error or
a warning, by starting a line with #error or #warning
respectively followed by a string literal in parentheses, like this: #
warning("Fix this!"). This can be a dramatic way to leave a
note to whoever subsequently tries to compile this code —
possibly your future self.
Test navigator (Command-6)
This navigator lists test files and individual test methods and
permits you to run your tests and see whether they succeeded. A
test is code that isn’t part of your app; rather, it calls a bit of your
app’s code, or exercises your app’s interface, to see whether
things behave as expected. I’ll talk more about tests in Chapter 9.
Debug navigator (Command-7)
By default, this navigator will appear when your code is paused
while you’re debugging it. There is not a strong distinction in
Xcode between running and debugging; the milieu is the same.
The difference is mostly a matter of whether breakpoints are
obeyed (more about that, and about debugging in general, in
Chapter 9).
To see the Debug navigator in action, you’ll need to give your
code a breakpoint. Navigate once more to the file
AppDelegate.swift, select in the line that says return true, and
choose Debug → Breakpoints → Add Breakpoint at Current Line
to make a breakpoint arrow appear on that line. Run the project.

--- Page 597 ---
By default, as the breakpoint is encountered, the Navigator pane
switches to the Debug navigator, and the Debug pane appears at
the bottom of the window. This overall layout (Figure 6-4) will
rapidly become familiar as you debug your projects.
Figure 6-4. The Debug layout
The Debug navigator starts with several numeric and graphical
displays of profiling information (at a minimum, you’ll see CPU,
Memory, Disk, and Network); click one to see extensive graphical

--- Page 598 ---
information in the editor. This information allows you to track
possible misbehavior of your app as you run it, without the added
complexity of running the Instruments utility (discussed in
Chapter 9). To toggle the visibility of the profiling information at
the top of the Debug navigator, click the “gauge” icon (to the
right of the process’s name).
The Debug navigator also displays the call stack, with the names
of the nested methods in which a pause occurs; as you would
expect, you can click a method name to navigate to it. You can
shorten or lengthen the list with the first button in the filter bar at
the bottom of the navigator.
The Debug pane, which can be shown or hidden at will (View →
Debug Area → Hide/Show Debug Area, or Command-Shift-Y),
has at its top the debug bar containing various buttons, and
consists of two subpanes:
The variables list (on the left)
The variables in scope for the selected method in the call
stack at the point where we are paused, along with their
values.
The console (on the right)
Here the debugger displays text messages; that’s how you
learn of exceptions thrown by your running app, plus you can
have your code deliberately send you log messages describing
your app’s progress and behavior. Such messages are
important, so keep an eye on the console as your app runs.
You can also use the console to enter commands to the
debugger. This can often be a better way to explore values
during a pause than the variables list.
Either the variables list or the console can be hidden using the
two buttons at the bottom right of the pane. The console can also

--- Page 599 ---
be summoned by choosing View → Debug Area → Activate
Console.
Breakpoint navigator (Command-8)
This navigator lists all your breakpoints. At the moment you have
only one, but when you’re actively debugging a large project with
many breakpoints, you’ll be glad of this navigator. Also, this is
where you create special breakpoints (such as symbolic
breakpoints), and in general it’s your center for managing existing
breakpoints. We’ll return to this topic in Chapter 9.
Report navigator (Command-9)
This navigator lists your recent major actions, such as building or
running (debugging) your project. Click a listing to see (in the
editor) the report generated when you performed that action. The
report might contain information that isn’t displayed in any other
way, and also it lets you dredge up console messages from the
recent past (“What was that exception I got while debugging a
moment ago?”).
By clicking on the listing for a successful build, we can see the
steps by which a build takes place (Figure 6-5). To reveal the full
text of a step, click that step and then click the Expand Transcript
button that appears at the far right (and see also the menu items in
the Editor menu).

--- Page 600 ---
Figure 6-5. The start of a build report
The Inspectors Pane
The Inspectors pane is the column at the right of the project window.
It contains inspectors that provide information about the current
selection or its settings; if those settings can be changed, this is where
you change them. The Inspectors pane’s importance emerges mostly
when you’re editing a .storyboard or .xib file (Chapter 7). But it can
be useful also while editing code, mostly because Quick Help, a form
of documentation (Chapter 8), is displayed here as well. To toggle the
visibility of the Inspectors pane, choose View → Inspectors →
Hide/Show Inspectors (Command-Option-0). You can change the
Inspectors pane’s width by dragging the vertical line at its left edge.
New in Xcode 12, if the project window is being displayed fullscreen
with the Inspectors pane hidden, you can display the Inspectors pane
by hovering the mouse at the right side of the screen.

--- Page 601 ---
What appears in the Inspectors pane depends on what’s selected in
the current editor:
A code file is being edited
The Inspectors pane shows the File inspector, the History
inspector, or the Quick Help inspector. Toggle between them with
the icons at the top of the Inspectors pane, or with their keyboard
shortcuts (Command-Option-1, Command-Option-2, Command-
Option-3). The File inspector consists of multiple sections, each
of which can be expanded or collapsed by clicking its header; I’ll
give an example of using it in Chapter 9 when I talk about
localization. History is about version control (Chapter 9 as well).
Quick Help can be useful because it displays documentation
(Chapter 8).
A .storyboard or .xib file is being edited
The Inspectors pane adds the Identity inspector (Command-
Option-4), the Attributes inspector (Command-Option-5), the
Size inspector (Command-Option-6), and the Connections
inspector (Command-Option-7). These inspectors can consist of
multiple sections, each of which can be expanded or collapsed by
clicking its header. I’ll talk more about them in Chapter 7.
Other forms of editing may cause other inspector combinations to
appear here.
The Editor
In the middle of the project window is the editor. This is where you
get actual work done, reading and writing your code (Chapter 9) or
designing your interface in a .storyboard or .xib file (Chapter 7). The
editor is the core of the project window. You can hide the Navigator

--- Page 602 ---
pane, the Inspectors pane, and the Debug pane, but there is basically
no such thing as a project window without an editor.
The jump bar across the top shows you hierarchically what file is
currently being edited. It also allows you to switch to a different file.
Each path component in the jump bar is a pop-up menu. These pop-
up menus can be summoned by clicking on a path component, or by
using keyboard shortcuts (shown in the View → Editor submenu).
Control-4 summons a hierarchical pop-up menu, which can be
navigated entirely with the keyboard, allowing you to choose a
different file in your project to edit. Each pop-up menu in the jump
bar also has a filter field; to see it, summon a pop-up menu from the
jump bar and start typing. Thus you can navigate your project even if
the Project navigator isn’t showing.
TIP
Command-click a jump bar component to summon a menu showing the
corresponding file in the Finder and its hierarchy of enclosing folders.
The symbol at the left end of the jump bar (Control-1) summons the
Related Items menu. This helps you navigate to files conceptually
related to the current one. Its contents depend on both the current file
and the current selection within it. You can navigate to files declaring
related types (Superclasses, Subclasses, Siblings, and adopted
Protocols) and to methods that call or are called by the currently
selected method. The Generated Interface menu displays a file’s
public interface as seen by Swift or Objective-C (see Appendix A).

--- Page 603 ---
The editor remembers the history of what it has displayed, and you
can return to previously viewed content with the Back button in the
jump bar, which is also a pop-up menu (Control-2). Alternatively,
choose Navigate → Go Back (Command-Control-Left).
EDITOR PANES
It is likely, as you develop a project, that you’ll want to edit more
than one file simultaneously, or obtain multiple views of a single file
so that you can edit different areas of it simultaneously. For this
purpose, the Editor pane area of the project window can be
subdivided into smaller editor panes. Each pane can display a
different file, or a different area of the same file.
To summon a new editor pane, choose File → New → Editor
(Command-Control-T) or click the Add Editor button at the top right
of an editor. Alternatively, if there is only one editor pane, Option-
click a file listing in the Project navigator to open it in a new editor
pane.
The new pane appears to the right of the current editor or below it;
choose View → Change Editor Orientation to reverse this default or
to move a pane from the right to below (or vice versa). To summon a
new editor pane in the other orientation, choose File → New →
Editor Below / On Right, or Option-click the Add Editor button.
To close an editor pane, choose File → Close Editor, or click the X
button at the top left of an editor pane.

--- Page 604 ---
To zoom an editor pane temporarily, so that it takes over the whole
editor area without closing any other panes, choose View → Editor
→ Focus, or click the outward double-arrow button at the top left of
the pane. To unzoom, do the same thing again: choose View → Editor
→ Hide Focus, or click the inward double-arrow button. While a
pane is zoomed, Close Editor and the X button are disabled; you have
to unzoom the pane before you can close it.
WARNING
Zooming a pane, deliberately or accidentally, and then wondering why you
can’t make additional editor panes, is a common beginner mistake.
When there are multiple editor panes, what happens when you click a
file listing in the Project navigator? By default, its destination is
current editor pane. But you can Option-click a file listing to specify
a different destination; the exact details depend on your settings in the
Navigation pane of Xcode’s preferences. For maximum flexibility,
Option-Shift-click a file listing to enter destination chooser mode;
you can then navigate with arrow keys to specify where you want this
file to open — in an existing pane or as a new additional pane, to the
right or below — and hit Return to open it there.
I like the destination chooser so much that I have made it the default:
in the Navigation preference pane, under Optional Navigation, I’ve
selected Uses Destination Chooser. The outcome is that the Option-
click and Option-Shift-click shortcuts are swapped: the destination
chooser appears when I hold the Option key while navigating.

--- Page 605 ---
TIP
If the Project navigator selection gets out of sync with the file displayed in the
current editor pane, you can bring it back in sync by choosing Navigate →
Reveal in Project Navigator (Command-Shift-J).
ASSISTANT PANES
An assistant pane is a special kind of editor pane tied to some primary
editor pane, in the following way: when you cause the primary pane
to display a different file, its assistant pane automatically displays a
different file to match. To summon an assistant pane, choose Editor
→ Assistant (or choose Assistant from the Editor Options pop-up
menu at the top right of the editor pane). You’ll know you’ve entered
editor-and-assistant mode because both panes will display an icon
showing two linked rings. To configure whether the assistant pane
divides the editor vertically or horizontally, choose Editor → Layout
→ Assistant On Right/Bottom (or use the Editor Options pop-up
menu).
Exactly what category of file the assistant pane automatically
displays depends upon what you’ve specified as its relationship to the
primary pane. You do that with the first pop-up menu in the assistant
pane’s jump bar, containing the linked rings icon (Control-4). Your
choices here are much like the menu items in the Related Items menu.
If more than one file falls into the category in question — for
example, you’ve set the assistant to show Callers and in the primary
pane you’ve selected a method with more than one caller — then a

--- Page 606 ---
pair of arrow buttons appears at the right end of the assistant’s jump
bar, with which you can navigate between them, or use the second
jump bar component (Control-5).
TABS AND WINDOWS
New in Xcode 12, there are two kinds of tab. This is rather confusing,
because menu commands don’t always distinguish them. There are
document tabs and window tabs:
Document tabs
A document tab (new in Xcode 12) is an alternative way of
populating an editor pane with multiple files. Instead of splitting
the editor pane into two or more smaller panes, the editor pane
displays different files as different tabs that you see one at a time,
occupying the entire editor pane — and then you can readily
switch between them.
To make a document tab, choose File → Open In Tab (Command-
Option-O), or Control-click on a file listing in the Project
navigator and choose Open In Tab. Or, if the document tab bar is
already showing, you can drag file listings into it from the Project
navigator to open them as tabs. (To show the document tab bar all
the time, choose View → Always Show Tab Bar so that it is
checked.) Additionally, in the Navigation preference pane, you
can set Optional Navigation or Double-click Navigation to Uses
Tab. I like the latter; that way, I double-click a listing in the
Project navigator to open it as a document tab.
A file opened as a document tab is “pinned” as a tab in the editor
pane. By “pinned,” I mean that if you click a different file listing
in the Project navigator, it opens as a separate tab rather than
replacing this file. So “pinned” files have a degree of
permanence. They mean: These are the particular files I want to

--- Page 607 ---
work on right now. (Tabs that open without being pinned are
replaceable; they display their filenames in italics.) You can “pin”
as many files as you like, making it easy to switch between them
and ensure that none of them will be replaced accidentally.
Window tabs (and windows)
A window tab (which Xcode 11 and before calls simply a tab)
doesn’t just display a file, like an editor pane or a document tab; it
displays the whole project window interface, and can display it
differently from another window tab. Thus one window tab might
show the Project navigator, while another might have the Project
navigator hidden, or display a different navigator. In other words,
a window tab is like a second window on the same project, except
that it doesn’t occupy any independent screen real estate: rather, it
shares the space with an existing project window.
To make a new window tab, choose File → New → Window Tab
(Command-T), revealing the window’s tab bar (just below the
toolbar) if it wasn’t showing already. Or, instead of a window tab,
you can display a second independent window on the same
project. To make a new window, choose File → New → Window
(Command-Shift-T), or promote a window tab to be a window by
dragging it right out of its current window.
In the Navigation preference pane, you can set Optional
Navigation or Double-click Navigation to Uses Separate Window
Tab or Uses Separate Window.
Project File and Dependents
The first item in the Project navigator represents the project itself. (In
the Empty Window project that we created earlier in this chapter, it is
called Empty Window.) Hierarchically dependent upon it are items

--- Page 608 ---
that contribute to the building of the project. Many of the listings in
the Project navigator correspond to items on disk in the project folder.
To survey this correspondence, let’s view our Empty Window project
in two ways simultaneously — in the Project navigator in the Xcode
project window, and in the project folder in a Finder window. Select
the project listing in the Project navigator and choose File → Show in
Finder. The Finder displays the contents of your project folder
(Figure 6-6).
Figure 6-6. The Project navigator (Xcode) and the project folder (Finder)
Contents of the Project Folder
The most important file in the project folder is Empty
Window.xcodeproj. This is the project file, corresponding to the
project listed first in the Project navigator. All Xcode’s knowledge
about your project — what files it consists of and how to build the
project — is stored in this file. To open a project from the Finder,
double-click the project file. (Alternatively, you can drag the project

--- Page 609 ---
folder onto Xcode’s icon in the Finder, the Dock, or the application
switcher; Xcode will locate the project file and open it for you.)
The Project navigator displays groups (folder-like things) and files
hierarchically from the project. Let’s consider how these correspond
to reality on disk as portrayed in the Finder (Figure 6-6):
The Empty Window group corresponds directly to the Empty
Window folder on disk. Groups in the Project navigator don’t
necessarily correspond to folders on disk in the Finder, and folders
on disk in the Finder don’t necessarily correspond to groups in the
Project navigator. But in this case, they do correspond (this is a
folder-linked group, as I’ll explain later).
Files within the Empty Window group, such as AppDelegate.swift,
correspond to real files on disk that are inside the Empty Window
folder. If you were to create additional code files (which, in real
life, you would almost certainly do in the course of developing
your project), you would likely put them in the Empty Window
group in the Project navigator, and they, too, would then be in the
Empty Window folder on disk. (However, your files can live
anywhere and your project will still work fine.)
Two files in the Empty Window group, Main.storyboard and
LaunchScreen.storyboard, appear in the Finder inside a folder that
doesn’t visibly correspond to anything in the Project navigator,
called Base.lproj. This arrangement has to do with localization,
which I’ll discuss in Chapter 9.
The item Assets.xcassets in the Project navigator corresponds to a
specially structured folder Assets.xcassets on disk. This is an asset
catalog; you add resources to the asset catalog in Xcode, which
maintains that folder on disk for you. I’ll talk more about the asset
catalog later in this chapter, and in Chapter 9.

--- Page 610 ---
The Products group and its contents don’t correspond to anything
in the project folder. Xcode generates a reference to the executable
bundle generated by building each target in your project, and by
convention these references appear in the Products group.
Now that you have inspected the contents of a typical project folder,
you should have little need to open a project folder ever again, except
in order to double-click the project file to open the project. Generally
speaking, you should not manipulate the contents of a project folder
by way of the Finder; manipulate the project in the project window.
The project expects things in the project folder to be a certain way; if
you make any alterations to the project folder directly in the Finder,
behind the project’s back, you can upset those expectations and break
the project. When you work in the project window, it is Xcode itself
that makes any necessary changes in the project folder, and all will be
well.
Groups
The purpose of groups in the Project navigator is to make the Project
navigator work conveniently for you. So feel free to add further
groups! If some of your code files have to do with a login screen that
your app sometimes presents, you might clump them together in a
Login group. If your app is to contain some sound files, you might
put them into a Sounds group. And so on.
A group might or might not correspond to a folder on disk in the
project folder. There’s a visual distinction: a group that corresponds
to a folder on disk is a folder-linked group, and has a solid folder
icon, like the Empty Window group in Figure 6-6; a group plain and

--- Page 611 ---
simple exists purely within the Project navigator, and has a marked
folder icon, like the Products group in Figure 6-6. You’ll encounter
this distinction at various times:
Creating a group
When you make a new group, there’s a choice of menu items: in
the contextual menu, you might see New Group and New Group
Without Folder. (Confusingly, the choice might sometimes be
New Group and New Group With Folder.) The one without a
folder creates a group plain and simple; the other creates a folder-
linked group.
Using a group
When you place a file into a folder-linked group, it goes into the
corresponding folder on disk (like the contents of the Empty
Window folder in Figure 6-6). When you place a file into a group
plain and simple, the group is effectively ignored in determining
where the file will go; it generally will go into the same place as
files at the same level as the group.
Renaming a group
To rename a group, select it in the Project navigator and press
Return to make the name editable. When you rename a folder-
linked group, the folder on disk is renamed as well.
The Target
A target is a collection of parts along with rules and settings for how
to build a product from those parts. Whenever you build, what you’re
building is a target (possibly more than one target).

--- Page 612 ---
Select the Empty Window project at the top of the Project navigator,
and you’ll see the project itself along with its targets listed on the left
side of the editor (Figure 6-7). Our Empty Window project comes
with one target — the app target, called Empty Window (like the
project itself). The app target is the target that you use to build and
run your app. Its settings are the settings that tell Xcode how your
app is to be built; its product is the app itself.
Under certain circumstances, you might add further targets to a
project:
You might want to add unit tests or interface tests to your project.
A test bundle is a target.
You might write an application extension, such as a photo editing
extension (custom photo editing interface to appear in the Photos
app). An extension is a target.
You might write a library, such as a custom framework, as part of
your iOS app. A custom framework is a target.
The project name and the list of targets can appear in two ways
(Figure 6-7): either as a column on the left side of the editor, or, if
that column is collapsed to save space, as a pop-up menu at the top
left of the editor. If, in the column or pop-up menu, you select the
project, you edit the project; if you select a target, you edit the target.

--- Page 613 ---
Figure 6-7. Two ways of showing the project and targets
Build Phases
Edit the app target and click Build Phases at the top of the editor
(Figure 6-8). These are the stages by which your app is built. The
build phases are both a report to you on how the target will be built
and a set of instructions to Xcode on how to build the target; if you
change the build phases, you change the build process. Click each
build phase to see a list of the files in your target to which that build
phase will apply.
Two of the build phases have contents. The meanings of these build
phases are pretty straightforward:
Compile Sources
Certain files (your code) are compiled, and the resulting compiled
code is copied into the app. This build phase typically applies to
all of the target’s .swift files. Sure enough, it currently contains all
three Swift files supplied by the app template when we created
the project.
Copy Bundle Resources

--- Page 614 ---
Certain files are copied into the app, so that your code or the
system can find them there when the app runs. This build phase
currently applies to the asset catalog; any resources you add to the
asset catalog will be copied into your app as part of the catalog. It
also applies to your launch storyboard file,
LaunchScreen.storyboard, and your app’s interface storyboard
file, Main.storyboard.
Copying doesn’t necessarily mean making an identical copy. Certain
types of file are automatically treated in special ways as they are
copied into the app bundle. Copying the asset catalog means that
icons in the catalog are written out to the top level of the app bundle,
while the asset catalog itself is transformed into a .car file; copying a
.storyboard file means that it is transformed into a .storyboardc file,
which is itself a bundle containing nib files.
You can alter these lists manually, and sometimes you may need to do
so. For instance:
If something in your project, such as a sound file, is not in Copy
Bundle Resources and you want it copied into the app during the
build process, drag it from the Project navigator into the Copy
Bundle Resources list, or (easier) click the Plus button beneath the
Copy Bundle Resources list to get a helpful dialog listing
everything in your project.
Conversely, if something in your project is in the Copy Bundle
Resources list and you don’t want it copied into the app, delete it
from the list; this will not delete it from your project, from the
Project navigator, or from the Finder, but only from the list of
things to be copied into your app.

--- Page 615 ---
Figure 6-8. The app target’s build phases
Build Settings
Build phases are only one aspect of how a target knows how to build
the app. The other aspect is build settings. To see them, edit the target
and click Build Settings at the top of the editor (Figure 6-9). Here
you’ll find a long list of settings, most of which you’ll never touch.
Xcode examines this list in order to know what to do at various stages
of the build process. Build settings are the reason your project
compiles and builds the way it does.

--- Page 616 ---
Figure 6-9. Target build settings
You can determine what build settings are displayed by clicking
Basic or All. The settings are combined into categories, and you can
close or open each category heading to save room. To locate a setting
quickly based on something you already know about it, such as its
name, use the search field at the top right to filter what settings are
shown.
You can determine how build settings are displayed by clicking
Combined or Levels; in Figure 6-9, I’ve clicked Levels, in order to
discuss what levels are. It turns out that not only does a target contain
values for the build settings, but the project also contains values for
the same build settings; furthermore, Xcode has certain built-in
default build setting values. The Levels display shows all of these
levels at once, so you can trace the derivation of the actual values
used for every build setting.

--- Page 617 ---
To understand the chart, read from right to left. For example, the iOS
default for the Build Active Architecture Only setting’s Debug
configuration (far right) is No. But then the project comes along
(second column from the right) and sets it to Yes. The target (third
column from the right) doesn’t change that setting, so the result
(fourth column from the right) is that the setting resolves to Yes.
You will rarely have occasion to manipulate build settings directly, as
the defaults are usually acceptable. Nevertheless, you can change
build setting values, and this is where you would do so. You can
change a value at the project level or at the target level. You can
select a build setting and show Quick Help in the Inspectors pane to
learn more about it.
Configurations
There are actually multiple lists of build setting values — though
only one such list applies when a particular build is performed. Each
such list is called a configuration. Multiple configurations are needed
because you build in different ways at different times for different
purposes, and you’ll want certain build settings to take on different
values under different circumstances.
By default, there are two configurations:
Debug
This configuration is used throughout the development process, as
you write and run your app.
Release

--- Page 618 ---
This configuration is used for late-stage testing, when you want to
check performance on a device, and for archiving the app to be
submitted to the App Store.
Configurations exist at all because the project says so. To see where
the project says so, edit the project and click Info at the top of the
editor (Figure 6-10). Note that these configurations are just names.
You can create additional configurations, and when you do, you’re
just adding to the list of names. The importance of configurations
emerges only when those names are coupled with build setting
values. Configurations can affect build setting values both at the
project level and at the target level.
Figure 6-10. Configurations
For example, return to the target build settings (Figure 6-9) and type
“optim” into the search field. Now you can look at the Optimization
Level build setting for Swift, at the very bottom of the window
(Figure 6-11):
The Debug configuration value for Optimization Level is No
Optimization: while you’re developing your app, you build with

--- Page 619 ---
the Debug configuration, so your code is just compiled line by line
in a straightforward way.
The Release configuration value for Optimization Level is
Optimize for Speed. When your app is ready to ship, you build it
with the Release configuration, so the resulting binary is
optimized for speed, which is great for your users running the app
on a device, but would be no good while you’re developing the
app because breakpoints and stepping in the debugger wouldn’t
work properly. Compilation may take longer when the compiler
must optimize for speed, but you won’t mind the delay, because
you won’t do a Release build very often.
Figure 6-11. How configurations affect build settings
Schemes and Destinations
So far, I have not said how Xcode knows which configuration to use
during a particular build. This is determined by a scheme.
A scheme unites a target (or multiple targets) with a build
configuration, with respect to the purpose for which you’re building.
A new project comes by default with a single scheme, named after
the project. The Empty Window project’s single scheme is currently
called Empty Window. To see it, choose Product → Scheme → Edit
Scheme. The scheme editor dialog opens (Figure 6-12).

--- Page 620 ---
Figure 6-12. The scheme editor
On the left side of the scheme editor are listed various actions you
might perform from the Product menu. Click an action to see its
corresponding settings in this scheme.
The first action, the Build action, is different from the other actions,
because it is common to all of them — the other actions all implicitly
involve building. The Build action merely determines what target(s)
will be built when each of the other actions is performed. For our
project this means that the app target is always to be built, regardless
of the action you perform.
The second action, the Run action, determines the settings that will be
used when you build and run. The Build Configuration pop-up menu

--- Page 621 ---
(in the Info pane) is set to Debug. That explains where the current
build configuration comes from: whenever you build and run
(Product → Run, or click the Run button in the toolbar), you’re using
the Debug build configuration and the build setting values that
correspond to it, because you’re using this scheme, and that’s what
this scheme says to do when you build and run.
You can edit an existing scheme, and this can be useful especially as
a temporary measure for doing certain kinds of specialized
debugging. For example, the Run action’s Diagnostics tab contains
checkboxes that let you turn on the Address Sanitizer or the Thread
Sanitizer, useful for tracking down certain types of obscure runtime
error. You’d check the checkbox, build and run, work on the error,
and then uncheck the checkbox again.
Alternatively, you can add a scheme. A typical approach is to
duplicate an existing scheme and then modify the duplicate. Instead
of changing your main scheme to turn on the Address Sanitizer
temporarily, you might have a second scheme where the Address
Sanitizer is always turned on; you would then use the Address
Sanitizer by switching schemes.
Handy access to schemes and their management is through the
Scheme pop-up menu in the project window toolbar (Figure 6-13).

--- Page 622 ---
Figure 6-13. The Scheme pop-up menu
The Scheme pop-up menu is something you’re going to be using a
lot. Your schemes are listed here; hierarchically appended to each
scheme are the destinations. A destination is effectively a machine
that can run your app. On any given occasion, you might want to run
the app on a physical device or in the Simulator — and, if in the
Simulator, you might want to specify that a particular type of device
should be simulated. To make that choice, pick a destination in the
Scheme pop-up menu.
Destinations and schemes have nothing to do with one another. The
presence of destinations in the Scheme pop-up menu is just a
convenience, letting you choose a scheme or a destination or both in a
single move. To switch easily among destinations without changing
schemes, click the destination name in the Scheme pop-up menu. To
switch among schemes, possibly also determining the destination (as
shown in Figure 6-13), click the scheme name in the Scheme pop-up
menu. You can open the Scheme pop-up menu with Control-0 (zero),
and the Destination pop-up menu with Control-Shift-0; the menu can

--- Page 623 ---
then be navigated with the keyboard, and is also filterable in the same
way as the jump bar (discussed earlier in this chapter).
Each simulated device has a system version that is installed on that
device. At the moment, all our simulated devices are running iOS 14;
there is no distinction to be drawn, and the system version is not
shown. But you can download earlier SDKs (systems) in Xcode’s
Components preference pane. If you do, and if your app can run
under more than one system version, you might also see a system
version listed in the Scheme pop-up menu as part of a Simulator
destination name.
To manage destinations, choose Window → Devices and Simulators.
Switch to the Simulators pane if necessary. This is where you govern
what simulated devices exist. Here you can create, delete, and rename
simulated devices, and specify whether a simulated device actually
appears as a destination in the Scheme pop-up menu.
From Project to Built App
Now that you know what’s in a project, I’m going to summarize how
Xcode builds that project into an app. Let’s first jump ahead and
examine the end product — the app itself.
What is an app anyway? It’s actually a special kind of folder called a
package (and a special kind of package called a bundle). The Finder
normally disguises a package as a file and does not dive into it to
reveal its contents to the user, but you can bypass this protection and
investigate an app bundle with the Show Package Contents

--- Page 624 ---
command. By doing so, you can study the internal structure of your
built app bundle.
We’ll use the Empty Window app that we built earlier as a sample
minimal app to investigate. Open the Products group in the Project
navigator, Control-click the app listing, and choose Show in Finder.
In the Finder, Control-click the Empty Window app, and choose
Show Package Contents. Here you can see the results of the build
process (Figure 6-14).
Figure 6-14. Contents of the app package
Think of the app bundle as a transformation of the project folder.
Here are some of the things it contains, and how they relate to what’s
in the project folder:
Empty Window
Our app’s compiled code. The build process has compiled all our
Swift files into this single file, our app’s binary. This is the heart
of the app, its actual executable material.

--- Page 625 ---
Main.storyboardc
Our app’s interface storyboard file. The project’s Main.storyboard
is currently where our app’s interface comes from — in this case,
an empty white view occupying the entire window. The build
process has compiled Main.storyboard into a tighter format,
resulting in a .storyboardc file, which is actually a bundle of nib
files to be loaded as required while the app runs. One of these nib
files, loaded as our app launches, will be the source of the hitherto
empty view displayed in the interface. Main.storyboardc sits in
the same Base.lproj subfolder as Main.storyboard does in the
project folder; as I said earlier, this folder structure has to do with
localization (to be discussed in Chapter 9).
LaunchScreen.storyboardc
This is the compiled version of LaunchScreen.storyboard,
containing the interface that will be displayed briefly during the
time it takes for our app to launch (the launch screen).
Assets.car, AppIcon60x60@2x.png
An asset catalog and an icon file. In preparation for this build, I
added an icon image to the original asset catalog, Assets.xcassets.
The build process has compiled this file, resulting in a compiled
asset catalog file (.car) containing any resources that have been
added to the catalog; at the same time, the icon file has been
written out to the top level of the app bundle.
Info.plist
A configuration file in a strict text format (a property list file). It
is derived from, but is not identical to, the project’s Info.plist. It
contains instructions to the system about how to treat and launch
the app. For example, the project’s Info.plist has a calculated
bundle name derived from the product name, $(PRODUCT_NAME);
in the built app’s Info.plist, this calculation has been performed,

--- Page 626 ---
and the value reads Empty Window, which is why our app is
labeled “Empty Window” on the device. Also, in conjunction
with the asset catalog writing out our icon file to the app bundle’s
top level, a setting has been added to the built app’s Info.plist
telling the system the name of that icon file, so that the system
can find it and display it as our app’s icon.
Frameworks
The built app contains no frameworks. That was a major
innovation of Swift 5, standing in sharp contrast to what used to
happen; previously, several megabytes of framework files were
added to the app, containing the entirety of the Swift language!
One of the great overarching achievements of Swift 5 was the
introduction of ABI stability, which means, in practical terms, that
the Swift frameworks could be moved off into the system,
reducing the size and overhead of your built apps. However, that’s
only on iOS 13 and later. If you were to build this app for an
earlier system, those framework files would return, and the app
package would look more like Figure 6-15.

--- Page 627 ---
Figure 6-15. Contents of the app package, old style
In real life, an app bundle may contain more files, but the difference
will be mostly one of degree, not kind. Our project might have
additional .storyboard or .xib files, additional frameworks, or
additional resources such as sound files. All of these would make
their way into the app bundle. Also, an app bundle built to run on a
device will contain some security-related files.
You are now in a position to appreciate, in a general sense, how the
components of a project are treated and assembled into an app, and
what responsibilities accrue to you, the programmer, in order to

--- Page 628 ---
ensure that the app is built correctly. The rest of this section outlines
what goes into the building of an app from a project.
Build Settings
We have already talked about how build settings are determined.
Xcode itself, the project, and the target all contribute to the resolved
build setting values, some of which may differ depending on the build
configuration. You, the programmer, will have specified a scheme
before building; the scheme determines the build configuration,
meaning the specific set of build setting values that will apply as this
build proceeds.
Property List Settings
Your project contains a property list file that will be used to generate
the built app’s Info.plist file. The file in the project does not have to
be named Info.plist! The app target knows what file it is because it is
specified in the Info.plist File build setting. In our project, the value
of the app target’s Info.plist File build setting is Empty
Window/Info.plist.
The property list file is a collection of key–value pairs. You can edit
it, and you may need to do so. There are three main ways to edit your
project’s Info.plist:
Edit the target, and switch to the General pane. Some of the
settings here are effectively ways of editing the Info.plist. For
example, when you click a Device Orientation checkbox here, you
are changing the value of the “Supported interface orientations”
key in the Info.plist.

--- Page 629 ---
Edit the Info.plist file manually by selecting it in the Project
navigator. The editor displays a special .plist editor interface. By
default, most of the key names (and some of the values) are
displayed descriptively, in terms of their functionality; for
example, it says “Bundle name” instead of the actual key, which is
CFBundleName. To view the actual keys, choose Editor → Raw
Keys & Values, or use the contextual menu.
If you like, you can see the file in its true XML text form: Control-
click the Info.plist file in the Project navigator and choose Open
As → Source Code from the contextual menu. (But editing an
Info.plist as raw XML is risky, because if you make a mistake you
can invalidate the XML, causing things to break with no warning.)
Edit the target, and switch to the Info pane. The Custom iOS
Target Properties section shows effectively the same information
as editing the Info.plist in the editor.
Some values in the project’s Info.plist are processed at build time to
transform them into their final values in the built app’s Info.plist. For
example, the “Executable file” key’s value in the project’s Info.plist is
$(EXECUTABLE_NAME); for this will be substituted the value of the EX
ECUTABLE_NAME build environment variable, supplied by Xcode at
build time. Also, some additional key–value pairs will be injected
into the Info.plist during processing.
For a complete list of the possible keys and their meanings, consult
Apple’s Information Property List Key Reference in the
documentation archive (see Chapter 8). I’ll talk more in Chapter 9
about some Info.plist settings that you’re particularly likely to edit.
Nib Files

--- Page 630 ---
A nib file is a file with the extension .nib containing a description of a
piece of user interface in a compiled format. You edit a .xib or
.storyboard file graphically, as in a drawing program. Your .xib and
.storyboard files are then transformed into nib files by compilation
during the build process. This compilation takes place by virtue of the
.storyboard or .xib file being listed in the app target’s Copy Bundle
Resources build phase. A .xib file results in a single nib file; a
.storyboard file results in a .storyboardc bundle containing multiple
nib files.
Our Empty Window project generated from the iOS App template
contains an interface .storyboard file called Main.storyboard. This is
our app’s main storyboard — not because of its name, but because
the Info.plist file says so, under the key “Main storyboard file base
name” (UIMainStoryboardFile). I’ll talk more about the main
storyboard later in this chapter; in Chapter 7 I’ll explain how nib files
create instances when your code runs.
Resources
Resources are ancillary files embedded in your app bundle to be
extracted as needed while the app runs. At some point during your
app’s lifetime you might want to display some images, or play some
sound files; to do so, you can include these files in your app bundle.
In effect, your app bundle is being treated as a folder full of extra
stuff.
There are two different places to add resources to your project in
Xcode:

--- Page 631 ---
The Project navigator
If you add a resource to the Project navigator, it is copied by the
build process to the top level of your app bundle (assuming that it
is also listed in the Copy Bundle Resources build phase).
An asset catalog
If you add a resource to an asset catalog, then when the asset
catalog is copied and compiled by the build process to the top
level of your app bundle, the resource’s data will be embedded
inside it.
RESOURCES IN THE PROJECT NAVIGATOR
To add a resource to your project through the Project navigator,
choose File → Add Files to [Project], or drag the resource from the
Finder into the Project navigator. A dialog appears (Figure 6-16):
Figure 6-16. Options when adding a resource to a project
Copy items if needed
Check this checkbox so that the resource is copied into the project
folder. Otherwise, your project will depend on a file that’s outside
the project folder, where you might delete or change it
unintentionally; keeping all of your project’s contents inside the
project folder is far safer.

--- Page 632 ---
Added folders
If what you’re adding to the project is a folder, these choices
determine how the project references the folder contents:
Create groups
The folder’s name becomes the name of a folder-linked group
within the Project navigator, and its contents appear in this
group; but the folder contents are listed individually in the
Copy Bundle Resources build phase and are copied
individually to the top level of the app bundle.
Create folder references
The folder becomes a folder reference. It is shown in blue in
the Project navigator, and the folder itself is listed in the Copy
Bundle Resources build phase. The build process will copy
the folder itself, along with its contents, into the app bundle;
the resources won’t be at the top level of the app bundle, but
rather in a subfolder within the app bundle. Your code for
accessing a resource will have to specify the subfolder.
Add to targets
This checkbox determines whether the resource is added to a
target’s Copy Bundle Resources build phase. If your purpose is to
make this resource available to the app when it runs, the app
target checkbox should be checked. If your purpose is merely to
use the project folder as convenient storage for something that
isn’t part of your app, the checkbox should not be checked. If you
get this wrong, you can change this setting later by editing the
target’s Copy Bundle Resources build phase.
RESOURCES IN AN ASSET CATALOG

--- Page 633 ---
Asset catalogs were invented originally to accommodate image files;
they can now contain any kind of data file. Keeping your resources in
an asset catalog provides certain advantages over keeping them at the
top level of the app bundle.
For example, you might need two or three versions of an image file,
corresponding to the single-, double-, and triple-resolution screens of
target devices; the asset catalog provides resolution slots to make that
easy (Figure 6-17). The asset catalog can perform certain
transformations on an image as it is loaded. And asset catalog images
load more efficiently, because they are stored in a special format.
Figure 6-17. Slots for an image set in the asset catalog
Asset catalogs can also hold named colors, Sprite Kit textures, and
general data objects. Different versions of the same asset can load in
response to device type, light or dark mode, and localization. An
asset catalog can contain “folders” that subdivide the assets between
namespaces, and multiple asset catalogs can be distinguished by
putting them in different bundles (such as frameworks).
Code Files

--- Page 634 ---
The build process compiles a code file into the app’s binary if it is
listed in the app target’s Compile Sources build phase. The Swift files
provided by the app template are listed under Compile Sources
already. As you develop a real app, you’ll create new Swift files by
choosing File → New → File; a Save dialog will appear, offering to
make this file part of the app target, and if you accept, the file will be
added to the app target’s Compile Sources build phase. If you get this
wrong, your code probably won’t compile, because the compiler
won’t see the newly added Swift file; you can fix this by editing the
Compile Sources build phase.
When you create a new file using the Cocoa Touch Class template,
you get some boilerplate code for free. A file template might import
the UIKit framework and write the initial class declaration for you,
and in the case of some commonly subclassed superclasses, such as
UIViewController and UITableViewController, it even provides stub
declarations of some of that class’s methods.
Frameworks, SDKs, and Packages
A framework is a library of compiled code used by your code. Most
of the frameworks you are likely to use when programming iOS will
be Apple’s built-in frameworks. These frameworks are the locus of
all the stuff that every app might need to do; they are Cocoa. That’s a
lot of stuff, and a lot of compiled code. Your app gets to share in the
goodness and power of the frameworks because it is hooked up to
them. Your code works as if the framework code were incorporated
into it. Yet your app is relatively tiny; it’s the frameworks that are
huge.

--- Page 635 ---
The Cocoa frameworks are already part of the system on the device
where your app will run; they live in /System/Library/Frameworks on
the device, though you can’t tell that because there’s no way
(normally) to inspect a device’s file hierarchy directly.
Your compiled code also needs to be connected to those frameworks
when the project is being built and run on your computer. To make
this possible, the iOS device’s /System/Library/Frameworks is
duplicated on your computer, inside Xcode itself. This duplicated
subset of the device’s system is called an SDK (for “software
development kit”). Which SDK is used depends upon what
destination you’re building for.
The process of hooking up your compiled code with the frameworks
that it needs, whether on your computer or on an actual device, is
called linking. Linking takes care of connecting your compiled code
to any needed frameworks, but your code also needs to be able to
compile in the first place. The frameworks are full of classes and
methods that your code will call. To satisfy the compiler, the
frameworks publish their API in header files, which your code can
import. For instance, your code can speak of NSString and can call r
ange(of:) because it imports the NSString header. (Actually, what
your code imports is the UIKit header, which in turn imports the
Foundation header, which in turn imports the NSString header, which
declares the range(of:) method.)
Using a framework is therefore a two-stage process. Your code must
import the framework’s header in order to compile, and it must link to
the framework’s binary so that your code can communicate with the

--- Page 636 ---
framework’s code at runtime. Luckily, Swift’s use of modules
simplifies the importing and linking process (as well as improving
compilation times). A Swift import statement takes care of
everything. The import UIKit statement at the top of our project’s
code files imports the UIKit framework’s header files and allows
your code to compile; then, at build time, it also enables linkage with
the UIKit framework.
A custom framework can be a useful way to subdivide your code into
modules, allowing your code to be compartmentalized and shared
between other modules. Also, a framework is a bundle, so it can
include resources that are referenced by specifying that bundle.
Here’s how to create a framework in your project:
1. Edit the target and choose Editor → Add Target.
2. Select iOS. Under Framework & Library, select Framework.
Click Next.
3. Give your framework a name; let’s call it MyCoolFramework.
You can pick a language, but I’m not sure this makes any
difference, as no code files will be created. The Project and
Embed in Application pop-up menus should be correctly set by
default. Click Finish.
A new MyCoolFramework target is created in your project. If you
now add a Swift file to the MyCoolFramework target, and inside it
define an object type and declare it public, then, back in one of your
main app target’s files, such as AppDelegate.swift, your code can imp
ort MyCoolFramework and will then be able to see that object type
and its public members. In the built app, the app bundle contains a

--- Page 637 ---
Frameworks folder which, in turn, contains a
MyCoolFramework.framework package containing your framework’s
code and resources — a secondary bundle embedded in your app.
Sharing frameworks between apps, however, is not simple; it can be
rather tricky to use a framework in more than one app of your own,
and it’s even harder to distribute your code to others as a framework,
and for others to embed your framework in their own app. Starting in
Xcode 11, a far more convenient mechanism is available: Swift
packages. The primary purpose of a Swift package is to share your
code as open source. A package is simpler and more efficient than a
framework, because it is basically just a collection of source code,
which doesn’t need linking.
Here’s how to create a package:
1. In your project (such as our Empty Window project), choose
File → New → Swift Package.
2. Give the package a name, such as MyCoolPackage. At the
bottom of the Save dialog, specify that you want to add this
package to the existing project (Empty Window), and make sure
you’re adding it at the top level of the project, not inside any
group. Observe that this is a folder and will not necessarily be
placed inside your project folder, though you can specify that if
you want to. Click Create.
3. The initial package files appear in the Project navigator, but this
module is not yet available to the app target. Edit the app target;
in the General pane, under Frameworks, Libraries, and
Embedded Content, click Plus and choose the package library in
the dialog (Figure 6-18). Click Add.

--- Page 638 ---
Figure 6-18. Adding a local package to the app target
In your app target’s code, you can now import MyCoolPackage to
access public types declared in the package. There is already one
source file, MyCoolPackage.swift, ready for you to play with.
A package is not a framework, and it’s not a full-fledged target. There
are no build settings or build phases; instead, at the top level of the
package is a configuration file, Package.swift, consisting primarily of
a single call to the Package class initializer. This call is the package
manifest. In effect, it does in code for a package what you would have
done with build settings and phases for a full-fledged target. This call
declares a target called "MyCoolPackage"; this name corresponds to
the MyCoolPackage group inside Sources, so that whatever is inside
that group, such as the MyCoolPackage.swift file, goes into that
target. If you add code files to the package, add them inside this same
MyCoolPackage group, so that they too are compiled as part of the
target.
Here’s the interesting part. When your app uses a Swift package
consisting of code files, then when you build the app, nothing new is
visibly added to the built app. There is no Frameworks folder. There
is no additional bundle. So where did the package code go? It has
been compiled together with your app target’s code, and is part of

--- Page 639 ---
your app’s binary. There is no need for linking! In effect, the package
has been incorporated directly into the app target.
When packages were introduced in Xcode 11, there was a severe
limitation: they had to consist only of code. You couldn’t include
images, a storyboard, or anything else that wasn’t code.
New in Xcode 12, however, you can add bundle resources, as well as
localizations, to your Swift package. For instance, suppose we want
to add an asset catalog. Select the existing source file,
MyCoolPackage.swift, and choose File → New → File. In the
template chooser, choose iOS → Resource → Asset Catalog. We
have now added the asset catalog to the package’s target, simply by
virtue of its place within the MyCoolPackage group.
The result is that now the built app will contain an actual bundle,
called MyCoolPackage_MyCoolPackage.bundle, created at top level,
containing this asset catalog. To access an image in the asset catalog,
code in the package must specify the bundle; the easiest way to do
that is with the convenience variable Bundle.module, which is
implemented for you by the build process. (Your app’s own code can
also specify the bundle, but not so easily; the expectation is that
resources in a package are for direct use by the package, not the
surrounding app.)
You can also include individual files or folders as resources in your
package, but in that case the package build mechanism needs to be
told what to do with them. You do that by editing the .target value
in the package manifest:

--- Page 640 ---
A file that you don’t want to add to the target would be added to
the target’s excludes: array.
A file that you do want to add to the target would be added to the
target’s resources: array as a .process Resource object; for an
entire folder (similar to a folder reference, discussed earlier), it
would be a .copy Resource object.
(For more details, there’s a good WWDC 2020 video on this topic.)
What we’ve created is a local package. But one of the key features of
packages is that they can readily be made public. You place your
package folder under Git control (see Chapter 9) and upload it to an
online remote Git repository, such as GitHub. That’s easy for you to
do. Now other programmers can incorporate it into their projects.
That’s easy for them to do.
To demonstrate, let’s turn the tables and see how easy it is for you to
incorporate other programmers’ public packages into your own
projects. For example, to add to your project the Swift Numerics
package that I mentioned in Chapter 3:
1. Choose File → Swift Packages → Add Package Dependency.
2. Enter the URL https://github.com/apple/swift-numerics into the
field in the dialog.
3. Click Next (twice).
4. Check the checkbox next to Numerics in the final dialog, and
click Finish.
The package is downloaded and made available to your project, and
now you can import Numerics in your project’s code files and use

--- Page 641 ---
the package code.
Interestingly, the package code is shown in your project, but the
package is not stored in your project folder. It’s stored in Xcode’s
DerivedData folder, where Xcode can incorporate it into your
project’s build process without polluting your project. From now on,
whenever you open your project, Xcode will check to see whether it
has the package code, and if it doesn’t, it will download it there and
then.
In addition, Xcode checks the version of the package code. This is
one of the most important features of Swift packages. Xcode can
ascertain online whether you’ve got the latest official version of a
package, and will update the package source if you don’t. Choose
File → Swift Packages → Update to Latest Package Versions to make
Xcode go online and check for updates. Moreover, a package can
declare a dependency, meaning that it relies on some other package
— and Xcode will also download that package and make sure that it
stays up to date. The package version numbering system and the rules
for determining whether a dependency needs updating are quite
sophisticated.
When you upload your own package, or when you update your
package, you need to declare its version number. You do this by
attaching a Git tag, in the form of a version string, to the most recent
commit:
% git tag "0.0.1" 
% git push --tags

--- Page 642 ---
Xcode’s package management mechanism works fine with private
repositories, so you can share your code without making it public;
you can upload your package and share it with yourself. This is a
great way to factor out common code and use it in different projects.
The App Launch Process
When the user launches your app, or when you launch it by building
and running it in Xcode, a lot needs to happen. Your app needs some
initial instances and an initial interface, and at least some of your
code needs an opportunity to run.
The Entry Point
When the app launches, the system knows where to find the compiled
binary inside the app’s bundle, because the app bundle’s Info.plist file
has an “Executable file” key (CFBundleExecutable) whose value is
the name of the binary; by default, the binary’s name comes from the
EXECUTABLE_NAME environment variable (such as “Empty Window”).
The system locates and loads the binary and links any needed
frameworks. Now it must call into the binary’s code to start it
running. But where?
If this app were an Objective-C program, the answer would be clear.
Objective-C is C, so the entry point is the main function. Our project
would typically have a main.m file containing the main function, like
this:

--- Page 643 ---
int main(int argc, char *argv[]) { 
    @autoreleasepool { 
        return UIApplicationMain(argc, argv, nil, 
            NSStringFromClass([AppDelegate class])); 
    } 
}
The main function does two things:
It sets up a memory management environment — the @autorelea
sepool and the curly braces that follow it.
It calls the UIApplicationMain function, which helps your app
pull itself up by its bootstraps and get running.
Our app, however, is a Swift program. It has no main function!
Instead, Swift has a special attribute: @main. You can see it in the
AppDelegate.swift file, attached to the declaration of the
AppDelegate class:
@main 
class AppDelegate: UIResponder, UIApplicationDelegate {
This attribute essentially does everything that the Objective-C main.m
file was doing: it creates an entry point that calls UIApplicationMai
n to get the app started.
NOTE
The term @main is new in Swift 5.3; formerly, this attribute was called @UIAppl
icationMain.

--- Page 644 ---
It would be very unusual for you to give your Swift app project a
main file. But you are free to do so. Delete the @main attribute and
instead create a main.swift file, making sure it is added to the app
target. The name is crucial, because a file called main.swift gets a
special dispensation: it is allowed to put executable code at the top
level of the file (Chapter 1)! The file should contain essentially the
Swift equivalent of the Objective-C call to UIApplicationMain, like
this:
import UIKit 
UIApplicationMain( 
    CommandLine.argc, CommandLine.unsafeArgv, nil, 
        NSStringFromClass(AppDelegate.self) 
)
New in Swift 5.3 and Xcode 12, there’s another way. Instead of
writing a main.swift file, you can designate one of your own types as
@main and give it a static main function, where you do whatever you
would have done in the main.swift file. Behind the scenes, the
main.swift file is synthesized for you. Here’s a minimal
implementation:
@main 
struct MyMain { 
    static func main() -> Void { 
         UIApplicationMain( 
             CommandLine.argc, CommandLine.unsafeArgv, nil, 
                 NSStringFromClass(AppDelegate.self) 
         ) 
    } 
}

--- Page 645 ---
(This use of the @main attribute is key to the new SwiftUI app
architecture, where your code doesn’t need to refer to any UIKit
classes in order to bootstrap the app.)
Regardless of whether you rely on the Swift @main attribute or write
your own main.swift file, in a Cocoa app you are calling the UIAppli
cationMain function. This one function call is the primary thing your
app does. Your entire app is really nothing but a single gigantic call to
UIApplicationMain! Moreover, UIApplicationMain is responsible
for solving some tricky problems as your app gets going. Where will
your app get its initial instances? What instance methods will initially
be called on those instances? Where will your app’s initial interface
come from? UIApplicationMain to the rescue!
How an App Gets Going
Let’s trace the sequence of events as your app launches and UIApplic
ationMain is called. The opening sequence varies somewhat,
depending on the circumstances. So let’s focus on what happens for a
new project created in Xcode 12, such as the Empty Window project
we created earlier in this chapter, which has these key features:
The app supports scenes: the Info.plist contains an “Application
Scene Manifest” dictionary (Figure 6-19), and the code mentions
classes and protocols whose names begin with UIScene.
The app has a main storyboard.
When an app with that structure launches in iOS 13 or later, here’s
what happens:

--- Page 646 ---
1. UIApplicationMain creates the shared application instance,
subsequently accessible to your code as UIApplication.share
d. The default class is UIApplication; it is possible to specify a
different class, but it is unlikely that you’d need to do so.
2. UIApplicationMain creates the application instance’s delegate.
With an explicit call to UIApplicationMain, the fourth
argument specifies, as a string, what the class of the app
delegate instance should be; in the main.swift file I described
earlier, that specification is NSStringFromClass(AppDelegat
e.self). When we use the @main attribute in the AppDelegate
class declaration in AppDelegate.swift, it means: “This is the
app delegate class!”
3. If this app supports scenes, UIApplicationMain turns to the
app delegate and, for the first time, runs some of your code: it
calls application(_:didFinishLaunchingWithOptions:).
This is a place for you to perform certain initializations.
4. UIApplicationMain creates a UISceneSession, a
UIWindowScene, and your app’s window scene delegate. The
Info.plist typically specifies, as a string, what the class of the
window scene delegate instance should be. In the app template,
it is the SceneDelegate class, which is declared in
SceneDelegate.swift; in the “Application Scene Manifest” entry
in the Info.plist, this value is written as $(PRODUCT_MODULE_NAM
E).SceneDelegate to take account of Swift “name mangling”
(Figure 6-19).
5. If there is a storyboard associated with this scene, as specified
by the Info.plist, UIApplicationMain loads it and looks inside
it to find the view controller designated as this storyboard’s
initial view controller (or storyboard entry point); it instantiates
this view controller, a UIViewController subclass. In our app
template, the app’s main storyboard, Main.storyboard, is the
initial scene’s storyboard; in that storyboard, the initial view

--- Page 647 ---
controller is an instance of the ViewController class, which is
declared in ViewController.swift.
6. UIApplicationMain creates your app’s window. This window
is assigned to the scene delegate’s window property. UIApplica
tionMain then assigns the initial view controller instance to the
window instance’s rootViewController property. This view
controller is now the app’s root view controller.
7. More of your code now has a chance to run: UIApplicationMa
in calls the scene delegate’s scene(_:willConnectTo:option
s:) method.
8. UIApplicationMain causes your app’s interface to appear, by
calling the UIWindow instance method makeKeyAndVisible.
9. The window is about to appear. This causes the window to turn
to the root view controller and tell it to obtain its main view. If
this view controller gets its view from a nib file, that nib is
loaded and its objects are instantiated and initialized (as I’ll
describe in Chapter 7). The view controller’s viewDidLoad is
then called — another early opportunity for your code to run.
Finally, the root view controller’s main view is placed into the
window, where it and its subviews are visible to the user.
More of your code can run at this time (some further app delegate and
scene delegate methods are called if they are implemented), but
basically the app is now up and running, with an initial set of
instances and a visible interface. UIApplicationMain is still running
(like Charlie on the M.T.A., UIApplicationMain never returns), and
is just sitting there, watching for the user to do something,
maintaining the event loop, which will respond to user actions as they
occur. Henceforth, your app’s code will be called only in response to
Cocoa events (as I’ll explain in Chapter 11).

--- Page 648 ---
App Without a Storyboard
In the preceding description of the app launch process, I assume that
the app has a main storyboard. It is possible, however, not to have a
main storyboard. Without a main storyboard, things like creating a
window instance, assigning it to the window property, creating an
initial view controller, assigning that view controller to the window’s
rootViewController property, and calling makeKeyAndVisible on
the window to show the interface, must be done by your code. This
architecture is useful when your intention is to create the entire
interface in code.
Let’s try it. Make a new project starting with the iOS App template;
call it Truly Empty. Now follow these steps:
1. Edit the target. In the General pane, select “Main” in the Main
Interface field and delete it (and press Tab to set this change).
2. In the Info.plist, select the “Storyboard Name” entry in the
“Application Scene Configuration” dictionary (Figure 6-19) and
press Delete (and save).
3. Optionally, in the Project navigator, delete Main.storyboard
from the project. You don’t have to do this, because even if
Main.storyboard remains, it will now be ignored.
4. In SceneDelegate.swift, edit scene(_:willConnectTo:option
s:) to look like Example 6-1.

--- Page 649 ---
Figure 6-19. The “Application Scene Manifest” entry in the Info.plist
Example 6-1. A scene delegate with no storyboard
func scene(_ scene: UIScene, 
           willConnectTo session: UISceneSession, 
           options connectionOptions: UIScene.ConnectionOptions) { 
    if let windowScene = scene as? UIWindowScene { 
        let window = UIWindow(windowScene: windowScene) 
        window.backgroundColor = .white 
        window.rootViewController = ViewController() 
        self.window = window 
        window.makeKeyAndVisible() 
    } 
}
The result is a minimal working app with an empty white window.
You can prove to yourself that the app is working normally by editing
ViewController.swift so that its viewDidLoad method changes the
main view’s background color:
override func viewDidLoad() { 
    super.viewDidLoad() 
    self.view.backgroundColor = .red 
}
Run the app again; sure enough, the background is now red.

--- Page 650 ---
In between an app with a main storyboard and an app without a main
storyboard, there is a hybrid architecture where there’s a main
storyboard (you omit steps 1, 2, and 3 in the earlier example) but you
sometimes ignore it at launch time (step 4). A common use case
would be an app with a sign-in screen that should appear when the
user first launches the app (you create the sign-in view controller
manually), but once the user has signed in, that screen shouldn’t
appear on any future launch (you let the main storyboard construct
the interface).
Renaming Parts of a Project
The name you give your project at creation time is used in many
places throughout the project. Beginners may worry that they can
never rename a project without breaking something. But in fact it’s
not a problem.
In the first place, you probably don’t need to rename the project. The
project name isn’t something the user will ever see, so what does it
matter? Typically, what you want to change is the name of the app —
the name that the user sees on the device, associated with this app’s
icon. To do so, change (or create) the “Bundle Display Name” in the
Info.plist; you can do this most easily by editing the Display Name
text field at the top of the General pane when you edit the target (see
“Property List Settings”).
If you really do want to rename the project, select the project listing
at the top of the Project navigator, press Return to make its name
editable, type the new name, and press Return again. Xcode presents

--- Page 651 ---
a dialog proposing to change some other names to match, including
the app target and the built app and, by implication, various relevant
build settings.
Everything that needs to change changes coherently when you
rename the project in this way. The only thing that isn’t changed is
the scheme name; there is no particular need to change it, but you can
do so: choose Product → Manage Schemes and click the scheme
name to make it editable.
You can change the name of the project folder in the Finder at any
time, and you can move the project folder in the Finder at will,
because all build setting references to file and folder items in the
project folder are relative.
WARNING
When you change the name of a folder-linked group, Xcode automatically
changes the name of the corresponding folder on disk, but does not change
build settings that depend upon the name of that folder, such as the Info.plist
File build setting. I regard this as a bug, because it means that changing a
group’s name can prevent your project from building. However, it usually isn’t
hard to fix the problem by changing manually any build settings that have
broken.

--- Page 652 ---
Chapter 7. Nib Files
A view (UIView) is an interface object, which draws itself into a
rectangular area. Your app’s visible interface consists of views. When
your app launches, some view controller is made the root view
controller of your app’s window (“How an App Gets Going”). That
view controller has a main view. That view and its subviews now
occupy the window. Whatever that view and its subviews look like
when they draw themselves, that is what the user will see.
Where do these interface views come from? Well, UIView is a class;
an individual UIView is an instance of that class. And you know how
to make an instance of a class — you call that class’s initializer:
let v = UIView()
So you could create all your interface views in code, one by one. For
each view, you would instantiate it; then you would configure it.
You’d say where it should go on the screen, what size it should have,
what color it should be. If the view is a button or a label, you’d say
what text it should display. And so on.
But that could be a lot of code. Wouldn’t it be nice if, instead, you
could draw your desired interface, just as in a drawing application,
and have the runtime build the interface for you, based on your
drawing? Well, you can — using a nib.

--- Page 653 ---
A nib is a file, in a special format, consisting of instructions for
creating and configuring instances — primarily UIView instances.
You “write” those instructions graphically, by drawing. You design
your app’s interface visually. Under the hood, Xcode encodes that
design. When the app runs and it’s time for those UIView instances to
appear visibly to the user, the runtime loads the nib. It decodes the
instructions and obeys them: it actually creates and configures the
view instances that the nib describes.
Xcode includes a graphical design environment so that you can draw
your interface into a nib file. I call this the nib editor. Long ago, the
files on which the nib editor operated were literally nib files — that
is, they had a .nib file extension. Nowadays, you’ll use the nib editor
to edit a .storyboard file or a .xib file. However, they will be turned
into actual .nib files when you build your project (“Nib Files”), so I
still refer to them loosely as nibs or nib files.
NOTE
The name nib has nothing to do with fountain pens or bits of chocolate. The nib
editor used to be a separate application called Interface Builder. The operating
system for which it was originally developed was called NeXTStep. The files
created by Interface Builder were given the .nib file extension as an acronym
for “NeXTStep Interface Builder.”
You don’t have to use nibs to create your interface objects. The
loading of a nib does nothing that you could not have done directly,
in code. A nib is just a device for making the creation of interface
views convenient and compact; one nib file can generate many views,

--- Page 654 ---
and the nib editor’s visual representation of those views can be more
intuitive than a code description. But you still have the alternative of
using code: you can programmatically instantiate a UIView, you can
configure it, you can place that view into your interface — manually,
step by step, one line of code at a time. You are free to mix and
match; you can generate some views in code and design other views
in the nib editor, or design a view in the nib editor but complete its
configuration in code. Clearly, nibs can be a powerful and convenient
way to create your app’s interface, in whole or in part.
Beginners often use nibs, to take advantage of that power and
convenience, without knowing what they really are, how they really
work, or how to manipulate them in code — as if nibs were some
kind of impenetrable magic. But nibs are not magic, and they are not
hard to understand. Failure to understand nibs and nib loading opens
the door to some elementary, confusing mistakes that can be avoided
or corrected merely by grasping the basic facts outlined in this
chapter.
TIP
One of the salient features of SwiftUI is that it avoids nibs completely. By
condensing the code needed to create views programmatically, it lets you
describe your interface clearly and compactly in Swift. Part of the goal is
multiplatform reusability: the same code can construct an interface destined for
an Apple Watch, an iPhone, an Apple TV, or a desktop Mac.
The Nib Editor Interface

--- Page 655 ---
Let’s explore Xcode’s nib editor. This is where you’ll draw your
app’s interface graphically. In Chapter 6, we created a simple project,
Empty Window, directly from the iOS App template; it contains a
storyboard file, so we’ll use that. In Xcode, open the Empty Window
project, locate Main.storyboard in the Project navigator, and click to
edit it.
Figure 7-1. Editing a nib file

--- Page 656 ---
Figure 7-1 shows part of the project window after selecting
Main.storyboard in the Project navigator. The interface may be
considered in four pieces:
1. The bulk of the editor is devoted to the canvas, where you
physically design your app’s interface. The canvas portrays
views graphically. View controllers are also represented in the
canvas; a view controller isn’t a view, so it isn’t drawn in your
app’s interface, but it has a view, which is drawn.
2. At the left of the editor is the document outline, listing the
storyboard’s contents hierarchically by name.
3. To the right of the editor, the inspectors in the Inspectors pane
let you edit details of the currently selected object.
4. The Objects Library, available as a floating window (View →
Show Library, Command-Shift-L), is your source of interface
objects to be added to the canvas or the document outline.
(If your nib editor’s canvas is displaying more panes to the right,
choose Editor → Show Editor Only to remove them.)
Document Outline
The document outline portrays hierarchically the relationships
between the objects in the nib. To show or hide the document outline,
choose Editor → Document Outline, or choose Document Outline
from the Editor Options pop-up menu at the top right of the canvas.
The document outline can also be hidden by dragging its right edge,
and it can be shown or hidden by clicking the button at the bottom
left corner below the canvas.

--- Page 657 ---
The structure of what’s displayed in the document outline differs
slightly depending on whether you’re editing a .storyboard file or a
.xib file.
In a storyboard file, the primary constituents are scenes. A scene is,
roughly speaking, a single view controller, along with some ancillary
material; every scene has a single view controller at its top level.
A view controller isn’t an interface object, but it manages an interface
object, a view that serves as its main view. A scene’s view controller
is displayed in the canvas with its main view inside it. In Figure 7-1,
the large rectangle in the canvas is a view controller’s main view, and
is actually inside a view controller. The view controller itself can be
seen and selected in the document outline. When anything in this
scene is selected, the view controller is also represented as an icon in
the scene dock, which appears above the view controller in the canvas
(Figure 7-2).
In the document outline, all the scenes are listed. Each scene is the
top level of a hierarchical list. Hierarchically down from each scene
are the objects that also appear in the view controller’s scene dock:
the view controller itself, along with two proxy objects, the First
Responder token and the Exit token. They are the scene’s top-level
objects. Then, hierarchically down from the view controller, we have
the view controller’s main view, along with the main view’s subviews
(if any) appearing hierarchically down from that, reflecting the
interface hierarchy of superviews and subviews.

--- Page 658 ---
Figure 7-2. A view controller selected in a storyboard
Objects listed in the document outline are of two kinds:
Nib objects
The view controller, along with its main view and its subviews,
will be turned into actual instances when the nib is loaded by the
running app. They are called nib objects.
Proxy objects
The First Responder and Exit tokens will not be turned into
instances when the nib is loaded. They are proxy objects. They
represent objects that already exist. They are displayed in the nib
in order to facilitate communication between nib objects and
those already existing objects; I’ll give examples later in this
chapter.
The document outline also contains the Storyboard Entry Point. This
isn’t an object of any kind. It’s an indicator that this view controller is
the storyboard’s initial view controller (because Is Initial View
Controller is checked in the view controller’s Attributes inspector); it
corresponds to the right-pointing arrow seen at the left of this view
controller in the canvas in Figure 7-1.

--- Page 659 ---
In a .xib file, there are no scenes. What would be, in a .storyboard
file, the top-level objects of a scene become, in a .xib file, the top-
level objects of the nib itself; and the top-level interface object of a
.xib file is usually a view. (A .xib file can contain a view controller,
but it usually doesn’t.) A .xib file’s top-level view might well be a
view that is to serve as a view controller’s main view, but that’s not a
requirement. Figure 7-3 shows a .xib file with a structure parallel to
the single scene of Figure 7-2.
Figure 7-3. A .xib file containing a view
The document outline in Figure 7-3 lists three top-level objects. Two
of them are proxy objects, termed Placeholders in the document
outline: the File’s Owner, and the First Responder. The third is a nib
object, a view; it will be turned into a UIView instance when the nib
is loaded as the app runs.
At present, the document outline may seem unnecessary, because
there is very little hierarchy; all objects in Figures 7-2 and 7-3 are
readily accessible in the canvas. But when a storyboard contains
many scenes, and when a view contains many levels of hierarchically
arranged objects, some of which are difficult to see or select in the
canvas, you’re going to be very glad of the document outline, which
lets you survey the contents of the nib in a nice hierarchical structure,

--- Page 660 ---
and where you can locate and select the object you’re after. You can
also rearrange the hierarchy here; if you’ve made a view a subview of
the wrong superview, you can reposition it within this outline by
dragging its name.
TIP
You can also select objects using the jump bar at the top of the editor: the last
jump bar path component is a hierarchical pop-up menu similar to the document
outline.
If the names of nib objects in the document outline seem generic and
uninformative, you can change them. The name is technically a label,
and has no special meaning, so feel free to assign nib objects labels
that are useful to you. Select a nib object’s label in the document
outline and press Return to make it editable, or select the object and
edit the Label field in the Document section of the Identity inspector.
Canvas
The canvas provides a graphical representation of a view and its
subviews, similar to what you’re probably accustomed to in any
drawing program. The canvas is scrollable and automatically
accommodates however many graphical representations it contains,
and can also be zoomed (Option-scroll, or choose Editor → Zoom, or
use the contextual menu or the zoom buttons at the bottom of the
canvas). New in Xcode 12, you can also display the minimap, which
shows you the whole content of the canvas in miniature and lets you
scroll around it by dragging; choose Editor → Canvas → Minimap or

--- Page 661 ---
choose Minimap from the Editor Options pop-up menu at the top
right of the canvas.
Our simple Empty Window project’s Main.storyboard contains just
one scene, so the only thing it represents in the canvas is that scene’s
view controller with its main view inside it. When the app runs, this
view controller will become the window’s rootViewController;
therefore its view will occupy the entire window, and will effectively
be our app’s initial interface. That gives us an excellent opportunity
to experiment: any visible changes we make within this view should
be visible when we subsequently build and run the app! To prove it,
let’s add a subview:
1. Start with the nib editor looking more or less like Figure 7-1.
2. Summon the Objects Library (Command-Shift-L, or click the
Library button in the project window toolbar). Make sure it’s
displaying objects (not images or colors). If it’s in icon view (a
grid of icons without text), switch to list view. Click in the
search field and type “button” so that only button objects are
shown in the list. The Button object we’re after is listed first.
3. Drag the Button object from the Library into the view
controller’s main view in the canvas (Figure 7-4), and let go of
the mouse.

--- Page 662 ---
Figure 7-4. Dragging a button into a view
A button is now present in the view in the canvas. The move we’ve
just performed — dragging from the Library into the canvas — is
extremely characteristic; you’ll do it often as you design your
interface.
TIP
By default, the Library floating window is temporary; it vanishes as soon as you
drag something out of it. To make it remain onscreen after the drag, hold Option
when summoning the Library or when dragging out of it; the Library window’s
toolbar then contains a close button, and the window will remain open until you
click that button.
Much as in a drawing program, the nib editor provides features to aid
you in designing your interface. Here are some things to try:

--- Page 663 ---
Select the button: resizing handles appear.
Using the resizing handles, resize the button to make it wider:
dimension information appears.
Drag the button near an edge of the view: a guideline appears,
showing standard spacing. Similarly, drag the button near the
center of the view: a guideline shows you when the button is
centered.
With the button selected, hold Option (but not the mouse button)
and hover the mouse outside the button: arrows and numbers
appear showing the distance between the button and the edges of
the view.
Control-Shift-click the button: a menu appears, letting you select
the button or whatever is behind it or up the hierarchy from it.
This is useful particularly when views overlap.
Double-click the button’s title. The title becomes editable. Give it
a new title, such as “Hello.” Press Return to set the new title.
To prove that we really are designing our app’s interface, we’ll run
the app:
1. Drag the button to a position near the top left corner of the
canvas. (If you don’t do this, the button could be off the screen
when the app runs.)
2. Examine the Debug → Activate / Deactivate Breakpoints menu
item. If it says Deactivate Breakpoints, choose it; we don’t want
to pause at any breakpoints you may have created while reading
the previous chapter.
3. Make sure the destination in the Scheme pop-up menu is an
iPhone simulator.

--- Page 664 ---
4. Choose Product → Run (or click the Run button in the toolbar).
After a heart-stopping pause, the Simulator opens, and presto, our
empty window is empty no longer (Figure 7-5); it contains a button!
You can tap this button with the mouse, emulating what the user
would do with a finger; the button highlights as you tap it.
Figure 7-5. The Empty Window app’s window is empty no longer
Inspectors
In addition to the File, History, and Quick Help inspectors, four
inspectors appear in conjunction with the nib editor, and apply to
whatever object is selected in the document outline, dock, or canvas:
Identity inspector (Command-Option-4)
The first section of this inspector, Custom Class, is the most
important. Here you can learn — and can change — the selected
object’s class.
Attributes inspector (Command-Option-5)
Settings here correspond to properties and methods that you
might use to configure the object in code. For instance, selecting
our view and choosing from the Background pop-up menu in the

--- Page 665 ---
Attributes inspector corresponds to setting the view’s background
Color property in code.
The Attributes inspector has sections corresponding to the
selected object’s class inheritance. The UIButton Attributes
inspector has three sections: in addition to a Button section,
there’s a Control section (because a UIButton is also a UIControl)
and a View section (because a UIControl is also a UIView).
Size inspector (Command-Option-6)
The X, Y, Width, and Height fields determine the object’s position
and size within its superview, corresponding to its frame property
in code; you can equally set these values in the canvas by
dragging and resizing, but numeric precision can be desirable.
Connections inspector (Command-Option-7)
I’ll demonstrate use of the Connections inspector later in this
chapter.
Loading a Nib
A nib file is a collection of potential instances — its nib objects.
They become actual instances only if, while your app is running, the
nib is loaded. At that moment, the nib objects described in the nib are
effectively transformed into instances that are available to your app. I
call this process — the loading of a nib and the resulting creation of
instances — the nib-loading mechanism. We may speak as if a nib
contains literal object instances; we may speak of “loading” or
“instantiating” a view controller or a view from a nib. But in fact the
nib contains nothing but instructions for creating a view controller or
view instance, and the nib-loading mechanism fulfills those
instructions.

--- Page 666 ---
Using nibs as a source of instances is efficient. Interface is relatively
heavyweight stuff, but a nib is small. Moreover, a nib isn’t loaded
until it is needed; indeed, it might never be loaded. So this
heavyweight stuff won’t come into existence until and unless it is
about to be displayed.
There’s no such thing as “unloading” a nib. A nib is loaded, its nib
objects are turned into instances, those instances are handed over to
the running app, and that’s all; the nib has done its job. It is then up to
the running app to decide what to do with the instances that just
sprang to life. It must hang on to them for as long as it needs them,
and will let them go out of existence when they are no longer needed.
Typically, it will do this by adding them to the interface, where they
will persist until that interface as a whole is removed.
The same nib file can be loaded multiple times, generating a new set
of instances each time. A nib is thus a mechanism for reproducing a
view controller or a view hierarchy as many times as necessary. A
single nib file might represent interface that you intend to use in
several places in your app — possibly several places simultaneously
— by loading the nib repeatedly. A case in point is the repeated cells
in a table view.
Loading a View Controller Nib
A nib containing a view controller will almost certainly come from a
storyboard. (A .xib file can contain a view controller, but it usually
won’t.) A storyboard is a collection of scenes. Each scene starts with
a view controller. When the app is built and the storyboard is

--- Page 667 ---
compiled, each view controller in the storyboard ends up in its own
individual nib. When the app runs, if that view controller is needed,
that nib is loaded.
A view controller may be loaded from a storyboard automatically (by
the runtime) or manually (by your code):
Automatic creation of a view controller
There are two main occasions when a view controller is loaded
automatically from a nib:
At app launch time
As your app launches, if it has a main storyboard, the runtime
looks for that storyboard’s initial view controller (entry point)
and loads its nib, turning it into a view controller instance to
serve as the app’s root view controller (“How an App Gets
Going”).
When a segue is performed
A storyboard typically contains several scenes connected by
segues; when a segue is performed, the destination scene’s
view controller nib is loaded and turned into an instance.
Manual instantiation of a view controller
In code, to turn a view controller in a storyboard into a view
controller instance, you start with a UIStoryboard instance, and
call one of these methods:
instantiateInitialViewController
Loads the storyboard’s initial view controller nib and turns it
into a view controller instance.

--- Page 668 ---
instantiateViewController(withIdentifier:)
Loads the nib of a view controller within the storyboard
whose scene is named by an identifier string, and turns it into
a view controller instance.
Loading a Main View Nib
A view controller has a main view. But for reasons of efficiency, a
view controller, when it is instantiated, lacks its main view. It obtains
its main view later, when that view is needed because it is to be
placed into the interface. We say that a view controller loads its view
lazily. A view controller can obtain its main view in several ways;
one way is to load it from a nib. There are two main cases to
consider:
View controller in a storyboard
When a view controller and its view belong to a scene in a
storyboard, then when the app is built and the storyboard is
compiled, we end up with two nibs: the nib containing the view
controller, and the nib containing the view. The app runs, and let’s
say the nib containing the view controller is loaded in order to
instantiate the view controller, as I just described; later, when the
view controller instance needs its main view, it automatically
loads that nib and generates its main view from it.
View controller instantiated in code
Another fairly common configuration is a view controller
instantiated entirely in code, whose main view has been designed
in a .xib file in your project. When you call the view controller’s
designated initializer init(nibName:bundle:), the nibName:
parameter tells this view controller instance the name of the nib

--- Page 669 ---
file generated from that .xib file. Alternatively, you might
override the view controller’s nibName property. Subsequently,
when the view controller needs its main view, it automatically
loads that nib and generates its main view from it.
Those two ways of getting the view controller’s main view are
actually the same. In each case, there is a view controller and an
associated nib. The view controller’s nibName property is the key; it
tells the view controller what nib to load in order to generate its main
view when it needs it.
Loading a View Nib Manually
A view can be designed in a .xib file. When the app is built, this file
is turned into a nib. Assume that this is not a view controller’s main
view. In the running app, to load that nib and create the view instance
requires a call to one of these methods:
loadNibNamed(_:owner:options:)
A Bundle instance method. Usually, you’ll direct it to Bundle.ma
in.
instantiate(withOwner:options:)
A UINib instance method. The nib in question was specified
when UINib was instantiated and initialized with init(nibName:
bundle:).
Sometimes the runtime will make those calls for you. Alternatively,
you can make those calls yourself to load a nib view directly. That’s
the best way to explore and exercise the nib-loading mechanism.
Let’s try it!

--- Page 670 ---
First we’ll create and configure a .xib file in our Empty Window
project:
1. In the Empty Window project, choose File → New → File and
specify iOS → User Interface → View. This will be a .xib file
containing a UIView instance. Click Next.
2. In the Save dialog, accept the default name, View, for the new
.xib file. Click Create.
3. We are now back in the Project navigator; our View.xib file has
been created and selected, and we’re looking at its contents in
the editor. Those contents consist of a single UIView.
4. Our view is too large for purposes of this demonstration, so
select it and, in the Attributes inspector, change the Size pop-up
menu, under Simulated Metrics, to Freeform. Handles appear
around the view in the canvas; drag them to make the view
smaller. About 240×200 would be a good size.
5. Populate the view with some arbitrary subviews by dragging
them into it from the Library. You can also configure the view
itself; for example, in the Attributes inspector, change its
background color (Figure 7-6).

--- Page 671 ---
Figure 7-6. Designing a view in a .xib file
Our goal now is to load this nib file, manually, in code, when the app
runs. There are three tasks you have to perform when you load a nib:
1. Load the nib.
2. Obtain the instances that it creates as it loads.
3. Do something with those instances.
I’ve already said that to load the nib we can call loadNibNamed(_:ow
ner:). This would be the complete code for loading our nib:
Bundle.main.loadNibNamed("View", owner: nil)
That’s the first task. But if that’s all we do, we will load the nib to no
effect. The instances will be created and will then vanish in a puff of
smoke. In order to prevent that, we need to capture those instances.
Here’s one way to do that. The call to loadNibNamed(_:owner:)
returns an array of instances created from the nib’s top-level nib
objects through the loading of that nib. Our nib contains just one top-

--- Page 672 ---
level nib object — the UIView — so it is sufficient to capture the first
(and only) element of this array:
let arr = Bundle.main.loadNibNamed("View", owner: nil)! 
let v = arr[0] as! UIView
We have now performed the second task: we’ve captured an instance
that we created by loading the nib. The variable v now refers to a
brand-new UIView instance.
Now let’s perform the third task — doing something with the view
we’ve just instantiated. A useful and dramatic thing to do with it, and
probably the reason you’d load a nib in the first place, is to put that
view into your interface. Let’s do that! Edit ViewController.swift and
put these lines of code into its viewDidLoad method:
let arr = Bundle.main.loadNibNamed("View", owner: nil)! 
let v = arr[0] as! UIView 
self.view.addSubview(v)
Build and run the app. There’s our view, visible in the running app’s
interface! This proves that our loading of the nib worked (Figure 7-
7).

--- Page 673 ---
Figure 7-7. A nib-loaded view appears in our interface
Connections
A connection is a directional linkage in the nib editor running from
one object to another. I’ll call the two objects the source and the
destination of the connection. There are two kinds of connection:
outlet connections and action connections. The rest of this section
describes them, explains how to create and configure them, and
discusses the nature of the problems that they are intended to solve.
Outlets
When a nib loads and its instances come into existence, those
instances are useless unless you can get a reference to them. In the
preceding section, we solved that problem by capturing the array of
instances returned from the loading of the nib. But there’s another
way: use an outlet. This approach is more complicated — it requires
some advance configuration, which can easily go wrong. But it is also
more common, especially when nibs are loaded automatically.

--- Page 674 ---
An outlet is a connection that has a name, which is effectively just a
string. When the nib loads, something unbelievably clever happens.
The source object and the destination object are no longer just
potential objects in a nib; they are now real, full-fledged instances.
The runtime looks in the outlet’s source object for an instance
property with the same name as the outlet, and assigns the destination
object to that property. The source object now has a reference to the
destination object!
To illustrate, suppose that the following three things are true:
1. As defined in code, a Dog has a master instance property
which is typed as Person.
2. There’s a Dog object and a Person object in a nib.
3. We make an outlet from the Dog object to the Person object in
the nib, and we name that outlet "master".
In that case, when the nib loads and the Dog instance and the Person
instance are created, that Person instance will be assigned as the
value of that Dog instance’s master property (Figure 7-8), just as if
we had said dog.master = person in code.

--- Page 675 ---
Figure 7-8. How an outlet provides a reference to a nib-instantiated object
As you can see, for an outlet to work, preparation must be performed
in two different places: in the class of the source object, where the
instance property is declared, and in the nib, where the outlet is
created and configured. This is a bit tricky; Xcode does try to help
you get it right, but it is still possible to mess it up. (I will discuss
ways of messing it up, in detail, later in this chapter.)

--- Page 676 ---
The Nib Owner
Consider once again the view-loading example that we implemented
earlier (illustrated in Figure 7-7). Let’s implement that example
again; this time, instead of assigning the nib-loaded view to a variable
in code, we’ll use an outlet connection to capture the nib-loaded view
into a property.
Now, there is an important difference between the Dog-and-Person
example I just outlined and the view-loading example. In our view-
loading example, who is the Dog, and who is the Person? The Person
is the view in the nib. But the Dog is the view controller (a
ViewController instance) — and the view controller is not in the nib.
For our view controller to use an outlet to capture a reference to a
view instance created from a nib, therefore, we need an outlet that
runs from an object outside the nib (the view controller) to an object
inside the nib (the view). That seems metaphysically impossible —
but it isn’t. The nib editor cleverly permits such an outlet to be
created, using the nib owner object.
Before I explain what the nib owner is, I’ll tell you where to find the
nib owner object in the nib editor:
In a storyboard scene
In a storyboard scene, the nib owner is the view controller. It is
the first object listed for that scene in the document outline, and
the first object shown in the scene dock.
In a .xib file

--- Page 677 ---
In a .xib file, the nib owner is a proxy object. It is the first object
shown in the document outline, listed under Placeholders as the
File’s Owner.
So what is the nib owner object? It’s a proxy representing an instance
that already exists outside the nib at the time that the nib is loaded.
When the nib is loaded, the nib-loading mechanism doesn’t
instantiate that object; the nib owner is already an instance. Instead,
the nib-loading mechanism substitutes the real, already existing
instance for the nib owner object, using the real instance to fulfill any
connections that involve the nib owner.
But wait! How does the nib-loading mechanism know what real,
already existing instance to substitute for the nib owner object in the
nib? It knows because it is told, in one of two ways, at nib-loading
time:
Your code loads the nib
If your code loads a nib manually, either by calling loadNibName
d(_:owner:options:) or by calling instantiate(withOwner:
options:), you specify an owner object as the owner: argument.
A view controller loads the nib
If a view controller instance loads a nib automatically in order to
obtain its main view, the view controller instance specifies itself
as the owner object.
Let’s do a thought-experiment with our Dog and Person objects. This
time, suppose the following four things are true:

--- Page 678 ---
1. As defined in code, a Dog has a master instance property
which is typed as Person.
2. There is a Person nib object in our nib, but no Dog nib object.
3. We configure an outlet in the nib from the nib owner object to
the Person object, and we name that outlet "master". We can’t
do that unless the nib owner object’s class is Dog, so we’ll set
its class first if necessary (using the Identity inspector).
4. When we load the nib, we specify an existing Dog instance as
owner.
The nib-loading mechanism will then match the Dog nib owner
object with the already existing actual Dog instance that we specified
as owner, and will assign the newly instantiated Person instance as
that Dog instance’s master (Figure 7-9).

--- Page 679 ---
Figure 7-9. An outlet from the nib owner object

--- Page 680 ---
Back in the real world, let’s reconfigure our Empty View nib-loading
project to demonstrate this mechanism. In ViewController.swift, we’re
already loading the View nib in code. This code is running inside a
ViewController instance. We want to use that instance as the nib
owner. This will be a little tedious to configure, but bear with me,
because understanding how it works is crucial:
1. We need an instance property in ViewController. At the start of
the body of the ViewController class declaration, insert the
property declaration, like this:
class ViewController: UIViewController { 
    @IBOutlet var coolview : UIView!
The var declaration you already understand; we’re making an
instance property called coolview. It is declared as an Optional
because it won’t have a “real” value when the ViewController
instance is created; it’s going to get that value later through the
loading of the nib (“Deferred initialization of properties”). The
@IBOutlet attribute is a hint to Xcode to allow us to create the
outlet in the nib editor.
2. Edit View.xib. We’d like to make the outlet, but in order to do
that, we must ensure that the nib owner object is designated as a
ViewController instance. Select the File’s Owner proxy object
and switch to the Identity inspector. In the first text field, under
Custom Class, set the Class value as ViewController. Tab out
of the text field and save.
3. Now we’re ready to make the outlet! In the document outline,
hold Control and Control-drag from the File’s Owner object to
the View; a little line follows the mouse as you drag. Release
the mouse when the View is highlighted. A little HUD (heads-

--- Page 681 ---
up display) appears, listing possible outlets we are allowed to
create (Figure 7-10). There are two of them: coolview and vie
w. Click coolview (not view!).
4. Finally, we need to modify our nib-loading code. We no longer
need to capture the result of our call to loadNibNamed(_:owne
r:). That’s the whole point of this exercise! Instead, we’re
going to load the nib with ourself as owner. This will cause our
coolview instance property to be set automatically:
Bundle.main.loadNibNamed("View", owner: self) 
self.view.addSubview(self.coolview)
Figure 7-10. Creating an outlet
Build and run. It works! The first line loaded the nib, instantiated the
view, and set our coolview instance property to that view. The
second line can display self.coolview in the interface, because sel
f.coolview now is that view.
Let’s sum up what we just did. Our preparatory configuration was a
little tricky, because it was performed in two places — in code, and in
the nib:
In code

--- Page 682 ---
There must be an instance property in the class whose instance
will act as owner when the nib loads. It must be marked as @IBOu
tlet; otherwise, Xcode won’t permit us to create the outlet in the
nib editor.
In the nib editor
The class of the nib owner object must be set to the class whose
instance will act as owner when the nib loads; otherwise, Xcode
still won’t permit us to create the outlet. We must then create the
outlet, with the same name as the property, from the nib owner to
some nib object.
If all those things are true, then, when the nib loads, if it is loaded
with an owner of the correct class, that owner’s instance property will
be set to the outlet destination.
TIP
When you configure an outlet to an object in the nib, that object’s name as listed
in the document outline ceases to be generic (e.g. “View”) and takes on the
name of the outlet (e.g. “coolview”). This name is still just a label — it has no
effect on the operation of the outlet — and you can change it in the Identity
inspector.
Automatically Configured Nibs
Now that we’ve created a nib owner outlet manually and loaded a nib
manually, we have demystified the nib-loading mechanism. When a
view controller gets its main view from a nib automatically,
everything works exactly like what we just did!

--- Page 683 ---
Consider our Empty Window project’s Main.storyboard, with its
single scene consisting of a ViewController and its main view:
In our manual example, we started with an instance property in
our nib owner class. Well, ViewController is a UIViewController,
and UIViewController has an instance property — its view
property! This is the property that needs to be set in order for the
view controller to obtain its main view.
In our manual example, in the nib editor, we made sure that the
nib owner object’s class would be the class of the owner when the
nib loads. Well, in our Main.storyboard scene, the View Controller
object is the nib owner, and it is of the correct class, namely
ViewController (the class declared in the ViewController.swift
file). Look and see: select the ViewController object in the
storyboard and examine its class in the Identity inspector.
In our manual example, in the nib editor, we created an outlet with
the same name as the owner instance property, leading from the
owner to the nib object. Well, in our Main.storyboard scene, the
ViewController object is the view nib owner, and it has an outlet
named view which is connected to the main view. Look and see:
select the view controller object in the storyboard and examine its
Connections inspector (Figure 7-11).
Figure 7-11. A view controller’s view outlet connection
So the storyboard has already been configured in a manner exactly
parallel to how we configured View.xib in the preceding section. And

--- Page 684 ---
the result is exactly the same! When the view controller needs its
view, it loads the view nib with itself as owner, the nib-loading
mechanism sees the connected view outlet, the view at the destination
of that outlet is assigned to the view controller’s view property, and
voilà! The view controller has its main view.
Moreover, the view controller’s main view is then placed into the
interface. And that is why whatever we design in this view in the
storyboard, such as putting into it a button whose title is “Hello,”
actually appears in the interface when the app runs.
Misconfigured Outlets
Setting up an outlet to work correctly involves several things being
true at the same time. You should expect that at some point in the
future you will fail to get this right, and your outlet won’t work
properly — and your app will probably crash. So be prepared! And
don’t worry; this happens to everyone. The important thing is to
recognize the symptoms so that you know what’s gone wrong. We’re
deliberately going to make things go wrong, so that we can explore
the main ways for an outlet to be incorrectly configured. The crashes
I’m about to describe, especially the first two, are extremely common
for beginners.
OUTLET–PROPERTY NAME MISMATCH
Start with our working Empty Window example. Run the project to
prove that all is well. Now, in ViewController.swift, change the
property name to badview:

--- Page 685 ---
@IBOutlet var badview : UIView!
In order to get the code to compile, you’ll also have to change the
reference to this property in viewDidLoad:
self.view.addSubview(self.badview)
The code compiles just fine. But when you run it, the app crashes
with this message in the console: “This class is not key value coding-
compliant for the key coolview.”
I’ll explain that message in Chapter 10. For now, just think of it as a
technical way of saying that the name of the outlet in the nib (which
is still coolview) doesn’t match the name of any property of the nib’s
owner when the nib loads — because we changed the name of that
property to badview and wrecked the configuration. In effect, we had
everything set up correctly, but then we went behind the nib editor’s
back and removed the corresponding instance property from the
outlet source’s class. When the nib loads, the runtime can’t match the
outlet’s name with any property in the outlet’s source — the
ViewController instance — and we crash.
There are other ways to bring about this same misconfiguration. You
could change things so that the nib owner is an instance of the wrong
class. You might do that in the nib editor, by selecting the nib owner
and changing its class in the Identity inspector. Alternatively, you
might do it in code:
Bundle.main.loadNibNamed("View", owner: NSObject())

--- Page 686 ---
We made the owner a plain vanilla NSObject instance. The NSObject
class has no property with the same name as the outlet, so the app
crashes when the nib loads, complaining about the owner not being
“key value coding-compliant.”
TIP
To change an outlet property’s name without breaking the connection from the
nib, select the property name in code and choose Editor → Refactor →
Rename.
NO OUTLET IN THE NIB
Fix the problem from the previous example by changing both
references to the property name from badview back to coolview in
ViewController.swift. Run the project to prove that all is well. Now
we’re going to mess things up at the other end! Edit View.xib. Select
the File’s Owner and switch to the Connections inspector, and
disconnect the coolview outlet by clicking the X at the left end of the
second cartouche. Run the project. We crash with this error message
in the console: “Fatal error: unexpectedly found nil while
unwrapping an Optional value.”
We removed the outlet from the nib. So when the nib loaded, our
ViewController instance property coolview, which is typed as an
implicitly unwrapped Optional wrapping a UIView, was never set to
anything. It kept its initial value, which is nil. We then tried to use
the implicitly unwrapped Optional by putting it into the interface:

--- Page 687 ---
self.view.addSubview(self.coolview)
Swift tries to obey by unwrapping the Optional, but you can’t unwrap
nil, so we crash.
NO VIEW OUTLET
I can’t demonstrate this problem using a .storyboard file. What we’d
like to do is disconnect the view outlet in Main.storyboard, but the
storyboard editor guards against this. But if you could make this
mistake, then trying to run the project would result in a crash at
launch time, with a console message complaining that “the view
outlet was not set.”
A nib that is to serve as the source of a view controller’s main view
must have a connected view outlet from the view controller (the nib
owner object) to the view. In a .xib file whose view is to function as a
view controller’s main view, you can make this mistake — usually by
forgetting to connect the File’s Owner view outlet to the view in the
first place.
Deleting an Outlet
Deleting an outlet coherently — that is, without causing one of the
problems described in the previous section — involves working in
several places at once, just as creating an outlet does. I recommend
proceeding in this order:
1. Disconnect the outlet in the nib.
2. Remove the outlet declaration from the code.

--- Page 688 ---
3. Attempt compilation and let the compiler catch any remaining
issues for you.
Let’s suppose that you decide to delete the coolview outlet from the
Empty Window project. You would follow the same three-step
procedure that I just outlined:
1. Disconnect the outlet in the nib. To do so, edit View.xib, select
the source object (the File’s Owner proxy object), and
disconnect the coolview outlet in the Connections inspector by
clicking the X.
2. Remove the outlet declaration from the code. To do so, edit
ViewController.swift and delete or comment out the @IBOutlet
declaration line.
3. Now attempt to build the project; the compiler issues an error
on the line referring to self.coolview in ViewController.swift,
because there is now no such property. Delete or comment out
that line, and build again to prove that all is well.
More Ways to Create Outlets
Earlier, we created an outlet by control-dragging from the source to
the destination in the document outline. Xcode provides many other
ways to create outlets — too many to list here. I’ll survey some of the
most interesting. We’ll continue to use the Empty Window project
and the View.xib file. All of this works exactly the same way for a
.storyboard file.
To prepare, delete the outlet in View.xib as I described in the previous
section (if you haven’t already done so). In ViewController.swift,
create (or uncomment) the property declaration, and save:

--- Page 689 ---
@IBOutlet var coolview : UIView!
Now we’re ready to experiment:
Drag from source Connections inspector
You can drag from a circle in the Connections inspector in the nib
editor to connect the outlet. In View.xib, select the File’s Owner
and switch to the Connections inspector. The coolview outlet is
listed here, but it isn’t connected: the circle at its right is open.
Drag from the circle next to coolview to the UIView object in the
nib. You can drag to the view in the canvas or in the document
outline. You don’t need to hold Control as you drag from the
circle, and there’s no HUD because you’re dragging from a
specific outlet, so Xcode knows which one you mean.
Drag from destination Connections inspector
Now let’s make that same move the other way round. Delete the
outlet in the nib. Select the View and look at the Connections
inspector. We want an outlet that has this view as its destination:
that’s a “referencing outlet.” Drag from the circle next to New
Referencing Outlet to the File’s Owner object. The HUD appears:
click coolview to make the outlet connection.
Drag from source HUD
Instead of starting by dragging, we can start by Control-clicking
to summon a HUD and then drag from that HUD. Again delete
the outlet in the Connections inspector. Control-click the File’s
Owner. A HUD appears, looking a lot like the Connections
inspector. Drag from the circle at the right of coolview to the
UIView.
Drag from destination HUD

--- Page 690 ---
Again, let’s make that same move the other way round. Delete the
outlet in the Connections inspector. Either in the canvas or in the
document outline, Control-click the view. There’s the HUD
showing its Connections inspector. Drag from the New
Referencing Outlet circle to the File’s Owner. A second HUD
appears, listing possible outlets; click coolview.
Again, delete the outlet. Now we’re going to create the outlet by
dragging between the code and the nib editor. This will require that
you work in two places at once: you’re going to need two editor
panes (see Chapter 6). In one editor pane, show ViewController.swift.
In the other editor pane, show View.xib, in such a way that the view is
visible.
Drag from property declaration to nib
Next to the property declaration in the code, in the gutter, is an
empty circle. Drag from that circle right across the barrier to the
View in the nib editor (Figure 7-12). You’ve done it! The outlet
connection has been formed in the nib; you can see this by
looking at the Connections inspector, and also because, back in
the code, the circle in the gutter is now filled in.
You can hover over the filled circle, or click it, to learn what the
outlet in the nib is connected to. You can click the little menu that
appears when you click in the filled circle to navigate to the
destination object.

--- Page 691 ---
Figure 7-12. Connecting an outlet by dragging from code to nib editor
Here’s one more way — the most amazing of all. Keep the two-pane
arrangement from the preceding example. Again, delete the outlet
(you will probably need to use the Connections inspector or HUD in
the nib editor pane to do this). Also delete the @IBOutlet line from
the code! We’re going to create the property declaration and connect
the outlet, in a single move!
Drag from nib to code
Control-drag from the view in the nib editor across the pane
barrier to just inside the body of the class ViewController
declaration. A HUD offers to Insert Outlet or Outlet Collection
(Figure 7-13). Release the mouse. A popover appears, where you
can configure the declaration to be inserted into your code.
Configure it as shown in Figure 7-14: you want an outlet, and this
property should be named coolview. Click Connect. The
property declaration is inserted into your code, and the outlet is
connected in the nib.

--- Page 692 ---
Figure 7-13. Creating an outlet by dragging from nib editor to code
Figure 7-14. Configuring an outlet property declaration
Making an outlet by connecting directly between code and the nib
editor is cool and convenient, but don’t be fooled: there’s no such
direct connection. There are two distinct and separate things — an
instance property in a class, and an outlet in the nib with the same
name and coming from an instance of that class. It is the identity of
the names and classes that allows the two to be matched at runtime
when the nib loads. Xcode tries to help you get everything set up
correctly, but it is not in fact magically connecting the code to the nib,

--- Page 693 ---
and it is still possible to mess up the configuration later, as I’ve
already described.
Outlet Collections
An outlet collection is an array instance property (in code) matched
(in a nib) by multiple connections to objects of the same type.
Suppose a class contains this property declaration:
@IBOutlet var coollabels: [UILabel]!
The outcome is that, in the nib editor, with an instance of this class
selected, the Connections inspector lists coollabels — not under
Outlets, but under Outlet Collections. This means that you can form
multiple coollabels outlets, each one connected to a different
UILabel object in the nib. When the nib loads, those UILabel
instances become the elements of the array coollabels; the order of
elements in the array is the order in which the outlets were formed.
Your code can then refer to the labels by number (the index into the
array). This can be cleaner than having a separate instance property
for each label.
Action Connections
An action connection, like an outlet connection, is a way of giving
one object in a nib a reference to another. But, unlike an outlet
connection, it’s not a property reference; it’s a message-sending
reference.

--- Page 694 ---
An action is a message emitted automatically by a Cocoa UIControl
interface object (a control), sent to another object when the user does
something to it, such as tapping the control. The various user
behaviors that will cause a control to emit an action message are
called events. To see a list of possible events, look at the
UIControl.Event documentation. For example, in the case of a
UIButton, the user tapping the button corresponds to the .touchUpIn
side control event.
For this architecture to work, the control object must know three
things:
Control event
What control event to respond to
Action
What message to send (that is, what method to call) when that
control event occurs
Target
What object to send that message to
An action connection in a nib builds the knowledge of those three
things into itself. It has the control object as its source; its destination
is the target; and you tell the action connection, as you form it, what
the control event and action message should be. To form the action
connection, you need to configure the class of the destination object
so that it has an instance method suitable as an action message.

--- Page 695 ---
To experiment with action connections, we’ll need a UIControl object
in a nib, such as a button. You may already have such a button in the
Empty Window project’s Main.storyboard file. However, it’s
probable that, when the app runs, we’ve been covering the button
with the view that we’re loading from View.xib. So first clear out the
ViewController class declaration body in ViewController.swift, so that
there is no outlet property and no manual nib-loading code; this
should be all that’s left:
class ViewController: UIViewController { 
}
Now let’s arrange to use the view controller in our Empty Window
project as a target for an action message emitted by the button’s .tou
chUpInside event (meaning that the button was tapped). We’ll need
a method in the view controller that will be called by the button when
the button is tapped. To make this method dramatic and obvious,
we’ll have the view controller put up an alert window. Insert this
method into the ViewController declaration body:
@IBAction func buttonPressed(_ sender: Any) { 
    let alert = UIAlertController( 
        title: "Howdy!", message: "You tapped me!", preferredStyle: .ale
rt) 
    alert.addAction( 
        UIAlertAction(title: "OK", style: .cancel)) 
    self.present(alert, animated: true) 
}
The @IBAction attribute is like @IBOutlet: it’s a hint to Xcode itself,
asking Xcode to make this method available in the nib editor. And
indeed, if we look in the nib editor, we find that it is now available:

--- Page 696 ---
edit Main.storyboard, select the View Controller object and switch to
the Connections inspector, and you’ll find that buttonPressed:,
which is the Objective-C name of our action method, is now listed
under Received Actions.
In Main.storyboard, in the single scene that it contains, the top-level
View Controller’s View should contain a button. (We created it earlier
in this chapter: see Figure 7-4.) If it doesn’t, add one, and position it
in the upper left corner of the view. Our goal now is to connect that
button’s Touch Up Inside event, as an action, to the buttonPressed
(_:) method in ViewController.
As with an outlet connection, there is a source and a destination. The
source here is the button in the storyboard; the destination is the
ViewController instance acting as owner of the nib containing the
button. There are many ways to form this action connection, all of
them completely parallel to the formation of an outlet connection.
The difference is that we must configure both ends of the connection.
At the button (source) end, we must specify that the control event we
want to use is Touch Up Inside; fortunately, this is the default for a
UIButton, so we might be able to skip this step. At the view
controller (destination) end, we must specify that the action method
to be called is our buttonPressed(_:) method.
Let’s form the action connection by Control-dragging from the button
to the view controller in the nib editor:
1. Control-drag from the button (in the canvas or in the document
outline) to the View Controller listing in the document outline

--- Page 697 ---
(or to the view controller icon in the scene dock above the view
in the canvas).
2. A HUD listing possible connections appears (Figure 7-15); it
lists mostly segues, but it also lists Sent Events, and in
particular it lists buttonPressed:.
3. Click the buttonPressed: listing in the HUD.
Figure 7-15. A HUD showing an action method
The action connection has now been formed. This means that when
the app runs, any time the button gets a Touch Up Inside event —
meaning that it was tapped — it will call the buttonPressed(_:)
method in the target, which is the view controller instance. We know
what that method should do: it should put up an alert. Try it! Build
and run the app, and when the app appears in the Simulator, tap the
button. It works!
More Ways to Create Actions
Other ways to form the action connection in the nib, having created
the action method in ViewController.swift, include the following:

--- Page 698 ---
Drag from source Connections inspector
Select the button and use the Connections inspector. Drag from
the Touch Up Inside circle to the view controller. A HUD
appears, listing the known action methods in the view controller;
click buttonPressed:.
Drag from source HUD
Control-click the button. A HUD appears, similar to the
Connections inspector. Proceed as in the previous case.
Drag from destination HUD
Control-click the view controller. A HUD appears, similar to the
Connections inspector. Drag from buttonPressed: (under
Received Actions) to the button. Another HUD appears, listing
possible control events. Click Touch Up Inside.
Drag from action method to nib
Make two editor panes. Arrange to see ViewController.swift in
one pane and the storyboard in the other. The buttonPressed
(_:) declaration in ViewController.swift has a circle to its left, in
the gutter. Drag from that circle across the pane barrier to the
button in the nib.
As with an outlet connection, the most impressive way to make an
action connection is to drag from the nib editor to your code,
inserting the action method and forming the action connection in the
nib in a single move. To try this, first delete the buttonPressed(_:)
method in your code and delete the action connection in the nib.
Make two editor panes. Arrange to see ViewController.swift in one
pane and the storyboard in the other. Now:

--- Page 699 ---
1. Control-drag from the button in the nib editor to an empty area
in the ViewController class declaration’s body. A HUD offering
to create an outlet or an action appears in the code. Release the
mouse.
2. The popover view appears:
1. Always look first at the Connection pop-up menu. It might
be offering to create an outlet connection. That isn’t what
you want; you want an action connection! If it says Outlet,
change it to Action.
2. Enter the name of the action method (here, buttonPresse
d) and configure the rest of the declaration. The defaults
are probably good enough: see Figure 7-16.
Figure 7-16. Configuring an action method declaration
Xcode forms the action connection in the nib, and inserts a stub
method into your code:
@IBAction func buttonPressed(_ sender: Any) { 
}
The method is just a stub (Xcode can’t read your mind and guess
what you want the method to do), so in real life, at this point, you’d
insert some functionality between those curly braces. As with an

--- Page 700 ---
outlet connection, the filled circle next to the code in an action
method tells you that Xcode believes that this connection is correctly
configured, and you can click the filled circle to learn, and navigate
to, the object at the source of the connection.
Misconfigured Actions
As with an outlet connection, configuring an action connection
involves setting things up correctly at both ends (the nib and the
code) so that they match. So of course you can wreck an action
connection’s configuration and crash your app. So be prepared! The
typical misconfiguration, commonly encountered by beginners, is that
the name of the action method as embedded in the action connection
in the nib no longer matches the name of the action method in the
code.
To see this, change the name of the action method in the code from b
uttonPressed to something else, like buttonPushed. Now run the
app and tap the button. Your app crashes, displaying in the console
this dreaded error message: “Unrecognized selector sent to instance.”
A selector is a message — the name of a method (Chapter 2). The
runtime tried to send a message to an object, but that object turned
out to have no corresponding method (because we renamed it). If you
look a little earlier in the error message, it even tells you the name of
this method:
-[Empty_Window.ViewController buttonPressed:]
The runtime is telling you (using Objective-C notation) that it tried to
call the buttonPressed(_:) method in your Empty Window

--- Page 701 ---
module’s ViewController class, but the ViewController class has no
such method.
TIP
To change an action method’s name without breaking the connection from the
nib, select the method name in code and choose Editor → Refactor → Rename.
SHOULD OUTLETS AND ACTIONS BE PRIVATE?
In my opinion, every @IBOutlet and @IBAction attribute should be followed by
the keyword private, or at least fileprivate. There is never any reason for
one view controller to access another view controller’s outlet properties or
action methods directly; to do so would be interfering, in effect, with that view
controller’s views. An outlet or action marked private continues to work
correctly, because the attribute exposes it to Objective-C.
Connections Between Nibs — Not!
You cannot draw an outlet connection or an action connection
between an object in a nib and an object in a different nib:
You cannot open nib editors on two different .xib files and
Control-drag a connection from one to the other.
In a .storyboard file, you cannot Control-drag a connection
between an object in one scene and an object in another scene.
The reason is obvious when you consider what a nib is. Objects in a
nib together will become instances together, at the moment when the
nib loads, so it makes sense to connect them in that nib, because we

--- Page 702 ---
know what instances we’ll be talking about when the nib loads. The
two objects may both be instantiated by loading the nib, or one of
them may be a proxy object (the nib owner), but they must both be
represented in the same nib, so that the actual instances can be
configured in relation to one another on each particular occasion
when this nib loads.
If an outlet connection or an action connection were drawn from an
object in one nib to an object in another nib, there would be no way
to understand what actual future instances the connection is supposed
to connect, because they are different nibs and will be loaded at
different times (if ever). The problem of communicating between an
instance generated from one nib and an instance generated from
another nib is a special case of the more general problem of how to
communicate between instances in a program, discussed in
Chapter 13.
Additional Configuration of Nib-Based
Instances
After a nib finishes loading, the instances that it describes have been
initialized and configured with all the attributes dictated through the
Attributes and Size inspectors, and their outlets have been used to set
the values of the corresponding instance properties. Nevertheless, you
might want to append your own code to the initialization process as
an object is instantiated by loading a nib. This section describes some
ways you can do that.

--- Page 703 ---
A common situation is that a view controller, functioning as the
owner when a nib containing its main view loads (and therefore
represented in the nib by the nib owner object), has an outlet to an
interface object instantiated by the loading of the nib. In this
architecture, the view controller can perform further configuration on
that interface object, because it has a reference to it after the nib loads
— the corresponding instance property. The earliest place where it
can perform such configuration is its viewDidLoad method. At the
time viewDidLoad is called, the view controller’s view has been
instantiated and assigned to its view property, and all its outlets have
been connected; but the view is not yet in the visible interface.
Another possibility is that you’d like the nib object to configure itself,
over and above whatever configuration has been performed in the
nib. Often, this will be because you’ve got a custom subclass of a
built-in interface object class; in fact, you might want to create a
subclass precisely so as to have a place to put this self-configuring
code. The problem you’re trying to solve might be that the nib editor
doesn’t let you perform the configuration you’re after, or that you
have many objects that need to be configured similarly, so that it
makes more sense for them to configure themselves by virtue of
sharing a common class than to configure each one individually.
One approach is to implement awakeFromNib in your custom class.
The awakeFromNib message is sent to all nib-instantiated objects just
after they are instantiated by the loading of the nib: the object has
been initialized and configured and its connections are operational.

--- Page 704 ---
Let’s make a button whose background color is always red, regardless
of how it’s configured in the nib. (This is a nutty example, but it’s
dramatically effective.) In the Empty Window project, we’ll create a
button subclass, RedButton:
1. In the Project navigator, choose File → New → File. Specify
iOS → Source → Cocoa Touch Class. Click Next.
2. Call the new class RedButton. Make it a subclass of UIButton.
Click Next.
3. Make sure you’re saving into the project folder, in the Empty
Window group, and that the Empty Window app target is
checked. Click Create. Xcode creates RedButton.swift.
4. In RedButton.swift, inside the body of the RedButton class
declaration, implement awakeFromNib:
override func awakeFromNib() { 
    super.awakeFromNib() 
    self.backgroundColor = .red 
}
We now have a UIButton subclass that turns itself red when it’s
instantiated from a nib. But we have no instance of this subclass in
any nib. Let’s fix that. Edit the storyboard, select the button that’s
already in the main view, and use the Identity inspector to change this
button’s class to RedButton. Now build and run the project. Sure
enough, the button is red!
A further possibility is to take advantage of the User Defined
Runtime Attributes in the nib object’s Identity inspector. This can

--- Page 705 ---
allow you to configure, in the nib editor, aspects of a nib object for
which the nib editor itself provides no built-in interface. What you’re
actually doing here is sending the nib object, at nib-loading time, a se
tValue(_:forKeyPath:) message; Cocoa key paths are discussed in
Chapter 10. Naturally, the object needs to be prepared to respond to
the given key path, or your app will crash when the nib loads.
One of the disadvantages of the nib editor is that it provides no way
to configure layer attributes. Let’s say we’d like to use the nib editor
to round the corners of our red button. In code, we would do that by
setting the button’s layer.cornerRadius property. The nib editor
gives no access to this property. Instead, we can select the button in
the nib editor and use the User Defined Runtime Attributes in the
Identity inspector. We set the Key Path to layer.cornerRadius, the
Type to Number, and the Value to whatever value we want — let’s
say 10 (Figure 7-17). Now build and run; sure enough, the button’s
corners are now rounded.
TIP
If you define your own property, your User Defined Runtime Attributes setting
for that property will fail silently unless you mark the property @objc.

--- Page 706 ---
Figure 7-17. Rounding a button’s corners with a runtime attribute
You can also configure a custom property of a nib object by making
that property inspectable. To do so, add the @IBInspectable
attribute to the property’s declaration in your code. This causes the
property to be listed in the nib object’s Attributes inspector. (It also
implicitly marks it @objc.)
Let’s make it possible to configure our button’s border in the nib
editor. At the start of the RedButton class declaration body, add this
code:
@IBInspectable var borderWidth : CGFloat { 
    get { 
        return self.layer.borderWidth 
    } 
    set { 
        self.layer.borderWidth = newValue 
    } 
}

--- Page 707 ---
That code declares a RedButton property, borderWidth, and makes it
a façade in front of the layer’s borderWidth property. It also causes
the nib editor to display that property in the Attributes inspector for
any button that is an instance of the RedButton class (Figure 7-18).
The result is that when we give this property a value in the nib editor,
that value is sent to the setter for this property at nib-loading time,
and the button border appears with that width.
Figure 7-18. An inspectable property in the nib editor
To intervene with a nib object’s initialization even earlier, if the
object is a UIView (or a UIView subclass), you can override init(co
der:). A minimal implementation would look like this:
required init?(coder: NSCoder) { 
    super.init(coder:coder) 
    // your code here 
}

--- Page 708 ---
Chapter 8. Documentation
Knowledge is of two kinds. We know a subject ourselves, or we
know where we can find information upon it.
Samuel Johnson, Boswell’s Life of Johnson
No aspect of iOS programming is more important than a fluid and
nimble relationship with the documentation. In addition to Swift’s
own types, there are hundreds of built-in Cocoa classes along with
their numerous methods and properties and other details. Apple’s
documentation, whatever its flaws, is the definitive official word on
how you can expect Cocoa to behave, and on the contractual rules
incumbent upon you in working with this massive framework whose
inner workings you cannot see directly.
Your primary access to the documentation is in Xcode, through the
documentation window. But there are other forms of documentation
and assistance. Quick Help popovers and the Quick Help inspector
provide documentation without leaving the code editor. You can
examine the code headers, which provide a useful overview and often
contain valuable comments, and you can jump quickly to a symbol
declaration. Apple provides sample code, and there are lots of
additional online resources.
The Documentation Window
There are two main categories of documentation provided by Apple:

--- Page 709 ---
Primary documentation
The primary documentation (reference documentation) for Cocoa
classes and other symbols is included entirely within Xcode, and
is displayed in the documentation window (Window →
Developer Documentation or Help → Developer Documentation,
Command-Shift-0). You can also view the same documentation
online, at https://developer.apple.com/documentation.
Secondary documentation
Secondary documentation consisting of older guides, sample
code, and technical notes and Q&As is available only online, at
https://developer.apple.com/library/archive/navigation. Apple
refers to this material as the documentation archive.
Within the documentation window, the primary pathway is a search;
press Command-Shift-0 (or Command-L or Command-Shift-F if
you’re already in the documentation window) and type a search term,
typically a class name such as “NSString” or “UIButton.” As you
type, you’re shown the top search results pertinent to the language of
your choice (such as Swift or Objective-C). You can choose a result
with the mouse, or you can navigate the results with arrow keys and
press Return to select the desired hit.
You can also perform a documentation window search starting from
within your code. You’ll very often want to do this: you’re looking
directly at a symbol (a type name, a function name, a property name,
and so on) at its point of use in your code, and you want to know
more about it. Select text in your code (or anywhere else) and choose
Help → Search Documentation for Selected Text (Command-Option-

--- Page 710 ---
Control-/). This is like typing that text into the search field in the
documentation window.
The documentation window behaves basically as a sort of web
browser. Terms shown in a documentation page are links; click one to
navigate to the documentation page about that term. You can then
navigate between pages you’ve already loaded, using Navigate → Go
Back and Navigate → Go Forward (or the back and forward buttons
in the documentation window). To split your view of the
documentation into multiple tabs, choose File → New → Window
Tab (Command-T); to open a link in a new tab, hold Command when
you click the link.
A hierarchical table of contents for the whole documentation appears
in the navigator pane at the left of the documentation window; to see
it if it isn’t showing, choose View → Navigators → Show Navigator
(Command-0), or click the Navigator button in the window toolbar.
The table of contents can display any of three panes: Swift,
Objective-C, or Other. You can switch between them with the pop-up
menu at the top of the table of contents, or use the keyboard shortcuts
(Command-1 and so on). To select in the table of contents the page
you’re currently viewing, choose Editor → Reveal in Navigator (or
use the contextual menu).
To search for text within the current documentation page, use the Find
menu commands. Find → Find (Command-F) summons a find bar, as
in Safari.

--- Page 711 ---
Class Documentation Pages
When dealing with Cocoa, your target documentation page will most
likely be the documentation for a class, such as the page shown in
Figure 8-1. Here are some typical features of a class documentation
page:
Figure 8-1. The start of the UIButton class documentation page

--- Page 712 ---
Jump bar
At the top of the page is the jump bar. This has two main
purposes:
Breadcrumbs
The jump bar functions as a kind of “breadcrumbs” display of
where you are. The UIButton class documentation page is in
the Views and Controls section of the UIKit division of the
documentation. This is the same hierarchy in which the page
is displayed in the navigator table of contents.
Navigation
Each item in the jump bar is a hierarchical menu, displaying
the same hierarchy as in the navigator table of contents.
Choose a menu item to navigate there. As with the Xcode
project window editor’s jump bar, you can type to filter the
items of the currently selected menu.
Language
Links let you choose between Swift and Objective-C as the
language for display of symbol names.
Availability
This list tells you two important things:
What sort of hardware you’re programming for when you use
this class. That’s important because searches are not filtered by
hardware type. If you were to stumble accidentally into the
NSViewController class documentation page, you might be
confused about how this class fits into the rest of iOS
programming, unless you notice that iOS is not even listed in
this class’s Availability; this is a macOS class (AppKit).

--- Page 713 ---
The lowest version number in which this class became
available. For example, the UIGraphicsImageRenderer page
tells you that this class is available in iOS 10.0 and later. So
you wouldn’t be able to use it in code intended to run on iOS
9.
Framework
The framework that vends this class.
On This Page
The class reference page is divided into sections, and these are
links to them, in order:
Declaration
The formal declaration for this class, showing its superclass.
Overview
If a page has an Overview section, read it! It explains what
this class is for and how to use it. It may also contain valuable
links to guides that provide related information.
Topics
These are primarily the class’s members — its properties and
methods — grouped by their purpose. Each member is
accompanied by a short description; click the member itself to
see further details. (I’ll talk more about that in a moment.)
There may also be listings for enums used by this class’s
properties and methods, and notifications if this class emits
any; the UIApplication class documentation page is a case in
point.
Relationships

--- Page 714 ---
There are two chief kinds of relationship that a class can have,
and you’ll want to keep an eye on both of them; a common
beginner mistake is failing to follow the documentation links
in this section:
Inherits from
This class’s superclass. A class inherits from its
superclasses, so the functionality or information you’re
looking for may be in a superclass. You won’t find addTar
get(_:action:for:) listed in the UIButton class page;
it’s in the UIControl class page (UIButton’s superclass).
You won’t find out that a UIButton has a frame property
from the UIButton class page; that information is in the
UIView class page (UIControl’s superclass).
Conforms to
Protocols adopted by this class. Again, the functionality or
information you’re looking for might be documented for a
protocol rather than in this class’s own page. For instance,
you won’t discover the viewWillTransition(to:with:)
method on the UIViewController class page; you have to
look in the documentation for the UIContentContainer
protocol, which UIViewController adopts.
When you click the name of a property or method in a class
documentation page, you’re taken to a separate page that describes it
in detail. This page is laid out similarly to a class documentation
page:
Jump bar
The jump bar provides breadcrumb navigation leading back to the
class documentation page.

--- Page 715 ---
Language
The page gives you a choice of languages.
Availability
The availability for a property or method need not be the same as
its class’s availability, because a class can acquire (and lose)
members over time. The UINavigationBar class is as old as iOS
itself and is available starting in iOS 2.0, but its prefersLargeTi
tles property didn’t appear until iOS 11.0.
On This Page
There is no separate Overview section, but there is always an
initial summary of purpose (the same summary that appears on
the class documentation page). The other sections of a method’s
page are:
Declaration
The formal declaration for this method, showing its
parameters and return type.
Parameters
Separate explanations for each parameter.
Return Value
An explicit description of what this method returns.
Discussion
Often contains extremely important further details about how
this method behaves. Always pay attention to this section!
See Also
Links to related methods and properties. Helpful for getting a
larger perspective on how this method fits into the overall

--- Page 716 ---
behavior of this class.
The Topics section of a class documentation page may list many class
members, and these can rapidly threaten to become overwhelming. If
you know the name of a class member that you’re interested in, or
you want to get to a particular topic quickly, how are you going to
reach it without the tedium of scrolling? Don’t forget the jump bar!
The jump bar lists all the class members listed on the page, grouped
by topic. And that list can be filtered by typing. Let’s say I know that
the class member I’m interested in contains the term “background.” I
summon the rightmost level of the jump bar, type “back,” and am
shown a shortened list of just those terms (Figure 8-2). Now it’s easy
to navigate to the detail page for any of those items.
Figure 8-2. Filtering the jump bar for the UIButton topics
In addition to the class documentation, the built-in primary
documentation includes explanatory guides on overall topics. The
existence of these guides is not always obvious. The UIButton class
documentation is inside the Views and Controls section; that page,
the section page, is an introductory guide to views and controls.
Sometimes there are extensive explanatory pages, effectively
constituting the chapters of a virtual booklet. The Table of Contents

--- Page 717 ---
can be a big help in spotting these; such pages are marked with a
document icon. The discussion of Swift Packages is a case in point.
Quick Help
Quick Help is a condensed rendering of the documentation for a
particular symbol such as a type, function, or property name. It
appears with regard to the current selection or insertion point
automatically in the Quick Help inspector (Command-Option-3) if
the inspector is showing. For instance, if you’re editing code and the
insertion point or selection is within the term viewDidLoad,
documentation for the viewDidLoad method automatically appears in
the Quick Help inspector if it is visible. Quick Help is also available
in the Quick Help inspector for interface objects selected in the nib
editor.
Quick Help documentation can also be displayed as a popover
window. Select a term in the code editor and choose Help → Show
Quick Help for Selected Item (Command-Control-Shift-?).
Alternatively, hold Option and hover the mouse over a term until the
cursor becomes a question mark; then Option-click the term.
TIP
When you’re developing Swift code, Quick Help is of increased importance. If
you click in the name of a Swift variable whose type is inferred, Quick Help
shows the inferred type (see Figure 3-1). This can help you understand compile
errors and other surprises.

--- Page 718 ---
The Quick Help documentation contains links. Click the Open in
Developer Reference link to see the full documentation in the
documentation window.
You can inject documentation for your own code into Quick Help. To
do so, precede a declaration with a comment enclosed in /**...*/ or
a sequence of single-line comments starting with ///. Within the
comment, Markdown formatting can be used
(http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/syntax). The first
paragraph of the comment becomes the Summary field for Quick
Help; remaining paragraphs become the Description field, except that
certain list items (paragraphs beginning with * or - followed by
space) are treated in a special way, such as:
List paragraphs beginning with Parameter paramname: are
incorporated into the Parameters field.
A list paragraph beginning with Throws: becomes the Throws
field.
A list paragraph beginning with Returns: becomes the Returns
field.
A list paragraph beginning with Note: becomes a Note field.
Here’s a function declaration with a preceding comment:
/** 
Many people would like to dog their cats. So it is *perfectly* 
reasonable to supply a convenience method to do so: 
 
* Because it's cool. 
* Because it's there. 
 

--- Page 719 ---
* Parameter cats: A string containing cats 
 
* Returns: A string containing dogs 
*/ 
 
func dogMyCats(_ cats:String) -> String { 
    return "Dogs" 
}
The double asterisk in the opening comment delimiter denotes that
this is documentation, which is automatically associated with the dog
MyCats method declaration that follows it. The outcome is that when
dogMyCats is selected anywhere in my code, its documentation is
displayed in Quick Help (Figure 8-3). The first paragraph of the
comment becomes the Summary, and is also displayed as part of code
completion (see Chapter 9). The word surrounded by asterisks is
formatted as italics; the asterisked paragraphs become bulleted
paragraphs; and the last two paragraphs become special fields.

--- Page 720 ---
Figure 8-3. Custom documentation injected into Quick Help
You can also generate a documentation comment automatically.
Select within the declaration line and choose Editor → Structure →
Add Documentation. The comment is inserted before the declaration.
The description, plus (if this is a function declaration) the Parameters,
Returns, and Throws fields, as applicable, are provided as
placeholders.
There are additional special documentation fields. For more
information about these, see the “Markup Functionality” page of
Apple’s Markup Formatting Reference.

--- Page 721 ---
Symbol Declarations
A symbol is a declared term, such as the name of a function, variable,
or object type. If you can see the name of a symbol in the code editor,
you can jump quickly to the declaration of that symbol. Select the
term and choose Navigate → Jump to Definition (Command-Control-
J); alternatively, hold Command-Control and hover the mouse over a
prospective term, until the cursor becomes a pointing finger, and then
Command-Control-click the term:
If the symbol is declared in your code, you jump to its declaration
in your code; this can be helpful not only for understanding your
code but also for navigation.
If the symbol is declared in the Swift library or a Cocoa
framework, you jump to its declaration in the header file. (I’ll talk
more about header files in the next section.)
TIP
Command-Control-click is the default for jumping to a symbol’s declaration,
but it can be changed. In the Navigation pane of Xcode’s preferences, under
Command-click on Code, switch the pop-up menu to Jumps to Definition. Now
you can jump to a symbol declaration with a simple Command-click.
To jump to the declaration of a symbol whose name you know, even
if you don’t see the name in the code before you, choose File →
Open Quickly (Command-Shift-O). A search field appears. In it, type
key letters from the name, which will be interpreted intelligently; to
search for application(_:didFinishLaunchingWithOptions:),

--- Page 722 ---
you might type “appdidf.” Possible matches are shown in a scrolling
list below the search field; you can navigate this list with the mouse
or by keyboard alone. Besides declarations from the framework
headers, declarations in your own code are listed as well, so this, too,
can be a rapid way of navigating your code.
In addition, a list of available symbols appears in the Symbol
navigator (Chapter 6). If the second icon in the filter bar is
highlighted, these are symbols declared in your project; if not,
symbols from imported frameworks are listed as well. Click to
navigate to a symbol declaration.
Header Files
A header file can be a useful form of documentation. The header is
necessarily accurate, up-to-date, and complete, and it may contain
comments telling you things that the documentation doesn’t. Also, a
single header file can contain declarations for multiple classes and
protocols. So it can be an excellent quick reference.
The previous section describes various ways of jumping to a symbol
declaration; since most symbols are declared in header files, these are
ways of reaching header files. To reach NSString.h, select the term NS
String wherever it may appear in your code and jump to its
declaration, or choose File → Open Quickly (Command-Shift-O) and
type “NSString.” Once you’re in a header file, you can navigate it
conveniently through the jump bar at the top of the editor.

--- Page 723 ---
When you jump to a header file from your code, the header file, if it
is written in Objective-C, can appear in Objective-C or Swift:
To switch from an Objective-C original to its Swift translation,
choose Generated Interface from the Related Items menu (at the
left end of the jump bar, Control-1).
To switch from a Swift translated (generated) header to the
Objective-C original, choose Navigate → Jump to Original
Source, or choose Original Source from the Related Items menu.
You can learn a lot about the Swift language and the built-in library
functions by examining the Swift header file. The special Swift
header files for Core Graphics and Foundation are also likely to prove
useful. A neat trick is to write an import statement just so that you
can reach the corresponding header. If you import Swift at the top
of a Swift file, the word Swift itself is a symbol that you can use to
jump to the Swift header.
Sample Code
The documentation archive includes plenty of sample code projects.
You can view the code in a browser, but you can see only one file at a
time, so it’s difficult to get an overview. Instead, click the Download
Sample Code button and open the downloaded project in Xcode; with
the sample code project open in a project window, you can read the
code, navigate it, edit it, and of course run the project.
Some of the primary documentation guides contain links to
downloadable sample code as well. This sample code can be difficult
to discover. In a few cases, the documentation archive links to it. In

--- Page 724 ---
other cases, you just have to stumble across it. Again, the table of
contents in the documentation window can be a big help here; sample
code pages are marked with a curly braces icon.
As a form of documentation, sample code is both good and bad. It
can be a superb source of working code that you can often copy and
paste and use with very little alteration in your own projects. It is
usually heavily commented, because the Apple folks are aware, as
they write the code, that it is intended for instructional purposes.
Sample code also illustrates concepts that users have difficulty
extracting from the documentation. But the logic of a project is often
spread over multiple files, and nothing is more difficult to understand
than someone else’s code (except, perhaps, your own code).
Moreover, what learners most need is not the fait accompli of a fully
written project but the reasoning process that constructed the project,
which no amount of commentary can provide.
Apple’s sample code is generally thoughtful and instructive, and is
definitely a major component of the documentation; it deserves more
appreciation and usage than it seems to get. But it is most useful, I
think, after you’ve reached a certain level of competence and
comfort. Also, while some of the sample code is astoundingly well-
written, some of it is a bit careless or even downright faulty.
Internet Resources
Programming has become a lot easier since the internet came along
and Google started indexing it. It’s amazing what you can learn with
a Google search. Your problem is very likely one that someone else

--- Page 725 ---
has faced, solved, and written about on the internet. Often you’ll find
sample code that you can paste into your project and adapt.
Apple’s own online resources go beyond the formal documentation.
There are WWDC videos (https://developer.apple.com/videos) from
the current and previous years. Apple also hosts developer forums
(https://developer.apple.com/forums); some interesting discussions
take place in these forums, and they are patrolled by helpful Apple
employees.
Other online resources have sprung up spontaneously as iOS
programming has become more popular, and lots of iOS and Cocoa
programmers post tutorials or blog about their experiences. Stack
Overflow (http://www.stackoverflow.com) is a site that I’m
particularly fond of; it’s a general programming question-and-answer
site, not devoted exclusively to iOS programming, but with lots of
iOS programmers hanging out there; questions are answered
succinctly and correctly, and the interface lets you focus on the right
answer quickly and easily.

--- Page 726 ---
Chapter 9. Life Cycle of a
Project
This chapter surveys some of the main stages in the life cycle of an
Xcode project, from inception to submission at the App Store. The
survey will provide an opportunity to discuss some additional
features of the Xcode development environment as well as various
tasks you’ll typically perform as you work on your app, including
editing, debugging, and testing your code, running your app on a
device, profiling, localization, and releasing to the public.
Environmental Dependencies
It may be useful to have your app behave differently depending on
the environment in which it finds itself when compiling or running:
Buildtime dependencies
These are choices made at build time. They affect the build
process, including what the compiler does. Typical dependencies
are:
The version of Swift under which we’re compiling.
The type of destination for which we’re compiling — a
simulator or a real device.
A custom compilation condition defined for the current build
configuration in the build settings.

--- Page 727 ---
The action that causes the build — for instance, whether we’re
building to run or to archive.
Runtime dependencies
These are choices made depending on what the app discovers its
environment to be when it runs. Typical dependencies are the type
of device we turn out to be running on (iPad vs. iPhone) and the
system version installed on this device:
Should the app be permitted to run under this environment?
Should the app do different things, or load different resources,
depending on the environment?
Should the app respond to the presence of an argument or
environment variable injected by Xcode?
Conditional Compilation
Stretches of code that might or might not be compiled into your built
app depending on the compile-time environment are fenced off by #i
f...#endif directives, as shown in Example 9-1.
Example 9-1. Swift conditional compilation
#if condition 
    statements 
#elseif condition 
    statements 
#else 
    statements 
#endif
The #elseif and #else sections can be omitted, and there can be
multiple #elseif sections. There are no curly braces, and the
statements will not in fact be indented by the code editor.

--- Page 728 ---
The conditions are treated as Bools, so they can be combined with the
usual Boolean logic operators. However, they are not Swift code
expressions! They must come from a limited predefined set of
reserved words. The ones you are most likely to use are:
swift(>=5.3), compiler(>=5.3) (or some other version number)
The version of the Swift language or compiler under which we’re
building. The only legal operators are < and >=. The swift
version depends on the Swift Language Version build setting, but
the compiler version depends on the Xcode version. Under Xcode
12, if the Swift Language Version is Swift 4.2, then swift is
less than 5, but compiler is not.
targetEnvironment(simulator)
Whether we’re building for a simulator or device destination.
This can allow an app to run coherently on the simulator even
though the simulator lacks certain capabilities, such as the
camera.
canImport(UIKit) (or some other module name)
Whether the module in question is available on the platform for
which we’re building.
Custom compilation condition
A name that you enter in the Active Compilation Conditions build
setting will yield true for purposes of conditional compilation.
The statements enclosed in each block will not be compiled at all
unless the appropriate condition is met, as this (very silly) example
demonstrates:

--- Page 729 ---
#if swift(>=5.3) 
print("howdy") 
#else 
Hey! Ba-Ba-Re-Bop 
#endif
That code compiles without complaint in a plain vanilla project built
from the iOS App template in Xcode 12. The statement Hey! Ba-Ba-
Re-Bop is not a legal Swift expression, but the compiler doesn’t care,
because our Swift version is Swift 5.3, so the compiler never even
examines the #else block.
An #if condition can distinguish between build configurations by
way of the Active Compilation Conditions build setting. In fact, your
project already comes with one such condition by default: the DEBUG
condition is defined for the Debug configuration but not for the
Release configuration (Figure 9-1). This means that for a Debug
build, but not for a Release build, the test #if DEBUG will succeed.
Figure 9-1. Compilation conditions in the build settings
A useful technique is to define a configuration, define an Active
Compilation Conditions setting for that configuration, and make a
scheme that builds using that configuration, or have different actions
of one scheme use different configurations.

--- Page 730 ---
For instance, if the Run action uses the Debug build configuration but
the Test action uses your custom Testing build configuration, you can
define Active Compilation Conditions for the Testing configuration
that will be present only when testing; in this way, you can use
conditional compilation to apply to testing only. I often make a
private method public during testing only, just so that method can be
tested. (I’ll talk more about testing later in this chapter.)
Build Action
The Development Assets build setting (introduced in Xcode 11) lets
you specify one or more paths for resources that won’t be included in
an archive build — meaning a build to be distributed to other users,
as I’ll explain later in this chapter. In this way your app can include
resources such as default data during development and testing, while
guaranteeing that those resources won’t pollute the ultimately
released built app.
The paths that you specify can designate individual resources, entire
asset catalogs, or even folders. A neat approach is a folder-linked
group in the Project navigator: put your development-only resources
into that group, and specify the path to the corresponding folder in
Development Assets.
If you combine the Development Assets build setting with the targe
tEnvironment(simulator) compilation condition, you have the
makings of a simulator-only test bed — code that is present only on
the simulator, along with ancillary files that won’t be present when
you ultimately distribute the app to others.

--- Page 731 ---
For example, my Albumen app is all about displaying the contents of
the user’s music library. The Simulator doesn’t really have a music
library, so I use conditional compilation with #if targetEnvironme
nt(simulator); on the simulator, I have the app load some
preconfigured data from a text file, and the app displays that data
instead. But I don’t want that text file to be present in the App Store
release, so I list it in the Development Assets.
Permissible Runtime Environment
Under what environments should this app be permitted to run? The
choices are determined by build settings, but you can configure them
through a more convenient interface:
Device Type
The device type(s) on which your app will run natively. This is
the app target’s Targeted Device Family build setting; to set, edit
the app target, switch to the General pane, and use the Device
checkboxes (under Deployment Info):
iPhone
The app will run on an iPhone or iPod touch. It can also run
on an iPad, but not as a native iPad app; it runs in a reduced
enlargeable window (Apple sometimes refers to this as
“compatibility mode”).
iPad
The app will run only on an iPad.
Both

--- Page 732 ---
The app will run natively on both kinds of device; it is a
universal app (and the Targeted Device Family setting will be
Universal).
iOS Deployment Target
The earliest system your app can run on: in Xcode 12, this can be
any major iOS system as far back as iOS 9.0. To set, edit the app
target, switch to the General pane, and choose from the Target
pop-up menu (under Deployment Info). There is also a drop-
down list when you edit the project, in the Info pane.
Backward Compatibility
Writing an app whose iOS Deployment Target system version is
lower than the current system version — that is, an app that is
backward compatible to an earlier system — can be challenging.
With each new system, Apple adds new features. You’ll want to take
advantage of these. But your app will crash if execution encounters
features not supported by the system on which it is actually running!
Fortunately, when the compiler knows that a feature is unsupported
by an earlier system, it will prevent you from accidentally using that
feature on that system. Here’s a line of code where we prepare to
draw a small image:
let r = UIGraphicsImageRenderer(size:CGSize(width:10,height:10))
The UIGraphicsImageRenderer class exists only in iOS 10.0 and
later. If your deployment target is iOS 9, the compiler will stop you
with an error: “UIGraphicsImageRenderer is only available on iOS
10.0 or newer.”

--- Page 733 ---
How does the compiler know we’ve got a potential problem here? It’s
because a term (a type or a member) states its availability in its
declaration. The UIGraphicsImageRenderer class declaration is
preceded (in Swift) with this annotation:
@available(iOS 10.0, *)
The details of the notation are not very important (if you’re
interested, consult the Attributes chapter of Apple’s Swift Reference
Manual). The important thing is that the annotation tells the compiler
— and you — that this class isn’t present until iOS 10 and later.
When you encounter this kind of issue, you cannot proceed until you
guarantee to the compiler that this code will run only on a system that
supports it. Luckily, Xcode’s Fix-it feature (discussed later in this
chapter) will help you do exactly that. Here, it offers to surround that
line with an availability check:
if #available(iOS 10.0, *) { 
    let r = UIGraphicsImageRenderer(size:CGSize(width:10,height:10)) 
} else { 
    // Fallback on earlier versions 
}
The if #available condition tests the current system at runtime. It
needs to match the @available annotation, and Xcode’s Fix-it will
make sure that it does. You can use #available in an if construct or
a guard construct.
You can also annotate your own type and member declarations with
an @available attribute. If you do, your own code will then have to

--- Page 734 ---
use an availability check in order to refer to that type or that member.
If your method is declared @available(iOS 14.0, *), then when
the deployment target is earlier than iOS 14, you can’t call that
method without an availability check that matches it: if #available
(iOS 14.0, *). Within such a method, you don’t need the
availability check, because you’ve already guaranteed that this
method won’t run on a system earlier than iOS 14.
A case in point is the built-in iOS App template. This template is not
very backward compatible, because it uses a scene delegate
(Chapter 6). Scene delegates and the related classes were introduced
in iOS 13; they don’t exist in iOS 12 and before, and the launch
process is different without them. To make a project generated from
the template backward compatible, you need to mark the entire
SceneDelegate class, and any methods in the AppDelegate class that
refer to UISceneSession, with an availability annotation: @available
(iOS 13.0, *).
Your code now compiles, and it runs on iOS 12. But it doesn’t
actually work on iOS 12. To fix that, you also need to declare a windo
w property in the AppDelegate class:
var window : UIWindow?
The result is that when this app runs in iOS 13 or later, the scene
delegate has the window, but when it runs in iOS 12 or before, the app
delegate has the window — and your other code may then need to
take account of that in order to be backward compatible.

--- Page 735 ---
A more insidious problem arises when the very same method or
property does exist on different systems, but behaves differently.
Often this is because Apple introduces a bug, or fixes a bug, or both.
For example, setting UIProgressView’s progressImage property
worked in iOS 7.0, didn’t work at all from iOS 7.1 through iOS 8.4,
and then started working again in iOS 9 and later. When that sort of
thing happens, the compiler can’t help you, and you usually have no
way of knowing about it other than trial and error (and working
around the problem coherently can be tricky).
To test your app on an earlier system, you’ll need a destination that
runs that earlier system. You can download an earlier Simulator SDK
going back as far as iOS 10.3.1 through Xcode’s Components
preference pane (see Chapter 6). To test on an earlier system than
that, you’ll need an older version of Xcode, and probably an older
device. This can be difficult to configure, and may not be worth the
trouble.
Device Type
An app might need to respond differently depending on the hardware
on which it finds itself running. A universal app might need to behave
differently depending on whether it is running on an iPad or an
iPhone, different devices have different screen resolutions that might
call for using different images, and so on.
You can learn in code whether we’re running on an iPhone or an
iPad. The current UIDevice (UIDevice.current), or the traitColle
ction of any UIViewController or UIView in the hierarchy, will tell

--- Page 736 ---
you the current device’s type as its userInterfaceIdiom, which will
be a UIUserInterfaceIdiom, either .phone or .pad.
When it comes to loading resources, there are some built-in shortcuts.
Image files to be loaded from the top level of the app bundle can be
distinguished automatically by using the same name but different
suffixes, such as @2x and @3x to indicate the screen resolution, or ~ip
hone and ~ipad to indicate the device type. Or you can use an asset
catalog (see “Resources in an asset catalog”), which allows you to
specify different images for different runtime environments just by
putting them in the correct slot. Either way, the runtime will
automatically choose the image variant appropriate to the current
environment.
Certain Info.plist settings come with name suffixes as well. For
example, it is usual for a universal app to adopt one set of possible
orientations on iPhone and another set on iPad: typically, the iPhone
version permits a limited set of orientations while the iPad version
permits all orientations. You configure this using two groups of
“Supported interface orientations” settings in the Info.plist:
UISupportedInterfaceOrientations
A general set of orientations.
UISupportedInterfaceOrientations~ipad
An iPad-only set that overrides the general set when the app runs
on an iPad.

--- Page 737 ---
The clearest and most reliable way to make these configurations is to
edit the Info.plist directly. Alternatively, there are some checkboxes
you can use, in the General pane when you edit the target, under
Deployment Info:
1. Uncheck iPad, check iPhone, and check the desired Device
Orientation checkboxes for the iPhone.
2. Uncheck iPhone, check iPad, and check the desired Device
Orientation checkboxes for the iPad.
3. Check both iPad and iPhone. Even though you’re now seeing
just one set of orientations, both sets are remembered.
(That is surely one of Xcode’s least intuitive bits of interface!)
Similarly, your app can load different nib files and display different
interfaces depending on the device type. If the nib comes from a .xib
file, use the image file naming convention: a nib file by the same
name with ~ipad appended will load automatically if we are running
on an iPad. If you want to have two different main storyboards, use
the Info.plist naming convention: configure two “Main storyboard file
base name” keys, UIMainStoryboardFile and UIMainStoryboardF
ile~ipad — or, with window scenes under iOS 13 and later,
configure two “Application Scene Manifest” keys, UIApplicationSc
eneManifest and UIApplicationSceneManifest~ipad, that
specify different UISceneStoryboardFile values.
Arguments and Environment Variables
You can inject key–value pairs into the environment, making them
available to your code, when running the app from Xcode. Edit the

--- Page 738 ---
scheme and go to the Arguments tab of the Run action. There are two
categories (Figure 9-2); to add a key–value pair, click the Plus button
under the desired category and enter a name and value:
Figure 9-2. The Arguments tab of the scheme’s Run action
Arguments Passed On Launch
The name of the argument must be preceded by a hyphen, and
followed with a space and the value. This allows you to inject
key–value pairs into user defaults. If an argument is -TEST1 1,
then you can say:
if UserDefaults.standard.integer(forKey: "TEST1") == 1 {
Environment Variables
There’s a Name column and a Value column (which is always a
string). To retrieve an environment variable, use the ProcessInfo
class. If the name is TEST2 and the value is 2, then you can say:

--- Page 739 ---
if let t = ProcessInfo.processInfo.environment["TEST2"], t == "2" {
A configured pair can be toggled on or off for subsequent builds by
clicking the checkbox to its left. So you don’t have to delete a
configured pair just because you don’t want to use it at the moment.
Arguments and environment variables configured for the Run action
are present when you build and run, but not when you are testing. But
the Test action has its own arguments and environment variables,
which are present only when you are testing. That gives your code a
way to detect that it is under test. For example, you might
conditionally substitute a “mock” version of a class or struct during
testing.
These arguments and environment variables are present only when
you build and run from Xcode; a user who launches your app on a
device will be unaffected by them. So you can take advantage of this
feature during development without worrying that its effects will leak
out into the real world.
Version Control
Sooner rather than later in the life of any real app, you should
consider putting your project under version control. Version control is
a way of taking periodic snapshots (technically called commits) of
your project. Its purpose might be:
Security

--- Page 740 ---
Version control can store your commits in a repository offsite, so
that your code isn’t lost in case of a local computer glitch or some
equivalent “hit by a bus” scenario.
Publication
You might want to make your project’s source publicly available
through an online site such as GitHub.
Collaboration
Version control affords multiple developers ready, rational access
to the same code.
Confidence
Progress on your code may require changes in many files,
possibly over many days, before a new feature can be tested.
Version control tracks and lists those changes, and if things go
badly, helps to pinpoint what’s gone wrong, and lets you
withdraw the changes altogether if necessary. You can confidently
embark on a programmatic experiment whose result may not be
apparent until much later.
Xcode’s version control facilities are geared primarily to Git
(http://git-scm.com). You can use a different version control system
with your projects, but not in an integrated fashion from inside
Xcode. Even with Git, it is possible to ignore Xcode’s integrated
version control and rely on the Terminal command line or a
specialized third-party GUI front end such as Sourcetree
(http://www.sourcetreeapp.com). In that case, you might turn off
Xcode’s version control integration by unchecking Enable Source
Control in the Source Control preference pane. If you check Enable
Source Control, additional checkboxes spring to life so that you can

--- Page 741 ---
configure what automatic behaviors you want. In this discussion, I’ll
assume that Enable Source Control is checked.
When you create a new project, the Save dialog includes a checkbox
that offers to place a Git repository into your project folder from the
outset. If you have no reason to decide otherwise, I suggest that you
check that checkbox! If you don’t, and if you change your mind later
and want to add a Git repository to an existing project, open the
project and choose Source Control → New Git Repositories.
Conversely, to download a working copy of an existing project from
a remote server, choose Source Control → Clone and enter the
required information.
When you open an existing project, if that project is already managed
with Git, Xcode detects this and displays version control information
in its interface. Files in the Project navigator are marked with their
status. You can distinguish modified files (M), new untracked files (?),
and new files added to the index (A).
Version control management commands are available in these places:
The Source Control menu
The file’s contextual menu, in the Source Control submenu
(Control-click the file’s listing in the Project navigator)
The change bars in a source editor pane
The Source Control navigator (Command-2) and Source Control
inspector (Command-Option-4)
The Code Review editor

--- Page 742 ---
The History inspector (Command-Option-2)
To commit changes for a single file, choose Source Control →
Commit [Filename] in the contextual menu for that file; to commit
changes for all files, choose Source Control → Commit from the
menu bar. These commands summon a comparison view of the
changes; each change can be excluded from this commit (or reverted
entirely), so related file hunks can be grouped into meaningful
commits. You can discard changes, push, and pull using the Source
Control menu. Cherry-pick and stashing commands are also present.
Branches, stashes, tags, and remotes are handled in the Source
Control navigator. Selecting an item here causes relevant information
to be displayed in the Source Control inspector; selecting a branch
displays its corresponding remote, and selecting a remote displays its
URL. Selecting a branch also shows the log of its commits in the
editor. The list of commits is filterable through a search field at the
top of the editor. Selecting a commit in this list displays in the
inspector its branches, its commit message, and its involved files.
Double-click a commit to see its involved files and their differences
from the previous commit in a comparison view.
Other relevant commands appear in the contextual menu for items in
the Source Control navigator. To add a remote, Control-click the
Remotes listing. To make a new branch, check out a branch, tag a
branch, delete a branch, or merge a branch, Control-click the branch
listing.

--- Page 743 ---
To see a comparison view for the file currently being edited, display
the Code Review editor: choose View → Show Code Review
(Command-Option-Shift-Return), or click the Code Review button in
the project window toolbar. This editor fills the entire editor area,
covering all individual editor panes. You can switch target files using
the Project navigator or jump bar while the Code Review editor is
showing.
In Figure 9-3, I’m using a comparison view to see that in the more
recent version of this file (on the left) I’ve changed my titleTextAt
tributes dictionary (because the Swift language changed). The
jump bar at the bottom permits me to view any commit’s version of
the current file. In the contextual menu I can choose Copy Source
Changes to capture the corresponding diff text (a patch file) on the
clipboard.
Figure 9-3. Version comparison

--- Page 744 ---
The History inspector (Command-Option-2) lists the commit log
from the current branch for any file, without having to show the
comparison view. Click a commit to summon a popover containing
the full commit message along with buttons to show the commit and
its files, switch to the Code Review editor, or address an email to the
commit’s author.
For similar information in a source editor pane, choose Editor →
Authors, or choose Authors from the Editor Options pop-up menu at
the top right of the pane. The file is divided into hunks corresponding
to the individual commits, with the commit author and date listed at
the right (a Git “blame” view). Click a commit to summon the
popover. Or, to get information on just a given line of code, select it
and choose Editor → Show Last Change For Line (or the contextual
menu).
If you’ve checked Show Source Control Changes in the Source
Control preferences pane, change bars appear in the source editor
pane, in the gutter at the left, showing what you’ve changed since the
last commit (Figure 9-4). In my opinion, this is Xcode’s most
valuable Git integration feature. By Command-clicking on a change
bar, you can display both the old committed text and the new
uncommitted text simultaneously. You can also click a change bar to
see a menu that lets you discard an individual change (be careful not
to do that by mistake).

--- Page 745 ---
Figure 9-4. An uncommitted change marked in the gutter
If you have an account with any of three popular online sites that
allow ready management of code submitted through version control
— GitHub (https://github.com), Bitbucket (https://bitbucket.org), and
GitLab (https://gitlab.com) — you can enter your authentication
information into Xcode’s Accounts preference pane. Once you’ve
done that:
Create a remote repository
If your project is already under Git control locally, switch to the
Source Control navigator, Control-click Remotes, and choose
Create [Project Name] Remote. A dialog lets you choose a remote
site and upload to it.
Clone a remote repository
When you choose Source Control → Clone, your repositories on
those sites are listed in a dialog and you can clone one of them
directly. Also, when you’re in a web browser looking at a GitHub
repository consisting of an Xcode project, if you click the Code
button, there’s an option to Open with Xcode; the repository is
cloned and the project is opened, in a single move.
Editing and Navigating Your Code
Many aspects of Xcode’s editing environment can be modified to suit
your tastes.

--- Page 746 ---
Your first step should be to go to Xcode’s Themes preference pane
and choose a theme and a Source Editor font face and size. Nothing is
so important as being able to read and write code comfortably! I like
a pleasant monospaced font. SF Mono is included and is the default; I
think it’s very nice. Other possibilities might be Menlo or Consolas,
or the freeware Inconsolata (http://levien.com/type/myfonts) or Source
Code Pro (https://github.com/adobe-fonts/source-code-pro). I also
like a largish size (13, 14, or even 16).
You also get a choice of line spacing (leading) and cursor. You can
change the theme and font size on the fly with the Editor → Font Size
and Editor → Theme hierarchical menus.
Text Editing Preferences
The exact look and behavior of the source code editor depends upon
your settings in the three tabs of Xcode’s Text Editing preference
pane — Display, Editing, and Indentation. I like to check just about
everything here. Here are some particularly interesting Text Editing
settings.
DISPLAY
With “Line numbers” checked, line numbers appear in the gutter to
the left of source code text. Visible line numbers are useful when
debugging.
Code folding lets you collapse the text between matching curly
braces. With “Code folding ribbon” checked, code folding bars
appear to the left of your code (at the right of the gutter), displaying

--- Page 747 ---
your code’s hierarchical structure and allowing you to collapse and
expand just by clicking the bars. I’m not fond of code folding, and I
don’t want to trigger it accidentally, so I leave that checkbox
unchecked. If I need code folding, it remains available through the
Editor → Code Folding hierarchical menu.
A divider line for a MARK: comment (discussed later in this chapter)
can appear in your code, above the comment; check “Mark
separators.”
With Editor Overscroll turned on, Xcode pretends that your file ends
with some extra whitespace, so that when you scroll to the end, the
last line appears in the middle of the editor pane rather than at the
bottom. Since the bottom of the editor pane is usually the bottom of
your screen, this let you keep your eyes focused more or less straight
ahead as you work; also, you can append lines without the editor
constantly scrolling to accommodate them.
EDITING
The first two checkboxes under Editing have to do with
autocompletion; I’ll discuss them separately in a moment.
With “Enable type-over completions” checked, Xcode helps balance
delimiters. Let’s say I intend to make a UIView by calling its
initializer init(frame:). I type as far as this:
let v = UIView(fr

--- Page 748 ---
Xcode automatically appends the closing right parenthesis, with the
insertion point still positioned before it:
let v = UIView(fr) 
// I have typed ^
When I finish typing the parameter and then type a right parenthesis,
I don’t end up with two adjacent right parentheses; instead, Xcode
moves the insertion point through the existing right parenthesis:
let v = UIView(frame:r) 
//       I have typed ^
With “Enclose selection in matching delimiters” checked, if you
select some text and type a left delimiter (such as a quotation mark or
a left parenthesis), the selected text is not replaced; rather, it is
surrounded with left and right delimiters. I find this natural and
convenient.
INDENTATION
I like to have just about everything checked under Indentation; I find
the way Xcode lays out code to be excellent with these settings. If a
line of code isn’t indenting itself correctly, select the problematic area
and choose Editor → Structure → Re-Indent (Control-I). Pasted code
is not indented automatically unless you’ve checked “Re-Indent on
paste.”

--- Page 749 ---
NOTE
Whether to indent case labels in a switch statement in Swift is a subject of
semireligious warfare. I’m not about to get involved.
Multiple Selection
You probably know from experience how to use the mouse and
keyboard to select text. In addition to the familiar forms of selection,
Xcode lets you set multiple simultaneous selections in your code.
With a multiple selection, your edits, including typing and keyboard
navigation, are performed at each selection site simultaneously,
which is useful when you have many parallel changes to make. Some
ways to get a multiple selection are:
Option-click and drag to create a rectangular selection.
Control-Shift-click (and perhaps drag, double-click, and so on) to
add a selection to the existing selection.
Select a symbol and choose Editor → Selection → Select All
Symbols; each occurrence of that symbol is selected
simultaneously. (Alternatively, Editor → Edit All In Scope selects
all occurrences of the currently selected term within the same
scope.)
Select any text and choose Find → Select Next Occurrence.
Press Command-F to bring up the search field at the top of the
editor, enter a search term, and choose Find → Find and Select
Next, or Find → Select All Find Matches.

--- Page 750 ---
Select a stretch of code consisting of multiple lines, and choose
Editor → Selection → Split Selection By Lines.
Autocompletion and Placeholders
As you write code, you’ll want to take advantage of Xcode’s
autocompletion feature. Type names and member names can be
astonishingly verbose, and whatever reduces your time and effort
typing will be a relief. Autocompletion behavior is governed by two
checkboxes in the Editing pane of the Text Editing preferences:
Suggest completions while typing
If this is checked, autocompletion is basically on all the time.
Use Escape key to show completion suggestions
If this is checked, you can ask for autocompletion manually by
pressing Esc.
I like to have the first checkbox unchecked and the second checkbox
checked. That way, I get autocompletion on demand.
Suppose I want my code to create an alert. I type as far as let alert
= UIAl and press Esc. A menu pops up, listing completions,
including UIAlertController. You can navigate this menu, dismiss
it, or accept the selection, using the mouse or the keyboard alone. I
like to use the keyboard. I arrow down to UIAlertController and
hit Return, and UIAlertController is entered in my code.
Now I type a left parenthesis, so that I’ve got UIAlertController(,
and again I press Esc. Now the menu pops up listing the initializers

--- Page 751 ---
appropriate to a UIAlertController (Figure 9-5). The last one is the
one I want, so I arrow down to it and hit Return.
Figure 9-5. The autocompletion menu
At this point, the template for the method call is entered in my code
(I’ve broken it into multiple lines here):
let alert = UIAlertController( 
    title: <#T##String?#>, 
    message: <#T##String?#>, 
    preferredStyle: <#T##UIAlertController.Style#>)
The expressions in <#...#> are placeholders, showing the type of
each parameter. They appear in Xcode as cartouche-like “text tokens”
to prevent them from being edited accidentally. To navigate among
placeholders, press Tab or choose Navigate → Jump to Next
Placeholder (Control-/). In this way, you can select each placeholder
in turn, typing to replace it with the actual argument you wish to pass
and then tabbing to the next placeholder. To convert a placeholder to
a normal string without the delimiters, select it and press Return, or
double-click it.

--- Page 752 ---
When you’re entering a declaration for a method that’s inherited from
a superclass or defined in an adopted protocol, you don’t need to type
the initial func; just type the first few letters of the method’s name. In
my app delegate class I might type:
app
If I then press Esc, I see a list of methods such as application(_:di
dFinishLaunchingWithOptions:); these are methods that might be
sent to my app delegate (by virtue of its being the app delegate, as
discussed in Chapter 11). When I choose one, the entire declaration is
filled in for me, including the curly braces:
func application(_ application: UIApplication, 
    didFinishLaunchingWithOptions 
    launchOptions: [UIApplication.LaunchOptionsKey : Any]?) -> Bool { 
        <#code#> 
}
A placeholder for the code appears between the curly braces, and it is
selected, ready for me to start entering the body of the function. If a
function needs an override designation, Xcode’s code completion
provides it.
What you type in connection with autocompletion doesn’t have to be
the literal start of a symbol. In the preceding example, I can get appl
ication(_:didFinishLaunchingWithOptions:) to be the only
thing in the code completion menu if I start by typing launch.
Snippets

--- Page 753 ---
Autocompletion is supplemented by code snippets. A code snippet is
a bit of text with an abbreviation. Code snippets are kept in the
Snippets library, which appears when you summon the Library
floating window (Command-Shift-L) while editing code. With the
Library showing, you can double-click or drag to insert a snippet into
your code. But the real point is that a code snippet’s abbreviation is
available to code completion, which means you can insert a snippet
without showing the library: you type the abbreviation and the
snippet’s name is included among the completions.
For example, to enter a class declaration at the top level of a file, I
would type class and press Esc to get autocompletion, and choose
Class — Subclass. The template for a class declaration appears in my
code: the class name and superclass name are placeholders, the curly
braces are provided, and the body of the declaration (between the
curly braces) is another placeholder.
In the Library, single-click on a snippet to see its details: its
expansion, its language, its platform(s), its code completion
abbreviation (labeled Completion), and the scope where it applies
(labeled Availability). If the details don’t appear, click the Details
button at the top right of the Library floating window.
You can add your own snippets to the Snippets library. These will be
categorized as user snippets and will appear first. Unlike built-in
snippets, user snippets can be edited and deleted.
To create a user snippet, select some text and choose Editor → Create
Code Snippet. The Library floating window will appear, with the new

--- Page 754 ---
snippet’s details ready for editing. Provide a name, a description, and
an abbreviation; the Availability pop-up menu lets you narrow the
scope in which the snippet will be available through code completion.
In the text of the snippet, use the <#...#> construct to form any
desired placeholders.
I’ve created an outlet snippet (Chapter 7), with an availability scope
of Class Implementation, defined like this:
@IBOutlet private var <#name#> : <#type#>!
And I’ve created an action snippet, defined like this:
@IBAction private func <#name#> (_ sender: Any) { 
    <#code#> 
}
My other snippets constitute a personal library of utility functions
that I’ve developed. My delay snippet inserts my DispatchQueue.m
ain.asyncAfter wrapper function (see Chapter 11), and has an
availability scope of Top Level.
Refactoring and Structure Editing
Refactoring is an intelligent form of code reorganization. To use it,
select within your code and then choose from the Editor → Refactor
hierarchical menu, or Control-click and choose from the Refactor
hierarchical menu in the contextual menu. Here are some of the
refactoring commands you’re most likely to use:
Rename

--- Page 755 ---
The selected symbol’s declaration and all references to it are
changed, throughout your code. This also allows you to change
the name of an outlet property or action method without breaking
the connection from the nib (Chapter 7).
Extract to Method
Creates a new method and moves the selected lines of code into
the body of that method, replacing the original lines with a call to
that method. The method name and the new call to it are then
selected, ready for you to supply a meaningful name.
Extract to Variable
Creates a new variable and assigns the selected code expression
to that variable, replacing the original expression with a reference
to the variable. If the same expression appears multiple times and
you choose Extract All Occurrences, they are all replaced with a
reference to the variable. The variable name and the new
reference(s) to it are then selected, ready for you to supply a
meaningful name.
Add Missing Protocol Requirements
In a type declaration, when the type name is selected, if the type
declares adoption of a protocol and does not in fact conform to
the protocol’s requirements, inserts stubs declaring the missing
required members.
Generate Memberwise Initializer
In a type declaration, when the type name is selected, synthesizes
an initializer based on the instance property names. This is a great
convenience for classes, because they, unlike structs, have no
implicit memberwise initializer. It can also be useful for structs,
because if you add an initializer to a struct, you lose the implicit
memberwise initializer — so this is a way to regain it.

--- Page 756 ---
Expand Switch Cases
In a switch statement where the tag is an enum, when the
keyword switch is selected, adds any missing cases.
Wrap in NSLocalizedString
When the selection is inside a literal string, replaces the literal
string with a call to NSLocalizedString where the literal string is
the key. This is useful when localizing your app, as I’ll explain
later in this chapter.
Another way to refactor is to Command-click (or, depending on your
Navigation preferences, Command-Control click) in a keyword that
introduces curly braces. A popover appears containing menu items
that let you edit the structure of your code. Some of the popover
menu commands are like the refactoring commands I’ve just listed.
Others let you insert templates for standard structural components
associated with that keyword:
A class or struct declaration (click class or struct)
Add Method and Add Property
A method declaration (click func)
Add Parameter and Add Return Type
An if construct (click if)
Add “else” Statement and Add “else if” Statement
A switch statement (click switch)
Add “case” Statement and Add “default” Statement

--- Page 757 ---
Fix-it and Live Syntax Checking
Xcode’s Fix-it feature allows the compiler to make and implement
positive suggestions on how to avert a problem that has arisen as a
warning or compile error. In effect, you’re getting the compiler to edit
your code for you.
Here’s an example. Figure 9-6, at the top, shows that I’ve
accidentally forgotten the parentheses after a method call. This causes
a compile error. But the stop-sign icon next to the error tells me that
Fix-it has a suggestion. I click the stop-sign icon, and Figure 9-6, at
the bottom, shows what happens: a dialog pops up, not only showing
the full error message but also telling me how Fix-it proposes to fix
the problem — by inserting the parentheses. If I click the Fix button
in the dialog, Xcode does insert the parentheses — and the error
vanishes, because the problem is solved.
Figure 9-6. A compile error with a Fix-it suggestion
The intelligence of Fix-it is sometimes the same as the intelligence of
refactoring. If a switch statement’s tag is an enum and you omit
cases, Fix-it will add them. If a type adopts a protocol and fails to

--- Page 758 ---
implement required members, Fix-it will insert stubs for those
members.
TIP
If you’re confident that Fix-it will do the right thing, you can have it implement
all suggestions simultaneously: choose Editor → Fix All Issues.
Live syntax checking is like continual compilation, emitting a
warning or error even if you don’t actually compile. This feature can
be toggled on or off using the “Show live issues” checkbox in
Xcode’s General preference pane. I keep it turned off, because I find
it intrusive. My code is almost never valid while I’m in the middle of
typing, because things are always half-finished; that’s what it means
to be typing! Merely typing let and pausing will likely cause the live
syntax checker to complain.
Navigation
Developing an Xcode project involves editing code in many files.
You’ll need to leap nimbly from file to file; you might want to see
multiple files simultaneously. Fortunately, Xcode provides numerous
ways to navigate your code, some of which have been mentioned
already in Chapters 6 and 8:
The Project navigator
Lists all your project’s files by name. If you know something
about the name of a file, you can find it quickly in the Project
navigator by typing into the search field in the filter bar at the

--- Page 759 ---
bottom of the navigator (Edit → Filter → Filter in Navigator,
Command-Option-J). For example, type story to see just your
.storyboard files.
The Symbol navigator
If you highlight the first two icons in the filter bar (so that they
are filled), the Symbol navigator lists your project’s object types
and their members. Click a symbol to navigate to its declaration
in the editor. As with the Project navigator, the filter bar’s search
field can help get you where you want to go.
The jump bar
Every path component of an editor pane’s jump bar is a menu:
The bottom level
At the jump bar’s bottom level (the rightmost menu, Control-
6) is a list of your file’s object and member declarations, in
the order in which they appear. Hold Command while
choosing the menu to see them in alphabetical order instead.
To filter what the menu displays, start typing while the menu
is open.
Another useful trick is to inject section titles into this menu; to
do so, put a comment in your code whose first word is MARK:,
TODO:, or FIXME:, followed by the section title. To make a
divider line in the menu, put a hyphen:
// MARK: - View lifecycle
Higher levels
Higher-level path components are hierarchical menus; you
can use any of them to work your way down the file hierarchy
and reach any file without using the project navigator. These
menus can also be filtered.

--- Page 760 ---
History
Each editor pane remembers the names of files you’ve edited
in it. The Back and Forward indicators are buttons as well as
pop-up menus (or choose Navigate → Go Back and Navigate
→ Go Forward, Command-Control-Left and Command-
Control-Right).
Related items
The leftmost button in the jump bar summons the Related
Items menu, a hierarchical menu of files related to the current
file, such as superclasses and adopted protocols. This list even
includes functions that call or are called by the currently
selected function.
Editor panes
Using multiple editor panes allows you to work in two places at
once.
Assistant pane
The assistant pane lets you walk through all places that relate to
your code in a specific way, such as all callers of a selected
method.
Document tabs
Using document tabs allows a single editor pane to be switched
between specific places where you want to work.
Window tabs and windows
You can work in two places at once by opening a window tab or a
separate window.
Jump to definition

--- Page 761 ---
Navigate → Jump to Definition (Command-Control-J, Command-
Control-click) lets you jump from a selected or clicked symbol in
your code to its declaration.
Open quickly
File → Open Quickly (Command-Shift-O) opens a dialog where
you can search for a symbol in your code and in the framework
headers.
Breakpoints
The Breakpoint navigator lists all breakpoints in your code.
Xcode lacks code bookmarks, but you can misuse a breakpoint as
a bookmark. Breakpoints are discussed later in this chapter.
Minimap
The minimap helps you navigate a single large source code file.
To see it, choose Editor → Minimap, or use the Editor Options
pop-up menu at the top right of the editor pane. The minimap
displays the entire file in miniature — too small to read, but
indicating the structure of the code, including MARK: comments,
along with transients such as warnings and errors, change bars,
breakpoints, and Find results. Drag the shaded area to scroll.
Hover the mouse to display structure and symbols; hold
Command while hovering to display all symbols (Figure 9-7).
Click a symbol to navigate to it.

--- Page 762 ---
Figure 9-7. The minimap
Finding
Finding is a form of navigation. Xcode has both an editor level find
and a global find. You’ll want to configure your search with find
options:
Editor level find (Find → Find, Command-F)
Appears in a bar at the top of the editor pane. A button at the right
end of the search field toggles case-sensitive search; a pop-up
menu lets you specify containment, word exact match, word start,
word end, or regular expression search.
Global find (Find → Find in Project, Command-Shift-F)
Appears in the Find navigator. The options appear above and
below the search field. Above the search field, you can choose
between Text, References (where a symbol is used), Definitions

--- Page 763 ---
(where a symbol is defined), Regular Expression, and Call
Hierarchy (tracing call stacks backward); you can search by word
contents, word exact match, word start, or word end. Below the
search field, you can toggle case sensitivity, and you can specify a
scope determining which files will be searched: click the current
scope to see the Search Scopes panel, where you can select a
different scope or create a custom scope.
TIP
Globally finding the Call Hierarchy is one of Xcode’s best, yet least-known,
features. It displays hierarchically the complete call stack, tracing all the paths
by which the search target is accessed. When you’re struggling to understand
how your code works (or doesn’t), this display is magic. There’s even a
shortcut: select a term and choose Find → Find Call Hierarchy.
To find and replace:
Editor level find and replace
Next to the magnifying glass icon, click Find and choose Replace
to toggle the visibility of the With field. You can perform a Find
and then click Replace to replace that instance, or click All to
replace all occurrences (hold Option to change it to All in
Selection).
Global find and replace
Above the left end of the search bar, click Find and choose
Replace. You can replace all occurrences (Replace All), or select
particular find results in the Find navigator and replace only those
(Replace); conversely, you can press Delete to remove a find

--- Page 764 ---
result from the Find navigator, to protect it from being affected by
Replace All.
Running in the Simulator
When you build and run with a simulator as the destination, you run
in the Simulator application. A Simulator window represents a
specific type of device. Depending on your app target’s Deployment
Target and Targeted Device Family build settings, and on what SDKs
you have installed, you may have choices about the device type and
system as you specify your destination before running (see
Chapter 6).
The Simulator can display multiple windows, representing different
devices. You can run different projects simultaneously, in the same
Simulator window or different Simulator windows. When you choose
from the Simulator’s File → Open Simulator hierarchical menu, you
switch to the window representing the chosen device, launching that
device’s simulator if needed.
A Simulator window can display the bezel surrounding the device’s
screen. Choose Window → Show Device Bezels to toggle this feature
(for all windows). Displaying the bezel allows you to press hardware
buttons (Home button, volume buttons, screen lock button) by
clicking the mouse; also, certain gestures, such as swiping from the
screen edge, become easier to perform. On the other hand, hiding the
bezel is arguably neater, and all those hardware buttons are still
available through menu commands.

--- Page 765 ---
A Simulator window can be resized by dragging an edge or corner.
You also have a choice of three standard sizes (you might have to
uncheck Show Device Bezels to enable them all):
Window → Physical Size
The device screen displayed on your computer monitor is the size
of the screen of the physical device. If you hold up the physical
device next to the Simulator window on the monitor, the screen
dimensions will match perfectly.
Window → Point Accurate
One point on the device screen is one point on the computer
monitor. An iPhone 6s screen is 375 points wide, so it occupies
375 points of computer screen width.
Window → Pixel Accurate
One pixel on the device screen is one pixel on the computer
monitor. My computer monitor is single-resolution, but an iPhone
6s is double-resolution, so it occupies 750 pixels of computer
screen width. If your computer monitor resolution matches the
resolution of the device, Pixel Accurate and Point Accurate are
the same.
New in Xcode 12, you can also maximize the Simulator window with
Window → Fit Screen; you can float the Simulator window in front
of all other applications, including Xcode; and you can tile it into
fullscreen mode, which is useful for splitting the screen between just
the Simulator and Xcode.
You can interact with the Simulator in some of the same basic ways
as you would a device. Using the mouse, you can tap on the device’s

--- Page 766 ---
screen; hold Option to make the mouse represent two fingers moving
symmetrically around their common center, and Option-Shift to
represent two fingers moving in parallel.
For an iPad, you can also capture the keyboard or (new in Xcode 12)
the keyboard and pointer; buttons for toggling this appear above the
Simulator window. That means you’re simulating a hardware
keyboard or mouse being connected; a captured pointer belongs
entirely to the Simulator, so now you can’t use your mouse to do
anything else until you end capture mode by pressing Esc (or
whichever keyboard shortcut you’ve specified in the Simulator
preferences).
Items in the Device menu let you perform hardware gestures such as
rotating the device, shaking it, locking its screen, and clicking the
Home button; starting in Xcode 11.4, buttons for clicking Home and
rotating the device are visible above the simulator window as well.
Items in the Features menu let you test your app by simulating special
situations such the arrival of a phone call or the user switching
between light and dark mode (Toggle Appearance).
The Debug menu in the Simulator is useful for detecting problems
with animations and drawing. Slow Animations, if checked, makes
animations unfold in slow motion so that you can see in detail what’s
happening. The four menu items whose names begin with Color
reveal possible sources of inefficiency in screen drawing. Simulate
Memory Warning lets you pretend your app is running low on
memory.

--- Page 767 ---
The Simulator application supports “side-loading” of apps. This
means you can get an app onto a simulator without launching it from
Xcode. To do so, drag a built .app file from the Finder onto an open
simulator window. Various other types of resource, such as images
and push notification payloads, can be side-loaded as well.
While running your app from Xcode in the Simulator, you can change
certain user settings on the simulated device without passing through
the Settings app. In the debug bar, click the Environment Overrides
button to summon a popover where you can switch between light and
dark modes, change the dynamic text size, and alter various
accessibility settings.
Another powerful way to control a simulator is from the command
line. In the Terminal, type xcrun simctl to see a list of things you
can do. Among other things, in addition to side-loading files, you can
change your app’s privacy permissions, manipulate its keychain, and
send it an external URL (such as a universal link).
In Xcode 11 and before, closing a Simulator window stops the
corresponding simulator; to use that simulator again later, it must be
rebooted. New in Xcode 12, the Preferences let you elect to keep
simulators running when closed and even when the Simulator app
isn’t running.
Debugging
Debugging is the art of figuring out what’s wrong with the behavior
of your app as it runs. I divide this art into two main techniques:

--- Page 768 ---
caveman debugging and pausing your running app.
Caveman Debugging
Caveman debugging consists of altering your code, usually
temporarily. Typically, you’ll add code to produce informative
messages that you’ll read in the Xcode console in the project
window’s Debug pane as your app runs.
The simplest Swift command for sending a message to the Xcode
console is the print function. You might print a string saying where
the path of execution is:
print("view did load")
You might output a value:
print("i is", i)
When you print an object, the output comes from that object’s descr
iption property. Cocoa objects generally have a useful built-in desc
ription property implementation:
print(self.view)
The output in the console reads something like this (I’ve formatted it
for clarity here):
<UIView: 0x79121d40; 
  frame = (0 0; 320 480); 
  autoresize = RM+BM; 
  layer = <CALayer: 0x79121eb0>>

--- Page 769 ---
We learn the object’s class, its address in memory (useful for
confirming whether two instances are in fact the same instance), and
the values of some additional properties. In your own object types,
you can adopt CustomStringConvertible and implement the descrip
tion property as desired (Chapter 4).
Instead of print, you might like to use dump. Its console output
describes an object along with its class inheritance and its instance
properties, by way of a Mirror object:
dump(self)
If self is a view controller of class ViewController with a didIniti
alSetup instance property, the console output looks like this:
* ViewController 
  - super: UIViewController 
    - super: UIResponder 
      - super: NSObject 
  - didInitialSetup: true
In your own object types, you can adopt CustomReflectable and
implement the customMirror property as desired (Chapter 5).
An important feature of print and dump is that they are effectively
suppressed when the app is launched independently of Xcode. That’s
good, because it means you’re free to pepper your code with print
statements and they’ll have no effect on your app in the real world.
But what if you want to send yourself messages when you’re running
the app independently of Xcode?

--- Page 770 ---
The traditional solution is to import Foundation (which, in real-life
iOS programming, you’re already doing) and call the NSLog C
function. It takes an NSString which operates as a format string,
followed by the format arguments. A format string is a string
containing symbols called format specifiers, for which values (the
format arguments) will be substituted at runtime. See “String Format
Specifiers” in Apple’s String Programming Guide in the
documentation archive. All format specifiers begin with a percent
sign (%), so the only way to enter a literal percent sign in a format
string is as a double percent sign (%%). The character(s) following the
percent sign specify the type of value that will be supplied at runtime.
The most common format specifiers are %@ (an object reference), %d
(an int), %ld (a long), and %f (a double):
NSLog("the view: %@", self.view)
In that example, self.view is the first (and only) format argument,
so its value will be substituted for the first (and only) format
specifier, %@, when the format string is printed in the console:
2015-01-26 10:43:35.314 Empty Window[23702:809945] 
  the view: <UIView: 0x7c233b90; 
    frame = (0 0; 320 480); 
    autoresize = RM+BM; 
    layer = <CALayer: 0x7c233d00>>
Over the past several years, NSLog has gradually been superseded by
a new unified logging system, OSLog. It still uses format specifiers,
but it adds some specialized efficiencies and lifts some limits on the
length of a message. New in iOS 14 and Swift 5.3, a Swift native
type, Logger, acts as a comfortable façade for OSLog. To use Logger,

--- Page 771 ---
import os and create a Logger object, typically as an instance
property or global:
import os 
let mylog = Logger(subsystem: "com.neuburg.matt", category: "testing")
The subsystem and category strings are arbitrary but useful,
because you can refer to them to focus on the particular log messages
that interest you. To send a log message, call a method of your
Logger instance; to start with, you can use log:
mylog.log("this is a test")
The argument has to be a literal string, but it can include string
interpolations. Behind the scenes, your interpolations are turned into
NSLog format specifiers and arguments, and are evaluated efficiently
at runtime outside of your app’s process, so that they don’t slow
down the app itself:
mylog.log("this is a test of \(self)")
When you run the app from Xcode, log messages from NSLog,
OSLog, and Logger appear in the Xcode console, and are tagged with
the current time and date, along with the process name, process ID,
and thread ID (useful for determining whether two logging statements
are called on the same thread). With Logger, the category from your
Logger configuration is also present, in square brackets; this gives
you something to filter on so that only the desired messages appear.
Even more important, these log messages appear even when the app
is running outside of Xcode. To view them, use the Console

--- Page 772 ---
application. In the Sources pane at the left, under Devices, are shown
all running simulators and any devices currently visible to the
computer. Select the desired device and exercise the app, while
watching the Console output. To eliminate unwanted output, set up a
filter in the toolbar search field. You can filter by the name of the
process (that is, the name of your app); even better, you can filter by
the subsystem and category you configured when creating your
Logger object. You can specify what information to show by
choosing the columns that appear, such as the Time, Process, Thread
ID, Category, Subsystem, and Type columns.
But perhaps you didn’t have the Console application configured and
ready at the time you ran your app? Then there’s another option: you
can read your log messages after the fact. To do so, use the log
command-line tool. Suppose I say this in the Terminal:
% sudo log collect --device-name "TheMattPhone" --last 1h
The result is that my home directory now contains a file called
system_logs.logarchive. I can open this file with the Console
application and explore it with filtering in exactly the same way as
I’ve just described for a live logging stream. Alternatively, I can filter
in the Terminal with another log command:
% log show --predicate 'category == "testing"' system_logs.logarchive
Bear in mind that what you can do, the user can do. The user can see
your logging messages just as well as you can. For this reason, string
interpolations are redacted by default when your app is running
independently of Xcode. If you want an interpolation to be always

--- Page 773 ---
legible in the Console or the system log, you have to specify that it is
public, using a Swift 5 string interpolation parameter:
mylog.log("this is a test of \(self, privacy: .public)")
You can also use string interpolation parameters to perform various
sorts of string formatting that you would otherwise have had to
perform using NSLog format specifiers, such as dictating the number
of digits after the decimal point and other sorts of padding and
alignment:
mylog.log("the number is \(i, format: .decimal(minDigits: 5))") // e.g. 
00001
Another way to mediate between public and private logging is by
specifying the logging level at which messages are to be sent. To do
so, call a Logger instance method that specifies the level: the methods
are debug, info, notice (same as log), error, and fault. The
significance of logging levels is:
Noisiness
What you’re categorizing is how bad the situation is. fault
means that, if we log this at all, there is an unexpected bug in the
program.
Persistence
A debug message is not written into the log file and doesn’t
propagate to the Console application. So it works more like
print: only you can see it, and only while running the app from
Xcode. The others are written into the log file, and the level

--- Page 774 ---
reflects how hard the message will resist being expunged as time
elapses and further data is accumulated.
Lagginess
A debug message has the least overhead, because there is no need
to talk to the file-writing mechanism, and on the user’s device the
format specifier arguments won’t even be evaluated, so the
expense is effectively zero.
Interface
The levels correspond to markings in the Console application. A f
ault message calls attention to itself with a red filled dot.
Another useful form of caveman debugging is deliberately aborting
your app because something has gone seriously wrong. See the
discussion of assert, precondition, and fatalError in Chapter 5.
precondition and fatalError work even in a Release build. By
default, assert is inoperative in a Release build, so it is safe to leave
it in your code when your app is ready to ship; by that time, of
course, you should be confident that the bad situation your assert
was intended to detect has been debugged and will never actually
occur.
Purists may scoff at caveman debugging, but I use it heavily: it’s
easy, informative, and lightweight. And sometimes it’s the only way.
Unlike the debugger, console logging works with any build
configuration (Debug or Release) and wherever your app runs (in the
Simulator or on a device). It works when pausing is impossible
(because of threading issues, for instance). It even works on someone
else’s device, such as a tester to whom you’ve distributed your app.

--- Page 775 ---
TIP
Swift defines four special literals, particularly useful when logging because they
describe their own location within the source code: #file, #line, #column, and
#function.
The Xcode Debugger
When Xcode is running your app, you can pause in the debugger and
use Xcode’s debugging facilities. The important thing, if you want to
use the debugger, is that the app should be built with the Debug build
configuration (the default for a scheme’s Run action). The debugger
is not very helpful against an app built with the Release build
configuration, not least because compiler optimizations can destroy
the correspondence between steps in the compiled code and lines in
your source code.
BREAKPOINTS
There isn’t a strong difference between running and debugging in
Xcode; the main distinction is whether breakpoints are effective or
ignored. The effectiveness of breakpoints can be toggled at two
levels:
Globally (active vs. inactive)
Breakpoints as a whole are either active or inactive. If
breakpoints are inactive, we won’t pause at any breakpoints.
Individually (enabled vs. disabled)

--- Page 776 ---
A given breakpoint is either enabled or disabled. Even if
breakpoints are active, we won’t pause at this one if it is disabled.
Disabling a breakpoint allows you to leave in place a breakpoint
that you might need later without pausing at it every time it’s
encountered.
To create a breakpoint, select in the editor the line where you want to
pause, and choose Debug → Breakpoints → Add/Remove Breakpoint
at Current Line (Command-\). This menu item toggles between
adding and removing a breakpoint for the current line. Alternatively,
a simple click in the gutter adds a breakpoint. The breakpoint is
symbolized by an arrow in the gutter (Figure 9-8, first). To remove a
breakpoint gesturally, drag the arrow out of the gutter.
Figure 9-8. A breakpoint
To disable a breakpoint at the current line, click the breakpoint in the
gutter to toggle its enabled status. Alternatively, select in the line and
choose Debug → Breakpoints → Enable/Disable Breakpoint at
Current Line; or Control-click the breakpoint and choose
Enable/Disable Breakpoint in the contextual menu. A dark breakpoint
is enabled; a light breakpoint is disabled (Figure 9-8, second).
To toggle the active status of breakpoints as a whole, click the
Breakpoints button in the debug bar, or choose Debug →

--- Page 777 ---
Activate/Deactivate Breakpoints (Command-Y). If breakpoints are
inactive, they are simply ignored en masse, and no pausing at
breakpoints takes place. Breakpoint arrows are a solid color if
breakpoints are active, gray if they are inactive (Figure 9-8, third).
The active status of breakpoints as a whole doesn’t affect the enabled
or disabled status of any breakpoints.
Once you have some breakpoints in your code, you’ll want to survey
and manage them. That’s what the Breakpoint navigator is for. Here
you can navigate to a breakpoint, enable or disable a breakpoint by
clicking on its arrow in the navigator, and delete a breakpoint.
You can also configure a breakpoint’s behavior. Control-click the
breakpoint, in the gutter or in the Breakpoint navigator, and choose
Edit Breakpoint; or double-click the breakpoint. You can have a
breakpoint pause only under a certain condition or after it has been
encountered a certain number of times, and you can have a
breakpoint perform one or more actions when it is encountered, such
as issuing a debugger command, logging, playing a sound, speaking
text, or running a script. A breakpoint whose behavior has been
configured is badged (Figure 9-8, fourth).
A breakpoint can be configured to continue automatically after
performing its action when it is encountered. A breakpoint that logs
and continues can be an excellent alternative to caveman debugging.
By definition, such a breakpoint operates only when you’re actively
debugging the project; it won’t dump any messages into the console
when the app runs independently, because breakpoints exist only in
Xcode.

--- Page 778 ---
Certain special kinds of breakpoint (event breakpoints) can be created
in the Breakpoint navigator — click the Plus button at the bottom of
the navigator and choose from its pop-up menu — or by choosing
from the Debug → Breakpoints hierarchical menu. Here are the ones
you’re most likely to use:
Swift error breakpoint
Pauses when your code says throw.
Exception breakpoint
Pauses when an Objective-C exception is thrown or caught,
without regard to whether the exception would crash your app
later. An exception breakpoint that pauses on all exceptions when
they are thrown gives the best view of the call stack and variable
values at the moment of the exception.
(Sometimes Apple’s code will throw an exception and catch it,
deliberately. This isn’t a crash, and nothing has gone wrong; but if
you’ve created an exception breakpoint, your app will pause at it,
which can be confusing. If this happens to you, choose Debug →
Continue to resume your app; if it keeps happening, you might
need to disable the exception breakpoint.)
Symbolic breakpoint
Pauses when a certain method or function is called, regardless of
what object called it. The method doesn’t have to be your
method! A symbolic breakpoint can help you probe Cocoa’s
behavior. A method may be specified in one of two ways:
Using Objective-C method notation
The instance method or class method symbol (- or +)
followed by square brackets containing the class name and the
method name:

--- Page 779 ---
-[UIApplication beginReceivingRemoteControlEvents]
By Objective-C method name
The Objective-C method name alone. The debugger will
resolve this for you into all possible class–method pairs, as if
you had entered them using the Objective-C notation that I
just described:
beginReceivingRemoteControlEvents
If you enter the method specification incorrectly, the symbolic
breakpoint won’t do anything; however, you might be assisted by
code completion, and in general you’ll know if you got things
right, because you’ll see the resolved breakpoint(s) listed
hierarchically below yours (though resolution may not take place
until you actually run the project).
Breakpoints come in three levels of exposure:
Local to you and a project
The default. The breakpoint appears in this project on this
machine.
Global to you
Use the contextual menu to say Move Breakpoint To → User. The
breakpoint now appears in all your projects on this machine.
Symbolic and exception breakpoints are particularly good
candidates for this level.
Shared with others
Use the contextual menu to say Share Breakpoint. The breakpoint
is now visible in this project to others with whom you share the

--- Page 780 ---
project.
PAUSED AT A BREAKPOINT
When the app runs with breakpoints active and an enabled breakpoint
is encountered (and assuming its conditions are met, and so on), the
app pauses. In the active project window, the editor shows the file
containing the point of execution, which will usually be the file
containing the breakpoint. We are paused at the line that is about to
be executed, which is shown by the instruction pointer (Figure 9-9).
Depending on the settings for Running → Pauses in the Behaviors
preference pane, the Debug navigator and the Debug pane may also
appear.
Figure 9-9. Paused at a breakpoint
Here are some things you might like to do while paused at a
breakpoint:
See where you are
One common reason for setting a breakpoint is to make sure that
the path of execution is passing through a certain line. Functions
listed in the call stack in the Debug navigator with a User icon are
yours; click one to see where you are paused in that function.
(Other listings are functions and methods for which you have no
source code, so there would be little point clicking one unless you
know something about assembly language.) You can also view
and navigate the call stack using the jump bar in the debug bar.
Study variable values

--- Page 781 ---
In the Debug pane, variable values for the current scope
(corresponding to what’s selected in the call stack) are visible in
the variables list. You can see additional object features, such as
collection elements, properties, and even some private
information, by opening disclosure indicators.
You can use the search field to filter variables by name or value.
If a formatted summary isn’t sufficiently helpful, you can send de
scription (or, if this object adopts
CustomDebugStringConvertible, debugDescription) to an
object variable and view the output in the console: choose Print
Description of [Variable] from the contextual menu, or select the
variable and click the Info button below the variables list.
You can also view a variable’s value graphically: select the
variable and click the Quick Look button (an eye icon) below the
variables list, or press the space bar. For example, in the case of a
CGRect, the graphical representation is a correctly proportioned
rectangle. You can make instances of your own custom class
viewable in the same way; declare the following method and
return an instance of one of the permitted types (see Apple’s
Quick Look for Custom Types in the Xcode Debugger in the
documentation archive):
@objc func debugQuickLookObject() -> Any { 
    // ... create and return your graphical object here ... 
}
You can also inspect a variable’s value in place in your code, by
examining its data tip. To see a data tip, hover the mouse over the
name of a variable in your code. The data tip is much like the
display of this value in the variables list: there’s a disclosure
indicator that you can open to see more information, plus an Info
button that displays the value description here and in the console,
and a Quick Look button for showing a value graphically
(Figure 9-10).

--- Page 782 ---
Figure 9-10. A data tip
Set a watchpoint
A watchpoint is like a breakpoint, but instead of depending on a
certain line of code it depends on a variable’s value: the debugger
pauses whenever the variable’s value changes. You can set a
watchpoint only while paused in the debugger. Control-click the
variable in the variables list and choose Watch [Variable].
Watchpoints, once created, are listed and managed in the
Breakpoint navigator.
Inspect your view hierarchy
You can study the view hierarchy while paused in the debugger.
Click the Debug View Hierarchy button in the debug bar, or
choose Debug → View Debugging → Capture View Hierarchy.
Views are listed in an outline in the Debug navigator. The editor
displays your views; this is a three-dimensional projection that
you can rotate. The Object inspector and the Size inspector
display information about the currently selected view.
Inspect your object graph
Using the Memory Debugger, you can study the object graph
(what objects you’ve created and how they refer to one another)

--- Page 783 ---
while paused in the debugger. I’ll talk more about that later in this
chapter.
Manage expressions
An expression is code to be added to the variables list and
evaluated every time we pause. Choose Add Expression from the
contextual menu in the variables list. The expression is evaluated
within the current context in your code, so be careful of side
effects.
Talk to the debugger
You can communicate directly with the debugger through the
console. Xcode’s debugger interface is a front end to the real
debugger, LLDB (http://lldb.llvm.org); by talking directly to
LLDB, you can do everything that you can do through the Xcode
debugger interface, and more. Common commands are:
ty loo (short for type lookup)
Followed by a type name, dumps a full declaration for the
type, listing all its members (properties and methods). For
Cocoa classes, you might get better information by
performing the lookup in Objective-C:
(lldb) ty loo -l objc -- ClassName
v (or fr v, short for frame variable)
Alone, prints out all variables locally in scope, similar to the
display in the variables list. Alternatively, can be followed by
the name of a variable you want to examine. Fast and
lightweight because it reaches right into the stack and grabs
the value, but it has some limitations; for obvious reasons, it
doesn’t work for computed properties.

--- Page 784 ---
p (or expression, expr, or simply e)
Compiles and executes, in the current context, any expression
in the current language. Be careful of your expression’s side
effects! This is more heavyweight than v.
po (meaning “print object”)
Like p, but displays the value of the executed expression in
accordance with its description or debugDescription
(similar to Print Description). It is actually an alias for expr -
O, meaning “object description.” Twice as expensive as p
because it has to be compiled and executed twice.
Fiddle with breakpoints
You are free to create, destroy, edit, enable and disable, and
otherwise manage breakpoints even while your app is running,
which is useful because where you’d like to pause next might
depend on what you learn while you’re paused here. Indeed, this
is one of the main advantages of breakpoints over caveman
debugging. To change your caveman debugging, you have to stop
the app, edit it, rebuild it, and start running the app all over again.
But to fiddle with breakpoints, you don’t have to be stopped; you
don’t even have to be paused! An operation that went wrong, if it
doesn’t crash your app, can probably be repeated in real time, so
you can just add a breakpoint and try again. If tapping a button
produces the wrong results, you can add a breakpoint to the action
method and tap the button again; you pass through the same code,
and this time you pause and can work out what the trouble is.
Continue or step
To proceed with your paused app, you can either resume running
or take one step and pause again. The commands are in the Debug
menu, or you can click the convenient buttons in the debug bar:

--- Page 785 ---
Continue
Resume running (until a breakpoint is encountered).
Step Over
Pause at the next line.
Step Into
Pause in your function that the current line calls, if there is
one; otherwise, pause at the next line.
Step Out
Pause when we return from the current function.
Start over, or abort
To kill the running app, click Stop in the toolbar (Product →
Stop, Command-Period). Clicking the Home button in the
Simulator (Hardware → Home) or on the device does not stop the
running app.
You can make changes to your code while the app is running or
paused in the Simulator or on a device, but those changes are not
magically communicated to the running app. To see your changes in
action, you must stop the running app, build, run, and launch the app
all over again.
However, you can inject changes into your code by means of an expr
command, given either at the LLDB console or through a custom-
configured breakpoint. Moreover, you can skip a line of code by
dragging the instruction pointer down; if you combine that with expr,
you’ve effectively replaced one line of code with another. So it may

--- Page 786 ---
be possible to modify your app’s logic and test a proposed change to
your code without rebuilding and relaunching.
WARNING
Local variable values can exist even if, at the point where you are paused, those
variables have not yet been initialized; but such values are meaningless, so
ignore them. This applies to the variables list, data tips, and so forth. Forgetting
this is a common beginner mistake.
Testing
A test is code that isn’t part of your app target; its purpose is to
exercise your app and make sure that it works as expected. Tests can
be broadly of two kinds:
Unit tests
A unit test exercises your app internally, from the point of view
of its code. A unit test might call some method in your code,
handing it various parameters and looking to see if the expected
result is returned each time, not just under normal conditions but
also when incorrect or extreme inputs are supplied.
Interface (UI) tests
An interface test exercises your app externally, from the point of
view of a user. Such a test guides your app through use case
scenarios by effectively tapping buttons with a ghost finger,
watching to make sure that the interface behaves as expected.

--- Page 787 ---
(You may sometimes hear a third type of test distinguished, an
integration test. In Xcode, an integration test is a higher-level form of
unit test.)
Tests — especially unit tests — should ideally be written and run
constantly as you develop your app. It can even be useful to write
unit tests before writing the real code, as a way of developing a
working algorithm. Having initially ascertained that your code passes
your tests, you continue to run those tests to detect whether a bug has
been introduced during the course of development (when that
happens, it’s called a regression).
Tests are bundled in a separate target (see Chapter 6). The app
templates give you an opportunity to add test targets at the time you
create your project. Alternatively, you can easily create a new test
target at any time: make a new target and specify iOS → Test → Unit
Testing Bundle or UI Testing Bundle.
A test class is a subclass of XCTestCase, which is itself a subclass of
XCTest. A test method is an instance method of a test class, returning
no value and taking no parameters, whose name starts with test. A
test method does not run — indeed, it is not even compiled — until
you explicitly ask it to do so. The test target has a dependency upon
the main target that it tests (usually, your app target); this means that
when a test class is to be compiled and built, the main target will be
compiled and built automatically first. But building the main target
(with Product → Build, Command-B, or Product → Run, Command-
R) does not build the test target! To build a test target so as to learn
whether its code compiles successfully, but without running a test

--- Page 788 ---
method, choose Product → Build For → Testing (Command-Shift-
U).
Each test method that runs may succeed or fail; more precisely, it
succeeds if it doesn’t fail. A test method can fail in two ways:
Assertions
A test method may call one or more assertions. These are global
functions whose names begin with XCTAssert; for a list, see the
XCTest class documentation. If any assertion fails, the test
method fails.
By default, a test method continues running after an assertion
fails. That might not be what you want; arguably, failure puts the
test method in a bad state. To prevent it, set the continueAfterF
ailure property of your XCTestCase to false beforehand.
Throws
A test method can be declared with throws. In that case, throwing
an error in the body of the method counts as the test failing.
Throwing aborts the test method immediately.
Alternatively, rather than succeeding or failing, a test method
declared with throws may be skipped. The idea is that you skip a test
based on conditions discovered at runtime (for instance, perhaps this
test makes sense only on a certain kind of device). To test those
conditions, you can call a global function, either XCTSkipIf or XCTSk
ipUnless; these are throwing functions, so the call is preceded by tr
y, and what they throw is an XCTSkip instance. Or you can test the
conditions yourself, and construct and throw your own XCTSkip

--- Page 789 ---
instance. When an XCTSkip instance is thrown, the test method is
aborted and neither succeeds nor fails.
A test class may contain utility methods that are called by the test
methods; their names do not begin with test. New in Xcode 12, a
utility method can behave like a test method — that is, it can fail
through an assertion or by throwing — and the call stack is traced to
point the finger at the right spot.
To accompany your test methods, you can override any of these
special methods inherited from XCTestCase:
setUp class method
Called once before all test methods in the class.
setUp instance method
Called before each test method. Starting in Swift 5.2, there’s a
throwing alternative: setUpWithError. If you implement both se
tUp and setUpWithError, the error method is executed first.
tearDown instance method
Called after each test method. Starting in Swift 5.2, there’s a
throwing alternative: tearDownWithError. If you implement
both tearDown and tearDownWithError, the error method is
executed last.
tearDown class method
Called once after all test methods in the class.

--- Page 790 ---
TIP
Each test method runs in its own separate XCTestCase instance. So if your
XCTestCase has instance properties, there is no need to use setUp or tearDown
just to reinitialize them; they are automatically initialized before each test
method is called.
As an alternative to the tearDown instance method, you can use a
teardown block. To do so, call self.addTeardownBlock(_:) with a
function (typically an anonymous function) to be called at teardown
time; self here is the XCTestCase instance. When the teardown
block is called depends on where it is added; if you call addTeardown
Block within a test method, the block is called only on exit from that
method, but if you call it in the setUp instance method, the block is
called after every test method, because the block was added freshly
before every test method.
Running a test also runs the app. The test target’s product is a bundle;
a unit test bundle is loaded into the app as it launches, whereas an
interface test bundle is loaded into a special test runner app generated
for you by Xcode. Resources, such as test data, can be included in the
bundle. You might use setUp to load such resources; you can get a
reference to the bundle by way of the test class, by saying Bundle(fo
r:Self.self).
Unit Tests
Unit tests need to see into the target to be tested, so the test target
must import the target to be tested, as a module. To overcome privacy

--- Page 791 ---
restrictions, the import statement should be preceded by the @testab
le attribute; this attribute temporarily changes internal (explicit or
implicit) to public throughout the imported module. A private or f
ileprivate method is not directly testable, but you can work around
that by providing an internal trampoline method that exists only
during testing thanks to conditional compilation (as I described
earlier).
As an example of writing and running a unit test method, we can use
our Empty Window project. Let’s give the ViewController class a
(nonsensical) instance method dogMyCats:
func dogMyCats(_ s:String) -> String { 
    return "" 
}
The method dogMyCats is supposed to receive any string and return
the string "dogs". At the moment, though, it doesn’t; it returns an
empty string instead. That’s a bug. Now we’ll write a test method to
ferret out this bug.
First, we’ll need a unit test target:
1. In the Empty Window project, choose File → New → Target
and specify iOS → Test → Unit Testing Bundle.
2. Call the product EmptyWindowTests; observe that the target to
be tested is the app target.
3. Click Finish.

--- Page 792 ---
In the Project navigator, a new group has been created,
EmptyWindowTests, containing a single test file,
EmptyWindowTests.swift. It contains a test class EmptyWindowTests,
including stubs for two test methods, testExample and testPerform
anceExample. Comment out those two methods. We’re going to
replace them with a test method that calls dogMyCats and makes an
assertion about the result:
1. At the top of EmptyWindowTests.swift, where we are importing
XCTest, we must also import the target to be tested, which is
the app target:
@testable import Empty_Window
2. Prepare an instance property in the declaration of the
EmptyWindowTests class to store our ViewController instance:
var viewController = ViewController()
3. Write the test method. Its name must start with test! Let’s call
it testDogMyCats. It has access to the ViewController instance
as self.viewController:
func testDogMyCats() { 
    let input = "cats" 
    let output = "dogs" 
    XCTAssertEqual(output, 
        self.viewController.dogMyCats(input), 
        "Failed to produce \(output) from \(inpu

--- Page 793 ---
t)") 
}
We are now ready to run our test. There are many ways to do this.
Switch to the Test navigator, and you’ll see that it lists our test target,
our test class, and our test method. You can run a test method, or the
whole class suite, using the contextual menu or with Run buttons that
appear when you hover the mouse over a listing. In addition, in
EmptyWindowTests.swift itself, there are diamond-shaped indicators
in the gutter to the left of the class declaration and the test method
name; when you hover the mouse over one of them, it changes to a
Run button. You can click that button to run, respectively, all tests in
this class or an individual test. Or, to run all tests in all test classes,
you can choose Product → Test.
TIP
After running a test, to run just that test again, choose Product → Perform
Action → Run [Test] Again. To run multiple individual tests, Command-click in
the Test navigator to select just those tests; then choose Product → Perform
Action → Run [n] Test Methods (or use the contextual menu).
So now let’s run testDogMyCats. The app target is compiled and
built; the test target is compiled and built. (If any of those steps fails,
we can’t test, and we’ll be back on familiar ground with a compile
error or a build error.) The app launches in the Simulator, and the test
runs.

--- Page 794 ---
The test fails! (Well, we knew that was going to happen, didn’t we?)
The error is described in a banner next to the assertion that failed in
our code; moreover, red X marks appear everywhere — at the top of
the project window, in the Test navigator next to testDogMyCats, and
in EmptyWindowTests.swift next to the first line of testDogMyCats.
The best place to survey what went wrong is the Report navigator.
Typically, what you’ll want to look at is the summary report; this is
what you see in the editor when you select the line that says Test in
the Report navigator (Figure 9-11).
Figure 9-11. The Report navigator reports a test failure
The failure is automatically tied to the place in your code where it
took place. Hover the mouse over the failure line in the report; a
button with an arrow appears at the right. Click it to jump to your
code. Alternatively, a button with two linked rings also appears at the
right (new in Xcode 12); click it to open your code in an assistant
pane, so that you can view the report and the code simultaneously.
Select any failure in the report pane to see the corresponding code in
the code pane.
Occasionally you might need to view further details. To do so, choose
Test → Log from the jump bar at the top of the editor (Figure 9-12);
by expanding transcripts, you can see the full console output from the
test run, including any caveman debugging messages that you may

--- Page 795 ---
have sent from your test code (to show them, click the little
horizontal lines icon at the far right).
Figure 9-12. The Report navigator details a test failure
Now let’s fix our code. In ViewController.swift, modify dogMyCats to
return "dogs" instead of an empty string. Now run the test again. It
passes!
When a test failure occurs, you might like to pause at the point where
the assertion is about to fail. To do so, in the Breakpoint navigator,
click the Plus button at the bottom and choose Test Failure
Breakpoint. This is like an Exception breakpoint, pausing on the
assertion line in your test method just before it reports failure. You
could then switch to the method being tested and debug it, examining
its variables and so forth, to work out the reason for the impending
failure. Don’t forget to continue running afterward, so that the test
can finish and generate the report.
Xcode’s code coverage feature lets you assess how much of your app
target’s code is being exercised by your unit tests. To switch it on,

--- Page 796 ---
edit the Test action in your scheme and check Code Coverage in the
Options pane. Run your tests. Afterward, the Report navigator has a
Coverage section displaying statistics (Figure 9-13); you can also
choose Editor → Code Coverage (or use the Editor Options pop-up
menu at the top right of the editor pane) to reveal a gutter at the right
of your code calling attention to stretches of code that didn’t run
during the tests.
Figure 9-13. The Report navigator displays code coverage statistics
Here are two further features of unit tests worth knowing about:
Asynchronous testing
Asynchronous testing allows a test method to wait for a time-
consuming operation to finish. Asynchronous code must use
asynchronous testing if you want to make an assertion there.
Here’s a typical pattern of usage:
let expect = XCTestExpectation() 
doSomethingAsynchronous { ok in 
    XCTAssert(ok, "got wrong asynchronous result") 
    expect.fulfill() 
} 

--- Page 797 ---
let result = XCTWaiter().wait(for: [expect], timeout: 0.5) 
XCTAssert(result == .completed, "did not complete properly")
We begin by forming an expectation — in effect, something to
wait for. The first assert checks the asynchronous result; we then
call fulfill so that the code can proceed after XCTWaiter().wa
it. The second assert checks that the expectation was fulfilled
within the time limit.
Performance testing
Performance testing lets you check that the speed of an operation
has not fallen off by running that operation repeatedly and timing
the result. Call the XCTestCase instance method measure; it takes
a function whose execution time will be recorded. The first time
you run a performance test, you establish a baseline measurement,
and on subsequent runs, it fails if the standard deviation of the
times is too far from the baseline, or if the average time has
grown too much.
Starting in Xcode 11, in addition to measuring elapsed time, your
performance tests can measure things like CPU and memory
usage. Call measure(metrics:) with an array of XCTMetric
objects, such as XCTCPUMetric. A performance test can also
exercise launching your app and report whether it launches as
quickly as it should.
For realistic performance testing you should run a release build
without the debugger attached and with all sanitizers and
diagnostics turned off. You can manage that with a custom
scheme (and possibly a test plan, as I’ll explain a bit later).
Interface Tests
Now let’s experiment with interface testing. I’m going to assume that
you still have (from Chapter 7) a button in the Empty Window

--- Page 798 ---
interface with an action connection to a ViewController method that
summons an alert. We’ll write a test that taps that button and makes
sure that the alert is summoned. Add a UI Testing Bundle to the
project; call it EmptyWindowUITests.
Interface test code is based on accessibility, a feature that allows the
screen interface to be described verbally and to be manipulated
programmatically. It revolves around three classes: XCUIElement,
XCUIApplication (an XCUIElement subclass), and
XCUIElementQuery. In the long run, it’s best to learn about these
classes and write your own UI test code; but to help you get started,
accessibility actions are recordable, meaning that you can generate
code automatically by performing the actual actions that constitute
the test. Let’s try it:
1. In the testExample stub method, create a new empty line and
leave the insertion point within it.
2. Choose Editor → Start Recording UI Test. (Alternatively,
there’s a Record button in the debug bar.) The app launches in
the Simulator.
3. In the Simulator, tap the button in the interface. When the alert
appears, tap OK to dismiss it.
4. Return to Xcode and choose Editor → Stop Recording UI Test.
Also choose Product → Stop to stop running in the Simulator.
The following code, or something similar, has been generated:
let app = XCUIApplication() 
app.staticTexts["Hello"].tap() 
app.alerts["Howdy!"].scrollViews.otherElements.buttons["OK"].tap()

--- Page 799 ---
The app object, obviously, is an XCUIApplication instance.
Properties such as staticTexts and alerts return
XCUIElementQuery objects. Subscripting such an object returns an
XCUIElement, which can then be sent action methods such as tap.
Now run the test by clicking in the diamond in the gutter at the left of
the testExample declaration. The app launches in the Simulator, and
a ghost finger performs the same actions we performed, tapping first
the button in the interface and then, when the alert appears, the OK
button that dismisses it. The test ends and the app stops running in the
simulator. The test passes!
More important, if the interface stops looking and behaving as it does
now, the test will not pass. To see this, in Main.storyboard, select the
button and, under Control in the Attributes inspector, uncheck
Enabled. The button is still there, but it can’t be tapped; we’ve broken
the interface. Run the test. The test fails, and the Report navigator
explains why (Figure 9-14): when we came to the Tap “OK” Button
step, we first had to Find the “OK” Button, and we failed because
there was no alert.
Ingeniously, the report also supplies lots of information about the
view hierarchy, along with a screenshot, so that we can inspect the
state of the interface during the test. Under Find the “OK” Button,
you can double-click Automatic Screenshot to learn what the screen
looked like at that moment: it’s easy to see the disabled interface
button (and no alert).

--- Page 800 ---
Figure 9-14. The Report navigator displays a failed UI test
PERSISTING SCREENSHOTS
Screenshots such as those taken automatically during the UI test I just
described can be useful for other purposes. You might like to retain a
more permanent record of how your interface looks under various
circumstances — as marketing materials, for submission to the App
Store, to help with localization, and so on. In fact, you might
construct some of your UI tests for no other purpose than to take
screenshots!
To this end, you can have your UI test deliberately take a screenshot
and make it persist. To do so, call the XCUIElement (or
XCUIScreen) screenshot method, turn the resulting
XCUIScreenshot object into an XCTAttachment, and call the
XCTestCase add method to retain the actual screenshot. Along the
way, be sure to extend the lifetime of the attachment so that it

--- Page 801 ---
persists even if the test succeeds; you can also give the screenshot a
convenient name:
let screenshot = XCUIApplication().screenshot() 
let attachment = XCTAttachment(screenshot: screenshot) 
attachment.lifetime = .keepAlways 
attachment.name = "OpeningScreen" 
self.add(attachment)
In the Report navigator, our screenshot is displayed under the name
we assigned to it (Figure 9-15).
Figure 9-15. The Report navigator displays a persisting screenshot
INTERFACE TESTING AND ACCESSIBILITY
During interface testing, your app is in effect being viewed from the
outside, as a human being would view it. As I’ve already said, that
depends upon accessibility. Standard interface objects are accessible,
but other interface that you create might not be. Select an interface
element in the nib editor to view its accessibility characteristics in the
Identity inspector. Run the app in the Simulator and choose Xcode →
Open Developer Tool → Accessibility Inspector to explore in real
time the accessibility characteristics of whatever is under the cursor.

--- Page 802 ---
Another useful trick is to put a breakpoint in a UI test method, run the
test, pause, and tell the debugger to po XCUIApplication() to see
the full view hierarchy as accessibility sees it. To see fewer results,
form a query specifying the type of entity you’re interested in, such
as po XCUIApplication().buttons.
Referring to an interface object by its visible title, as in our code app.
staticTexts["Hello"], is poor practice. If the title changes, or if
the app is localized for another language (discussed later in this
chapter), the reference breaks. Instead, we should give our button a
fixed accessibility identifier, either in code or in the Identity inspector
in the nib editor. If the Hello button’s accessibility identifier is Greet
ingButton, we can refer to it as app.buttons["GreetingButton"]
instead.
For more about adding useful accessibility to your interface objects,
see Apple’s Accessibility Programming Guide for iOS in the
documentation archive.
Test Plans
When you’ve built up several suites of tests, you’ll want a way to
configure what tests should be run under what conditions on a given
occasion. Before Xcode 11, such configuration was confined to a
scheme. By editing a scheme’s Test action, you could determine the
complete set of tests that would run when you chose Product → Test.
If you wanted more than one set of tests, you needed multiple
schemes.

--- Page 803 ---
Starting in Xcode 11, this scheme-based architecture has been
superseded by test plans. A test plan is a text file (in JSON format),
but you won’t have to deal with it as text; you edit it in a dedicated
editor, similar to how an Info.plist is treated. To create a test plan,
choose Product → Test Plan → New Test Plan. The test plan should
not be part of any target, and you’ll probably put it at the top level of
your project. Edit the new test plan. Click the Plus button and select
the targets containing the tests you want to use.
In the Tests pane of the test plan, you can specify individual test
classes and test methods to be run. In the Configurations pane, you
can specify the behavior of your tests, including various choices you
would previously have made in the scheme editor and elsewhere:
arguments and environment variables, system language, simulated
location, screenshot policy, diagnostics, whether to use code
coverage, and whether tests should run in random order (which can
help unmask hidden dependencies between tests).
You can make configuration choices on two levels, a set of shared
settings and individual named configurations that inherit the shared
settings and can override them. It’s important to give each named
configuration a meaningful name, because this name is the identifier
that will be displayed in the test report.
Having created one or more test plans, you still can’t use them for
anything until you convert your scheme to use test plans. To do so,
choose Product → Scheme → Convert Scheme to Use Test Plans. (I
presume that some day test plans will be the default and this step will
no longer be needed.) The Test action of your scheme will now point

--- Page 804 ---
to the test plans you’ve added to it. These should include every test
plan you might ever want to use with this scheme.
Your scheme may now have multiple test plans, but only one test plan
is current at any given moment. When you choose Product → Test, it
is the current test plan that runs. Here’s how the current test plan is
determined:
In the Test navigator
At the top, the Test navigator has a pop-up menu letting you pick
a test plan from among those attached to the current scheme.
Whatever test plan is currently displayed here is the current test
plan. If the current test plan doesn’t include a test, that test is
dimmed and you can’t run it from the Test navigator (though of
course you can select it and run it from the test source).
In the Product menu
The Product → Test Plan hierarchical menu lists the test plans
attached to the current scheme. Whatever test plan is checked
here is the current test plan.
WARNING
If the current test plan has more than one configuration, then whenever you run
a test method, it runs by default under all configurations successively. That can
come as a surprise. If it isn’t what you want, Control-click to summon the
contextual menu; it lets you specify a configuration for this run.
Massaging the Report

--- Page 805 ---
Nothing is more important after running your tests than
understanding what happened. Your key source of information is the
report. XCTest includes powerful features that give you a lot of
control over what goes into the report.
One simple but effective trick is to group the report output into
meaningful activities. To do so, in your test method call XCTContex
t.runActivity(named:). In addition to the name, which should be
some explanatory string, it takes a function; that function is where
you’ll do your testing and call your assertions. The outcome is that, in
the test report summary, the activity name appears as a line in the
report, and the test results are grouped hierarchically under that line
(Figure 9-16).
Figure 9-16. A test report with an activity
Another useful device is attachments. We’ve already seen that you
can attach a screen shot to your report. But an attachment can be any
kind of data. XCTAttachment has initializers for attaching a string, an
image, the contents of a file or a directory, a Data object, and more.
As we’ve seen, you can call self.add (where self is the XCTest) to
get your attachment into the test report. A call to XCTContext.runAc
tivity is also a great place to add an attachment: the function

--- Page 806 ---
parameter hands you an XCTActivity object, and you call add with
your attachment.
It’s possible that a test will hang — perhaps there’s a threading
deadlock — or just take too long. You don’t want to come back from
running your tests overnight and discover that they’re still incomplete
because of a hang. New in Xcode 12, an XCTestCase or a test plan
can declare an execution time allowance. If a test takes longer than
that, it fails, and a spindump file is attached to the test report.
Finally, new in Xcode 12, the entire report mechanism relies upon an
XCTIssue object that is passed into the XCTestCase record method
to contribute to the report. You can intervene in this mechanism!
Instead of throwing or calling a built-in assert, you can create your
own XCTIssue, populate it, and record it, like this:
let loc = XCTSourceCodeLocation(filePath: #file, lineNumber: #line) 
var issue = XCTIssue(type: .assertionFailure, compactDescription: "oh da
rn") 
issue.add(XCTAttachment(string:"yipes")) 
issue.sourceCodeContext = XCTSourceCodeContext(location: loc) 
self.record(issue)
At an even deeper level, you can override record and modify the
incoming XCTIssue before calling super — or don’t call super and
thus suppress the failure entirely.
Clean
From time to time, during repeated testing and debugging, and before
making a different sort of build (switching from Debug to Release, or

--- Page 807 ---
running on a device instead of the Simulator), it’s a good idea to
clean your target. This means that existing builds will be removed
and caches will be cleared, so that all code will be considered to be in
need of compilation and you can build your app from scratch.
Cleaning removes the cruft, quite literally. Suppose you have been
including a certain resource in your app, and you decide it is no
longer needed. You can remove it from the Copy Bundle Resources
build phase (or from your project as a whole), but that doesn’t
necessarily remove it from your built app. This sort of leftover
resource can cause all kinds of mysterious trouble. The wrong version
of a nib may seem to appear in your interface. Code that you’ve
edited may seem to behave as it did before the edit. Cleaning removes
the built app and all the intermediate build products that Xcode
caches in order to construct it, and very often solves the problem.
You can choose Product → Clean Build Folder, which removes the
entire build folder for this project. For an even more extensive
cleaning, quit Xcode, open your user
~/Library/Developer/Xcode/DerivedData folder, and move all its
contents to the trash. This is a complete clean for every project
you’ve opened recently — plus the module cache. Removing the
module cache can reset Swift itself, causing occasional mysterious
compilation, code completion, or syntax coloring issues to go away.
In addition to cleaning your project, you should also remove your app
from the Simulator. This is for the same reason as cleaning the
project: when a new build of the app is copied to the Simulator,
existing resources inside the old build may not be removed (in order

--- Page 808 ---
to save time), and this may cause the app to behave oddly. To clean
out the current simulator while running the Simulator, choose
Hardware → Erase All Content and Settings. To clean out all
simulators, quit the Simulator and then say, in the Terminal:
% xcrun simctl erase all
Running on a Device
Eventually, you’ll want to progress from running and testing and
debugging in the Simulator to running and testing and debugging on a
real device. The Simulator is nice, but it’s only a simulation; there are
many differences between the Simulator and a real device. The
Simulator is really your computer, which is fast and has lots of
memory, so problems with memory management and speed won’t be
exposed until you run on a device. User interaction with the
Simulator is limited to what can be done with a mouse: you can click,
you can drag, you can hold Option to simulate use of two fingers, but
more elaborate gestures can be performed only on an actual device.
And many iOS facilities, such as the accelerometer and access to the
music library, are not present on the Simulator at all, so that testing an
app that uses them is possible only on a device.
Running your app on a device requires a Developer Program
membership, which in turn requires an annual fee. You may balk
initially, but sooner or later you’re going to get over it and accept that
this fee is worth paying. (The temporary ability to run your app on a
device without a paid Developer Program membership is very limited
and I’m not going to discuss it.)

--- Page 809 ---
Obtaining a Developer Program Membership
To obtain a Developer Program membership, go to the Apple
Developer Program web page (https://developer.apple.com/programs)
and initiate the enrollment process. When you’re starting out, the
Individual program is sufficient. The Organization program costs no
more, but adds the ability to privilege additional team members in
various roles; you do not need the Organization program merely to
distribute your built app to other users for testing.
Your Developer Program membership involves two things:
An Apple ID
The user ID that identifies you at Apple’s site (along with the
corresponding password). You’ll use your Developer Program
Apple ID for all kinds of things. In addition to letting you prepare
an app to run on a device, this same Apple ID lets you post on
Apple’s development forums, download Xcode beta versions, and
so forth.
A team name
You, under a single Apple ID, can belong to more than one team.
On each team, you will have one or more roles dictating your
privileges. If you are the head (or sole member) of the team, you
are the team agent, meaning that you can do everything: you can
develop apps, run them on your device, submit apps to the App
Store, and receive the money for any paid apps that sell copies
there.
Having established your Developer Program Apple ID, you should
enter it into the Accounts preference pane in Xcode. Click the Plus
button at the bottom left and select Apple ID as the type of account to

--- Page 810 ---
add. Provide the Apple ID and password. From now on, Xcode will
identify you through the team name(s) associated with this Apple ID;
you shouldn’t need to tell Xcode this password again.
Signing an App
Running an app on a device is a remarkably complicated business.
You will need to sign the app as you build it. An app that is not
properly signed for a device will not run on that device (assuming
you haven’t jailbroken the device). Signing an app requires two
things:
An identity
An identity represents Apple’s permission for a given team to
develop, on this computer, apps that can run on a device. It
consists of two parts:
A private key
The private key is stored in the keychain on the computer. It
identifies a computer where this team can potentially develop
device-targeted apps.
A certificate
A certificate is a virtual permission slip from Apple. It
contains the public key matching the private key (because you
told Apple the public key when you asked for the certificate).
With a copy of this certificate, any machine holding the
private key can actually be used to develop device-targeted
apps under the name of this team.
A provisioning profile

--- Page 811 ---
A provisioning profile is a virtual permission slip from Apple,
uniting four things:
An identity.
An app, identified by its bundle identifier.
A list of eligible devices, identified by their unique device
identifiers (UDIDs).
A list of entitlements. An entitlement is a special privilege that
not every app needs, such as the ability to talk to iCloud. You
won’t concern yourself with entitlements unless you write an
app that needs one.
A provisioning profile is therefore sufficient for signing an app as
you build it. It says that on this computer it is permitted to build
this app such that it will run on these devices.
There are two types of identity, and hence two types of certificate and
provisioning profile: development and distribution (a distribution
certificate is also called a production certificate). We are concerned
here with the development identity, certificate, and profile; I’ll talk
about the distribution side later.
The only thing that belongs entirely to you is the private key in your
computer’s keychain. Apple is the ultimate keeper of all other
information: your certificates, your provisioning profiles, what apps
and what devices you’ve registered. Your communication with Apple,
when you need to verify or obtain a copy of this information, will
take place through one of two means:
The developer member center

--- Page 812 ---
A set of web pages at https://developer.apple.com/account.
Having logged in with your Apple ID, you can click Certificates,
Identifiers & Profiles (or go directly to
https://developer.apple.com/account/resources) to access all
features and information to which you are entitled by your
membership type and role. (This is the area of Apple’s site
formerly referred to as the Portal.)
Xcode
Just about everything you would need to do at the developer
member center can be done through Xcode instead. When all goes
well, using Xcode is a lot simpler! If there’s a problem, you can
head for the developer member center to iron it out.
Automatic Signing
Apple provides two distinct ways of obtaining and managing
certificates and profiles in connection with a project — automatic
signing, and manual signing. For new projects, automatic signing is
the default. This is indicated by the fact that the “Automatically
manage signing” checkbox is checked in the Signing & Capabilities
pane when you edit your project’s app target (Figure 9-20).
To see just how automatic Xcode’s signing management can be, let’s
start at a stage where as yet you have neither a development
certificate in your computer’s keychain nor a development profile for
any app. But you do have a Developer Program Apple ID, and you’ve
entered it into Xcode’s Accounts preference pane. Then, when you
create a new project (File → New → Project), you’ll see on the
second screen (“Choose options for your new project”) a pop-up

--- Page 813 ---
menu listing all the teams with which your Apple ID is associated.
Specify the desired team here.
When you then create the project on disk and the project window
opens, everything happens automatically. Your computer’s keychain
creates a private key for a development certificate. The public key is
sent to Apple. The actual development certificate is created at the
developer member center, and is downloaded and installed into your
computer’s keychain. With no conscious effort, you’ve obtained a
development identity!
If you’ve never run on any device before, and if you haven’t
manually registered any devices at the developer member center, that
might be as far as Xcode can go for now. If so, you’ll see some
warnings in the Signing & Capabilities pane, similar to Figure 9-17.
Figure 9-17. Xcode knows of no devices
Now connect a device via USB to your computer and select it as the
destination, either under Product → Destination or in the Scheme
pop-up menu in the project window toolbar. Try to build. This causes
a dialog to appear, offering to register the device (Figure 9-18). Click
Register Device!

--- Page 814 ---
Figure 9-18. Xcode offers to register a device
The problem is resolved; the error vanishes. You can switch to the
Report navigator to learn what just happened (Figure 9-19).
Figure 9-19. Xcode has registered a device for us
As the Report navigator tells us, the device has been registered —
and a development provisioning profile has been created and
downloaded (and has been stored in your
~/Library/MobileDevice/Provisioning Profiles folder). This is a
universal iOS Team Provisioning Profile — also known as a wildcard
or XC wildcard profile — and that is all you need in order to run any

--- Page 815 ---
basic app on any device. Figure 9-20 shows the resulting display in
the Signing & Capabilities pane.
Figure 9-20. Xcode manages signing credentials automatically
You are now almost ready to run this project on this device. There
may, however, be one further step: you might have to disconnect the
device from USB and connect it again. This is so that Xcode can
recognize the device afresh and prepare for debugging on it. This
process is rather time-consuming; a progress indication is shown at
the top of the project window, and in the Devices and Simulators
window.
The good news is that once you already have a development
certificate, and once Xcode has already generated and downloaded a
universal iOS Team Provisioning Profile, and once your device is
already registered with Apple and prepared by Xcode for debugging,
none of that will be necessary ever again. When you create a new
project, you supply your team name. Xcode now knows everything it
needs to know! The development certificate is valid for this
computer, the universal iOS Team Provisioning Profile is universal,
and the device is registered with Apple and prepared for debugging.

--- Page 816 ---
Therefore, you should from now on be able to create a project and
run it on this device immediately.
You can confirm your possession of a universal development
provisioning profile by clicking the “i” button at the right of the
Provisioning Profile (Figure 9-20): a popover displays information
about the provisioning profile, as shown in Figure 9-21.
Figure 9-21. A universal development profile
The asterisk (*) in that popover tells you that this is a universal
profile, not restricted to one particular app ID. The universal
development profile allows you to run any app on the targeted device
for testing purposes, provided that the app doesn’t require special
entitlements (such as using iCloud). If you turn on any entitlements
for an app target (which you would do by adding a capability from
the Signing & Capabilities pane when you edit the app target), and if
you’re using automatic signing, Xcode will communicate with the
developer member center to attach those entitlements to your
registered app; then it will create a new provisioning profile that
includes those entitlements, download it, and use it for this project.
Manual Signing

--- Page 817 ---
If you don’t want a project’s signing to be managed automatically by
Xcode, simply uncheck the “Automatically manage signing”
checkbox. This causes Xcode to take its hands off completely. Xcode
won’t automatically generate or choose a development certificate or a
provisioning profile; you will have to do it all yourself.
If you need to obtain a development certificate manually, there are
two possible approaches:
The Accounts preference pane
In Xcode’s Accounts preference pane, select your team name and
click Manage Certificates to summon the “Signing certificates”
dialog. Click the Plus button at the lower left, and choose Apple
Development. Xcode will communicate with the developer
member center and a development certificate will be created and
installed on your computer.
Keychain Access and the developer member center
Go to Certificates at the developer member center, click the Plus
button, ask for an Apple Development certificate, click Continue,
and follow the instructions that the page links to:
1. You begin by generating the private key in your computer’s
keychain. Launch the Keychain Access application and
choose Keychain Access → Certificate Assistant →
Request a Certificate From a Certificate Authority. Click the
“Saved to disk” radio button and save the certificate signing
request file onto your computer.
2. At the developer member center, upload the certificate
signing request file. The actual certificate is generated;
download it, and double-click to install it into the keychain.

--- Page 818 ---
(You can then throw away both the certificate request file
and the downloaded certificate.)
Figure 9-22 shows what a valid development certificate looks like in
Keychain Access.
Figure 9-22. A valid development certificate
Once you have a development certificate, you can use the developer
member center to create a development profile manually, if
necessary:
1. The device must be registered at the developer member center.
Look under Devices to see if it is. If it isn’t, click the Plus
button and enter a name for this device along with its UDID.
You can copy the device’s UDID from its listing in Xcode’s
Devices and Simulators window.
2. The app must be registered at the developer member center.
Look under Identifiers to see if it is. If it isn’t, add it: Click Plus.
Choose App IDs. Choose App. Enter a description for this app
(such as its name). Ignore the App ID Prefix field. Copy the
Bundle Identifier from the Signing & Capabilities pane and
paste it into the bundle identifier field, and register the app.
(If your app uses special entitlements, this step is also where
you’d associate those entitlements manually with the app.)

--- Page 819 ---
3. Under Profiles, click Plus. Ask for an iOS App Development
profile. On the next screen, choose the App ID for this app
(presumably the one you just created in the previous step). On
the next screen, check your development certificate. On the next
screen, select the device(s) you want to run on. On the next
screen, give this profile a name, and generate the profile. You
are now offered a chance to download the profile, but you don’t
have to do that, because Xcode can do it for you.
4. In Xcode, in the Signing & Capabilities pane, in the
Provisioning Profile pop-up menu, choose Download Profile.
The profile you created at the developer member center is listed
here! Select it. The profile is downloaded and development
provisioning is enabled for this project (Figure 9-23).
Figure 9-23. Manual code signing
Running the App
Once you have a development profile applicable to an app and a
device, you can connect the device via USB, choose it as the
destination in the Scheme pop-up menu, and build and run the app.
(If you’re asked for permission to access your keychain, you should
grant it.)

--- Page 820 ---
The app is built, loaded onto your device, and launched. As long as
you launch the app from Xcode, everything is just as when running in
the Simulator. You can run and you can debug. The running app is in
communication with Xcode, so that you can stop at breakpoints, read
messages in the console, profile your app with Instruments, and so
on. The outward difference is that to interact physically with the app,
you use the device, not the Simulator.
You can also configure your device to allow Xcode to build and run
apps on it without a USB connection. To do so, start with the device
connected via USB; locate the device in the Devices and Simulators
window and check “Connect via network.” The device can now be
used as a build and run destination wirelessly, provided it is
connected via WiFi to the local network or to some other network
that your computer can access by its IP address. You can build and
run from Xcode, pausing at breakpoints and receiving console
messages, even though the device is not physically attached to your
computer. This would be useful particularly if the app you’re testing
requires the device to be manipulated in ways that are difficult when
the device is tethered by a USB cable.
Managing Development Certificates and Devices
You’re allowed to have more than one development certificate, so
there should be no problem running your project on a device from
another computer. Just do what you did on the first computer! If
you’re using automatic signing, a new certificate will be generated
for you, and it won’t conflict with the existing certificate for the first
computer.

--- Page 821 ---
When a device is attached to the computer, it appears in Xcode’s
Devices and Simulators window. If this device has never been
prepared for development, you can ask Xcode to prepare it for
development. You can then build and run onto the device. If the
device isn’t registered at the member center, a dialog appears offering
to let you register it; click Register Device, and now the device is
registered. Your automatically generated provisioning profile is
modified to include this device, and you are now able to build and
run on it.
The Devices and Simulators window can be used to communicate in
other ways with a connected device. Using the contextual menu, you
can copy the device’s UDID, and you can view and manage
provisioning profiles on the device. In the main part of the window,
you can see (and delete) apps that have been installed for
development using Xcode, and you can view and download their
sandboxes. You can take screenshots. You can view the device’s
stored logs. You can open the Console application to view the
device’s console output in real time.
Profiling
Xcode provides tools for probing the internal behavior of your app
graphically and numerically, and you should keep an eye on those
tools. The gauges in the Debug navigator allow you to monitor key
indicators, such as CPU and memory usage, any time you run your
app. Memory debugging gives you a graphical view of your app’s
objects and their ownership chains, and can even reveal memory
leaks. And Instruments, a sophisticated and powerful utility

--- Page 822 ---
application, collects profiling data that can help track down problems
and provide the numeric information you need to improve your app’s
performance and responsiveness.
Gauges
The gauges in the Debug navigator are operating whenever you build
and run your app. Click a gauge to see further detail displayed in the
editor. The gauges do not provide highly detailed information, but
they are extremely lightweight and always active, so they are an easy
way to get a general sense of your running app’s behavior at any
time. If there’s a problem, such as a prolonged period of unexpectedly
high CPU usage or a relentless unchecked increase in memory usage,
you can spot it in the gauges and then use Instruments to help track it
down.
There are four basic gauges: CPU, Memory, Disk, and Network.
Depending on the circumstances, you may see additional gauges. An
Energy Impact gauge appears when running on a device, and for
certain devices, a GPU gauge may appear as well.
In Figure 9-24, I’ve been heavily exercising my app for a few
moments, repeating the most calculation- and memory-intensive
actions I expect the user to perform. These actions do cause some
spikes in energy usage, but that’s to be expected; this is a user-
initiated action, and the user won’t perform it very often. Meanwhile,
my app’s memory usage remains level. So I don’t suspect any issues.

--- Page 823 ---
Figure 9-24. The Debug gauges
WARNING
Note that Figure 9-24 is the result of running on a device. Running in the
Simulator might give completely different — and misleading — results.
Memory Debugging
Memory debugging lets you pause your app and view a graphical
display of your object hierarchy at that moment. This is valuable not
only for detecting problems but also for understanding your app’s
object structure.
To use memory debugging, run the app and click the Debug Memory
Graph button in the debug bar (Figure 9-25). The app pauses, and you
are shown a drawing of your app’s objects, linked by their chains of
ownership. The Debug navigator lists your objects hierarchically;

--- Page 824 ---
click an object to see a different part of the graph. Double-click an
object in the graph to refocus the graph on that object.
In my app, the root view controller is a ViewController whose view’s
subviews include a MyBoard view whose tilesInOrder property is
an array of Tile views. Figure 9-25 displays that situation.
Figure 9-25. A memory graph
At the cost of some additional overhead, you can enable the malloc
stack before running your app: edit the scheme’s Run action and
under Diagnostics check Malloc Stack Logging with the pop-up
menu set to All Allocation and Free History. When you run the app,
selecting an object in the memory graph provides a backtrace in the
Memory inspector that tells you how each object came into being. If
the backtrace is collapsed, hover the mouse over the word Backtrace
and click the Expand button that appears. Hover over a line of the
backtrace and click the right-arrow button to jump to that line of your
code.

--- Page 825 ---
Memory debugging also detects memory leaks. Such leaks will cause
an error icon to appear, and are listed in the Runtime pane of the Issue
navigator. Suppose we run the example from Chapter 5 where I have
a Dog class instance and a Cat class instance with strong references
to one another and no other references to either instance, so they are
both leaking. The leaking Cat and Dog are listed in the Issue
navigator, and clicking one them displays a graph of the problem: the
Cat and the Dog are retaining one another (Figure 9-26).
Figure 9-26. The memory graph displays a leak
Instruments
To get started with Instruments, first set the desired destination in the
Scheme pop-up menu in the project window toolbar. The destination
should be a device if possible; Instruments on the Simulator does not
reflect the reality you’re trying to measure. Now choose Product →
Profile. Your app builds using the Profile action for your scheme; by
default, this uses the Release build configuration, which is what you
want. Instruments launches; if your scheme’s Instrument pop-up
menu for the Profile action is set to Ask on Launch (the default),
Instruments presents a dialog where you choose a template.

--- Page 826 ---
Alternatively, click Profile In Instruments in a Debug navigator gauge
editor; this is convenient when the gauges have suggested a possible
problem, and you want to reproduce that problem under the more
detailed monitoring of Instruments. Instruments launches, selecting
the appropriate template for you. A dialog offers two options: Restart
stops your app and relaunches it with Instruments, whereas Profile
keeps your app running and hooks Instruments into it.
Once the Instruments main window appears, if you chose Product →
Profile, you’ll probably have to click the Record button, or choose
File → Record Trace, to get your app running. Now you should
interact with your app like a user; Instruments will record its
statistics.
Figure 9-27 shows me doing much the same thing in Instruments that
I did with the Debug navigator gauges in Figure 9-24. I’ve set the
destination to my device. I choose Product → Profile; when
Instruments launches, I choose the Allocations template. With my
app running under Instruments, I exercise it for a while and then
pause Instruments, which meanwhile has charted my memory usage.
Examining the chart, I find that there are spikes up to about 21MB,
but the app always settles back down to a much lower level (around
6MB). Those are very gentle and steady memory usage figures, so
I’m happy.

--- Page 827 ---
Figure 9-27. Instruments graphs memory usage over time
The Leaks template can help you detect memory leaks (similar to the
memory graph leak detection I discussed earlier). In Figure 9-28, I’ve
again run the retain cycle code from Chapter 5, profiling the app
using the Leaks template. Instruments has detected the leak, and has
diagrammed the issue.
Figure 9-28. Instruments describes a retain cycle
In the next example, I’m curious as to whether I can shorten the time
it takes my app to load a photo image. I’ve set the destination to a
device, because that’s where speed matters and needs to be measured.
I choose Product → Profile. Instruments launches, and I choose the
Time Profiler template. When the app launches under Instruments on

--- Page 828 ---
the device, I load new images repeatedly to exercise this part of my
code for about ten seconds.
In Figure 9-29, I’ve paused Instruments, and am looking at what it’s
telling me. Opening the disclosure indicators in the lower portion of
the window, I can drill down to my own code, indicated by the user
icon.
Figure 9-29. Drilling down into the time profile
By double-clicking the listing of that line, I can see my own code,
time-profiled (Figure 9-30). The profiler is drawing my attention to

--- Page 829 ---
the call to CGImageSourceCreateThumbnailAtIndex; this is where
we’re spending most of our CPU time. That call is in the ImageIO
framework; it isn’t my code, so I can’t make it run any faster. It may
be, however, that I could load the image another way; at the expense
of some temporary memory usage, perhaps I could load the image at
full size and scale it down by redrawing it myself. If I’m concerned
about speed here, I could spend a little time experimenting. The point
is that now I know what the experiment should be. This is just the
sort of focused, fact-based numerical analysis at which Instruments
excels.
Figure 9-30. My code, time-profiled
You can inject custom messages into your Instruments graphs in the
form of signposts. For instance, based on the first Instruments
example, I may suspect that my highest memory spikes are taking
place within my newGame method. To confirm this, I’ll add some
signposts. I import os and configure an OSLog object called mylog
with a .pointsOfInterest category:
let mylog = OSLog(subsystem: "diabelli", category: .pointsOfInterest)
Then I instrument the start and end of my newGame method with os_s
ignpost calls:

--- Page 830 ---
private func newGame(imageSource: Any, song: String) { 
    os_signpost(.begin, log: mylog, name: "newgame") 
    // ... 
    os_signpost(.end, log: mylog, name: "newgame") 
}
To prepare my Instruments template, I start with the Allocations
template; then I choose View → Show Library to bring up the
instrument chooser, and add the Points of Interest instrument to my
template. When I run the app, Instruments displays the "newgame"
signposts — and sure enough, they surround the memory spikes
(Figure 9-31).
Figure 9-31. Signposts in Instruments
Those examples barely scratch the surface. Use of Instruments is an
advanced topic; an entire book could be written about Instruments
alone. The Instruments application comes with online help that’s
definitely worth studying. Many WWDC videos from current and

--- Page 831 ---
prior years are about Instruments; look particularly for sessions with
“Instruments” or “Performance” in their names.
Localization
A device or an individual app can be set by the user to prefer a certain
language as its primary language. You might like your app’s interface
to respond to this situation by appearing in that language. This is
achieved by localizing the app for that language. You will probably
want to implement localization relatively late in the development of
the app, after the app has achieved its final form, in preparation for
distribution.
Localization operates through localization folders with an .lproj
extension in your project folder and in the built app bundle (Figure 6-
6). When your app obtains a resource, if it is running on a system
whose language corresponds to a localization folder, if that
localization folder contains a version of that resource, that’s the
version that is loaded.
Any type of resource can live in these localization folders; you will
be particularly concerned with text that is to appear in your interface.
Such text must be maintained in specially formatted .strings files,
with special names:
To localize your Info.plist file, use InfoPlist.strings.
To localize your Main.storyboard, use Main.strings.
To localize your code strings, use Localizable.strings.

--- Page 832 ---
Fortunately, you don’t have to create or maintain these files
manually! Instead, you work with exported XML files in the standard
.xliff format. Xcode will generate .xliff files automatically, based on
the structure and content of your project; it will also read them and
will turn them automatically into the various localized .strings files.
Creating Localized Content
To experiment with localization, our app needs some localizable
content:
1. Edit the target and enter a value in the Display Name text field
in the General pane. Our Empty Window app already says
“Empty Window” here, but it’s in gray, indicating that this is
merely an automatic display name; enter “Empty Window”
explicitly (and press Tab), to make this an actual display name.
You have now created a “Bundle display name” key (CFBundle
DisplayName) in the Info.plist file. That key will be localized.
2. Edit Main.storyboard and confirm that it contains a button
whose title is “Hello.” That title will be localized. (It will help
the example if you also widen the button to about 100 points.)
3. Edit ViewController.swift. The code here contains some string
literals, such as "Howdy!":
@IBAction func buttonPressed(_ sender: Any) { 
    let alert = UIAlertController( 
        title: "Howdy!", message: "You tapped m
e!", 
        preferredStyle: .alert) 
    alert.addAction( 

--- Page 833 ---
        UIAlertAction(title: "OK", style: .cance
l)) 
    self.present(alert, animated: true) 
}
That code won’t be localized, unless we modify it. Your code
needs to call the global NSLocalizedString function; you’ll
usually supply these parameters:
key (first parameter, no label)
The first parameter is the key into a .strings file.
value
The default string if there’s no .strings file for the current
language.
comment
An explanatory comment.
So modify our buttonPressed method to look like this:
@IBAction func buttonPressed(_ sender: Any) { 
    let alert = UIAlertController( 
        title: NSLocalizedString( 
            "Greeting", value:"Howdy!", commen
t:"Say hello"), 
        message: NSLocalizedString( 
            "Tapped", value:"You tapped me!", 
            comment:"User tapped button"), 
        preferredStyle: .alert) 
    alert.addAction(UIAlertAction( 
        title: NSLocalizedString( 

--- Page 834 ---
            "Accept", value:"OK", comment:"Dismis
s"), 
        style: .cancel)) 
    self.present(alert, animated: true) 
}
EXPORTING
Now we’re going to give our project an actual localization, and we’ll
export an editable .xliff file expressing the details of that localization.
For my localization language, I’ll choose French:
1. Edit the project. In the Info pane, under Localizations, click the
Plus button. In the pop-up menu that appears, choose French. In
the dialog, click Finish.
2. Still editing the project, choose Editor → Export For
Localization. In the dialog that appears, check French. You’re
about to create a folder, so call it something like Empty
Window Localization and save it to the desktop.
The result is an .xcloc bundle called fr.xcloc (for French). It’s an
ordinary folder containing subfolders, along with a contents.json file
describing the output (Figure 9-32).

--- Page 835 ---
Figure 9-32. An exported xcloc bundle
The heart of this output is an XML file called fr.xliff (inside the
Localized Contents subfolder). Examining this file, you’ll observe
that our app’s localizable strings have all been discovered and have
been turned into <file> elements. Looking at the original attribute,
you can see what files these represent. The InfoPlist.strings file
localizes our Info.plist; the Main.storyboard file localizes our main
storyboard; and the Localizable.strings file localizes our code.
EDITING
Now let’s pretend that you are the French translator, tasked with
creating the French localization of this app. Your job is to modify the
fr.xliff file by supplying a <target> tag for every <source> tag that
is to be translated into French. Your edited file might contain, at the
appropriate places, translations like this (note that the id and Object
ID attributes will be different in your actual fr.xliff file):

--- Page 836 ---
<trans-unit id="RoQ-mP-swT.normalTitle"> 
  <source>Hello</source> 
  <target>Bonjour</target> 
  <note>Class="UIButton"; normalTitle="Hello"; ObjectID="RoQ-mP-swT";</n
ote> 
</trans-unit> 
 
<trans-unit id="CFBundleDisplayName"> 
  <source>Empty Window</source> 
  <target>Fenêtre Vide</target> 
</trans-unit> 
<trans-unit id="CFBundleName"> 
  <source>Empty Window</source> 
  <target>Empty Window</target> 
</trans-unit> 
 
<trans-unit id="Accept"> 
  <source>OK</source> 
  <target>OK</target> 
  <note>Dismiss</note> 
</trans-unit> 
<trans-unit id="Greeting"> 
  <source>Howdy!</source> 
  <target>Bonjour!</target> 
  <note>Say hello</note> 
</trans-unit> 
<trans-unit id="Tapped"> 
  <source>You tapped me!</source> 
  <target>Vous m'avez tapé!</target> 
  <note>User tapped button</note> 
</trans-unit>
Other types of localizable resources may have been exported
automatically as well. For example, images in the asset catalog are
localizable, and these are exported too (in Localized Contents). If an
asset catalog was exported for localization, the translator can edit or
replace the localized version of an image directly.

--- Page 837 ---
In addition, the original versions of our localizable material were
exported (in Source Contents); and your export can include
screenshots taken during interface testing (described earlier in this
chapter). These can give the translator valuable context as to the
usage of the terms to be translated.
IMPORTING
The French translator, having edited the fr.xliff file and any exported
localizable asset catalog images, returns the fr.xcloc folder to us. We
proceed to incorporate it back into our project:
1. Edit the project.
2. Choose Editor → Import Localizations; in the dialog, locate and
open the fr.xcloc folder.
Xcode parses the .xcloc folder, locates the fr.xliff file inside it, opens
and reads it, and creates the corresponding files in the project. In
particular, the project folder now contains a fr.lproj folder containing
.strings files in the correct format, namely key–value pairs like this:
/* Optional comments are C-style comments */ 
"key" = "value";
The .strings files in our fr.lproj folder include the following:
An InfoPlist.strings file, localized for French, corresponding to
our Info.plist file. It reads like this:
/* Bundle display name */ 
"CFBundleDisplayName" = "Fenêtre Vide"; 

--- Page 838 ---
 
/* Bundle name */ 
"CFBundleName" = "Empty Window";
A Main.strings file, localized for French, corresponding to
Main.storyboard. It will be similar to this:
/* Class="UIButton"; normalTitle="Hello"; ObjectID
="RoQ-mP-swT"; */ 
"RoQ-mP-swT.normalTitle" = "Bonjour";
A Localizable.strings file, localized for French, localizing the
strings in our code. It looks like this:
/* Dismiss */ 
"Accept" = "OK"; 
 
/* Say hello */ 
"Greeting" = "Bonjour!"; 
 
/* User tapped button */ 
"Tapped" = "Vous m'avez tapé!";
If the translator has edited any exported asset catalog images, they
will be incorporated into the appropriate slots in our asset catalog.
Testing Localization
Build and run the project in the Simulator. The project runs in
English, so the button title is still “Hello,” and the alert that it

--- Page 839 ---
summons when you tap it still contains “Howdy!”, “You tapped me!”,
and “OK.” Stop the project in Xcode.
Now we’re going to transport ourselves magically to France! Edit the
scheme. In the scheme’s Run action, under the Options pane, change
the Application Language to French. Then build and run again.
Presto! The button in the interface has the title Bonjour. When we tap
it, the alert contains “Bonjour!”, “Vous m’avez tapé!”, and “OK.”
That doesn’t prove, however, that our Info.plist localizations are
working. To test that, in the Simulator, use the Settings app to change
the system language to French (under General → Language and
Region). You’ll see that, in the Springboard, our app’s title has
changed to Fenêtre Vide.
In real life, preparing your nib files to deal with localization will take
some additional work. In particular, you’ll want to use autolayout,
configuring your interface so that interface objects containing text
have room to grow and shrink to compensate for the change in the
length of their text in different languages.
To view your interface under different localizations, you can preview
your localized nib files within Xcode, without running the app. Edit a
.storyboard or .xib file and choose Editor → Preview (or choose
Preview from the Editor Options pop-up menu at the top right of the
editor pane). In the preview pane, a pop-up menu at the lower right
lists localizations; choose from the menu to switch between them. A
“double-length pseudolanguage” stress-tests your interface with
really long localized replacement text.

--- Page 840 ---
Test plans (discussed earlier in this chapter) let you create multiple
configurations, each of which can have a different system language
and region. When you run a test, it runs under all of the current test
plan’s configurations in succession. This provides an automated way
to check that your app behaves correctly under all localizations.
Distribution
Distribution means sharing your built app with users (other than
members of your team) for running on their devices. There are two
primary kinds of distribution:
Ad Hoc distribution
You are providing a copy of your app to a limited set of known
users so that they can try it on specific devices and report bugs,
make suggestions, and so forth.
App Store distribution
You are providing the app to the App Store. This could be for one
of two reasons:
TestFlight testing
You are providing access to the app temporarily to certain
users for testing through TestFlight.
Sale
You are providing the app to the App Store to be listed
publicly, so that anyone can download it and run it, possibly
for a fee.
Making an Archive

--- Page 841 ---
To create a copy of your app for distribution, you need first to build
an archive of your app. An archive is basically a preserved build. It
has three main purposes:
Distribution
An archive will serve as the basis for subsequent distribution of
the app; the distributed app will be exported from the archive.
Reproduction
Every time you build, conditions can vary, so the resulting app
might behave slightly differently. But every distribution from a
particular archive contains an identical binary and will behave the
same way. If a bug report arrives based on an app distributed from
a particular archive, you can distribute that archive to yourself
and run it, knowing that you are testing exactly the same app.
Symbolication
The archive includes a .dSYM file that allows Xcode to accept a
crash log and report the crash’s location in your code. This helps
you to deal with crash reports from users.
Here’s how to build an archive of your app:
1. Set the destination in the Scheme pop-up menu in the project
window toolbar to Any iOS Device. Until you do this, the
Product → Archive menu item will be disabled. You do not
have to have a device connected; you are not building to run on
a particular device, but saving an archive that will run on some
device.
2. If you like, edit the scheme to confirm that the Release build
configuration will be used for the Archive action. This is the
default, but it does no harm to double-check.

--- Page 842 ---
3. Choose Product → Archive. The app is compiled and built. The
archive itself is stored in a date folder within your user
~/Library/Developer/Xcode/Archives folder. Also, it is listed in
Xcode’s Organizer window (Window → Organizer) under the
Empty Window app’s Products → Archives entry; this window
may open spontaneously to show the archive you’ve just
created. You can add a description here; you can also change the
archive’s name (this won’t affect the name of the app).
You’ve just signed your archive with a development profile; that’s
good, because it means you can run the archived build directly on
your device. However, a development profile can’t be used to make
an Ad Hoc or App Store build of your app; therefore, when you
export the archive to form an Ad Hoc or App Store build, Xcode will
embed the appropriate distribution profile instead. So now, in order to
export from your archive, you need a distribution certificate and a
distribution profile.
The Distribution Certificate
A distribution certificate (sometimes called a production certificate)
is essential for distributing your app to other users. There are three
ways to obtain a distribution certificate, parallel to the three ways of
obtaining a development certificate described earlier in this chapter:
Automatic signing
If you’re using automatic signing, and if you have no distribution
certificate, then when you first export the archive to the App
Store (as I’ll describe later in this chapter), Xcode will offer to
create and download a distribution certificate for you,
automatically, along with a distribution profile.

--- Page 843 ---
The Accounts preference pane
You can request a distribution certificate through Xcode’s
Accounts preference pane: select your Apple ID, choose your
team, click Manage Certificates to show the “Signing certificates”
dialog, click the Plus button at the bottom left, and ask for an
Apple Distribution certificate.
Keychain Access and the developer member center
You can obtain a distribution certificate manually using the
Keychain Access application and the developer member center,
exactly as I described earlier for obtaining a development
certificate manually.
Once you’ve obtained a distribution certificate, you’ll see it in your
keychain. It will look just like Figure 9-22, except that it will say
“Distribution” instead of “Development.”
There is an important difference between distribution certificates and
development certificates: There’s a fixed limit on how many
distribution certificates a team can have. (For a while, that limit was
one, but it may have been raised subsequently to three.) This means
that you can run out of distribution certificates — especially if you
are trying to distribute from more than one computer.
Let’s say your distribution certificate is in the keychain of your first
computer. On your second computer, Xcode reports the existence of
the distribution certificate (in the Accounts preference pane, under
Manage Certificates), but tells you that it isn’t in the keychain of this
computer. You’d like to install a copy of your existing distribution
certificate. But you can’t simply go to the developer member center

--- Page 844 ---
and download a copy of the existing distribution certificate, because
the existing distribution certificate is matched to a private key, and
won’t work without it — and that private key is still sitting in the
keychain of the first computer.
The solution is to return to the first computer, and, in the Accounts
preference pane, under Manage Certificates, Control-click that
certificate and choose Export Certificate from the contextual menu.
You’ll be asked to save the resulting file, securing it with a password.
The password is needed because this file, a .p12 file, contains the
private key from your keychain. Now copy the .p12 file to the second
computer. (You could email it to yourself.) On that computer, open
the exported file, using the password. The private key and the
certificate are imported into the keychain of the second computer.
You can then throw away all copies of the .p12 file; it has done its
job.
The Distribution Profile
Obtaining a distribution profile is like obtaining a development
profile. If you’re using automatic signing for this project, Xcode will
probably be able to create an appropriate distribution profile for you
automatically when you export your archive.
You can also obtain a distribution profile manually, at the developer
member center, under Certificates, Identifiers & Profiles. The
procedure is similar to obtaining a development profile manually,
with a few slight differences:

--- Page 845 ---
1. If this is to be an Ad Hoc distribution profile, collect the UDIDs
of all the devices where this build is to run, and make sure
you’ve added each of them at the developer member center
under Devices. (For an App Store distribution profile, omit this
step.)
2. Make sure that the app is registered at the developer member
center under Identifiers, as I described earlier in this chapter.
3. Under Profiles, click the Plus button to ask for a new profile.
Choose an Ad Hoc or App Store profile. On the next screen,
choose your app from the pop-up menu. On the next screen,
choose your distribution certificate. On the next screen, for an
Ad Hoc profile only, specify the devices you want this app to
run on. On the next screen, give the profile a name.
Be careful about the profile’s name, as you might need to be
able to recognize it later from within Xcode! My own practice
is to assign a name containing the term “AdHoc” or “AppStore”
and the name of the app.
4. Click Done. You should subsequently be able to download the
profile from within Xcode (and if not, you can click Download
at the developer member center).
Distribution for Testing
There are two ways to distribute your app for testing: Ad Hoc
distribution and TestFlight distribution. I’ll briefly describe each of
them.
AD HOC DISTRIBUTION
Here are the steps for creating an Ad Hoc distribution file from an
archive:

--- Page 846 ---
1. In the Organizer window, under Archives, select the archive and
click Distribute App at the upper right. A dialog appears. Here,
you are to specify a method; choose Ad Hoc. Click Next.
2. In the next screen, you may be offered various options:
App Thinning
This means that multiple copies of the app can be created,
each containing resources appropriate only to one type of
device, simulating what the App Store will do when the user
downloads the app to a device. There would normally be no
need for this, though it might be interesting to learn the size
of your thinned app.
Rebuild from Bitcode
Bitcode allows the App Store to regenerate your app to
incorporate future optimizations. If you’re going to be using
bitcode when you upload to the App Store, you might like to
use it when you perform your Ad Hoc build. Personally, I
avoid bitcode, so I would uncheck this checkbox.
3. In the next screen, you may be offered a choice between
automatic and manual signing. An automatically generated Ad
Hoc distribution profile will be configured to run on all devices
registered for your team at the developer member center. If you
choose manual signing, you’ll see another screen where you can
specify the certificate and choose an Ad Hoc distribution
profile, either from the member center or (if you’ve downloaded
the distribution profile already) from your computer.
4. The archive is prepared, and a summary window is displayed.
The name of the provisioning profile is shown, so you can tell
that the right thing is happening. Click Export.
5. You are shown a dialog for saving a folder. The file will be
inside that folder, with the suffix .ipa (“iPhone app”),

--- Page 847 ---
accompanied by property list and log files describing the export
process.
6. Locate in the Finder the .ipa file you just saved. Provide this file
to your users with instructions.
How should a user who has received the .ipa file copy it onto a
registered device? Starting with macOS 10.15 Catalina, it’s
ridiculously easy: use the Finder! The user attaches the device to the
computer (clicking the various Trust buttons if necessary), selects the
device in a Finder window sidebar, and just drags the app right onto
the device’s window.
If there’s any difficulty, another reliable way is to download the
Apple Configurator application from the Mac App Store. Attach the
device to the computer and launch Apple Configurator. An image of
the device’s screen appears in the Configurator window. Drag the .ipa
file from the Finder onto that image, and it will be copied onto the
device.
TESTFLIGHT DISTRIBUTION
The number of Ad Hoc testers is limited to 100 devices per year per
developer (not per app). Devices used for development are counted
against this limit. You can work around this limit, and provide your
betas more conveniently to testers, by using TestFlight beta testing
instead.
TestFlight has many advantages over Ad Hoc testing. It lifts the limit
of 100 devices to a limit of 10000 testers. It is far more convenient
for your testers than Ad Hoc distribution, because they download and

--- Page 848 ---
install prerelease versions of your app directly from the App Store
onto their devices, through the TestFlight app. Communication
between you and your testers is handled seamlessly: TestFlight emails
invitations to testers, allows testers to provide feedback comments,
collects crash logs, notifies testers when you update the app, and so
forth.
Configuration is performed at the App Store Connect site; a
prerelease version uploaded to App Store Connect must be exported
as if for App Store distribution (see the discussion of App Store
submission later in this chapter). See the “Test a beta version” chapter
of Apple’s App Store Connect Help document (Help → App Store
Connect Help).
Prerelease versions of your app intended for distribution to beta
testers require review by Apple. Basically, the rule is that if your
app’s minor version number increases, you can expect a delay while
Apple performs the review. On the other hand, internal testers (team
members who have direct access to your App Store Connect account)
can download new versions immediately. That includes you! I often
use TestFlight as a way of distributing a build to myself so that I can
test on a device under real-world conditions.
Final App Preparations
As the big day approaches when you’re thinking of submitting your
app to the App Store, don’t become so excited by the prospect of
huge fame and massive profits that you rush the all-important final
stages of app preparation. Apple has a lot of requirements, and failure

--- Page 849 ---
to meet them can cause your app to be rejected. Take your time.
Make a checklist and go through it carefully. See Apple’s App Store
Connect Help and the “Icons and Images” chapter of the iOS Human
Interface Guidelines.
ICONS IN THE APP
The best way to provide your app with icons is to use the asset
catalog (Figure 9-33). The image sizes needed are listed in the asset
catalog itself. To determine which slots should be displayed, use the
checkboxes in the Attributes inspector when you select the icon set.
To add an image, drag it from the Finder into the appropriate slot.
Figure 9-33. Icon slots in the asset catalog
An icon file must be a PNG file, without alpha transparency. It should
be a full square; the rounding of the corners will be added for you.

--- Page 850 ---
Apple seems nowadays to prefer simple, cartoony images with a few
bright colors and possibly a gentle gradient background.
App icon sizes have changed over the years. If your app is to be
backward compatible to earlier systems, you may need additional
icons in additional sizes, corresponding to the expectations of those
earlier systems. Conversely, new devices can come along, bringing
with them new icon size requirements (this happened when the iPad
Pro appeared on the scene). Again, this is exactly the sort of thing the
asset catalog will help you with.
Optionally, you may elect to include smaller versions of your icon to
appear when the user does a search on the device, as well as in the
Settings app if you include a settings bundle. However, I never
include those icons; the system’s scaled-down versions of my app
icons look fine to me.
MARKETING ICON
To submit an app to the App Store, you will need to supply a
1024×1024 PNG or high-quality JPEG icon to be displayed at the
App Store (the marketing icon). Apple’s guidelines say that it should
not merely be a scaled-up version of your app’s icon; but it must not
differ perceptibly from your app’s icon, either, or your app will be
rejected (I know this from bitter experience).
The marketing icon should be included in the asset catalog. There’s a
slot for it, along with the slots for the real app icons (Figure 9-34).

--- Page 851 ---
Figure 9-34. Marketing icon slot in the asset catalog
LAUNCH IMAGES
There is a delay between the moment when the user taps your app’s
icon to launch it and the moment when your app is up and running
and displaying its initial window. To cover this delay and give the
user a visible indication that something is happening, a launch image
needs to be displayed during that interval.
The launch image needn’t be detailed; in fact, it probably should not
be. It might be just a blank depiction of the main elements or regions
of the interface that will be present when the app has finished
launching. In this way, when the app does finish launching, those
elements or regions appear to be filled in as the launch image fades
away to reveal the real app.
To prepare the launch image, you use a launch nib file — a .xib or
.storyboard file containing a single view. You construct this view
using subviews and autolayout. The view is automatically
reconfigured to match the screen size and orientation of the device on
which the app is launching, and label and button text can be
localized. The launch image will be a snapshot of this view.

--- Page 852 ---
By default, a new app project comes with a LaunchScreen.storyboard
file. This is where you design your launch image. The Info.plist
points to this file as the value of its “Launch screen interface file base
name” key (UILaunchStoryboardName). You can configure the
Info.plist, if necessary, by editing the target and setting the Launch
Screen File field (under App Icons and Launch Images).
Custom fonts included in your app bundle cannot be displayed in a
launch nib file. This is because they have not yet been loaded at the
time the launch screen needs to be displayed. Also, code cannot run
in association with the display of the launch screen; by definition,
your app is launching and its code has not yet started to run. None of
those limitations should be a concern. Keep the launch screen simple
and minimal. Don’t try to misuse it as some kind of introductory
splash screen. If you want a splash screen, configure a real view
controller to display its view when the app has finished launching.
Screenshots and Video Previews
When you submit your app to the App Store, you will be asked for
one or more screenshots of your app in action to be displayed at the
App Store. These screenshots must demonstrate actual user
experience of the app, or your app may be rejected by Apple’s review
team. You should take them beforehand and be prepared to provide
them during the app submission process. You can provide a
screenshot corresponding to the screen size and resolution of every
device on which your app can run, or you can reuse a larger-size
screenshot for smaller sizes.

--- Page 853 ---
You can obtain screenshots either from the Simulator or from a
device connected to the computer:
Simulator
Run the app in the Simulator with the desired device type as your
destination. Choose File → Save Screen. Alternatively, click the
Save Screen button above the simulator window. New in Xcode
12, a miniature screenshot window appears; Control-click it to
choose an option for disposing of the screenshot. By default, it is
saved to the Desktop. You can also generate a screenshot from the
command-line. For instance:
% xcrun simctl io booted screenshot myscreenshot.png
That command saves a screenshot as myscreenshot.png in my
home directory (because that’s where I was in the Terminal when
I gave the command).
Device
In Xcode, in the Devices and Simulators window, locate your
connected device under Devices and click Take Screenshot.
Alternatively, choose Debug → View Debugging → Take
Screenshot of [Device].
You can also take a screenshot directly on a device. If the device
has a Home button, click the screen lock button and the Home
button simultaneously. If not, click the screen lock button and the
Volume Up button simultaneously. Now the screenshot is saved in
the Photos app, and you can communicate it to your computer in
any convenient way (such as by emailing it to yourself).
You probably don’t have devices with every size you need in order to
submit screenshots to the App Store. The Simulator supplies every

--- Page 854 ---
needed device size. It may be, however, that your app doesn’t run
properly on the Simulator, because it uses features that exist only on a
device. I frequently solve this problem by supplying artificial data to
my app, on the simulator only (as I described earlier, “Build Action”),
so that its interface works sufficiently to let me capture screenshots.
You can also submit to the App Store a video preview showing your
app in action; it can be up to 30 seconds long, in H.264 or Apple
ProRes format. One way to capture the video preview is with your
device and QuickTime Player:
1. Connect the device to the computer and launch QuickTime
Player. Choose File → New Movie Recording.
2. If necessary, set the Camera and Microphone to the device,
using the pop-up menu next to the Record button that appears
when you hover the mouse over the QuickTime Player window.
3. Start recording, and exercise the app on the device. When
you’re finished, stop recording and save. The resulting movie
file can be edited to prepare it for submission to the App Store.
You can also capture a video preview from a simulator, using the
command-line. I might say this in the Terminal:
% xcrun simctl io booted recordVideo --codec=h264 mymovie.mov
The video preview begins recording, and continues until I press
Control-C in the Terminal.
For more details, see the “App preview specifications” section of the
Reference chapter of Apple’s App Store Connect Help.

--- Page 855 ---
Property List Settings
A number of settings in the Info.plist are crucial to the proper
behavior of your app. You should peruse Apple’s Information
Property List Key Reference for full information. Most of the required
keys are created as part of the template, and are given reasonable
default values, but you should check them anyway. The following are
particularly worthy of attention:
Bundle display name (CFBundleDisplayName)
The name that appears under your app’s icon on the device
screen; this name needs to be short in order to avoid truncation. I
talked earlier in this chapter about how to localize the display
name. You can enter this value directly in the General pane when
you edit your app target.
Supported interface orientations (UISupportedInterfaceOrientati
ons)
This key designates the totality of orientations in which the app is
ever permitted to appear. I talked earlier in this chapter about the
interface for making these settings with checkboxes in the
General pane of the target editor, but you get better fine tuning by
editing the Info.plist directly. For example, it might be necessary
to reorder the orientations (because on an iPhone the first
orientation listed may be the one into which the app will actually
launch).
Required device capabilities (UIRequiredDeviceCapabilities)
You should set this key if the app requires capabilities that are not
present on all devices. But don’t use this key unless it makes no
sense for your app to run at all on a device lacking the specified
capabilities.

--- Page 856 ---
Bundle version
Your app needs a version number. The best place to set it is the
General pane of the target editor. Things are a little confusing
here because there are two fields:
Version
Corresponds in the Info.plist to “Bundle versions string,
short” (CFBundleShortVersionString). This is a user-facing
string and needs to be a version string, such as "1.0". It will
be displayed at the App Store, distinguishing one release from
another. Failure to increment the version string when
submitting an update will cause the update to be rejected.
Build
Corresponds in the Info.plist to “Bundle version” (CFBundleV
ersion). The user never sees this value. I treat it as an
independent integer value. It is legal to increment the Build
number without incrementing the Version number, and that is
what I do when I submit several successive builds of the same
prospective release during TestFlight testing.
The interplay between TestFlight versions and App Store versions
is a little tricky. If you’re satisfied with a TestFlight version, you
can submit the very same binary, which is already present at App
Store Connect, for distribution by the App Store. But once you
have submitted a version to the App Store, the next build that you
submit, even if it is just for TestFlight, must have a higher version
string; upping the build number is not sufficient.

--- Page 857 ---
WARNING
Version strings don’t work like decimal numbers! Each component of the string
is treated as an integer. A short version string "1.4" is not “higher” than a
version string "1.32" — because 4 is smaller than 32. As usual, I learned this
lesson the hard way.
Submission to the App Store
When you’re satisfied that your app works well, and you’ve installed
or collected all the necessary resources, you’re ready to submit your
app to the App Store for distribution. To do so, you’ll need to make
preparations at the App Store Connect site
(https://appstoreconnect.apple.com).
NOTE
The first time you visit App Store Connect, you should go to the Contracts
section and complete submission of your contract. You can’t offer any apps for
sale until you do, and even free apps require completion of a contractual form.
I’m not going to recite all the steps you have to go through to tell App
Store Connect about your app, as these are described thoroughly in
Apple’s App Store Connect Help document, which is the final word
on such matters. But here are some of the main pieces of information
you will sooner or later have to supply (and see also
https://developer.apple.com/app-store/product-page):
Your app’s name

--- Page 858 ---
This is the name that will appear at the App Store; it need not be
identical to the short name that will appear under the app’s icon
on the device, dictated by the “Bundle display name” setting in
your Info.plist file. Apple now requires that this name be 30
characters or fewer. You can get a rude shock when you submit
your app’s information to App Store Connect and discover that
the name you wanted is already taken. There is no reliable way to
learn this in advance, and such a discovery can necessitate a
certain amount of last-minute scrambling on your part. (Can you
guess how I know that?)
Subtitle
A description of the app, 30 characters or fewer, that will appear
below the name at the App Store.
Description
You must supply a description of fewer than 4,000 characters;
Apple recommends fewer than 580 characters, and the first
paragraph is the most important, because this may be all that
users see at first when they visit the App Store. It must be pure
text, with no HTML or character styling.
Promotional text
Optional; 170 characters or fewer. The significance of the
promotional text is that you can change it for an existing app,
without uploading a new build.
Keywords
A comma-separated list, shorter than 100 characters. These
keywords will be used, in addition to your app’s name, to help
users discover your app through the Search feature of the App
Store.
Privacy policy

--- Page 859 ---
The URL of a web page describing your privacy policy.
Support
The URL of a web site where users can find more information
about your app.
Copyright
Do not include a copyright symbol in this string; it will be added
for you at the App Store.
SKU number
This is arbitrary, so don’t get nervous about it. It’s just an
identifier that’s unique within the world of your own apps. It’s
convenient if it has something to do with your app’s name. It
needn’t be a number; it can actually be any string.
Price
You don’t get to make up a price. You have to choose from a list
of pricing “tiers.”
Availability Date
There’s an option to make the app available as soon as it is
approved, and this will typically be your choice.
TIP
As you submit information, click Save often! If the connection goes down and
you haven’t explicitly saved, all your work can be lost. (Can you guess how I
know that?)

--- Page 860 ---
Once your app is initially registered at App Store Connect, and when
you have an archived build ready for distribution, you can export and
upload it. The export process is similar to what I described earlier for
Ad Hoc distribution. Select the archived build in the Organizer and
click Distribute App; on the next screen, select App Store Connect.
Subsequent options are slightly different from the options for an Ad
Hoc distribution: you won’t see anything about app thinning, because
that depends on how the user obtains the app; you’ll see the bitcode
checkbox; and there’s a checkbox for uploading symbols, which
should make it easier to analyze crash reports. Eventually, a screen is
displayed summarizing the .ipa content, and you can now upload to
App Store Connect or save to disk:
Upload to App Store Connect
The upload is performed within Xcode, and the app will be
validated at the far end.
Save to disk
You can perform the upload later using Transporter, available
from the App Store
(https://apps.apple.com/us/app/transporter/id1450874784).
After uploading the archive, you have one final step to perform. Wait
for the binary to be processed at Apple’s end. (You should receive an
email when processing has completed.) Then return to App Store
Connect, where you submitted your app information. You will now
be able to select the binary, save, and submit the app for review.
You will subsequently receive notifications from Apple informing
you of your app’s status as it passes through various stages: “Waiting

--- Page 861 ---
For Review,” “In Review,” and finally, if all has gone well, “Ready
For Sale” (even if it’s a free app). Your app will then appear at the
App Store.
Once your app is registered at the App Store, you do not need to
make further preparations merely to upload a new build. Simply
increase the build number or version string, as I described earlier, and
upload the build. If this build is for TestFlight, and if this version has
already been reviewed for TestFlight, the new build becomes
available for testing immediately. If this build is for the App Store,
you can upload it first and register the new version at App Store
Connect later.

--- Page 862 ---
Part III. Cocoa
The Cocoa Touch frameworks provide the general capabilities needed
by any iOS application. Buttons can be tapped, text can be read,
screens of interface can succeed one another, because Cocoa makes it
so. To use the framework, you must learn to let the framework use
you. You must put your code in the right place so that it will be called
at the right time. You must fulfill certain obligations that Cocoa
expects of you. You master Cocoa by being Cocoa’s obedient servant.
In this part of the book, that’s what you’ll learn to do.
Chapter 10 describes how Cocoa is organized and structured
through such Objective-C language features as subclassing,
categories, and protocols. Then some important built-in Cocoa
object types are introduced. The chapter concludes with a
description of Cocoa key–value coding and a look at how the root
NSObject class is organized.
Chapter 11 presents Cocoa’s event-driven model of activity, along
with its major design patterns and event-related features —
notifications, delegation, data sources, target–action, the responder
chain, and key–value observing. The chapter concludes with some
words of wisdom about managing the barrage of events Cocoa
will be throwing at you, and how to escape that barrage
momentarily with delayed performance.
Chapter 12 is about Cocoa memory management. I’ll explain how
memory management of reference types works. Then some special

--- Page 863 ---
memory management situations are described: autorelease pools,
retain cycles, notifications and timers, nib loading, and
CFTypeRefs. The chapter concludes with a discussion of Cocoa
property memory management, and advice on how to debug
memory management issues.
Chapter 13 discusses the question of how your objects are going to
see and communicate with one another within the confines of the
Cocoa-based world. It concludes with a look at two new ways of
managing object communications, the Combine framework and
SwiftUI.
Finally, don’t forget to read Appendix A for more detail about how
Objective-C and Swift interact and cooperate.

--- Page 864 ---
Chapter 10. Cocoa Classes
When you program iOS through Foundation and UIKit, you’re
programming Cocoa. The Cocoa API is written mostly in Objective-
C, and Cocoa itself consists mostly of Objective-C classes, derived
from the root class, NSObject.
This chapter introduces Cocoa’s class structure and explains how
Cocoa is conceptually organized, in terms of its underlying
Objective-C features, along with a survey of some of the most
commonly encountered Cocoa utility classes. The chapter then
discusses Objective-C instance properties and Cocoa key–value
coding, and concludes with a description of the Cocoa root class and
its features, which are inherited by all Cocoa classes.
Subclassing
Cocoa supplies a large repertory of objects that already know how to
behave in certain desirable ways. A UIButton knows how to draw
itself and how to respond when the user taps it; a UITextField knows
how to display editable text, how to summon the keyboard, and how
to accept keyboard input. When the default behavior or appearance of
an object supplied by Cocoa isn’t quite what you’re after, you’ll want
to customize it.

--- Page 865 ---
But that does not necessarily mean you need to subclass! In fact,
subclassing is one of the rarer ways in which your code will relate to
Cocoa. Most built-in Cocoa Touch classes will never need
subclassing (and some, in their documentation, downright forbid it).
Instead, Cocoa classes are often heavily endowed with methods that
you can call and properties that you can set precisely in order to
customize an instance, and these will be your first resort. Always
study the documentation for a Cocoa class to see whether instances
can already be made to do what you want. The UIButton class
documentation shows that you can set a button’s title, title color,
internal image, background image, and many other features and
behaviors, without subclassing.
In addition, many built-in classes use delegation (Chapter 11) as the
preferred way of letting you customize their behavior. You wouldn’t
subclass UITextField just in order to respond in some special way
when the user types text, because the delegate mechanism and the
UITextFieldDelegate protocol provide ways to do that.
Nevertheless, sometimes setting properties and calling methods and
using delegation won’t suffice to customize an instance the way you
want to. In such cases, a Cocoa class may provide methods that are
called by the runtime at key moments in the life of the instance,
allowing you to customize that class’s behavior by subclassing and
overriding. In fact, certain Cocoa Touch classes are subclassed
routinely, constituting the exception that proves the rule.

--- Page 866 ---
A case in point is UIViewController. Every Cocoa app uses view
controllers, but a plain vanilla UIViewController, not subclassed, is
very rare. A Cocoa iOS app without at least one UIViewController
subclass would be practically impossible. Subclassing is how you
inject your functionality into a view controller. Much of your code
will probably revolve around UIViewController subclasses that you
have written.
Another case in point is UIView. Cocoa Touch is full of built-in
UIView subclasses that behave and draw themselves as needed
(UIButton, UITextField, and so on), and you will rarely need to
subclass any of them. On the other hand, you might create your own
UIView subclass, whose job would be to draw itself in some
completely new way.
You don’t actually draw a UIView; rather, when a UIView needs
drawing, its draw(_:) method is called so that the view can draw
itself. So the way to draw a custom UIView is to subclass UIView
and implement draw(_:) in the subclass. As the documentation says,
“Subclasses that … draw their view’s content should override this
method and implement their drawing code there.” The documentation
is saying that you need to subclass UIView in order to draw custom
content.
Suppose we want our window to contain a horizontal line. There is no
horizontal line interface widget built into Cocoa, so we’ll just have to
roll our own — a UIView that draws itself as a horizontal line. Let’s
try it:

--- Page 867 ---
1. In our Empty Window example project, choose File → New →
File and specify iOS → Source → Cocoa Touch Class, and in
particular a subclass of UIView. Call the class MyHorizLine.
Xcode creates MyHorizLine.swift. Make sure it’s part of the app
target.
2. In MyHorizLine.swift, replace the contents of the class
declaration with this (without further explanation):
required init?(coder: NSCoder) { 
    super.init(coder:coder) 
    self.backgroundColor = .clear 
} 
override func draw(_ rect: CGRect) { 
    let c = UIGraphicsGetCurrentContext()! 
    c.move(to:CGPoint(x: 0, y: 0)) 
    c.addLine(to:CGPoint(x: self.bounds.size.widt
h, y: 0)) 
    c.strokePath() 
}
3. Edit the storyboard. Find UIView in the Library (it is called
simply “View”) and drag it into the View object in the canvas.
You may resize it to be less tall.
4. Select the UIView that you just dragged into the canvas and use
the Identity inspector to change its class to MyHorizLine.
Build and run the app in the Simulator. You’ll see a horizontal line
corresponding to the location of the top of the MyHorizLine instance
in the nib. Our view has drawn itself as a horizontal line, because we
subclassed it to do so.

--- Page 868 ---
In that example, we started with a bare UIView that had no drawing
functionality of its own. But you might also be able to subclass a
built-in UIView subclass to modify the way it already draws itself. In
the UILabel class documentation, the discussions of both drawText
(in:) and textRect(forBounds:limitedToNumberOfLines:)
refer explicitly to overriding these methods. The implication is that
these are methods that will be called for us, automatically, by Cocoa,
as a label draws itself; we can subclass UILabel and implement these
methods in our subclass to modify how a particular label draws itself.
In one of my own apps, I subclass UILabel and override drawText(i
n:) to make a label that draws its own rectangular border and has its
content inset somewhat from that border. As the documentation tells
us: “In your overridden method, you can configure the current
context further and then invoke super to do the actual drawing [of
the text].” Let’s try it:
1. In the Empty Window project, make a new class file, a UILabel
subclass; call the class MyBoundedLabel.
2. In MyBoundedLabel.swift, insert this code into the body of the
class declaration:
override func drawText(in rect: CGRect) { 
    let context = UIGraphicsGetCurrentContext()! 
    context.stroke(self.bounds.insetBy(dx: 1.0, d
y: 1.0)) 
    super.drawText(in: rect.insetBy(dx: 5.0, dy: 
5.0)) 
}

--- Page 869 ---
3. Edit the storyboard, add a UILabel to the interface, and change
its class in the Identity inspector to MyBoundedLabel.
Build and run the app. As you can see, the rectangle is drawn and the
label’s text is inset within it.
Categories and Extensions
A category is an Objective-C language feature that allows code to
reach right into an existing class and inject additional methods. This
is comparable to a Swift extension (Chapter 4), so I’ll start by
reminding you how extensions are used, and then I’ll describe how
Cocoa uses categories.
TIP
Objective-C categories have names, and you may see references to these names
in the headers, the documentation, and so forth. However, the names are
effectively meaningless, so don’t worry about them.
How Swift Uses Extensions
In the Swift standard library header, many native object type
declarations consist of an initial declaration followed by a series of
extensions. After declaring the generic struct Array<Element>, the
header proceeds to declare some dozen extensions on the Array
struct. Some of these add protocol adoptions; all of them add
declarations of properties or methods. These extensions are not, for
the most part, functionally significant. The header could have

--- Page 870 ---
declared the Array struct with all of those properties and methods
within the body of a single declaration. Instead, it breaks things up
into multiple extensions as a way of clumping related functionality
together, organizing this object type’s members so as to make them
easier for human readers to understand.
In the Swift Core Graphics header, on the other hand, extensions are
functionally significant — and just about everything is an extension
— because Swift is adapting types that are already defined elsewhere.
It adapts Swift numeric types for use with Core Graphics and
CGFloat, and it adapts C structs such as CGPoint and CGRect for use
as Swift object types.
How You Use Extensions
For the sake of object-oriented encapsulation, you will often want to
write a function that you inject, as a method, into an existing object
type. To do so, you’ll write an extension. Subclassing merely to add a
method or two is heavy-handed — and besides, it often wouldn’t help
you do what you need to do.
Suppose you wanted to add a method to Cocoa’s UIView class. You
could subclass UIView and declare your method, but then it would be
present only in your UIView subclass and in subclasses of that
subclass. It would not be present in UIButton, UILabel, and all the
other built-in UIView subclasses, because they are subclasses of
UIView, not of your subclass. An extension solves the problem
beautifully: you inject your method into UIView, and it is inherited
by all built-in UIView subclasses as well.

--- Page 871 ---
For more fine-grained injection of functionality, you can use protocol
extensions. Suppose I want UIButton and UIBarButtonItem — which
is not a UIView, but does have button-like behavior — to share a
certain method. I can declare a protocol with a method, implement
that method in a protocol extension, and then use extensions to make
UIButton and UIBarButtonItem adopt that protocol and acquire that
method:
protocol ButtonLike { 
    func behaveInButtonLikeWay() 
} 
extension ButtonLike { 
    func behaveInButtonLikeWay() { 
        // ... 
    } 
} 
extension UIButton : ButtonLike {} 
extension UIBarButtonItem : ButtonLike {}
How Cocoa Uses Categories
Cocoa uses categories as an organizational tool much as Swift uses
extensions. The declaration of a class will often be divided by
functionality into multiple categories; these can even appear in
separate header files.
A good example is NSString. NSString is defined as part of the
Foundation framework, and its basic methods are declared in
NSString.h. Here we find that NSString itself, aside from its
initializers, has just two members, length and character(at:),
because these are regarded as the minimum functionality that a string
needs in order to be a string.

--- Page 872 ---
Additional NSString methods — those that create a string, deal with a
string’s encoding, split a string, search in a string, and so on — are
clumped into categories. These are shown in the Swift translation of
the header as extensions. After the declaration for the NSString class
itself, we find this in the Swift translation of the header:
extension NSString { 
    func substring(from: Int) -> String 
    func substring(to: Int) -> String 
    // ... 
}
That is actually Swift’s translation of this Objective-C code:
@interface NSString (NSStringExtensionMethods) 
- (NSString *)substringFromIndex:(NSUInteger)from; 
- (NSString *)substringToIndex:(NSUInteger)to; 
// ... 
@end
That notation — the keyword @interface, followed by a class name,
followed by another name in parentheses — is an Objective-C
category.
Moreover, although the declarations for some of Cocoa’s NSString
categories appear in this same file, NSString.h, many of them appear
elsewhere:
A string may serve as a file pathname, so we also find a category
on NSString in NSPathUtilities.h, where methods and properties
such as pathComponents are declared for splitting a pathname
string into its constituents and the like.

--- Page 873 ---
In NSURL.h, which is devoted primarily to declaring the NSURL
class (and its categories), there is also another NSString category,
declaring methods for dealing with percent encoding in a URL
string, such as addingPercentEncoding(withAllowedCharacte
rs:).
Off in a completely different framework (UIKit),
NSStringDrawing.h adds two further NSString categories, with
methods like draw(at:withAttributes:) having to do with
drawing a string in a graphics context.
This organization means that the NSString methods are not gathered
in a single header file. In general, fortunately, this won’t matter to
you as a programmer, because an NSString is an NSString, no matter
how it acquires its methods.
Protocols
Objective-C has protocols, and these are generally comparable to and
compatible with Swift protocols (see Chapter 4). Since classes are the
only Objective-C object type, all Objective-C protocols are seen by
Swift as class protocols. Conversely, Swift protocols marked as @obj
c are implicitly class protocols and can be seen by Objective-C.
Cocoa makes extensive use of protocols.
A case in point is how Cocoa objects are copied. Some objects can be
copied; some can’t. This has nothing to do with an object’s class
heritage. Yet we would like a uniform method to which any object
that can be copied will respond. So Cocoa defines a protocol named
NSCopying, which declares just one required method, copyWithZon
e:. Here’s how NSObject.h declares the NSCopying protocol:

--- Page 874 ---
@protocol NSCopying 
- (id)copyWithZone:(nullable NSZone *)zone; 
@end
That’s translated into Swift:
protocol NSCopying { 
    func copy(with zone: NSZone? = nil) -> Any 
}
The NSCopying protocol declaration in NSObject.h, however, is not a
statement that NSObject itself conforms to NSCopying. Indeed,
NSObject does not conform to NSCopying! This doesn’t compile:
let obj = NSObject().copy(with:nil) // compile error
But this does compile, because NSString does conform to
NSCopying:
let s = ("hello" as NSString).copy(with: nil)
Far and away the most pervasive use of protocols in Cocoa is in
connection with the delegation pattern. I’ll discuss this pattern in
detail in Chapter 11, but you can readily see an example in our handy
Empty Window project: the AppDelegate class provided by the
project template is declared like this:
class AppDelegate: UIResponder, UIApplicationDelegate { // ...
AppDelegate’s chief purpose on earth is to serve as the shared
application’s delegate. The shared application object is a

--- Page 875 ---
UIApplication, and UIApplication’s delegate property is declared
like this (I’ll explain the unsafe modifier in Chapter 12):
unowned(unsafe) var delegate: UIApplicationDelegate?
The UIApplicationDelegate type is a protocol. UIApplication is
saying: “I don’t care what class my delegate belongs to, but whatever
it is, it should conform to the UIApplicationDelegate protocol.” Such
conformance constitutes a promise that the delegate will implement
instance methods declared by the protocol, such as application(_:d
idFinishLaunchingWithOptions:). The AppDelegate class
officially announces its role by explicitly adopting the
UIApplicationDelegate protocol.
A Cocoa protocol has its own documentation page. When the
UIApplication class documentation tells you that the delegate
property is typed as UIApplicationDelegate, it’s implicitly telling you
that if you want to know what messages the application’s delegate
might receive, you need to look in the UIApplicationDelegate
protocol documentation. application(_:didFinishLaunchingWith
Options:) isn’t mentioned anywhere in the UIApplication class
documentation page; it’s in the UIApplicationDelegate protocol
documentation page.
Optional Members
Objective-C protocols, and Swift protocols marked as @objc, can
have optional members (see “Optional Protocol Members”). The
UIApplicationDelegate protocol method application(_:didFinish
LaunchingWithOptions:) is a case in point; it’s optional. But how,

--- Page 876 ---
in practice, is an optional member feasible? We know that if a
message is sent to an object and the object can’t handle that message,
an exception is raised and your app will likely crash. How does
Objective-C prevent that from happening?
The answer is that Objective-C is both dynamic and introspective.
Objective-C can ask an object whether it can deal with a message
without actually sending it that message. The key method here is
NSObject’s responds(to:) method (Objective-C respondsToSelec
tor:), which takes a selector parameter (see Chapter 2) and returns a
Bool. Thus it is possible to send a message to an object conditionally
— that is, only if it would be safe to do so.
Demonstrating responds(to:) in Swift is generally a little tricky,
because Swift, with its strict type checking, doesn’t want to let us
send an object a message to which it might not respond. In this
artificial example, I start by defining, at top level, a class that derives
from NSObject, because otherwise we can’t send responds(to:) to
it, along with an @objc protocol to declare the message that I want to
send conditionally:
class MyClass : NSObject { 
} 
@objc protocol Dummy { 
    func woohoo() 
}
Now I can say this:
let mc = MyClass() 
if mc.responds(to: #selector(Dummy.woohoo)) { 

--- Page 877 ---
    (mc as AnyObject).woohoo() 
}
Note the cast of mc to AnyObject. This causes Swift to abandon its
strict type checking (see “Suppressing type checking”); we can now
send this object any message that Swift knows about, provided it is
susceptible to Objective-C introspection — that’s why I marked my
protocol declaration as @objc to start with. As you know, Swift
provides a shorthand for sending a message conditionally: append a
question mark to the name of the message. I could have written this:
let mc = MyClass() 
(mc as AnyObject).woohoo?()
Behind the scenes, those two approaches are exactly the same; the
latter is syntactic sugar for the former. In response to the question
mark, Swift is calling responds(to:) for us, and will refrain from
sending woohoo to this object if it doesn’t respond to this selector.
That explains how optional protocol members work. It is no
coincidence that Swift treats optional protocol members like
AnyObject members. Here’s the example I gave in Chapter 4:
@objc protocol Flier { 
    @objc optional var song : String {get} 
    @objc optional func sing() 
}
When you call sing?() on an object typed as Flier, responds(to:)
is called behind the scenes to determine whether this call is safe. That
is also why optional protocol members work only on @objc protocols

--- Page 878 ---
and classes derived from NSObject: Swift is relying here on a purely
Objective-C feature.
You wouldn’t want to send a message optionally, or call responds(t
o:) explicitly, before sending just any old message, because it isn’t
generally necessary except with optional methods, and it slows things
down a little. But Cocoa does in fact call responds(to:) on your
objects as a matter of course. To see that this is true, implement resp
onds(to:) on the AppDelegate class in our Empty Window project
and instrument it with logging:
override func responds(to aSelector: Selector) -> Bool { 
    print(aSelector) 
    return super.responds(to:aSelector) 
}
The output on my machine, as the Empty Window app launches,
includes the following:
application:handleOpenURL: 
application:openURL:sourceApplication:annotation: 
application:openURL:options: 
applicationDidReceiveMemoryWarning: 
applicationWillTerminate: 
applicationSignificantTimeChange: 
application:willChangeStatusBarOrientation:duration: 
application:didChangeStatusBarOrientation: 
application:willChangeStatusBarFrame: 
application:didChangeStatusBarFrame: 
application:deviceAccelerated: 
application:deviceChangedOrientation: 
applicationDidBecomeActive: 
applicationWillResignActive: 
applicationDidEnterBackground: 

--- Page 879 ---
applicationWillEnterForeground: 
applicationWillSuspend: 
application:didResumeWithOptions: 
application:shouldSaveApplicationState: 
application:shouldSaveSecureApplicationState: 
application:supportedInterfaceOrientationsForWindow: 
application:defaultWhitePointAdaptivityStyleForWindow: 
application:configurationForConnectingSceneSession:options: 
application:didDiscardSceneSessions: 
application:performFetchWithCompletionHandler: 
application:didReceiveRemoteNotification:fetchCompletionHandler: 
application:willFinishLaunchingWithOptions: 
application:didFinishLaunchingWithOptions:
That’s Cocoa, checking to see which optional UIApplicationDelegate
protocol methods are actually implemented by our AppDelegate
instance. Cocoa checks all the optional protocol methods once, when
it first meets the object in question, and presumably stores the results;
the app is slowed a tiny bit by this one-time initial bombardment of r
esponds(to:) calls, but now Cocoa knows all the answers and won’t
have to perform any of these same checks on the same object later.
The entire pattern of a delegate with optional delegate members
depends upon this technique.
Informal Protocols
You may occasionally see, online or in the Cocoa documentation, a
reference to an informal protocol. An informal protocol isn’t really a
protocol at all; it’s just an Objective-C trick for providing the
compiler with a knowledge of a method name so that it will allow a
message to be sent without complaining.

--- Page 880 ---
There are two complementary ways to implement an informal
protocol. One is to define a category on NSObject; this makes any
object eligible to receive the messages listed in the category. The
other is to define a protocol to which no class formally conforms;
instead, messages listed in the protocol are sent only to objects typed
as id (AnyObject), suppressing any objections from the compiler.
These techniques were widespread in Cocoa before Objective-C
protocols could declare methods as optional; now they are largely
unnecessary, and are also mildly dangerous. Nowadays, very few
informal protocols remain, but they do exist. NSKeyValueCoding
(discussed later in this chapter) is an informal protocol; you may see
the term NSKeyValueCoding in the documentation and elsewhere,
but there isn’t actually any such type — it’s a category on NSObject.
Some Foundation Classes
The Foundation classes of Cocoa provide basic data types and
utilities that will form the basis of your communication with Cocoa.
In this section, I’ll survey those that you’ll probably want to be aware
of initially. For more information, start with Apple’s list of the
Foundation classes in the Foundation framework documentation
page.
In many situations, you can use Foundation classes implicitly by way
of Swift classes. That’s because of Swift’s ability to bridge between
its own classes and those of Foundation. There are two kinds of
bridging to be distinguished here:

--- Page 881 ---
Native Swift types
Certain purely native Swift types are bridged to Objective-C types
for purposes of interoperability. For instance, String and Array are
native Swift types, with an independent existence. String is
bridged to NSString (Chapter 3), and Array is bridged to NSArray
(Chapter 4), so a String and an NSString can be cast to one
another, and an Array and an NSArray can be cast to one another.
But in fact you’ll rarely need to cast, because wherever the
Objective-C API expects you to pass an NSString or an NSArray,
these will be typed in the Swift translation of that API as a String
or an Array. And when you use String or Array in the presence of
Foundation, many NSString and NSArray properties and methods
spring to life.
Foundation overlay types
The Swift Foundation overlay puts a native Swift interface in
front of many Foundation types. The Swift interface is
distinguished by dropping the “NS” prefix that marks Foundation
class names. These are not native Swift types; they are façades for
Objective-C types, meaning that you cannot use them except in
the presence of Cocoa’s Foundation framework. For instance,
Objective-C NSData is accessed through Swift Data, and
Objective-C NSDate is accessed through Swift Date — though
you can still use NSData and NSDate directly if you really want
to. The Swift and Objective-C types are bridged to one another,
and the API shows the Swift type, so casting and passing both
work as you would expect. The Swift types provide many
conveniences that the Objective-C types do not: they may declare
adoption of appropriate Swift protocols such as Equatable,
Hashable, and Comparable, and, in some cases, they may be
value types (structs) where the Objective-C types are reference
types (classes).

--- Page 882 ---
NSRange
NSRange is a C struct (see Appendix A). Its components are integers,
location and length. An NSRange whose location is 1 starts at
the second element of something (because element counting is always
zero-based), and if its length is 2 it designates this element and the
next.
A Swift Range and a Cocoa NSRange are constructed very differently
from one another. A Swift Range is defined by two endpoints. A
Cocoa NSRange is defined by a starting point and a length.
Nevertheless, Swift goes to some lengths (in the Foundation overlay)
to help you work with an NSRange:
NSRange is endowed with Range-like members such as lowerBou
nd, upperBound, and contains(_:).
You can coerce a Swift Range whose Bound type (the type of its
endpoints) is Int (or any other integer type) to an NSRange.
You can coerce from an NSRange to a Swift Range — resulting in
an Optional wrapping a Range, for reasons I’ll explain in a
moment.
For example:
// Range to NSRange 
let r = 2..<4 
let nsr = NSRange(r) // (2,2), an NSRange 
// NSRange to Range 
let nsr2 = NSRange(location: 2, length: 2) 
let r2 = Range(nsr2) // Optional wrapping Range 2..<4

--- Page 883 ---
But what about strings? A Swift String’s range Bound type is not Int;
it is String.Index. Meanwhile, on the Cocoa side, an NSString still
uses an NSRange whose components are integers. Not only is there a
type mismatch, there’s also a value mismatch, because (as I explained
in Chapter 3) a String is indexed on its characters, meaning its
graphemes, but an NSString is indexed on its Unicode codepoints.
Sometimes, Swift will solve the problem by crossing the bridge for
you in both directions; here’s an example I’ve already used:
let s = "hello" 
let range = s.range(of:"ell") // Optional wrapping Range 1..<4
The range(of:) method in that code is actually a Cocoa method.
Swift has cast the String s to an NSString for us, called a Foundation
method that returns an NSRange, and coerced the NSRange to a
Swift Range (wrapped in an Optional), adjusting its value as needed,
entirely behind the scenes.
On other occasions, you will want to perform that coercion explicitly.
For this purpose, Range has an initializer init(_:in:), taking an
NSRange and the String to which the resulting range is to apply:
let range = NSRange(location: 1, length: 3) 
let r = Range(range, in:"hello") // Optional wrapping 1..<4 of String.In
dex
And NSRange has the converse initializer init(_:in:), taking a
Range of String.Index and the String to which it applies:

--- Page 884 ---
let s = "hello" 
let range = NSRange(s.range(of:"ell")!, in: s) // (1,3), an NSRange
Sometimes, however, you actively want to operate in the Cocoa
Foundation world, without bridging back to Swift. You can do that by
casting:
let s = "Hello" 
let range = (s as NSString).range(of: "ell") // NSRange 
let mas = NSMutableAttributedString(string:s) 
mas.addAttributes([.foregroundColor:UIColor.red], range: range)
In that code, we cast a String to an NSString so as to be able to call
NSString’s range(of:) and get an NSRange, because that is what
NSMutableAttributedString’s addAttributes(_:range:) wants as
its second parameter. It would be wasteful and time-consuming to call
range(of:) on a Swift String, which crosses into the Foundation
world, gets the range, and brings it back to the Swift world, only to
convert it back to an NSRange again.
NSNotFound
NSNotFound is a constant integer indicating that some requested
element was not found. The true numeric value of NSNotFound is of
no concern; you always compare against NSNotFound itself to learn
whether a result is meaningful. If you ask for the index of a certain
object in an NSArray and the object isn’t present, the result is NSNotF
ound:
let arr = ["hey"] as NSArray 
let ix = arr.index(of:"ho") 
if ix == NSNotFound { 

--- Page 885 ---
    print("it wasn't found") 
}
Why does Cocoa resort to an integer value with a special meaning in
this way? Because it has to. The result could not be 0 to indicate the
absence of the object, because 0 would indicate the first element of
the array. Nor could it be -1, because an NSArray index value is
always positive. Nor could it be nil, because Objective-C can’t
return nil when an integer is expected (and even if it could, it would
be seen as another way of saying 0). Contrast Swift, whose Array fir
stIndex(of:) method returns an Int wrapped in an Optional,
precisely so that it can return nil to indicate that the target object
wasn’t found.
If a search returns an NSRange and the thing sought is not present,
the location component of the result will be NSNotFound. This
means that, when you turn an NSRange into a Swift Range, the
NSRange’s location might be NSNotFound, and Swift needs to be
able to express that as a nil Range. That’s why the initializers for
coercing an NSRange to a Range are failable. It is also why, when
you call NSString’s range(of:) method on a Swift String, the result
is an Optional:
let s = "hello" 
let r = s.range(of:"ha") // nil; an Optional wrapping a Swift Range
NSString and Friends
NSString is the Cocoa object version of a string. NSString and Swift
String are bridged to one another, and you will often move between

--- Page 886 ---
them without thinking, passing a Swift String to Cocoa, calling
Cocoa NSString methods on a Swift String, and so forth:
let s = "hello" 
let s2 = s.capitalized
In that code, s is a Swift String and s2 is a Swift String, but the capi
talized property actually belongs to Cocoa. In the course of that
code, a Swift String has been bridged to NSString and passed to
Cocoa, which has processed it to get the capitalized string; the
capitalized string is an NSString, but it has been bridged back to a
Swift String. In all likelihood, you are not conscious of the bridging;
capitalized feels like a native String property, but it isn’t — as you
can readily prove by trying to use it in an environment where
Foundation is not imported.
In some cases, Swift may fail to cross the bridge implicitly for you,
and you will need to cast explicitly. If s is a Swift string, you can’t
call appendingPathExtension on it directly:
let s = "MyFile" 
let s2 = s.appendingPathExtension("txt") // compile error
You have to cast explicitly to NSString:
let s2 = (s as NSString).appendingPathExtension("txt")
Similarly, to use NSString’s substring(to:), you must cast the
String to an NSString beforehand:
let s2 = (s as NSString).substring(to:4)

--- Page 887 ---
In this situation, however, we can stay entirely within the Swift world
by calling prefix, which is a native Swift method, not a Foundation
method; delightfully, it takes an Int, not a String.Index:
let s2 = s.prefix(4)
However, those two calls are not equivalent: they can give different
answers! The reason is that String and NSString have fundamentally
different notions of what constitutes an element of a string (see “The
String–NSString Element Mismatch”). A String must resolve its
elements into characters, which means that it must walk the string,
coalescing any combining codepoints; an NSString behaves as if it
were an array of UTF-16 codepoints. On the Swift side, each
increment in a String.Index corresponds to a true character, but access
by index or range requires walking the string; on the Cocoa side,
access by index or range is extremely fast, but might not correspond
to character boundaries. (See the “Characters and Grapheme
Clusters” chapter of Apple’s String Programming Guide in the
documentation archive.)
Another important difference between a Swift String and a Cocoa
NSString is that an NSString is immutable. This means that, with
NSString, you can do things such as obtain a new string based on the
first — as capitalized and substring(to:) do — but you can’t
change the string in place. To do that, you need another class, a
subclass of NSString, NSMutableString. Swift String isn’t bridged to
NSMutableString, so you can’t get from String to NSMutableString
merely by casting. To obtain an NSMutableString, you’ll have to
make one. The simplest way to do that is with NSMutableString’s

--- Page 888 ---
initializer init(string:), which expects an NSString — meaning
that you can pass a Swift String. Coming back the other way, you can
cast all the way from NSMutableString to a Swift String in one move,
because an NSMutableString is an NSString:
let s = "hello" 
let ms = NSMutableString(string:s) 
ms.deleteCharacters(in:NSRange(location: ms.length-1, length:1)) 
let s2 = (ms as String) + "ion" // now s2 is a Swift String, "hellion"
As I said in Chapter 3, native Swift String methods are thin on the
ground. All the real string-processing power lives over on the Cocoa
side of the bridge. So you’re going to be crossing that bridge a lot!
And this will not be only for the power of the NSString and
NSMutableString classes. Many other useful classes are associated
with them. Suppose you want to search a string for some substring;
all the best ways come from Cocoa:
An NSString can be searched using various range methods, with
numerous options such as ignoring diacriticals, ignoring case, and
searching backward.
Perhaps you don’t know exactly what you’re looking for: you
need to describe it structurally. A Scanner (Objective-C
NSScanner) lets you walk through a string looking for pieces that
fit certain criteria; for example, with Scanner (and CharacterSet,
Objective-C NSCharacterSet) you can skip past everything in a
string that precedes a number and then extract the number.
By specifying the .regularExpression search option, you can
search using a regular expression. Regular expressions are also
supported as a separate class, NSRegularExpression, which in turn
uses NSTextCheckingResult to describe match results.

--- Page 889 ---
More sophisticated automated textual analysis is supported by
some additional classes, such as NSDataDetector, an
NSRegularExpression subclass that efficiently finds certain types
of string expression such as a URL or a phone number.
In this example, our goal is to replace all occurrences of the word
“hell” with the word “heaven.” We don’t want to replace mere
occurrences of the substring “hell” — the word “hello” should be left
intact. Clearly our search needs some intelligence as to what
constitutes a word boundary. That sounds like a job for a regular
expression. Swift doesn’t have regular expressions, so the work has to
be done by Cocoa:
var s = "hello world, go to hell" 
let r = try! NSRegularExpression( 
    pattern: #"\bhell\b"#, 
    options: .caseInsensitive) 
s = r.stringByReplacingMatches( 
    in: s, 
    range: NSRange(s.startIndex..., in:s), 
    withTemplate: "heaven") 
// s is "hello world, go to heaven"
NSString also has convenience utilities for working with a file path
string, and is often used in conjunction with URL (Objective-C
NSURL), which is another Foundation type worth looking into, along
with its companion types, URLComponents (Objective-C
NSURLComponents) and URLQueryItem (Objective-C
NSURLQueryItem). In addition, NSString — like some other classes
discussed in this section — provides methods for writing out to a
file’s contents or reading in a file’s contents; the file can be specified
either as a string file path or as a URL.

--- Page 890 ---
An NSString carries no font and size information. Interface objects
that display strings (such as UILabel) have a font property that is a
UIFont; but this determines the single font and size in which the
string will display. If you want styled text — where different runs of
text have different style attributes (size, font, color, and so forth) —
you need to use NSAttributedString, along with its supporting classes
NSMutableAttributedString, NSParagraphStyle, and
NSMutableParagraphStyle. These allow you to style text and
paragraphs easily in sophisticated ways. The built-in interface objects
that display text can display an attributed string.
String drawing in a graphics context can be performed with methods
provided through the NSStringDrawing category on NSString and on
NSAttributedString.
NSDate and Friends
A Date (Objective-C NSDate) is a date and time, represented
internally as a number of seconds since some reference date. Calling
Date’s initializer init() — that is, saying Date() — gives you a
Date object for the current date and time. Many date operations will
also involve the use of DateComponents (Objective-C
NSDateComponents), and conversions between Date and
DateComponents require use of a Calendar (Objective-C
NSCalendar). Here’s an example of constructing a date based on its
calendrical values:
let greg = Calendar(identifier:.gregorian) 
let comp = DateComponents(calendar: greg, 

--- Page 891 ---
    year: 2020, month: 8, day: 10, hour: 15) 
let d = comp.date // Optional wrapping Date
Similarly, DateComponents provides the correct way to do date
arithmetic. Here’s how to add one month to a given date:
let d = Date() // or whatever 
let comp = DateComponents(month:1) 
let greg = Calendar(identifier:.gregorian) 
let d2 = greg.date(byAdding: comp, to:d) // Optional wrapping Date
Because a Date is essentially a wrapper for a TimeInterval (a
Double), Swift can overload the arithmetic operators so that you can
do arithmetic directly on a Date:
let d = Date() 
let d2 = d + 4 // 4 seconds later
You can express the range between two dates as a DateInterval
(Objective-C NSDateInterval). DateIntervals can be compared,
intersected, and checked for containment:
let greg = Calendar(identifier:.gregorian) 
let d1 = DateComponents(calendar: greg, 
    year: 2020, month: 1, day: 1, hour: 0).date! 
let d2 = DateComponents(calendar: greg, 
    year: 2020, month: 8, day: 10, hour: 15).date! 
let di = DateInterval(start: d1, end: d2) 
if di.contains(Date()) { // are we currently between those two dates?
You will also likely be concerned with dates represented as strings. If
you don’t take explicit charge of a date’s string representation, it is
represented by a string whose format may surprise you. If you simply

--- Page 892 ---
print a Date, you are shown the date in the GMT timezone, which
can be confusing if that isn’t where you live. A simple solution when
you’re just logging to the console is to call description(with:),
whose parameter is a Locale (Objective-C NSLocale) comprising the
user’s current time zone, language, region format, and calendar
settings:
print(d) 
// 2020-08-10 22:00:00 +0000 
print(d.description(with:Locale.current)) 
// Monday, August 10, 2020 at 3:00:00 PM Pacific Daylight Time
For full control over date strings, especially when presenting them to
the user, use DateFormatter (Objective-C NSDateFormatter), which
takes a format string describing how the date string is laid out:
let df = DateFormatter() 
df.dateFormat = "M/d/y" 
let s = df.string(from: Date()) 
// 7/6/2020
For the date format string notation, see Appendix F of Unicode
Technical Report 35.
DateFormatter knows how to make a date string that conforms to the
user’s local conventions. In this example, we call the class method da
teFormat(fromTemplate:options:locale:) with the current
locale as configured on the user’s device. The template: is a string
listing the date components to be used, but their order, punctuation,
and language are left up to the locale:

--- Page 893 ---
let df = DateFormatter() 
let format = DateFormatter.dateFormat( 
    fromTemplate:"dMMMMyyyyhmmaz", options:0, 
    locale:Locale.current) 
df.dateFormat = format 
let s = df.string(from:Date())
The result is that the date is shown in the user’s time zone and
language, using the correct linguistic conventions. That involves a
combination of region format and language, which are two separate
settings:
On my device, the result might be “July 9, 2020, 12:34 PM PDT.”
If I change my device’s region to France, it might be “9 July 2020
at 12:34 pm GMT-7.”
If I also change my device’s language to French, and if my app is
localized for French, it might be “9 juillet 2020 à 12:34 PM
UTC−7.”
DateFormatter can also parse a date string into a Date — but be sure
that the date format is correct. This attempt to parse a string will fail,
because the date format doesn’t match the way the string is
constructed:
let df = DateFormatter() 
df.locale = Locale(identifier: "en_US_POSIX") 
df.dateFormat = "M/d/y" 
let d = df.date(from: "14/7/2020") // nil; should have been "d/M/y"

--- Page 894 ---
TIP
Setting the Locale to "en_US_POSIX" guarantees that we will override the
device’s settings. Forgetting to do this, and then wondering why parsing a string
into a Date fails on some devices, is a common beginner error, particularly
when you were expecting 12-hour vs. 24-hour time formatting.
NSNumber
An NSNumber is an object that wraps a numeric value. The wrapped
value can be any standard Objective-C numeric type (including
BOOL, the Objective-C equivalent of Swift Bool). In Swift,
everything is an object — a number is a Struct instance — so it
comes as a surprise to Swift users that NSNumber is needed. But an
ordinary number in Objective-C is a scalar, not an object, so it cannot
be used where an object is expected; and an object cannot be used
where a number is expected. Thus, NSNumber solves an important
problem for Objective-C, converting a number into an object and
back again.
Swift does its best to shield you from having to deal directly with
NSNumber. It bridges Swift numeric types to Objective-C in two
different ways:
As a scalar
If Objective-C expects an ordinary number, a Swift number is
bridged to an ordinary number (a scalar):
UIView.animate(withDuration: 1, 
    animations: whatToAnimate, completion: whatToDoLater)

--- Page 895 ---
Objective-C animateWithDuration:animations:completion:
takes a C double as its first parameter. The Swift numeric object
that you supply as the first argument to animate(withDuration:
animations:completion:) becomes a C double.
As an NSNumber
If Objective-C expects an object, a Swift numeric type is bridged
to an NSNumber (including Bool, because NSNumber can wrap
an Objective-C BOOL):
UserDefaults.standard.set(1, forKey:"Score")
Objective-C setObject:forKey: takes an Objective-C object as
its first parameter. The Swift numeric object that you supply as
the first argument to set(_:forKey:) becomes an NSNumber.
Naturally, if you need to cross the bridge explicitly, you can. You can
cast a Swift number to an NSNumber:
let n = 1 as NSNumber
Coming back from Objective-C to Swift, an NSNumber (or an Any
that is actually an NSNumber) can be unwrapped by casting it down
to a numeric type — provided the wrapped numeric value matches
the type. To illustrate, I’ll fetch the NSNumber that I created in
UserDefaults by bridging a moment ago:
let n = UserDefaults.standard.value(forKey:"Score") 
// n is an Optional<Any> containing an NSNumber 
let i = n as! Int // legal 
let d = n as! Double // legal

--- Page 896 ---
An NSNumber object is just a wrapper and no more. It can’t be used
directly for numeric calculations; it isn’t a number. It wraps a
number. One way or another, if you want a number, you have to
extract it from the NSNumber.
An NSNumber subclass, NSDecimalNumber, on the other hand, can
be used in calculations, thanks to a bunch of arithmetic methods:
let dec1 = 4.0 as NSDecimalNumber 
let dec2 = 5.0 as NSDecimalNumber 
let sum = dec1.adding(dec2) // 9.0
Underlying NSDecimalNumber is the Decimal struct (Objective-C
NSDecimal); it is an NSDecimalNumber’s decimalValue. In
Objective-C, NSDecimal comes with C functions that are faster than
NSDecimalNumber methods. In Swift, things are even better, because
the arithmetic operators are overloaded to allow you to do Decimal
arithmetic; you are likely to prefer working with Decimal rather than
NSDecimalNumber:
let dec1 = Decimal(4.0) 
let dec2 = Decimal(5.0) 
let sum = dec1 + dec2
Why does Decimal exist? Well, a computer thinks in binary, and
native numeric types are stored in a base-2 representation. When
there are digits after the decimal point, the results of an arithmetic
operation may not appear quite as you would expect:
let d1 = 0.2222 
let d2 = 0.2221 
let diff = d1 - d2 // 0.0001000000000000167

--- Page 897 ---
(The reasons for that kind of result are explained in a classic
exposition entitled What Every Computer Scientist Should Know
About Floating-Point Arithmetic.)
Decimal, on the other hand, represents base-10 numbers, and its
operations are base-10 operations:
let dec1 = Decimal(d1) // 0.2222 
let dec2 = Decimal(d2) // 0.2221 
let decDiff = dec1 - dec2 // 0.0001 
let diff = NSDecimalNumber(decimal: decDiff).doubleValue // 0.0001
But of course Decimal operations are much slower than normal
arithmetic operations! So you’ll use them only when you have to.
NSValue
NSValue is NSNumber’s superclass. It is used for wrapping
nonnumeric C values, such as C structs, where an object is expected.
The problem being solved here is parallel to the problem solved by
NSNumber: a Swift struct is an object, but a C struct is not, so a
struct cannot be used in Objective-C where an object is expected, and
vice versa.
Convenience methods provided through the
NSValueUIGeometryExtensions category on NSValue allow easy
wrapping and unwrapping of such common structs as CGPoint,
CGSize, CGRect, CGAffineTransform, UIEdgeInsets, and UIOffset:
let pt = self.oldButtonCenter // a CGPoint 
let val = NSValue(cgPoint:pt)

--- Page 898 ---
Additional categories allow easy wrapping and unwrapping of
NSRange, CATransform3D, CMTime, CMTimeMapping,
CMTimeRange, MKCoordinate, and MKCoordinateSpan (and you
are unlikely to need to store any other kind of C value in an NSValue,
but if you do need to, you can).
But you will rarely need to deal with NSValue explicitly, because
Swift will wrap any of those common structs in an NSValue for you
as it crosses the bridge from Swift to Objective-C. Here’s an example
from my own real-life code:
let pt = CGPoint( 
    x: screenbounds.midX + r * cos(rads), 
    y: screenbounds.midY + r * sin(rads) 
) 
// apply an animation of ourself to that point 
let anim = CABasicAnimation(keyPath:"position") 
anim.fromValue = self.position 
anim.toValue = pt
In that code, self.position and pt are both CGPoints. The
CABasicAnimation properties fromValue and toValue need to be
Objective-C objects (that is, class instances) so that Cocoa can obey
them to perform the animation. It is therefore necessary to wrap sel
f.position and pt as NSValue objects. But you don’t have to do
that; Swift wraps those CGPoints as NSValue objects for you, Cocoa
is able to interpret and obey them, and the animation works correctly.
The same thing is true of an array of common structs. Again,
animation is a case in point. If you assign an array of CGPoint to a
CAKeyframeAnimation’s values property, the animation will work

--- Page 899 ---
properly, without your having to map the CGPoints to NSValues first.
That’s because Swift maps them for you as the array crosses the
bridge.
NSData
Data (Objective-C NSData) is a general sequence of bytes (UInt8);
basically, it’s just a buffer, a chunk of memory. In Objective-C,
NSData is immutable; the mutable version is its subclass
NSMutableData. In Swift, however, where Data is a bridged value
type imposed in front of NSData, a Data object is mutable if it was
declared with var, just like any other value type. Moreover, because a
Data object represents a byte sequence, Swift makes it a Collection
(and therefore a Sequence), causing Swift features such as
enumeration with for...in, subscripting, and append(_:) to spring
to life. Thus, although you can work with NSData and
NSMutableData if you want to (by casting to cross the bridge), you
are much more likely to prefer Data.
In practice, Data tends to arise in two main ways:
When downloading from the internet
URLSession (Objective-C NSURLSession) supplies whatever it
retrieves from the internet as Data. Transforming it from there
into (let’s say) a string, specifying the correct encoding, would
then be up to you.
When serializing an object
A typical use case is that you’re storing an object as a file or in
user preferences (UserDefaults). You can’t store a UIColor value

--- Page 900 ---
directly into user preferences. So if the user has made a color
choice and you need to save it, you transform the UIColor into a
Data object (using NSKeyedArchiver) and save that:
let ud = UserDefaults.standard 
let c = UIColor.blue 
let cdata = try! NSKeyedArchiver.archivedData( 
    withRootObject: c, requiringSecureCoding: true) 
ud.set(cdata, forKey: "myColor")
NSMeasurement and Friends
The Measurement type (Objective-C NSMeasurement) embodies the
notion of a measurement by some unit (Unit, Objective-C NSUnit). A
unit may be along some dimension that can be expressed in different
units convertible to one another; by reducing values in different units
of the same dimension to a base unit, a Measurement permits you to
perform arithmetic operations and conversions.
The dimensions, which are all subclasses of the (abstract) Dimension
class (Objective-C NSDimension, an NSUnit subclass), have names
like UnitAngle and UnitLength (Objective-C NSUnitAngle,
NSUnitLength), and have class properties vending an instance
corresponding to a particular unit type; UnitAngle has class
properties degrees and radians and others, UnitLength has class
properties miles and kilometers, and so on.
To illustrate, I’ll add 5 miles to 6 kilometers:
let m1 = Measurement(value:5, unit: UnitLength.miles) 
let m2 = Measurement(value:6, unit: UnitLength.kilometers) 
let total = m1 + m2

--- Page 901 ---
The answer, total, is 14046.7 meters under the hood, because meters
are the base unit of length. But it can be converted to any length unit:
let totalFeet = total.converted(to: .feet).value // 46084.9737532808
If your goal is to output a measurement as a user-facing string, use a
MeasurementFormatter (Objective-C NSMeasurementFormatter). Its
behavior is locale-dependent by default, expressing the value and the
units as the user would expect:
let mf = MeasurementFormatter() 
let s = mf.string(from:total) // "8.728 mi"
My code says nothing about miles, but the MeasurementFormatter
outputs "8.728 mi" because my device is set to United States
(region) and English (language). If my device is set to France
(region) and French (language), the very same code outputs "14,047
km" — using the French decimal point notation and the French
preferred unit of distance measurement.
Equality, Hashability, and Comparison
In Swift, the equality and comparison operators can be overridden for
an object type that adopts Equatable and Comparable (“Operators”).
But Objective-C operators are applicable only to scalars. Objective-C
therefore performs comparison of object instances in a special way,
and it can be useful to know about this when working with Cocoa
classes.
To permit determination of whether two objects are “equal” —
whatever that may mean for this object type — an Objective-C class

--- Page 902 ---
must implement isEqual(_:), which is inherited from NSObject.
Swift will help out by treating NSObject as Equatable and by
permitting the use of the == operator, implicitly converting it to an is
Equal(_:) call. Thus, if a class derived from NSObject implements i
sEqual(_:), ordinary Swift comparison will work. If an NSObject
subclass doesn’t implement isEqual(_:), it inherits NSObject’s
implementation, which compares the two objects for identity (like
Swift’s === operator).
These two Dog objects can be compared with the == operator, even
though Dog does not adopt Equatable, because they derive from
NSObject. Dog doesn’t implement isEqual(_:), so == defaults to
using NSObject’s identity comparison:
class Dog : NSObject { 
    var name : String 
    var license : Int 
    init(name:String, license:Int) { 
        self.name = name 
        self.license = license 
    } 
} 
let d1 = Dog(name:"Fido", license:1) 
let d2 = Dog(name:"Fido", license:1) 
let ok = d1 == d2 // false
If we wanted two Dogs with the same name and license to be
considered equal, we’d need to implement isEqual(_:), like this:
class Dog : NSObject { 
    var name : String 
    var license : Int 
    init(name:String, license:Int) { 

--- Page 903 ---
        self.name = name 
        self.license = license 
    } 
    override func isEqual(_ object: Any?) -> Bool { 
        if let otherdog = object as? Dog { 
            return (otherdog.name == self.name && 
                otherdog.license == self.license) 
        } 
        return false 
    } 
} 
let d1 = Dog(name:"Fido", license:1) 
let d2 = Dog(name:"Fido", license:1) 
let ok = d1 == d2 // true
At this point, you might be saying (thinking of “Synthesized Protocol
Implementations”): “But wait, why don’t you just declare Dog to
adopt Equatable and get autosynthesis of equatability based on its
properties?” But you can’t do that. Autosynthesis of Equatable
conformance doesn’t work for classes, and in any case Dog is already
Equatable by virtue of being an NSObject subclass. Besides,
Equatable is about how to implement ==, whereas what we need to
implement here is isEqual:.
Foundation types implement isEqual(_:) in a sensible way, so
Swift equatability works as you would expect. NSNumber
implements isEqual(_:) by comparing the underlying numbers;
thus, you can use NSNumber where a Swift Equatable is expected,
and, because a Swift number will be cast automatically to an
NSNumber if needed, you can even compare an NSNumber to a
Swift number:

--- Page 904 ---
let n1 = 1 as NSNumber 
let n2 = 2 as NSNumber 
let n3 = 3 as NSNumber 
let ok = n2 == 2 // true 
let ix = [n1,n2,n3].firstIndex(of:2) // Optional wrapping 1
By the same token, for an NSObject subclass to work properly where
hashability is required — as a dictionary key or a set member, even if
this is a Swift Dictionary or Set — it must conform to the NSObject
notion of hashability, namely, an implementation of isEqual(_:)
plus a corresponding override of the NSObject hash property,
meaning that two equal objects should have equal hash values. If we
wanted our Dog from the previous code to be usable in a Set, we’d
need to override hash; that would be tricky to implement on our own,
but fortunately the Hasher struct (introduced in Swift 4.2) makes it
easy:
class Dog : NSObject { 
    var name : String 
    var license : Int 
    init(name:String, license:Int) { 
        self.name = name 
        self.license = license 
    } 
    override func isEqual(_ object: Any?) -> Bool { 
        if let otherdog = object as? Dog { 
            return (otherdog.name == self.name && 
                otherdog.license == self.license) 
        } 
        return false 
    } 
    override var hash: Int { 
        var h = Hasher() 
        h.combine(self.name) 
        h.combine(self.license) 

--- Page 905 ---
        return h.finalize() 
    } 
} 
var set = Set<Dog>() 
set.insert(Dog(name:"Fido", license:1)) 
set.insert(Dog(name:"Fido", license:1)) 
print(set.count) // 1
Foundation types come with a built-in hash implementation (and the
Swift overlay types are all both Equatable and Hashable as well).
In Objective-C it is also up to individual classes to supply ordered
comparison methods. The standard method is compare(_:), which
returns one of three cases of ComparisonResult (Objective-C
NSComparisonResult):
.orderedAscending
The receiver is less than the argument.
.orderedSame
The receiver is equal to the argument.
.orderedDescending
The receiver is greater than the argument.
Swift comparison operators (< and so forth) do not magically call com
pare(_:) for you. You can’t compare two NSNumber values
directly:
let n1 = 1 as NSNumber 
let n2 = 2 as NSNumber 
let ok = n1 < n2 // compile error

--- Page 906 ---
You will typically fall back on calling compare(_:) yourself:
let n1 = 1 as NSNumber 
let n2 = 2 as NSNumber 
let ok = n1.compare(n2) == .orderedAscending // true
On the other hand, a Swift Foundation overlay type can adopt
Comparable, and in that case comparison operators do work. You
can’t use the < operator to compare two NSDate values, but you can
use it to compare two Date values.
NSArray and NSMutableArray
NSArray is Objective-C’s array object type. It is fundamentally
similar to Swift Array, and they are bridged to one another; but
NSArray elements must be objects (classes and class instances), and
they don’t have to be of a single type. For a full discussion of how to
bridge back and forth between Swift Array and Objective-C
NSArray, implicitly and by casting, see “Swift Array and Objective-C
NSArray”.
An NSArray’s length is its count, and an element can be obtained by
index number using object(at:). The index of the first element, as
with a Swift Array, is zero, so the index of the last element is count
minus one.
Instead of calling object(at:), you can use subscripting with an
NSArray. This is not because NSArray is bridged to Swift Array, but
because NSArray implements an Objective-C method, objectAtInde
xedSubscript:, which is the Objective-C equivalent of a Swift subs

--- Page 907 ---
cript getter. In fact, when you examine the NSArray header file
translated into Swift, that method is shown as a subscript
declaration!
You can seek an object within an array with index(of:) or indexOf
ObjectIdentical(to:); the former’s idea of equality is to call isEq
ual(_:), whereas the latter uses object identity (like Swift’s ===). If
the object is not found in the array, the result is NSNotFound.
Like an Objective-C NSString, an NSArray is immutable. This
doesn’t mean you can’t mutate any of the objects it contains; it means
that once the NSArray is formed you can’t remove an object from it,
insert an object into it, or replace an object at a given index. To do
those things while staying in the Objective-C world, you can derive a
new array consisting of the original array plus or minus some objects,
or use NSArray’s subclass, NSMutableArray.
Swift Array is not bridged to NSMutableArray; if you want an
NSMutableArray, you must create it. The simplest way is with the
NSMutableArray initializers, init() or init(array:). Once you
have an NSMutableArray, you can call methods such as insert(_:a
t:) and replaceObject(at:with:). You can also assign into an
NSMutableArray using subscripting. Again, this is because
NSMutableArray implements a special Objective-C method, setObje
ct:atIndexedSubscript:; Swift recognizes this as equivalent to a s
ubscript setter.
Coming back the other way, you can cast an NSMutableArray down
to a Swift array:

--- Page 908 ---
let marr = NSMutableArray() 
marr.add(1) // an NSNumber 
marr.add(2) // an NSNumber 
let arr = marr as NSArray as! [Int]
Cocoa provides ways to sort an array, as well as to search or filter an
array by passing a function. You might prefer to perform those kinds
of operation in the Swift Array world, but it can be useful to know
how to do them the Cocoa way:
let pep = ["Manny", "Moe", "Jack"] as NSArray 
let ems = pep.objects( 
    at: pep.indexesOfObjects { obj, idx, stop -> Bool in 
        return (obj as! NSString).range( 
            of: "m", options:.caseInsensitive 
            ).location == 0 
    } 
) // ["Manny", "Moe"]
NSDictionary and NSMutableDictionary
NSDictionary is Objective-C’s dictionary object type. It is
fundamentally similar to Swift Dictionary, and they are bridged to
one another. But NSDictionary keys and values must be objects
(classes and class instances), and they don’t have to be of a single
type; the keys must conform to NSCopying and must be hashable.
See “Swift Dictionary and Objective-C NSDictionary” for a full
discussion of how to bridge back and forth between Swift Dictionary
and Objective-C NSDictionary, including casting.
An NSDictionary is immutable; its mutable subclass is
NSMutableDictionary. Swift Dictionary is not bridged to
NSMutableDictionary; you can most easily make an

--- Page 909 ---
NSMutableDictionary with an initializer, init() or init(dictionar
y:), and you can cast an NSMutableDictionary down to a Swift
Dictionary type.
The keys of an NSDictionary are distinct (using isEqual(_:) for
comparison). If you add a key–value pair to an NSMutableDictionary,
then if that key is not already present, the pair is simply added, but if
the key is already present, then the corresponding value is replaced.
This is parallel to the behavior of Swift Dictionary.
The fundamental use of an NSDictionary is to request an entry’s
value by key (using object(forKey:)); if no such key exists, the
result is nil. In Objective-C, nil is not an object and cannot be a
value in an NSDictionary, so the meaning of this response is
unambiguous. Swift handles this by treating the result of object(for
Key:) as an Optional wrapping an Any.
Subscripting is possible on an NSDictionary or an
NSMutableDictionary, for similar reasons to an NSArray or an
NSMutableArray. NSDictionary implements objectForKeyedSubsc
ript:, and Swift understands this as equivalent to a subscript
getter. In addition, NSMutableDictionary implements setObject:fo
rKeyedSubscript:, and Swift understands this as equivalent to a su
bscript setter.
Like a Swift Dictionary, an NSDictionary is unordered. You can get
from an NSDictionary a list of keys (allKeys), a list of values (allV
alues), or a list of keys sorted by value. You can also walk through

--- Page 910 ---
the key–value pairs, and you can even filter an NSDictionary by a test
against its values.
NSSet and Friends
An NSSet is an unordered collection of distinct objects. Swift Set is
bridged to NSSet, and the Swift Foundation overlay even allows you
to initialize an NSSet from a Swift array literal. But NSSet elements
must be objects (classes and class instances), and they don’t have to
be of a single type. For details, see “Swift Set and Objective-C
NSSet”.
“Distinct” for an NSSet means that no two objects in a set can return
true when they are compared using isEqual(_:). Learning whether
an object is present in a set is much more efficient than seeking it in
an array (because a set’s elements are hashable), and you can ask
whether one set is a subset of, or intersects, another set. You can walk
through (enumerate) a set with the for...in construct, though the
order is of course undefined. You can filter a set, as you can an
NSArray. Indeed, much of what you can do with a set is parallel to
what you can do with an array, except that you can’t do anything with
a set that involves the notion of ordering.
To transcend that restriction, you can use an ordered set. An ordered
set (NSOrderedSet) is very like an array, and the methods for
working with it are similar to the methods for working with an array
— you can even fetch an element by subscripting (because it
implements objectAtIndexedSubscript:). But an ordered set’s
elements must be distinct. An ordered set provides many of the

--- Page 911 ---
advantages of sets: as with an NSSet, learning whether an object is
present in an ordered set is much more efficient than for an array, and
you can readily take the union, intersection, or difference with
another set. Since the distinctness restriction will often prove no
restriction at all (because the elements were going to be distinct
anyway), it can be worthwhile to use NSOrderedSet instead of
NSArray where possible.
An NSSet is immutable. You can derive one NSSet from another by
adding or removing elements, or you can use its subclass,
NSMutableSet. Similarly, NSOrderedSet has its mutable counterpart,
NSMutableOrderedSet (which you can insert into by subscripting,
because it implements setObject:atIndexedSubscript:). There is
no penalty for adding to a set an object that the set already contains;
nothing is added (and so the distinctness rule is enforced), but there’s
no error.
NSCountedSet, a subclass of NSMutableSet, is a mutable unordered
collection of objects that are not necessarily distinct (this concept is
often referred to as a bag). It is implemented as a set plus a count of
how many times each element has been added.
NSMutableSet, NSCountedSet, NSOrderedSet, and
NSMutableOrderedSet are easily formed from a set or an array using
an initializer. Coming back the other way, you can cast an
NSMutableSet or NSCountedSet down to a Swift Set. Because of
their special behaviors, however, you are much more likely to leave
an NSCountedSet or NSOrderedSet in its Objective-C form for as
long as you’re working with it.

--- Page 912 ---
NSIndexSet
IndexSet (Objective-C NSIndexSet) represents a collection of unique
whole numbers; its purpose is to express element numbers of an
ordered collection, such as an array. For instance, to retrieve multiple
elements simultaneously from an NSArray, you specify the desired
indexes as an IndexSet. It is also used with other things that are array-
like; for example, you pass an IndexSet to a UITableView to indicate
what sections to insert or delete.
NSIndexSet is immutable; it has a mutable subclass,
NSMutableIndexSet. But IndexSet is a value type, so it is mutable if
the declaration uses var. And, as with other Swift types imposed in
front of Foundation types, IndexSet gets to do all sorts of convenient
Swift magic. Comparison and arithmetic operators work directly with
IndexSet values. Even more important, an IndexSet acts like a Set: it
adopts the SetAlgebra protocol, and methods like contains(_:) and
intersection(_:) spring to life. You probably won’t need
NSMutableIndexSet at all.
To take a specific example, let’s say you want to speak of the
elements at indexes 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, and 10 of an array. IndexSet
expresses this notion in some compact implementation that can be
readily queried. The actual implementation is opaque, but you can
imagine that this IndexSet might consist of two Ranges, 1...4 and
8...10, and IndexSet’s methods actually invite you to think of it as a
Set of Ranges:
let arr = ["zero", "one", "two", "three", "four", "five", 
    "six", "seven", "eight", "nine", "ten"] 

--- Page 913 ---
var ixs = IndexSet() 
ixs.insert(integersIn: 1...4) 
ixs.insert(integersIn: 8...10) 
let arr2 = (arr as NSArray).objects(at:ixs) 
// ["one", "two", "three", "four", "eight", "nine", "ten"]
To walk through (enumerate) the index values specified by an
IndexSet, you can use for...in; alternatively, you can walk through
an IndexSet’s indexes or ranges by calling various enumerate
methods that let you pass a function returning a Bool.
NOTE
A Swift Array cannot access elements by way of IndexSet; IndexSet is
ultimately a façade for NSIndexSet, and applies only to NSArray. As of this
writing, though, there’s a Swift Evolution proposal for adding a true native
Swift type, RangeSet, that will allow subscripting into a native Swift collection.
You can try it out by way of the Standard Library Preview package,
https://github.com/apple/swift-standard-library-preview.
NSNull
The NSNull class does nothing but supply a pointer to a singleton
object, NSNull(). This singleton object is used to stand for nil in
situations where an actual Objective-C object is required and nil is
not permitted. You can’t use nil as the value of an element of an
Objective-C collection (such as NSArray, NSDictionary, or NSSet),
so you’d use NSNull() instead.
NSNull() makes it possible for a Swift Array of Optional to be
handed to Objective-C. The Swift Array might contain nil, which is

--- Page 914 ---
illegal in Objective-C. But Swift will bridge the Array of Optional for
you, as it crosses into Objective-C, by substituting NSNull() for any
nil elements. And, coming back the other way, Swift will perform
the inverse operation when you cast an NSArray down to an Array of
Optional, substituting nil for any NSNull() elements.
You can test an object for equality against NSNull() using the
ordinary equality operator (==), because it falls back on NSObject’s i
sEqual(_:), which is identity comparison. This is a singleton
instance, and therefore identity comparison works.
Immutable and Mutable
Cocoa Foundation has a pattern of class pairs where the superclass is
immutable and the subclass is mutable; I’ve given many examples
already, such as NSString and NSMutableString, or NSArray and
NSMutableArray. This is similar to the Swift distinction between a
constant (let) and a true variable (var). An NSArray being
immutable means that you can’t append or insert into this array, or
replace or delete an element of this array; but if its elements are
reference types — and of course, for an NSArray, they are reference
types — you can mutate an element in place. That’s just like the
behavior of a Swift Array referred to with let.
The reason why Cocoa needs these immutable/mutable pairs is to
prevent unauthorized mutation. An NSString object, say, is an
ordinary class instance — a reference type. If NSString were
mutable, an NSString property of a class could be mutated by some
other object, behind this class’s back. To prevent that from

--- Page 915 ---
happening, a class will work internally and temporarily with a
mutable instance, but then store and vend to other classes an
immutable instance, protecting the value from being changed by
anyone else. Swift doesn’t face the same issue, because its
fundamental built-in object types such as String, Array, and
Dictionary are structs, and therefore are value types, which cannot be
mutated in place; they can be changed only by being replaced, and
that is something that can be guarded against, or detected through a
setter observer. NSString isn’t a value type, but as far as mutability is
concerned, it displays value semantics (“Value Types and Reference
Types”).
The documentation may not make it completely obvious that the
mutable classes obey and, if appropriate, override the methods of
their immutable superclasses. Dozens of NSMutableArray methods
are not listed on NSMutableArray’s class documentation page,
because they are inherited from NSArray. And when such methods
are inherited by the mutable subclass, they may be overridden to fit
the mutable subclass. NSArray’s init(array:) generates an
immutable array, but NSMutableArray’s init(array:) — which
isn’t even listed on the NSMutableArray documentation page,
because it is inherited from NSArray — generates a mutable array.
That fact also answers the question of how to make an immutable
array mutable, and vice versa. This single method, init(array:),
can transform an array between immutable and mutable in either
direction. You can also use copy (produces an immutable copy) and m
utableCopy (produces a mutable copy), both inherited from

--- Page 916 ---
NSObject; but these are not as convenient because they yield an Any
which must then be cast.
WARNING
These immutable/mutable class pairs are all implemented as class clusters,
which means that Cocoa uses a secret class, different from the documented class
you work with. You may discover this by peeking under the hood; an NSString,
for instance, might be characterized as an NSTaggedPointerString or an
NSCFString. You should not spend any time wondering about this secret class.
It’s a mere implementation detail, and is subject to change without notice; you
should never have looked at it in the first place.
Property Lists
A property list is a string (XML) representation of data. The
Foundation classes NSString, NSData, NSArray, and NSDictionary
are the only Cocoa classes that can be expressed directly in a property
list. Moreover, an NSArray or NSDictionary can be expressed in a
property list only if its elements are instances of those classes, along
with NSDate and NSNumber. Those are the property list types.
(That is why, as I mentioned earlier, you must convert a UIColor into
a Data object in order to store it in user defaults; the user defaults
storage is a property list, and UIColor is not a property list type. But
Data is a property list type, because it is bridged to NSData.)
The primary use of a property list is as a way of serializing a value —
saving it to disk in a form from which it can be reconstructed.
NSArray and NSDictionary provide write methods that generate

--- Page 917 ---
property list files; conversely, they also provide initializers that create
an NSArray object or an NSDictionary object based on the property
list contents of a given file. (The NSString and NSData write
methods just write the data out as a file directly, not as a property
list.)
Here I’ll create an array of strings and write it out to disk as a
property list file:
let arr = ["Manny", "Moe", "Jack"] 
let fm = FileManager.default 
let temp = fm.temporaryDirectory 
let f = temp.appendingPathComponent("pep.plist") 
try! (arr as NSArray).write(to: f)
The result is a file that looks like this:
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<!DOCTYPE plist PUBLIC "-//Apple//DTD PLIST 1.0//EN" 
    "http://www.apple.com/DTDs/PropertyList-1.0.dtd"> 
<plist version="1.0"> 
<array> 
    <string>Manny</string> 
    <string>Moe</string> 
    <string>Jack</string> 
</array> 
</plist>
When you reconstruct an NSArray or NSDictionary object from a
property list file in this way, the collections, string objects, and data
objects in the collection are all immutable. If you want them to be
mutable, or if you want to convert an instance of one of the other
property list classes to a property list, you’ll use the

--- Page 918 ---
PropertyListSerialization class (Objective-C
NSPropertyListSerialization; see the Property List Programming
Guide in the documentation archive).
Codable
Property lists are a Cocoa Objective-C construct, useful for
serializing objects. But in Swift you can serialize an object without
crossing the bridge into the Objective-C world, provided it adopts the
Codable protocol. In effect, every native Swift type and every
Foundation overlay type does adopt the Codable protocol! This
means, among other things, that enums and structs can easily be
serialized.
There are three main use cases, involving three pairs of classes to
serialize the object and extract it again later; what you’re encoding to
and decoding from is a Data object:
Property lists
Use PropertyListEncoder and PropertyListDecoder.
JSON
Use JSONEncoder and JSONDecoder.
NSCoder
Use NSKeyedArchiver and NSKeyedUnarchiver.
To illustrate, let’s rewrite the previous example, serializing an array
of strings to a property list, without casting it to an NSArray. This
works because both Swift Array and Swift String adopt Codable;

--- Page 919 ---
indeed, thanks to conditional conformance (Chapter 4), an Array is
Codable only just in case its element type is Codable:
let arr = ["Manny", "Moe", "Jack"] 
let fm = FileManager.default 
let temp = fm.temporaryDirectory 
let f = temp.appendingPathComponent("pep.plist") 
let penc = PropertyListEncoder() 
penc.outputFormat = .xml 
let d = try! penc.encode(arr) 
try! d.write(to: f)
The resulting file looks like this:
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<!DOCTYPE plist PUBLIC "-//Apple//DTD PLIST 1.0//EN" 
    "http://www.apple.com/DTDs/PropertyList-1.0.dtd"> 
<plist version="1.0"> 
<array> 
    <string>Manny</string> 
    <string>Moe</string> 
    <string>Jack</string> 
</array> 
</plist>
That example doesn’t do anything that we couldn’t have done with
NSArray. But now consider, for instance, an index set. You can’t
write an NSIndexSet directly into a property list using Objective-C,
because NSIndexSet is not a property list type. But the Swift
Foundation overlay type, IndexSet, is Codable:
let penc = PropertyListEncoder() 
penc.outputFormat = .xml 
let d = try! penc.encode(IndexSet([1,2,3]))

--- Page 920 ---
And here’s the result:
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<!DOCTYPE plist PUBLIC "-//Apple//DTD PLIST 1.0//EN" 
    "http://www.apple.com/DTDs/PropertyList-1.0.dtd"> 
<plist version="1.0"> 
<dict> 
    <key>indexes</key> 
    <array> 
        <dict> 
            <key>length</key> 
            <integer>3</integer> 
            <key>location</key> 
            <integer>1</integer> 
        </dict> 
    </array> 
</dict> 
</plist>
Notice how cleverly Swift has encoded this object. You can’t put an
IndexSet into a property list — but this property list doesn’t contain
any IndexSet! It is composed entirely of legal property list types — a
dictionary containing an array of dictionaries whose values are
numbers. And Swift can extract the encoded object from the property
list:
let ix = try! PropertyListDecoder().decode(IndexSet.self, from: d) 
// [1,2,3]
Your own custom types can adopt Codable and make themselves
encodable in the same way. In fact, in the simplest case, adopting
Codable is all you have to do! If the type’s properties are themselves
Codable, the right thing will happen automatically. The Codable
protocol has two required methods, but we don’t have to implement

--- Page 921 ---
them because default implementations are synthesized (see
“Synthesized Protocol Implementations”) — though we could
implement them if we wanted to customize the details of encoding
and decoding.
Here’s a simple Person struct:
struct Person : Codable { 
    let firstName : String 
    let lastName : String 
}
Person adopts Codable, so with no further effort we can turn a Person
into a property list:
let p = Person(firstName: "Matt", lastName: "Neuburg") 
let penc = PropertyListEncoder() 
penc.outputFormat = .xml 
let d = try! penc.encode(p)
Here’s our encoded Person:
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<!DOCTYPE plist PUBLIC "-//Apple//DTD PLIST 1.0//EN" 
    "http://www.apple.com/DTDs/PropertyList-1.0.dtd"> 
<plist version="1.0"> 
<dict> 
    <key>firstName</key> 
    <string>Matt</string> 
    <key>lastName</key> 
    <string>Neuburg</string> 
</dict> 
</plist>

--- Page 922 ---
Observe that this would work just as well for, say, an array of Person,
or a dictionary with Person values, or any Codable struct with a
Person property.
UserDefaults is a property list, so an object that isn’t a property list
type must be archived to a Data object in order to store it in
UserDefaults. A PropertyListEncoder creates a Data object, so we can
use it to store a Person object in UserDefaults:
let ud = UserDefaults.standard 
let p = Person(firstName: "Matt", lastName: "Neuburg") 
let pdata = try! PropertyListEncoder().encode(p) 
ud.set(pdata, forKey: "person")
Encoding as JSON is similar to encoding as a property list:
let p = Person(firstName: "Matt", lastName: "Neuburg") 
let jenc = JSONEncoder() 
jenc.outputFormatting = .prettyPrinted 
let d = try! jenc.encode(p) 
print(String(data:d, encoding:.utf8)!) 
/* 
{ 
  "firstName" : "Matt", 
  "lastName" : "Neuburg" 
} 
*/
The final use case is encoding or decoding through an NSCoder.
There are various situations where Cocoa lends you an NSCoder
object and invites you to put some data into it or pull some data out of
it. The NSCoder in question will be either an NSKeyedArchiver,
when you’re encoding, or an NSKeyedUnarchiver, when you’re

--- Page 923 ---
decoding. These subclasses, respectively, provide methods encodeEn
codable(_:forKey:), which takes a Codable object, and decodeDec
odable(_:forKey:), which produces a Codable object. Thus, your
Codable adopters can pass into and out of an archive by way of
NSCoder.
As I mentioned earlier, your Codable adopter can take more control
of the encoding and decoding process. You can map between your
object’s property names and the encoded key names by adding a
CodingKeys enum, and you can provide an explicit implementation
of the encode(to:) and decode(from:) methods instead of letting
them be synthesized for you. For more information, consult the help
document “Encoding and Decoding Custom Types.”
Accessors, Properties, and Key–Value
Coding
An Objective-C instance variable is structurally similar to a Swift
instance property: it’s a variable that accompanies each instance of a
class, with a lifetime and value associated with that particular
instance. An Objective-C instance variable, however, is usually
private, in the sense that instances of other classes can’t see it (and
Swift can’t see it). If an instance variable is to be made public, an
Objective-C class will typically implement accessor methods: a getter
method and (if this instance variable is to be publicly writable) a
setter method. This is such a common thing to do that there are
naming conventions:

--- Page 924 ---
The getter method
A getter should have the same name as the instance variable
(without an initial underscore if the instance variable has one). If
the instance variable is named myVar (or _myVar), the getter
method should be named myVar.
The setter method
A setter method’s name should start with set, followed by a
capitalized version of the instance variable’s name (without an
initial underscore if the instance variable has one). The setter
should take one parameter — the new value to be assigned to the
instance variable. If the instance variable is named myVar (or _my
Var), the setter should be named setMyVar:.
This pattern — a getter method, possibly accompanied by an
appropriately named setter method — is so common that the
Objective-C language provides a shorthand: a class can declare a
property, using the keyword @property and a name. Here’s a line
from the UIView class declaration in Objective-C (ignore the material
in the parentheses):
@property(nonatomic) CGRect frame;
This declaration constitutes a promise that there is a getter accessor
method frame returning a CGRect, along with a setter accessor
method setFrame: that takes a CGRect parameter.
When Objective-C formally declares a @property in this way, Swift
sees it as a Swift property. UIView’s frame property declaration is
translated directly into a Swift declaration of an instance property fra
me of type CGRect:

--- Page 925 ---
var frame: CGRect
An Objective-C property name, however, is mere syntactic sugar;
Objective-C objects do not really “have” properties. When you
apparently set a UIView’s frame property, you are actually calling its
setFrame: setter method, and when you apparently get a UIView’s f
rame property, you are actually calling its frame getter method. In
Objective-C, use of the property is optional; Objective-C code can,
and often does, call the setFrame: and frame methods directly. But
you can’t do that in Swift! If an Objective-C class has a formal @prop
erty declaration, the accessor methods are hidden from Swift.
An Objective-C property declaration can include the word readonly
in the parentheses. This indicates that there is a getter but no setter:
@property(nonatomic,readonly,strong) CALayer *layer;
(Ignore the other material in the parentheses.) Swift will reflect this
restriction with {get} after the declaration, as if this were a
computed read-only property; the compiler will not permit you to
assign to such a property:
var layer: CALayer { get }
Although Objective-C accessor methods may literally be ways of
accessing an invisible instance variable, they don’t have to be. When
you set a UIView’s frame property and the setFrame: accessor
method is called, you have no way of knowing what that method is
really doing: it might be setting an instance variable called frame or _
frame, but who knows? In this sense, accessors and properties are a

--- Page 926 ---
façade, hiding the underlying implementation. This is similar to how,
within Swift, you can set a variable without knowing or caring
whether it is a stored variable or a computed variable (and, if it is a
computed variable, without knowing what its getter and setter
functions really do).
Swift Accessors
Just as Objective-C properties are actually a shorthand for accessor
methods, so Objective-C treats Swift properties as a shorthand for
accessor methods — even though no such methods are formally
present. If you, in Swift, declare that a class has a property prop,
Objective-C can call a prop method to get its value or a setProp:
method to set its value, even though you have not implemented such
methods. Those calls are routed to your property through implicit
accessor methods.
In Swift, you should not write explicit accessor methods for a
property; the compiler will stop you if you attempt to do so. If you
need to implement an accessor method explicitly and formally, use a
computed property. Here I’ll add to my UIViewController subclass a
computed color property with a getter and a setter:
class ViewController: UIViewController { 
    @objc var color : UIColor { 
        get { 
            print("someone called the getter") 
            return .red 
        } 
        set { 
            print("someone called the setter") 
        } 

--- Page 927 ---
    } 
}
Objective-C code can now call explicitly the implicit setColor: and
color accessor methods — and when it does, the computed
property’s setter and getter methods are in fact called:
ViewController* vc = [ViewController new]; 
[vc setColor:[UIColor redColor]]; // "someone called the setter" 
UIColor* c = [vc color]; // "someone called the getter"
This proves that, in Objective-C’s mind, you have provided setColo
r: and color accessor methods.
You can even change the Objective-C names of accessor methods! To
do so, follow the @objc attribute with the Objective-C name in
parentheses. You can add it to a computed property’s setter and getter
methods, or you can add it to a property itself:
@objc(hue) var color : UIColor?
Objective-C code can now call hue and setHue: accessor methods
directly.
If, in speaking to Objective-C, you need to pass a selector for an
accessor method, precede the contents of the #selector expression
with getter: or setter:. For example, #selector(setter:color)
is "setHue:" if we have modified our color property’s Objective-C
name with @objc(hue) (or "setColor:" if we have not).

--- Page 928 ---
If all you want to do is add functionality to the setter, use a setter
observer. To add functionality to the Objective-C setFrame: method
in your UIView subclass, you can override the frame property and
write a didSet observer:
class MyView: UIView { 
    override var frame : CGRect { 
        didSet { 
            print("the frame setter was called: \(super.frame)") 
        } 
    } 
}
Key–Value Coding
Cocoa can dynamically call an accessor method, or access an instance
variable, based on a string name specified at runtime, through a
mechanism called key–value coding (KVC). The string name is the
key; what is passed or returned is the value. The basis for key–value
coding is the NSKeyValueCoding protocol, an informal protocol; it is
actually a category injected into NSObject. A Swift class, to be
susceptible to key–value coding, must therefore be derived from
NSObject.
The fundamental Cocoa key–value coding methods are setValue(_:
forKey:) and value(forKey:). When one of these methods is
called on an object, the object is introspected. In simplified terms,
first the appropriate accessor method is sought; if it doesn’t exist, the
instance variable is accessed directly. The value can be an Objective-
C object of any type, so its Objective-C type is id; therefore it is
typed in Swift as Any. Whatever you pass into setValue(_:forKe

--- Page 929 ---
y:) will cross the bridge from Swift to Objective-C. Coming back the
other way, when calling value(forKey:), you’ll receive an Optional
wrapping an Any; you’ll want to cast this down safely to its expected
type.
A class is key–value coding compliant (or KVC compliant) on a given
key if it provides the accessor methods, or possesses the instance
variable, required for access through that key. An attempt to access a
key for which a class is not key–value coding compliant will likely
cause a crash at runtime. It is useful to be familiar with the message
you’ll get when such a crash occurs, so let’s cause it deliberately:
let obj = NSObject() 
obj.setValue("hello", forKey:"keyName") // crash
The console says: “This class is not key value coding-compliant for
the key keyName.” The last word in that error message is the key
string that caused the trouble.
What would it take for that method call not to crash? The class of the
object to which it is sent would need to have a setKeyName: setter
method, or a keyName or _keyName instance variable. In Swift, as I
demonstrated in the previous section, an instance property implies the
existence of accessor methods. So we can use Cocoa key–value
coding on an instance of any NSObject subclass that has a declared
property, provided the key string is the string name of that property.
Let’s try it! Here is such a class:
class Dog : NSObject { 
    @objc var name : String = "" 

--- Page 930 ---
}
And here’s our test:
let d = Dog() 
d.setValue("Fido", forKey:"name") // no crash! 
print(d.name) // "Fido" - it worked!
How Outlets Work
Key–value coding lies at the heart of how outlet connections work
(Chapter 7). Suppose that you have a class Dog with an @IBOutlet
property master typed as Person, and you’ve drawn a "master"
outlet from a Dog object in the nib to a Person object in the nib. The
name of that outlet, "master", is just a string. When the nib loads,
the outlet name "master" is translated through key–value coding to
the accessor method name setMaster:, and your Dog instance’s set
Master: implicit accessor method is called with the Person instance
as its parameter, setting the value of your Dog instance’s master
property to the Person instance (Figure 7-8).
If something goes wrong with the match between the outlet name in
the nib and the name of the property in the class, then at runtime,
when the nib loads, Cocoa’s attempt to use key–value coding to set a
value in your object based on the name of the outlet will fail, and
your app will crash — with an error message complaining (you
guessed it) that the class is not key–value coding compliant for the
key. (The key here is the outlet name.) A likely way for this to
happen is that you formed the outlet correctly but then later changed

--- Page 931 ---
the name of (or deleted) the property in the class; see “Misconfigured
Outlets”.
Cocoa Key Paths
A Cocoa key path allows you to chain keys in a single expression. If
an object is key–value coding compliant for a certain key, and if the
value of that key is itself an object that is key–value coding compliant
for another key, you can chain those keys by calling value(forKeyPa
th:) and setValue(_:forKeyPath:).
A key path string looks like a succession of key names joined using
dot-notation. valueForKeyPath("key1.key2") effectively calls val
ue(forKey:) on the message receiver, with "key1" as the key, and
then takes the object returned from that call and calls value(forKe
y:) on that object, with "key2" as the key.
To illustrate, here are two classes that form a chain of properties — a
DogOwner that has a dog property which is a Dog that has a name
property:
class Dog : NSObject { 
    @objc var name : String = "" 
} 
class DogOwner : NSObject { 
    @objc var dog : Dog? 
}
Now let’s configure an actual chain:
let owner = DogOwner() 
let dog = Dog() 

--- Page 932 ---
dog.name = "Fido" 
owner.dog = dog
Now we can use key–value coding with a key path to work our way
down the chain:
if let name = owner.value(forKeyPath:"dog.name") as? String {
We retrieve the value as an Optional wrapping an Any which is
actually a string, and we cast down safely to retrieve the real value,
"Fido".
Uses of Key–Value Coding
Cocoa key–value coding allows you, in effect, to decide at runtime,
based on a string, what accessor to call. In the simplest case, you’re
using a string to access a dynamically specified property. That’s
useful in Objective-C code; but such unfettered introspective
dynamism is contrary to the spirit of Swift, and in translating my own
Objective-C code into Swift I have generally found myself
accomplishing the same ends by other means.
Nevertheless, key–value coding remains useful in programming iOS,
especially because a number of built-in Cocoa classes permit you to
use it in special ways:
If you send value(forKey:) to an NSArray, it sends value(forK
ey:) to each of its elements and returns a new array consisting of
the results, an elegant shorthand. NSSet behaves similarly.
NSDictionary implements value(forKey:) as an alternative to ob
ject(forKey:) (useful particularly if you have an NSArray of

--- Page 933 ---
dictionaries). Similarly, NSMutableDictionary treats setValue(_:
forKey:) as a synonym for set(_:forKey:), except that the first
parameter can be nil, in which case removeObject(forKey:) is
called.
NSSortDescriptor sorts an NSArray by sending value(forKey:)
to each of its elements. This makes it easy to sort an array of
dictionaries on the value of a particular dictionary key, or an array
of objects on the value of a particular property.
NSManagedObject, used in conjunction with Core Data, is
guaranteed to be key–value coding compliant for attributes you’ve
configured in the entity model. It’s common to access those
attributes with value(forKey:) and setValue(_:forKey:).
CALayer and CAAnimation permit you to use key–value coding
to define and retrieve the values for arbitrary keys, as if they were
a kind of dictionary; they are, in effect, key–value coding
compliant for every key. This is extremely helpful for attaching
extra information to an instance of one of these classes.
Also, many Cocoa APIs use key–value coding indirectly: you supply
a key string, and Cocoa applies it for you. For example, a
CABasicAnimation must be initialized with a keyPath string
parameter:
let anim = CABasicAnimation(keyPath:"transform")
What you’re really doing here is telling the animation that you’re
going to want to animate a CALayer’s transform property.
Similarly, the AV Foundation framework, used in conjunction with
videos, takes string keys to specify properties whose value you’re
going to be interested in:

--- Page 934 ---
let url = Bundle.main.url(forResource:"ElMirage", withExtension:"mp4")! 
let asset = AVURLAsset(url:url) 
asset.loadValuesAsynchronously(forKeys:["tracks"]) {
That works because an AVURLAsset has a tracks property.
KeyPath Notation
Using key–value coding can be dangerous, because you risk using a
key for which the target object is not key–value coding compliant.
But Swift can often provide some measure of safety. Instead of
forming the key string yourself, you ask the Swift compiler to form it
for you. To do so, use #keyPath notation.
#keyPath notation is similar to #selector syntax (Chapter 2):
you’re asking the Swift compiler to form the key string for you, and it
will refuse if it can’t confirm that the key in question is legal. We
crashed by saying this:
let obj = NSObject() 
obj.setValue("hello", forKey:"keyName") // crash
But if we had used #keyPath notation, our code wouldn’t have
crashed — because it wouldn’t even have compiled:
let obj = NSObject() 
obj.setValue("howdy", forKey: #keyPath(NSObject.keyName)) // compile err
or
Now return to our Dog with a name property:
class Dog : NSObject { 
    @objc var name : String = "" 

--- Page 935 ---
}
This compiles, because Swift knows that Dog has a name property:
let d = Dog() 
d.setValue("Fido", forKey:#keyPath(Dog.name))
But that code will not compile if Dog is not an NSObject subclass, or
if its name property is not exposed to Objective-C. Thus the Swift
compiler can often help to save us from ourselves. Some of my
earlier examples can be rewritten more safely using #keyPath
notation, and in real life, this is how I would write them:
let anim = CABasicAnimation(keyPath: #keyPath(CALayer.transform))
And:
let url = Bundle.main.url(forResource:"ElMirage", withExtension:"mp4")! 
let asset = AVURLAsset(url:url) 
let tracks = #keyPath(AVURLAsset.tracks) 
asset.loadValuesAsynchronously(forKeys:[tracks]) {
But the compiler can’t always save us from ourselves. There are
situations where you can’t form a string indirectly using #keyPath
notation, and you’ll just have to hand Cocoa a string that you form
yourself. For example (self is a CALayer):
self.rotationLayer.setValue(.pi/4.0, forKeyPath:"transform.rotation.y")
You can’t rewrite that using #keyPath(CALayer.transform.rotati
on.y), because the compiler won’t let you form that key path. The
problem is that the compiler is unaware of any rotation property of

--- Page 936 ---
a CALayer transform — because there is no such property. That sort
of key path works by a special dispensation within Cocoa:
CATransform3D (the type of a CALayer’s transform) is key–value
coding compliant for a repertoire of keys and key paths that don’t
correspond to any actual properties, and Swift has no way of knowing
that.
You may be wondering how all of this relates to Swift’s own key path
mechanism (Chapter 5). If a Dog has a name property, you can say:
let d = Dog() 
d[keyPath:\.name] = "Rover"
That is a completely different mechanism! You’ll surely prefer to use
the Swift mechanism where possible. It provides complete safety,
along with type information; a Swift KeyPath object is strongly
typed, because it is a generic, specified to the type of the
corresponding property. But that won’t help you when you’re talking
to Cocoa. Objective-C key–value coding uses string keys, and a Swift
KeyPath object cannot be magically transformed into a string key.
TIP
Cocoa key–value coding is a powerful technology with many ramifications
beyond what I’ve described here; see Apple’s Key-Value Coding Programming
Guide in the documentation archive for full information.
The Secret Life of NSObject

--- Page 937 ---
Every Objective-C class inherits from NSObject, which is
constructed in a rather elaborate way:
It defines some native class methods and instance methods having
mostly to do with the basics of instantiation and of method
sending and resolution.
It adopts the NSObject protocol. This protocol declares instance
methods having mostly to do with memory management, the
relationship between an instance and its class, and introspection.
Because all the NSObject protocol methods are required, the
NSObject class implements them all. In Swift, the NSObject
protocol is called NSObjectProtocol, to avoid name clash.
It implements convenience methods related to the NSCopying,
NSMutableCopying, and NSCoding protocols, without formally
adopting those protocols. NSObject intentionally doesn’t adopt
these protocols because this would cause all other classes to adopt
them, which would be wrong. But thanks to this architecture, if a
class does adopt one of these protocols, you can call the
corresponding convenience method. For instance, NSObject
implements the copy instance method, so you can call copy on
any instance, but you’ll crash unless the instance’s class also
adopts the NSCopying protocol and implements copy(with:).
A large number of methods are injected into NSObject by more
than two dozen categories on NSObject, scattered among various
header files. For example, awakeFromNib (see Chapter 7) comes
from the UINibLoadingAdditions category on NSObject, declared
in UINibLoading.h.
A class object is an object. Therefore all Objective-C classes,
which are objects of type Class, inherit from NSObject. Therefore,
any instance method of NSObject can be called on a class object
as a class method! For example, responds(to:) is defined as an

--- Page 938 ---
instance method by the NSObject protocol, but it can (therefore)
be treated also as a class method and sent to a class object.
Taken as a whole, the NSObject methods may be roughly classified
as follows:
Creation, destruction, and memory management
Methods for creating an instance, such as alloc and copy, along
with methods for learning when something is happening in the
lifetime of an object, such as initialize and dealloc, plus
methods that manage memory.
Class relationships
Methods for learning an object’s class and inheritance, such as su
perclass, isKind(of:), and isMember(of:).
Object introspection and comparison
Methods for asking what would happen if an object were sent a
certain message, such as responds(to:), for representing an
object as a string (description), and for comparing objects (isE
qual(_:)).
Message response
Methods for meddling with what does happen when an object is
sent a certain message, such as doesNotRecognizeSelector
(_:). If you’re curious, see the Objective-C Runtime
Programming Guide in the documentation archive.
Message sending
Methods for sending a message dynamically. For example, perfo
rm(_:) takes a selector as parameter, and sending it to an object
tells that object to perform that selector. This might seem identical
to just sending that message to that object, but what if you don’t

--- Page 939 ---
know what message to send until runtime? Moreover, variants on
perform allow you to send a message on a specified thread, or to
send a message after a certain amount of time has passed (perfor
m(_:with:afterDelay:) and similar).

--- Page 940 ---
Chapter 11. Cocoa Events
All of your app’s executable code lies in its functions. The impetus
for a function being called must come from somewhere. One of your
functions may call another, but who will call the first function in the
first place? How, ultimately, will any of your code ever run?
After your app has completely finished launching, none of your code
runs. UIApplicationMain (see “How an App Gets Going”) just sits
and loops — the event loop — waiting for something to happen. In
general, the user needs to do something, such as touching the screen,
or switching away from your app. When something does happen, the
runtime detects it and informs your app, and Cocoa can call your
code.
But Cocoa can call your code only if your code is there to be called.
Your code is like a panel of buttons, ready for Cocoa to press one. If
something happens that Cocoa feels your code needs to know about
and respond to, it presses the right button — if the right button is
there. Cocoa wants to send your code a message, but your code must
have ears to hear.
The art of Cocoa programming lies in knowing what messages Cocoa
would like to send your app. You organize your code, right from the
start, with those messages in mind. Cocoa makes certain promises
about how and when it will dispatch messages to your code. These

--- Page 941 ---
are Cocoa’s events. Your job is to know what those events are and
how they will arrive; armed with that knowledge, you can arrange for
your code to respond to them.
Reasons for Events
Broadly speaking, the reasons you might receive an event may be
divided informally into four categories. These categories are not
official; I made them up. Often it isn’t completely clear which of
these categories an event fits into. But they are still generally useful
for visualizing how and why Cocoa interacts with your code:
User events
The user does something interactive, and an event is triggered
directly. Obvious examples are events that you get when the user
taps or swipes the screen, or types a key on the keyboard.
Lifetime events
These are events notifying you of the arrival of a stage in the life
of the app, such as the fact that the app is starting up or is about to
go into the background, or of a component of the app, such as the
fact that a UIViewController’s view has just loaded or is about to
be removed from the screen.
Functional events
Cocoa is about to do something by calling its own code, and is
willing to let you subclass and override that code so as to modify
its behavior. I would put into this category UIView’s draw(_:)
(your chance to have a view draw itself), with which we
experimented in Chapter 10.

--- Page 942 ---
Query events
Cocoa turns to you to ask a question; its behavior will depend
upon your answer. The way data appears in a table (a
UITableView) is that Cocoa asks you how many rows the table
should have, and then, for each row, asks you for the
corresponding cell.
Subclassing
A built-in Cocoa class may define methods that Cocoa itself will call
if you override them in a subclass, so that your custom behavior, and
not (merely) the default behavior, will take place. As I explained in
Chapter 10, this is not a commonly used architecture in Cocoa, but
for many classes it’s there if you need it, and for certain classes it is
downright essential. UIView and UIViewController are the best
examples.
UIView’s draw(_:) is what I call a functional event. By default it
does nothing, but by overriding it in a UIView subclass, you dictate
how a view draws itself. You don’t know exactly when this method
will be called, and you don’t care; when it is, you draw, and this
guarantees that the view will always appear the way you want it to.
UIViewController is a class meant for subclassing, and is probably
the only Cocoa class that you will regularly subclass. Of the methods
listed in the UIViewController class documentation, just about all are
methods you might have reason to override. If you create a
UIViewController subclass in Xcode, you’ll see that the template
already includes some method overrides to get you started. viewDidL

--- Page 943 ---
oad is called to let you know that your view controller has obtained
its main view (its view), so that you can perform initializations; it’s
an obvious example of a lifetime event. And UIViewController has
many other lifetime events that you can and will override in order to
get fine control over what happens when.
Not only methods but also properties may be overridden in order to
get an event. A case in point is UIViewController’s supportedInter
faceOrientations. You’ll override this property as a computed
variable in order to receive what I call a query event. Whenever
Cocoa wants to know what orientations your view can appear in, it
fetches the value of this property; your getter is a function that is
called at that moment, and its job is to return a bitmask (“Option
sets”) providing the answer to that question. You trust Cocoa to
trigger this call at the appropriate moments, so that if the user rotates
the device, your app’s interface will or won’t be rotated to
compensate, depending on what value you return.
When you’re looking for events that you can receive through
subclassing, be sure to look upward though the inheritance hierarchy.
If you’re wondering how to get an event when your custom UILabel
subclass is embedded into another view, you won’t find the answer in
the UILabel class documentation; a UILabel receives the appropriate
event by virtue of being a UIView. In the UIView class
documentation, you’ll learn that you can override didMoveToSuperv
iew to be informed when this happens.
By the same token, look upward through adopted protocols as well. If
you’re wondering how to get an event when your view controller’s

--- Page 944 ---
view is about to undergo app rotation, you won’t find out by looking
in the UIViewController class documentation; a UIViewController
receives the appropriate event by virtue of adopting the
UIContentContainer protocol. In the UIContentContainer protocol
documentation, you’ll learn that you can override viewWillTransit
ion(to:with:).
Notifications
Cocoa provides your app with a single NotificationCenter instance
(Objective-C NSNotificationCenter), available as NotificationCent
er.default. This instance, the notification center, is the basis of a
mechanism for sending and receiving messages called notifications.
A notification is a Notification instance (Objective-C
NSNotification).
Think of a notification as having a topic and a sender. The topic is
some subject matter that might be of interest to others; the sender is
some object that others might be interested in hearing from. The
notification center functions as a kind of broker for message
transmission:
1. A potential recipient of messages can register with the
notification center, saying: “Hey, if any messages on this topic
or from this sender arrive, please pass them on to me.”
2. A sender does in fact hand the notification center a message to
send out; this is called posting a notification.
3. When the notification center receives a posting on a certain
topic or from a certain sender, it looks through its list of

--- Page 945 ---
registered recipients and passes along the message to any
recipients that match.
More than one recipient can register for messages with the same topic
or sender. The notification mechanism is well described as a
dispatching or broadcasting mechanism. It lets the poster send a
message without knowing or caring whether there are recipients or, if
there are, who or how many they may be. And it lets the recipient
arrange to receive the message without being in direct contact with
the sender (possibly without even knowing who the sender is).
Who can post a notification? Anyone who cares to! There are two
main posters of notifications to consider — Cocoa and you:
Cocoa
Cocoa posts notifications through the notification center, and your
code can register to receive them. Notifications are a way for your
code to receive events from Cocoa. You’ll find a separate
Notifications section in the documentation for a class that
provides them.
You
You can post notifications yourself as a way of communicating
with your own code. This relieves your app’s architecture from
the formal responsibility of somehow hooking up instances just so
a message can pass from one to the other (which can sometimes
be quite tricky or onerous, as I’ll discuss in Chapter 13). When
objects are conceptually “distant” from one another, notifications
can be a fairly lightweight way of permitting one to message the
other.

--- Page 946 ---
A Notification instance has three pieces of information associated
with it, which can be retrieved through properties:
name
The topic of the notification. It’s a string, but it has been wrapped
up in a Notification.Name, a struct adopting RawRepresentable
with a String rawValue. Built-in Cocoa notification names are
vended as static/class Notification.Name properties, either of
Notification.Name itself or of the class that sends them.
object
An instance associated with the notification; typically, the sender
who posted it.
userInfo
An Optional dictionary; if not nil, it contains additional
information associated with the notification. What information it
will contain, and under what keys, depends on the particular
notification; you have to consult the documentation. When you
post a notification yourself, you can put anything you like into the
userInfo for the notification’s recipient(s) to retrieve. Do not
misuse a notification’s object as a way of passing along a value.
That’s what the userInfo is for.
Receiving a Notification
To register to receive notifications, you send one of two messages to
the notification center.
SELECTOR-BASED REGISTRATION

--- Page 947 ---
One way to register for notifications is to call the notification center’s
addObserver(_:selector:name:object:). The parameters are:
observer:
The first parameter is the instance to which the notification is to
be sent. This will typically be self; it would be quite unusual for
one instance to register a different instance as the receiver of a
notification.
selector:
The message to be sent to the observer instance when the
notification occurs. The designated method should take one
parameter, which will be the Notification instance. The selector
must specify correctly a method that is exposed to Objective-C;
Swift’s #selector syntax will help you with that (see Chapter 2).
name:
The name (topic) of the notification you’d like to receive. If this is
nil, you’re asking to receive all notifications associated with the
object designated in the object: parameter.
object:
The object (sender) of the notification you’re interested in. If
this is nil, you’re asking to receive all notifications with the
name designated in the name: parameter. (If both the name: and o
bject: parameters are nil, you’re asking to receive all
notifications!)
Here’s a real-life example. There is a music player belonging to the
MPMusicPlayerController class; this class promises to post a
notification whenever the music player starts playing a different song.
(To find this out, I look under Notifications in the

--- Page 948 ---
MPMusicPlayerController class documentation; the notification in
question is called MPMusicPlayerControllerNowPlayingItemDidC
hange.) In my app, I want to receive that notification and change my
interface accordingly.
Here’s how I register myself to receive the desired playback
notification:
NotificationCenter.default.addObserver(self, 
    selector: #selector(nowPlayingItemChanged), 
    name: .MPMusicPlayerControllerNowPlayingItemDidChange, 
    object: nil)
As a result, whenever an .MPMusicPlayerControllerNowPlayingI
temDidChange notification is posted, my nowPlayingItemChanged
method will be called. Note that this method must be marked @objc
so that Objective-C can see it (the Swift compiler will help out by
ensuring this when you use #selector syntax):
@objc func nowPlayingItemChanged (_ n:Notification) { 
    self.updateNowPlayingItem() 
    // ... and so on ... 
}
FUNCTION-BASED REGISTRATION
Heavy use of addObserver(_:selector:name:object:) means
that your code ends up peppered with methods that exist solely in
order to be called by the notification center. There is nothing about
these methods that tells you what they are for — you may want to use
explicit comments to remind yourself — and the methods are

--- Page 949 ---
separate from the registration call, which can make your code rather
confusing.
One way to solve that problem is to use the other way of registering
to receive a notification, addObserver(forName:object:queue:usi
ng:). The parameters are:
The name: and object: parameters are just like those of the addO
bserver(_:selector:name:object:) method.
Instead of providing an observer and a selector, you provide (as
the using: parameter) a function consisting of the actual code to
be executed when the notification arrives. This function should
take one parameter — the Notification itself. You can use an
anonymous function, and typically you will.
The queue: is the OperationQueue on which your using:
function will be called. It will usually be nil. (Explaining what a
non-nil queue would mean is outside the scope of this book.)
This method also returns a value, which is in fact the observer that
has been registered with the notification center. I’ll talk more
about that in a moment.
The outcome is that your registration for a notification and your
response when the notification arrives are encapsulated in a single
call:
let ob = NotificationCenter.default.addObserver( 
    forName: .MPMusicPlayerControllerNowPlayingItemDidChange, 
    object: nil, queue: nil) { _ in 
        self.updateNowPlayingItem() 
        // ... and so on ... 
    }

--- Page 950 ---
That can be a much cleaner way of dealing with notifications.
Unfortunately, using addObserver(forName:...) correctly is a little
more complicated than that, because you still need to unregister the
observer, as I’ll discuss in the next section.
Unregistering
To unregister an object as a recipient of notifications, call the
notification center’s removeObserver(_:) method. Alternatively,
you can unregister an object for just a specific set of notifications
with removeObserver(_:name:object:). The object passed as the
first argument is the object that is no longer to receive notifications.
What object that is depends on how you registered it in the first place:
You called addObserver(_:selector:name:object:)
You supplied an observer originally, as the first argument; that is
the observer you will now unregister. This will typically be self.
You called addObserver(forName:object:queue:using:)
The call returned an observer token object typed as an
NSObjectProtocol (its real class and nature are undocumented);
that is the observer you will now unregister.
In the old days, if you failed to unregister an object as a notification
recipient and that object went out of existence, your app would crash
the next time the notification was sent — because the runtime was
trying to send a message to an object that was now missing in action.
But in iOS 9, Apple introduced a safety check. Nowadays, if the
notification center tries to send a message to a nonexistent object,

--- Page 951 ---
there is no crash, and the notification center helpfully unregisters the
object for you.
What you need to do as you go out of existence depends, once again,
on how you registered in the first place:
You called addObserver(_:selector:name:object:)
You probably don’t need to unregister the object passed as the
first argument. If that object goes out of existence, and if the
notification is posted subsequently, there won’t be any crash.
You called addObserver(forName:object:queue:using:)
You do need to unregister the observer, because otherwise the
notification center keeps it alive and can continue to send
notifications to it (which means that the attached function will
continue to be called).
So the question now boils down to how you’re going to unregister the
observer returned by a call to addObserver(forName:object:queu
e:using:). If you only need to receive a notification once, you can
unregister from within the anonymous function that runs when the
notification is received (because the observer is in scope within the
anonymous function). Otherwise, you’ll have to keep a separate
persistent reference to the observer object so that you can unregister it
later.
What’s a good way to do that? Let’s assume you’re going to be
calling addObserver(forName:object:queue:using:) many times
from within the same class. Then you’re going to end up receiving
many observer tokens, and you’ll need to preserve a reference to all

--- Page 952 ---
of them. One obvious approach is to store the observers in an instance
property that is a mutable collection. My favored approach is a Set
property:
var observers = Set<NSObject>()
So now, each time I register for a notification by calling addObserve
r(forName:object:queue:using:), I capture the result and add it
to the set:
let ob = NotificationCenter.default.addObserver( 
    forName: .MPMusicPlayerControllerNowPlayingItemDidChange, 
    object: nil, queue: nil) { _ in 
        self.updateNowPlayingItem() 
        // ... and so on ... 
    } 
self.observers.insert(ob as! NSObject)
When it’s time to unregister all observers, I enumerate the set and
empty it:
for ob in self.observers { 
    NotificationCenter.default.removeObserver(ob) 
} 
self.observers.removeAll()
WARNING
Use of addObserver(forName:...) can also involve you in some memory
management complications that I’ll talk about in Chapter 12.
Posting a Notification

--- Page 953 ---
Notifications can be a way of communicating between your own
objects. You post a notification yourself (in one object) and receive it
yourself (in another object). This is probably not a good way to
compensate for a failure to devise proper lines of communication
between objects, but it can be appropriate when the objects are
conceptually distant or independent from one another, or when you
need the flexibility of broadcasting to multiple recipients.
To post a notification, send post(name:object:userInfo:) to the
notification center. For the name:, you’ll have to coerce a string into a
Notification.Name. There are two main places to do this:
In the name: argument
You perform the coercion directly in the method call; for
example, you might say Notification.Name("someName").
That’s simple but error-prone: you’ll need to perform the same
coercion twice (to post the notification and to register to receive
it), and the repeated string literal is an invitation to make a typing
mistake and have things mysteriously go wrong.
As a globally available constant
You define a namespaced constant beforehand, and use it both
when posting the notification and when registering for it. This
approach localizes the coercion in a single place; it’s a little more
work than the first approach, but it’s more correct and you should
use it.
For example, one of my apps is a simple card game. The game needs
to know when a card is tapped. But a card knows nothing about the
game; when it is tapped, it simply emits a virtual shriek by posting a

--- Page 954 ---
notification. I’ve defined my notification name by extending my Card
class:
extension Card { 
    static let tappedNotification = Notification.Name("cardTapped") 
}
When a card is tapped, it responds like this:
NotificationCenter.default.post(name: Self.tappedNotification, object: s
elf)
The game object has registered for Card.tappedNotification, so it
hears about this and retrieves the notification’s object; now it knows
what card was tapped and can proceed appropriately.
TIP
The notification center has no API for introspecting it in code, but you can
introspect it while paused in the debugger; enter po NotificationCenter.def
ault to see a list of registered notifications, with the name, object, recipient,
and options for each. The object and recipient are listed as memory addresses,
but you can learn more from such an address by entering expr -l objc -O --
followed by the address.
Timer
A Timer (Objective-C NSTimer) is not a notification, but it behaves
quite similarly. It gives off a signal (fires) after the lapse of a certain
time interval. Thus you can arrange to get an event when a certain

--- Page 955 ---
time has elapsed. The timing is not perfectly accurate, nor is it
intended to be, but it’s good enough for most purposes.
A timer that is actively watching the clock is said to be scheduled. A
timer may fire once, or it may be a repeating timer. To stop a timer, it
must be invalidated. A timer that is set to fire once is invalidated
automatically after it fires; a repeating timer repeats until you
invalidate it by sending it the invalidate message. An invalidated
timer should be regarded as dead: you cannot revive it or use it for
anything further, and you should probably not send any messages to
it.
For example, one of my apps is a game with a score; I want to
penalize the user by diminishing the score for every ten seconds that
elapses after each move without the user making a further move. So I
create and schedule a repeating timer whose time interval is ten
seconds. Whenever the timer fires, I diminish the score. Whenever
the user moves, I invalidate the existing timer and start over with a
new repeating timer.
The simplest way to create a timer is with a class method that also
schedules the timer, so that it begins watching the clock immediately:
scheduledTimer(timeInterval:target:selector:userInfo:rep
eats:)
The target: and selector: determine what message will be
sent to what object when the timer fires; the method in question
should take one parameter, which will be a reference to the timer.
The userInfo: is just like the userInfo: of a notification.

--- Page 956 ---
scheduledTimer(withTimeInterval:repeats:block:)
You provide a function to be called when the timer fires; the
function should take one parameter, which will be a reference to
the timer.
A repeating Timer is often maintained as an instance property, so that
you can invalidate it later on. But be careful! There is a temptation to
call scheduledTimer(timeInterval:target:selector:userInf
o:repeats:) directly as the initializer in your declaration of a Timer
instance property, like this:
class ViewController : UIViewController { 
    var timer = Timer.scheduledTimer(timeInterval: 1, target: self, 
        selector: #selector(timerFired), userInfo: nil, repeats: true)
If the target is self, that won’t work, because self doesn’t exist
yet at the time you’re initializing the instance property. (In my
opinion, Swift should warn you about this, and I regard its failure to
do so as a bug.) Use deferred initialization instead (“Deferred
initialization of properties”):
class ViewController: UIViewController { 
    var timer : Timer! 
    override func viewDidLoad() { 
        super.viewDidLoad() 
        self.timer = Timer.scheduledTimer(timeInterval: 1, target: self, 
            selector: #selector(timerFired), userInfo: nil, repeats: tru
e) 
    }

--- Page 957 ---
WARNING
Timers have some memory management implications that I’ll be discussing in
Chapter 12.
Delegation
Delegation is an object-oriented design pattern, a relationship
between two objects in which a primary object’s behavior is
customized or assisted by a secondary object. The secondary object is
the primary object’s delegate. No subclassing is involved, and indeed
the primary object is agnostic about the delegate’s class.
The class of the primary object can be Cocoa’s class or your class. As
with notifications, you’ll want to understand Cocoa’s delegation
pattern because it’s an important way of getting events from Cocoa;
plus, you might want to implement the pattern yourself as a useful
way of communicating between your own objects.
Cocoa Delegation
As implemented by Cocoa, here’s how delegation works:
1. A built-in Cocoa class has an instance property, usually called d
elegate (it will certainly have delegate in its name).
2. The Cocoa class promises that at certain moments it will turn to
its delegate for instructions by sending it a certain message.
3. One of those moments arrives! If the Cocoa instance finds that
its delegate is not nil, and that its delegate is prepared to

--- Page 958 ---
receive that message, the Cocoa instance sends the message to
the delegate.
Delegation is one of Cocoa’s main uses of protocols (Chapter 10). In
the old days, delegate methods were listed in the Cocoa class’s
documentation, and their names were made known to the compiler
through an informal protocol (a category on NSObject). Nowadays, a
class’s delegate methods are usually listed in a genuine protocol with
its own documentation. There are over 70 Cocoa delegate protocols;
that shows how heavily Cocoa relies on delegation. Most delegate
methods are optional, but in a few cases you’ll discover some that are
required.
To take advantage of Cocoa delegation, you’ll have one of your
classes adopt a Cocoa delegate protocol, and you’ll set some Cocoa
object’s delegate (typed as that protocol) to an instance of your
class. You might form the connection in code; alternatively, you
might do it in a nib by connecting an object’s delegate outlet to an
appropriate object within the nib. Now you are the delegate, and you
get to help determine the Cocoa object’s behavior.
Your delegate class will probably do other things besides serving as
this instance’s delegate. Indeed, one of the nice things about
delegation is that it leaves you free to slot delegate code into your
class architecture however you like; the delegate type is a protocol, so
the actual delegate can be an instance of any class.
Here’s a typical example. I want to ensure that my app’s root view
controller, a UINavigationController, should appear only in portrait
orientation when this view controller is in charge. But

--- Page 959 ---
UINavigationController isn’t my class; my class is a different view
controller, a UIViewController subclass, which acts as the
UINavigationController’s child. How can the child tell the parent
how to rotate?
Delegation to the rescue! UINavigationController has a delegate
property, typed as UINavigationControllerDelegate (a protocol). It
promises to send this delegate the navigationControllerSupporte
dInterfaceOrientations(_:) message when it needs to know how
to rotate. So my view controller, very early in its lifetime, sets itself
as the UINavigationController’s delegate. It also implements the nav
igationControllerSupportedInterfaceOrientations(_:)
method. Presto, the problem is solved:
class ViewController : UIViewController, UINavigationControllerDelegate 
{ 
    override func viewDidLoad() { 
        super.viewDidLoad() 
        self.navigationController?.delegate = self 
    } 
    func navigationControllerSupportedInterfaceOrientations( 
        _ nav: UINavigationController) -> UIInterfaceOrientationMask { 
            return .portrait 
    } 
}
When you’re searching the documentation for how you can be
notified of a certain event, be sure to consult the corresponding
delegate protocol, if there is one. Suppose you’d like to know when
the user taps in a UITextField to start editing it. You won’t find
anything relevant in the UITextField class documentation; what

--- Page 960 ---
you’re after is textFieldDidBeginEditing(_:) in the
UITextFieldDelegate protocol.
WARNING
You might be tempted to try to inject a method into a class that adopts a Cocoa
delegate protocol by extending the protocol and implementing the delegate
method in the protocol extension. That isn’t going to work, because Objective-C
can’t see Swift protocol extensions (see Appendix A). You can call such a
method from Swift, but Cocoa is never going to call it, because it doesn’t know
that the method implementation exists.
Implementing Delegation
The Cocoa protocol-and-delegate pattern is very useful, and you’ll
probably want to adopt it in your own code. Setting up the pattern
takes some practice, and can be a little time-consuming. But it’s a
clean solution to the problem of apportioning knowledge and
responsibilities among your objects. I’ll demonstrate with an example
from one of my apps.
The app declares a view controller, a UIViewController subclass
called ColorPickerController; its view contains three sliders that the
user can move to choose a color. Some other view controller will
create and present the ColorPickerController instance, displaying its
view. When the user taps Done or Cancel, the view should be
dismissed and the ColorPickerController instance can go out of
existence; but first, I need to send a message from the
ColorPickerController instance back to the view controller that
presented it, reporting what color the user chose.

--- Page 961 ---
Here’s the declaration for the message that I want the
ColorPickerController to send before it goes out of existence:
func colorPicker(_ picker:ColorPickerController, 
    didSetColorNamed theName:String?, 
    to theColor:UIColor?)
The question is: where and how should this method be declared?
Now, it happens that in my app I know the class of the instance that
will in fact present the ColorPickerController: it is a
SettingsController. So I could simply declare this method in
SettingsController and stop. But that would mean that the
ColorPickerController, in order to send this message to the
SettingsController, must know that the instance that presented it is a
SettingsController. That’s wrong. Surely it is a mere contingent fact
that the instance being sent this message is a SettingsController; it
should be open to any class to present and dismiss a
ColorPickerController.
Therefore we want ColorPickerController itself to declare the method
that it itself is going to call; and we want it to send that message
blindly to some receiver, without regard to the class of that receiver.
That’s what a protocol is for!
The solution, then, is for ColorPickerController to define a protocol,
with this method as part of that protocol, and for the class that
presents a ColorPickerController to conform to that protocol.
ColorPickerController will also need an appropriately typed delegat

--- Page 962 ---
e instance property; this provides the channel of communication, and
tells the compiler that sending this message is legal:
protocol ColorPickerDelegate : AnyObject { 
    // color == nil on cancel 
    func colorPicker(_ picker:ColorPickerController, 
        didSetColorNamed theName:String?, 
        to theColor:UIColor?) 
} 
class ColorPickerController : UIViewController { 
    weak var delegate: ColorPickerDelegate? 
    // ... 
}
(For the weak attribute and the AnyObject designation, see
Chapter 5.) When my SettingsController instance creates and
configures and presents a ColorPickerController instance, it also sets
itself as that ColorPickerController’s delegate — which it can do,
because it adopts the protocol:
extension SettingsController : ColorPickerDelegate { 
    func showColorPicker() { 
        let colorName = // ... 
        let c = // ... 
        let cpc = ColorPickerController(colorName:colorName, color:c) 
        cpc.delegate = self 
        self.present(cpc, animated: true) 
    } 
    func colorPicker(_ picker:ColorPickerController, 
        didSetColorNamed theName:String?, 
        to theColor:UIColor?) { 
            // ... 
    } 
}

--- Page 963 ---
When the user picks a color, the ColorPickerController knows to
whom it should send colorPicker(_:didSetColorNamed:to:) —
namely, its delegate! And the compiler allows this, because the
delegate has adopted the ColorPickerDelegate protocol:
@IBAction func dismissColorPicker(_ sender : Any?) { // user tapped Done 
    let c : UIColor? = self.color 
    self.delegate?.colorPicker(self, didSetColorNamed: self.colorName, t
o: c) 
}
Data Sources
A data source is like a delegate, except that its methods supply the
data for another object to display. The chief Cocoa classes with data
sources are UITableView, UICollectionView, UIPickerView, and
UIPageViewController. In each case, the data source must formally
adopt a data source protocol with required methods.
It comes as a surprise to some beginners that a data source is
necessary at all. Why isn’t a table’s data just a property of the table?
The reason is that such an architecture would violate generality. A
view displays data; the structure and management of that data is a
separate matter, and is up to the data source. The only requirement is
that the data source must be able to supply information quickly,
because it will be asked for it in real time when the data needs
displaying.
Another surprise is that the data source is different from the delegate.
But this again is only for generality; it’s an option, not a requirement.

--- Page 964 ---
There is no reason why the data source and the delegate should not be
the same object, and most of the time they probably will be.
In this example from one of my apps, I implement a UIPickerView
that allows the user to configure a game by saying how many stages it
should consist of (“1 Stage,” “2 Stages,” and so on). The first two
methods are UIPickerView data source methods; the third method is a
UIPickerView delegate method. It takes all three methods to supply
the picker view’s content:
extension NewGameController: UIPickerViewDataSource, UIPickerViewDelegat
e { 
    func numberOfComponents(in pickerView: UIPickerView) -> Int { 
        return 1 
    } 
    func pickerView(_ pickerView: UIPickerView, 
        numberOfRowsInComponent component: Int) -> Int { 
            return 9 
    } 
    func pickerView(_ pickerView: UIPickerView, 
        titleForRow row: Int, forComponent component: Int) -> String? { 
            return "\(row+1) Stage" + ( row > 0 ? "s" : "") 
    } 
}
Actions
An action is a message emitted by an instance of a UIControl
subclass (a control) reporting a significant user event taking place in
that control. The UIControl subclasses are all simple interface objects
that the user can interact with directly, such as a button (UIButton) or
a segmented control (UISegmentedControl).

--- Page 965 ---
The significant user events (control events) are listed under
UIControl.Event in the Constants section of the UIControl class
documentation. Different controls implement different control events:
a segmented control’s Value Changed event signifies that the user has
tapped a segment, but a button’s Touch Up Inside event signifies that
the user has tapped the button. Of itself, a control event has no
external effect; the control responds visually (a tapped button looks
tapped), but it doesn’t automatically share the information that the
event has taken place. If you want to know when a control event
takes place, so that you can respond to it in your code, you must
arrange for that control event to trigger an action message.
Here’s how it works. A control maintains an internal dispatch table:
for each control event, there can be any number of target–action
pairs, in each of which the action is a selector designating the name
of a method, and the target is an object on which that method is to be
called. When a control event occurs, the control consults its dispatch
table, finds all the target–action pairs associated with that control
event, and sends each action message to the corresponding target
(Figure 11-1).

--- Page 966 ---
Figure 11-1. The target–action architecture
There are two ways to manipulate a control’s action dispatch table:
Action connection
You can configure an action connection in a nib. I described in
Chapter 7 how to do this, but I didn’t completely explain the

--- Page 967 ---
underlying mechanism. Now all is revealed: an action connection
formed in the nib editor is a visual way of configuring a control’s
action dispatch table.
Code
Your code can directly configure the control’s action dispatch
table. The key method here is the UIControl instance method add
Target(_:action:for:), where the target: is an object, the ac
tion: is a selector, and the for: parameter is a UIControl.Event
bitmask (“Option sets”).
Recall the example of a control and its action from Chapter 7. We
have a buttonPressed(_:) method:
@IBAction func buttonPressed(_ sender: Any) { 
    let alert = UIAlertController( 
        title: "Howdy!", message: "You tapped me!", preferredStyle: .ale
rt) 
    alert.addAction( 
        UIAlertAction(title: "OK", style: .cancel)) 
    self.present(alert, animated: true) 
}
That sort of method is an action handler. Its purpose is to be called
when the user taps a certain button in the interface. In Chapter 7, we
arranged for that to happen by setting up an action connection in the
nib: we connected the button’s Touch Up Inside event to the
ViewController buttonPressed(_:) method. In reality, we were
forming a target–action pair and adding that target–action pair to the
button’s dispatch table for the Touch Up Inside control event.
Instead of making that arrangement in the nib, we could have done
the same thing in code. Suppose we had never drawn that action

--- Page 968 ---
connection. And suppose that, instead, we have an outlet connection
from the view controller to the button, called self.button. Then the
view controller, after the nib loads, can configure the button’s
dispatch table like this:
self.button.addTarget(self, 
    action: #selector(buttonPressed), 
    for: .touchUpInside)
The signature for the action selector can be in any of three forms:
The fullest form takes two parameters:
— The control.
— The UIEvent that generated the control event. This will rarely
be needed. (I’ll talk more about UIEvents in the next section.)
A shorter form, the one most commonly used, omits the second
parameter. buttonPressed(_:) is an example; it takes one
parameter. When buttonPressed(_:) is called through an action
message emanating from the button, its parameter will be a
reference to the button.
There is a still shorter form that omits both parameters.
Curiously, none of the action selector parameters provide any way to
learn which control event triggered the current action selector call! To
distinguish a Touch Up Inside control event from a Touch Up Outside
control event, their corresponding target–action pairs must specify
two different action handlers; if you dispatch them to the same action
handler, that handler cannot discover which control event occurred.

--- Page 969 ---
New in iOS 14, a UIControl’s target and action can be expressed by
attaching to the UIControl a UIAction instance encapsulating the
action as a function — probably an anonymous function. In this way,
there is no explicit target and no separate action method. This is a
very nice notation, but behind the scenes it is still the target–action
architecture.
WARNING
A control event can have multiple target–action pairs. You might configure it
this way intentionally, but it is also possible to do so accidentally.
Unintentionally giving a control event a target–action pair without removing its
existing target-action pair is an easy mistake to make, and can cause some very
mysterious behavior. If you form an action connection in the nib and configure
the dispatch table in code, a tap on the button will cause the action handler
method to be called twice.
The Responder Chain
Whenever the user does something with a finger (sets it down on the
screen, moves it, raises it from the screen), a touch object (UITouch)
is used to represent that finger. UIEvents are the lowest-level objects
charged with communication of touch objects to your app; a UIEvent
is basically a timestamp (a Double) along with a collection (Set) of
touch objects. As I said in the previous section, you can receive a
UIEvent along with a control event, but you will rarely need to do so.
A responder is an object that knows how to receive UIEvents
directly. It is an instance of UIResponder or a UIResponder subclass.
If you examine the Cocoa class hierarchy, you’ll find that just about

--- Page 970 ---
any class that has anything to do with display on the screen is a
responder. A UIView is a responder. A UIWindow is a responder. A
UIViewController is a responder. Even a UIApplication is a
responder. Even the app delegate is a responder!
A UIResponder has four low-level methods for receiving touch-
related UIEvents:
touchesBegan(_:with:)
touchesMoved(_:with:)
touchesEnded(_:with:)
touchesCancelled(_:with:)
These methods — the touch methods — are called to notify a
responder that a touch event has occurred: the user has placed,
moved, or lifted a finger from the screen. No matter how your code
ultimately hears about a user-related touch event — indeed, even if
your code never hears about a touch event directly — the touch was
initially communicated to a responder through one of the touch
methods.
The mechanism for this communication starts by deciding which
responder the user touched. The UIView methods hitTest(_:wit
h:) and point(inside:with:) are called until the correct view (the
hit-test view) is located. Then UIApplication’s sendEvent(_:)
method is called, which calls UIWindow’s sendEvent(_:), which
now wants to call the correct touch method in some responder.

--- Page 971 ---
So now the runtime starts looking for a responder that implements the
correct touch method, so that the touch event can be reported by
calling it. That responder need not be the hit-test view! The hit-test
view is just the starting place for the search. The search depends upon
the fact that your app’s responders participate in a responder chain,
which essentially links them up through the view hierarchy.
The responder chain, from bottom to top, looks roughly like this:
1. The UIView that we start with (here, the hit-test view).
2. If this UIView is a UIViewController’s view, that
UIViewController.
3. The UIView’s superview.
4. Go back to step 2 and repeat! Keep repeating until we reach…
5. The UIWindow (and the UIWindowScene).
6. The UIApplication.
7. The UIApplication’s delegate.
The next responder up the responder chain is a responder’s next
responder, which is obtained from a responder through its next
property (which returns an Optional wrapping a UIResponder). Thus
the responder chain can be walked upward from any responder to the
top of the chain.
Nil-Targeted Actions
A nil-targeted action is a UIControl target–action pair in which the
target is nil. There is no designated target object, so the following

--- Page 972 ---
rule is used: starting with the hit-test view (the view with which the
user is interacting), Cocoa walks up the responder chain looking for
an object that can respond to the action message:
If a responder is found that handles this message, that method is
called on that responder, and that’s the end.
If we get all the way to the top of the responder chain without
finding a responder to handle this message, nothing happens; the
message goes unhandled, with no penalty.
Here’s a UIButton subclass that configures itself to call a nil-targeted
action when tapped:
override func awakeFromNib() { 
    super.awakeFromNib() 
    class Dummy { 
        @objc func buttonPressed(_:Any) {} 
    } 
    self.addTarget(nil, // nil-targeted 
        action: #selector(Dummy.buttonPressed), 
        for: .touchUpInside) 
}
That’s a nil-targeted action. So what happens when the user taps the
button? First, Cocoa looks in the UIButton itself to see whether it
responds to buttonPressed. If not, it looks in the UIView that is its
superview. And so on, up the responder chain. There is surely a view
controller that owns the view that contains the button; if the view
controller is the first responder encountered in the search whose class
implements buttonPressed, tapping the button will cause the view
controller’s buttonPressed to be called — even though the view
controller is not the target!

--- Page 973 ---
TIP
The declaration for your action handler method (such as buttonPressed) must
be marked @objc (or @IBAction). Otherwise, Cocoa won’t be able to find it as
it walks up the responder chain.
It’s obvious how to construct a nil-targeted action in code: you set up
a target–action pair where the target is nil, as in the preceding
example. But how do you construct a nil-targeted action in a nib? The
answer is: you form a connection to the First Responder proxy object
(in the dock). That’s what the First Responder proxy object is for!
The First Responder isn’t a real object with a known class, so before
you can connect an action to it, you have to define the action message
within the First Responder proxy object, like this:
1. Select the First Responder proxy in the nib, and switch to the
Attributes inspector.
2. You’ll see a table (probably empty) of user-defined nil-targeted
First Responder actions. Click the Plus button and give the new
action a name; it must take a single parameter (so that its name
will end with a colon).
3. Now you can Control-drag from a control, such as a UIButton,
to the First Responder proxy to specify a nil-targeted action
with the name you specified.
Key–Value Observing
Key–value observing, or KVO, is rather like a target–action
mechanism that works between any two objects. One object (the

--- Page 974 ---
observer) registers directly with another object (the observed) so as to
be notified when a value in the observed object changes. The
observed object doesn’t actually have to do anything; when the value
in the observed object changes, the observer is automatically notified.
The process of using KVO may be broken down into stages:
Registration
The observer — that is, the object that desires to hear about future
changes in a value belonging to the observed object — must
register with that observed object.
Change
A change takes place in the value belonging to the observed
object, and it must take place in a special way — a KVO
compliant way. Typically, this means using a key–value coding
compliant accessor to make the change. Setting a property passes
through a key–value coding compliant accessor.
Notification
The observer is automatically notified that the value in the
observed object has changed.
Unregistration
The observer eventually unregisters to prevent the arrival of
further notifications about the observed value of the observed
object.
As with notifications and delegation, you can use KVO with Cocoa
objects or you can implement it as a form of communication between
your own objects. When you use KVO with Cocoa:

--- Page 975 ---
The observer will be your object; you will write the code that will
respond when the observer is notified of the change for which it
has registered.
The observed object will be Cocoa’s object. Many Cocoa objects
promise to behave in a KVO compliant way. Certain frameworks,
such as the AVFoundation framework, don’t implement delegation
or notifications very much; instead, they expect you to use KVO
to hear about what they are doing. Thus, KVO can be an important
form of Cocoa event.
When you use KVO with your own observed object, you have to
configure that object to be KVO compliant for one or more values.
I’ll explain later how to do that.
Registration and Notification
There are two different ways to configure KVO registration and
notification. The first way is the Cocoa way; it basically just
translates the Objective-C API directly into Swift. The second way is
provided by Swift; it uses the Cocoa way under the hood, but it
shields you from some of the messy details.
I’ll first describe the Cocoa way, just so that you understand the mess
that the Swift way shields you from:
1. In the Cocoa way, you call addObserver(_:forKeyPath:opti
ons:context:) on the object whose property you want to
observe, using a Cocoa key path (Chapter 10).
2. Subsequently, the observer’s observeValue(forKeyPath:of:c
hange:context:) is called for every change for which this
observer has been registered.

--- Page 976 ---
There are two problems here. First, step 1 and step 2 happen in two
different places; there’s a disconnect between the two steps. And
second, this observer might be observing more than one property,
possibly in more than one observed object, so there can be many
repetitions of step 1; but no matter how many times step 1 happens,
there is only one step 2. There is just one single observer method,
through which all observation calls must flow — which constitutes a
nasty bottleneck. That’s what the Swift way protects you from.
Here’s how the Swift way works. You register by calling observe(_:
options:changeHandler:) on the object whose property you want
to observe, with these parameters:
keyPath:
The first parameter is a Swift key path (Chapter 5), not a Cocoa
key path.
options:
An NSKeyValueObservingOptions bitmask (an option set)
specifying such things as when you want to be notified (only
when the observed value changes, or now as well) and what
information you want included in the notification (the old value,
the new value, or both).
changeHandler:
A function to be called as a way of sending the notification. It
will typically be an anonymous function, making it part of the
registration. It should take two parameters:
The object
This will be the observed object with which we are registered.

--- Page 977 ---
The change
An NSKeyValueObservedChange object. Its properties give
you information such as the old value and the new value if
you requested them in the options: argument.
The call to observe(_:options:changeHandler:) also returns a
value, an NSKeyValueObservation instance. That is the registered
observer.
The Swift key–value observing API is a language feature, not an
SDK feature. It puts a convenient mechanism in front of the Cocoa
API, but it still uses the Cocoa API. When you call observe(_:opti
ons:changeHandler:), Swift calls addObserver(_:forKeyPath:op
tions:context:) to register the observer with the observed object.
And the NSKeyValueObservation object implements the bottleneck
method observeValue(forKeyPath:of:change:context:) to
receive notification messages, which it passes on to you.
Unregistering
Unregistration is performed through a message to the observed
object, namely removeObserver(_:forKeyPath:context:). If the
observer goes out of existence without unregistering, the observed
object might later try to send a message to a nonexistent observer,
resulting in a crash. So the observer needs to maintain a reference to
the observed object and, at the latest, must unregister itself when
going out of existence.
That can be a daunting responsibility — and is yet another thing that
the Swift API helps you with. The NSKeyValueObservation object

--- Page 978 ---
returned from the call to observe(_:options:changeHandler:)
maintains a reference to the observed object, so you don’t have to;
and it will unregister itself, by calling removeObserver(_:forKeyPa
th:context:) on the observed object, either if you send it the inval
idate message or automatically when it itself is about to go out of
existence.
Your job is to capture the NSKeyValueObservation object and
maintain it, probably in an instance property of the observer. That’s
all, because this means it will go out of existence, at the latest, when
the observer does — and at that moment will unregister itself in good
order. But you must capture and maintain that object somehow! If
you don’t, it will go out of existence and unregister itself immediately
— before a notification is ever sent — and you’ll never get any
notifications in the first place.
Another problem is what happens if the observed object goes out of
existence when observers are still registered on it. There are two
cases:
In iOS 10 and before
Your app will crash immediately. To prevent that, if the observed
object is about to go out of existence while the observer continues
to exist, you must unregister the NSKeyValueObservation object
explicitly, yourself, by sending it the invalidate message.
In iOS 11 and later
There are no bad consequences. There is no crash, and the
NSKeyValueObservation object sends itself the invalidate
message.

--- Page 979 ---
Key–Value Observing Example
To demonstrate KVO, I’ll declare classes to play both roles, the
observer and the observed.
First, the observed. My Observed class has a value instance property
that we want other objects to be able to observe:
class Observed : NSObject { 
  
    @objc dynamic var value : Bool = false 
  
}
The observed object’s class must derive from NSObject;
otherwise, you won’t be able to call observe(_:options:change
Handler:) on it. That’s because the mechanism for being
observed is a feature of NSObject.
The property to be observed must be declared @objc in order to
expose it to Objective-C — and it must also be declared dynamic.
That’s because KVO works by swizzling the accessor methods;
Cocoa needs to be able to reach right in and change this object’s
code, and it can’t do that unless the property is dynamic.
The Observer class contains code that registers with an Observed to
hear about changes in its value property:
class Observer { 
    var obs = Set<NSKeyValueObservation>() 
  
    func register(with observed:Observed) { 
        let opts : NSKeyValueObservingOptions = [.old, .new] 
        let ob = observed.observe(\.value, options: opts) { obj,change i
n 
  
            if let oldValue = change.oldValue { 
                print("old value was \(oldValue)") 
            } 

--- Page 980 ---
            if let newValue = change.newValue { 
                print("new value is \(newValue)") 
            } 
        } 
        obs.insert(ob) 
  
    } 
}
Observer has an instance property for maintaining
NSKeyValueObservation objects. As with Notification observer
tokens (discussed earlier in this chapter), I like to use a Set for
this purpose.
Observer (in its register(with:) method) will register with an
Observed instance by calling observe(_:options:changeHandl
er:), using a Swift key path to specify the value property. I’ve
illustrated the use of NSKeyValueObservingOptions by asking for
both the old and new values of the observed property when a
notification arrives. That information will arrive into the
notification function inside an NSKeyValueObservedChange
object.
The call to observe(_:options:changeHandler:) returns an
NSKeyValueObservation object. It is crucial to ensure the
continued existence of this object; otherwise, it will go out of
existence and unregister itself before the notification can ever
arrive. Therefore, I immediately store it in the Set instance
property that was declared for this purpose.
Presume now that we have a persistent Observer instance, observer,
and that its register(with:) has been called with argument observ
ed, an Observed instance that is also persistent:
observer.register(with: observed)

--- Page 981 ---
So much for registration!
Now let’s talk about change and notification. Somehow, someone sets
observed’s value property to true. That changes it in a KVO
compliant way. So, at that moment, the notification is sent and the
anonymous function is called! The following appears in the console:
old value was false 
new value is true
Finally, let’s talk about unregistering. As long as we are running in
iOS 11 or later, there is nothing to talk about! It doesn’t matter
whether observed or observer goes out of existence first;
everything happens automatically and in good order:
If observed goes out of existence first, there is no crash and there
will be no further notifications.
When observer goes out of existence, the obs property is
destroyed, and so the NSKeyValueObservation object is destroyed
— and at that moment, if observed still exists, the
NSKeyValueObservation object unregisters itself (and if observe
d no longer exists, nothing bad happens).
In general your real-life use of KVO in programming iOS will likely
be as simple as that. Cocoa key–value observing, however, is a deep
and complex mechanism; consult Apple’s Key-Value Observing
Programming Guide in the documentation archive for full
information.
Swamped by Events

--- Page 982 ---
Cocoa has the potential to send lots of events, telling you what the
user has done, informing you of each stage in the lifetime of your app
and its objects, asking for your input on how to proceed. To receive
the events that you need to hear about, your code is peppered with
entry points — methods that you have written with just the right
name and in just the right class so that they can be called as Cocoa
events. In fact, it is easy to imagine that in many cases your code for
a class will consist almost entirely of entry points.
Arranging all those entry points is one of your primary challenges as
a Cocoa programmer. You know what you want to do, but you don’t
get to “just do it.” You have to divide up your app’s functionality and
allocate it in accordance with when and how Cocoa is going to call
into your code. You know the events that Cocoa is going to want to
send you, and you need to be prepared to receive them. Before
you’ve written a single line of your own code, the skeleton structure
of a class is likely to have been largely mapped out for you.
Suppose that your iPhone app presents an interface consisting of a
table view. You’ll probably subclass UITableViewController (a built-
in UIViewController subclass); an instance of your subclass will own
and control the table view, and you’ll probably use it as the table
view’s data source and delegate as well. In this single class, then,
you’re likely to want to implement at a minimum the following
methods:
init(coder:) or init(nibName:bundle:)
UIViewController lifetime method, where you perform instance
initializations.

--- Page 983 ---
viewDidLoad
UIViewController lifetime method, where you perform view-
related initializations and deferred initializations.
viewDidAppear
UIViewController lifetime method, where you set up states that
need to apply only while your view is onscreen. If you’re going to
register for a notification or set up a timer, this is a likely place to
do it.
viewDidDisappear
UIViewController lifetime method, where you reverse what you
did in viewDidAppear. This would be a likely place to unregister
for a notification or invalidate a repeating timer that you set up in
viewDidAppear.
supportedInterfaceOrientations
UIViewController query method, where you specify what device
orientations are allowed for this view controller’s main view.
numberOfSections(in:)
tableView(_:numberOfRowsInSection:)
tableView(_:cellForRowAt:)
UITableView data source query methods, where you specify the
contents of the table.
tableView(_:didSelectRowAt:)
UITableView delegate user action method, where you respond
when the user taps a row of the table.
deinit

--- Page 984 ---
Swift class instance lifetime method, where you perform end-of-
life cleanup.
Suppose, further, that you do in fact use viewDidAppear to register
for a notification and to set up a timer, using the target–selector
architecture; then you must also implement the methods specified by
those selectors.
We already have, then, about a dozen methods whose presence is
effectively boilerplate. These are not your methods; you are never
going to call them. They are Cocoa’s methods, which you have
placed here so that each can be called at the appropriate moment in
the life story of your app.
A Cocoa program consists of numerous disconnected entry points,
each with its own meaning, each called at its own set moment. The
logic of such a program is far from obvious; a Cocoa program, even
your program, even while you’re writing it, is hard to read and hard
to understand. To figure out what our hypothetical class does, you
have to know already such things as when viewDidAppear is called
and how it is typically used; otherwise, you don’t know what this
method is for. Moreover, because of your code’s object-oriented
structure, multiple methods in this class (and perhaps others) will be
managing the same instance properties; your program’s logic is
divided between methods and even across different classes.
Your challenges are compounded by surprises involving the order of
events. Beginners (and even experienced programmers) are often
mystified when their program doesn’t work as expected, because they
have wrong expectations about when an entry point will be called, or

--- Page 985 ---
what the state of an instance will be when it is called. To make
matters worse, the order of events isn’t even reliable; my apps often
break when I upgrade them from one iOS version to the next, because
the new version of iOS is sending certain events in a different order
from the old version.
How will you find your way through the swamp of events that a
Cocoa program consists of? There’s no easy solution, but here’s some
simple advice:
Write comments
Comment every method, quite heavily if need be, saying what
that method does and under what circumstances you expect it to
be called — especially if it is an entry point, where it is Cocoa
itself that will do the calling.
Debug
Instrument your code heavily during development with caveman
debugging (see Chapter 9). As you test your code, keep an eye on
the console output and check whether the messages make sense.
You may be surprised at what you discover. If things don’t work
as expected, add breakpoints and run the app again so you can see
the order of execution and watch the variables and properties as
they change.
Perhaps the most common kind of mistake in writing a Cocoa app is
not that there’s a bug in your code itself, but that you’ve put the code
in the wrong place. Your code isn’t running, or it’s running at the
wrong time, or the pieces are running in the wrong order. I see
questions about this sort of thing all the time on the various online

--- Page 986 ---
user forums (these are all actual examples that appeared over the
course of just two days):
There’s a delay between the time when my view appears and when
my button takes on its correct title.
That’s because you put the code that sets the button’s title in view
DidAppear. That’s too late; your code needs to run earlier,
perhaps in viewWillAppear.
My subviews are positioned in code and they’re turning out all
wrong.
That’s because you put the code that positions your subviews in vi
ewDidLoad. That’s too early; your code needs to run later, when
your view’s dimensions have been determined.
My view is rotating even though my view controller’s supporte
dInterfaceOrientations says not to.
That’s because you implemented supportedInterfaceOrientat
ions in the wrong class. Only the topmost view controller in the
view controller hierarchy is consulted through this property.
I set up an action connection for Value Changed on a text field,
but my code isn’t being called when the user edits.
That’s because you connected the wrong control event; a text field
emits Editing Changed, not Value Changed.
Delayed Performance
Your code is executed in response to some event; but your code in
turn may trigger a new event or chain of events. Sometimes this
causes bad things to happen: there might be a crash, or Cocoa might
appear not to have done what you said to do. To solve this problem,

--- Page 987 ---
perhaps you just need to step outside Cocoa’s own chain of events for
a moment and wait for everything to settle down before proceeding.
The technique for doing this is called delayed performance. You tell
Cocoa to do something, not right this moment, but in a little while,
when things have settled down. Perhaps you need only a very short
delay, just to let Cocoa finish doing something, such as laying out the
interface. Technically, you’re allowing the current run loop to finish,
completing and unwinding the entire current call stack, before
proceeding further with your own code.
When you program Cocoa, you’re likely to be using delayed
performance a lot more than you might expect. With experience,
you’ll develop a kind of sixth sense for when delayed performance
might be the solution to your difficulties.
The main way to get delayed performance is by calling
DispatchQueue’s after(when:execute:) method. It takes a function
stating what should happen after the specified time has passed. Here’s
a utility function that encapsulates the call:
func delay(_ delay:Double, closure:@escaping () -> ()) { 
    let when = DispatchTime.now() + delay 
    DispatchQueue.main.asyncAfter(deadline: when, execute: closure) 
}
That utility function is so important that I routinely paste it at the top
level of the AppDelegate class file in every app I write. To use it, I
call delay with a delay time (usually a very small number of seconds
such as 0.1) and an anonymous function saying what to do after the

--- Page 988 ---
delay. Note that what you propose to do in this anonymous function
will be done later on; you’re deliberately breaking out of your own
code’s line-by-line sequence of execution. So a delayed performance
call will typically be the last call in its own surrounding function, and
cannot return any value.
In this example from one of my own apps, the user has tapped a row
of a table, and my code responds by creating and showing a new view
controller:
override func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, 
    didSelectRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) { 
        let t = TracksViewController( 
            mediaItemCollection: self.albums[indexPath.row]) 
        self.navigationController?.pushViewController(t, animated: true) 
}
Unfortunately, the innocent-looking call to my TracksViewController
initializer init(mediaItemCollection:) can take a moment to
complete, so the app comes to a stop with the table row highlighted
— very briefly, but just long enough to startle the user. To cover this
delay with a sense of activity, I’ve rigged my UITableViewCell
subclass to show a spinning activity indicator when it’s selected:
override func setSelected(_ selected: Bool, animated: Bool) { 
    if selected { 
        self.activityIndicator.startAnimating() 
    } else { 
        self.activityIndicator.stopAnimating() 
    } 
    super.setSelected(selected, animated: animated) 
}

--- Page 989 ---
But there’s a problem: the spinning activity indicator never appears
and never spins. The reason is that the events are stumbling over one
another here. UITableViewCell’s setSelected(_:animated:) isn’t
called until the UITableView delegate method tableView(_:didSel
ectRowAt:) has finished. But the delay we’re trying to paper over is
during tableView(_:didSelectRowAt:); the whole problem is that
it doesn’t finish fast enough.
Delayed performance to the rescue! I’ll rewrite tableView(_:didSe
lectRowAt:) so that it finishes immediately — triggering setSelect
ed(_:animated:) immediately and causing the activity indicator to
appear and spin — and I’ll use delayed performance to call init(med
iaItemCollection:) later on, when the interface has ironed itself
out:
override func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, 
    didSelectRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) { 
        delay(0.1) { 
            let t = TracksViewController( 
                mediaItemCollection: self.albums[indexPath.row]) 
            self.navigationController?.pushViewController(t, animated: t
rue) 
        } 
}

--- Page 990 ---
Chapter 12. Memory
Management
Classes, both in Swift and in Objective-C, are reference types (see
“Value Types and Reference Types”). Behind the scenes, Swift and
Objective-C memory management for reference types works
essentially the same way. Such memory management, as I pointed out
in Chapter 5, can be a tricky business.
Fortunately, Swift uses ARC (automatic reference counting), so you
don’t have to manage the memory for every reference type object
explicitly and individually, as was once necessary in Objective-C.
Thanks to ARC, you are far less likely to make a memory
management mistake, and more of your time is liberated to
concentrate on what your app actually does instead of dealing with
memory management concerns.
Still, even in Swift, and even with ARC, it is possible to make a
memory management mistake, or to be caught unawares by Cocoa’s
memory management behavior. A memory management mistake can
lead to runaway excessive memory usage, crashes, or mysterious
misbehavior of your app. Cocoa memory management can be
surprising in individual cases, and can mislead you into making a
memory management mistake; so you need to understand, and
prepare for, what Cocoa is going to do.

--- Page 991 ---
Principles of Cocoa Memory
Management
The reason why reference type memory must be managed at all is
that references to reference type objects are merely pointers to the
actual object, and there can be multiple references (pointers) to the
very same object. This means that every reference must deal carefully
with that object, out of consideration for the needs of other possible
references. At the very latest, the object should go out of existence
when there are no pointers to it. But so long as there are any pointers
to it, the object must not go out of existence.
To illustrate, imagine three objects, Manny, Moe, and Jack, where
both Manny and Moe have references to Jack. Jack is the object
whose memory we are concerned to manage:
The object must not go out of existence too late
If both Manny and Moe go out of existence, and if no other object
has a reference to Jack, Jack should go out of existence too. An
object without a pointer to it is useless; it is occupying memory,
but no other object has, or can ever get, a reference to it. This is a
memory leak.
The object must not go out of existence too soon
If both Manny and Moe have a pointer to Jack, and if Manny
somehow causes Jack to go out of existence, poor old Moe is left
with a pointer to nothing (or worse, to garbage). A pointer whose
object has been destroyed behind the pointer’s back is a dangling
pointer. If Moe subsequently uses that dangling pointer to send a
message to the object that he thinks is there, the app will crash.

--- Page 992 ---
To prevent both memory leakage and dangling pointers, there is a
policy of manual memory management based on a number,
maintained by every reference type object, called its retain count. The
rule is that other objects can increment or decrement an object’s
retain count — and that’s all they are allowed to do. As long as an
object’s retain count is positive, the object will persist. No object has
the direct power to tell another object to be destroyed; rather, as soon
as an object’s retain count is decremented to zero, it is destroyed
automatically.
By this policy, every object that needs Jack to persist should
increment Jack’s retain count, and should decrement it once again
when it no longer needs Jack to persist. As long as all objects are
well-behaved in accordance with this policy, the problem of manual
memory management is effectively solved:
There cannot be any dangling pointers, because any object that has
a pointer to Jack has incremented Jack’s retain count, ensuring that
Jack persists.
There cannot be any memory leaks, because any object that no
longer needs Jack decrements Jack’s retain count. If every object
that doesn’t need Jack any longer behaves this way, then when no
object needs Jack any longer, Jack’s retain count will reach zero
and Jack will go out of existence.
Rules of Cocoa Memory Management
An object is well-behaved with respect to memory management as
long as it adheres to certain very simple, well-defined rules in

--- Page 993 ---
conformity with the basic concepts of memory management. The
underlying ethic is that each object that has a reference to a reference
type object is responsible solely for its own memory management of
that object, in accordance with these rules. If all objects that ever get
a reference to this reference type object behave correctly with respect
to these rules, the object’s memory will be managed correctly and it
will go out of existence exactly when it is no longer needed:
If Manny or Moe explicitly instantiates Jack — by directly calling
an initializer — then the initializer increments Jack’s retain count.
If Manny or Moe makes a copy of Jack — by calling copy or muta
bleCopy or any other method with copy in its name — then the
copy method increments the retain count of this new, duplicate
Jack.
If Manny or Moe acquires a reference to Jack (not through explicit
instantiation or copying), and needs Jack to persist — long enough
to work with Jack in code, or long enough to be the value of an
instance property — then he himself increments Jack’s retain
count. (This is called retaining Jack.)
If and only if Manny or Moe has done any of those things — that
is, if Manny or Moe has ever directly or indirectly caused Jack’s
retain count to be incremented — then when he himself no longer
needs his reference to Jack, before letting go of that reference, he
decrements Jack’s retain count to balance exactly all previous
increments that he himself has performed. (This is called releasing
Jack.) Having released Jack, Manny or Moe should then assume
that Jack no longer exists, because if this causes Jack’s retain
count to drop to zero, Jack will no longer exist. This is the golden
rule of memory management — the rule that makes memory
management work coherently and correctly.

--- Page 994 ---
A general way to understand the golden rule of memory management
is in terms of ownership. If Manny has created, copied, or retained
Jack — that is, if Manny has ever incremented Jack’s retain count —
Manny has asserted ownership of Jack. Both Manny and Moe can
own Jack at the same time, but each is responsible only for managing
his own ownership of Jack correctly. It is the responsibility of an
owner of Jack eventually to decrement Jack’s retain count — to
release Jack, resigning ownership of Jack. The owner says: “Jack
may or may not persist after this, but as for me, I’m done with Jack,
and Jack can go out of existence as far as I’m concerned.” At the
same time, a nonowner of Jack must never release Jack. As long as
all objects behave this way with respect to Jack, Jack will not leak
nor will any pointer to Jack be left dangling.
What ARC Is and What It Does
Once upon a time, retaining and releasing an object was a matter of
you, the programmer, literally sending retain and release
messages to it. NSObject still implements retain and release, but
under ARC (and in Swift) you can’t call them. That’s because ARC is
calling them for you! That’s ARC’s job — to do for you what you
would have had to do if memory management were still up to the
programmer.
ARC is implemented as part of the compiler. The compiler is literally
modifying your code by inserting retain and release calls behind
the scenes. When you receive a reference type object by calling some
method, ARC immediately retains it so that it will persist for as long
as this same code continues to run; then ARC releases it when the

--- Page 995 ---
code comes to an end. Similarly, when you create or copy a reference
type object, ARC knows that its retain count has been incremented,
and releases it when the code comes to an end.
ARC is very conservative, but also very accurate. In effect, ARC
retains at every juncture that might have the slightest implications for
memory management: it retains when an object is received as an
argument, it retains when an object is assigned to a variable, and so
forth. It may even insert temporary variables, behind the scenes, to
enable it to refer sufficiently early to an object so that it can retain it.
But of course it eventually also releases to match.
How Cocoa Objects Manage Memory
Built-in Cocoa objects will take ownership of objects that you hand to
them, by retaining them, if it makes sense for them to do so, and will
of course then balance that retain with a release later. Indeed, this is
so generally true that if a Cocoa object is not going to retain an object
you hand it, there will be a note to that effect in the documentation.
A collection, such as an array or dictionary, is a particularly obvious
case in point. An object can hardly be an element of a collection if
that object can go out of existence at any time; so when you add an
element to a collection, the collection asserts ownership of the object
by retaining it. Thereafter, the collection acts as a well-behaved
owner. If this is a mutable collection, then if an element is removed
from it, the collection releases that element. If the collection object
goes out of existence, it releases all its elements.

--- Page 996 ---
Prior to ARC, removing an object from a mutable collection
constituted a potential trap. Consider the following Objective-C code:
id obj = myMutableArray[0]; // an NSMutableArray 
[myMutableArray removeObjectAtIndex: 0]; // bad idea in non-ARC code! 
// ... could crash here by referring to obj ...
As I just said, when you remove an object from a mutable collection,
the collection releases it. So, without ARC, the second line of that
code involves an implicit release of the object that used to be the first
element of myMutableArray. If this reduces the object’s retain count
to zero, it will be destroyed. The pointer obj will then be a dangling
pointer, and a crash may be in our future when we try to use it as if it
were a real object.
With ARC, however, that sort of danger doesn’t exist. Assigning a
reference type object to a variable retains it! But we did assign this
object to a variable, obj, before we removed it from the collection.
Therefore, that code is perfectly safe, and so is its Swift equivalent:
let obj = myMutableArray[0] // retain 
myMutableArray.removeObject(at:0) // release 
// ... safe to refer to obj ...
The first line retains the object. The second line releases the object,
but that release balances the retain that was placed on the object when
the object was placed in the collection originally. The object’s retain
count is still more than zero, and it continues to exist for the duration
of this code.

--- Page 997 ---
Autorelease Pool
When a method creates an instance and returns that instance, some
memory management hanky-panky has to take place. Consider this
simple code:
func makeImage() -> UIImage? { 
    if let im = UIImage(named:"myImage") { 
        return im 
    } 
    return nil 
}
Think about the retain count of im, the UIImage we are returning.
This retain count has been incremented by our call to the UIImage
initializer UIImage(named:). According to the golden rule of
memory management, as we pass im out of our own control by
returning it, we should decrement the retain count of im, balancing
the increment and surrendering ownership. But when can we possibly
do that? If we do it before the line return im, the retain count of im
will be zero and it will vanish in a puff of smoke; we will be
returning a dangling pointer. But we can’t do it after the line return
im, because when that line is executed, our code comes to an end.
Clearly, we need a way to vend this object without decrementing its
retain count now — so that it stays in existence long enough for the
caller to receive and work with it — while ensuring that at some
future time we will decrement its retain count, so as to balance our in
it(named:) call and fulfill our own management of this object’s
memory. The solution is something midway between releasing the
object and not releasing it — autoreleasing it.

--- Page 998 ---
Here’s how autoreleasing works. Your code runs in the presence of
something called an autorelease pool. When ARC autoreleases an
object, that object is placed in the autorelease pool, and a number is
incremented saying how many times this object has been placed in
this autorelease pool. From time to time, when nothing else is going
on, the autorelease pool is automatically drained. This means that the
autorelease pool releases each of its objects, the same number of
times as that object was placed in this autorelease pool, and empties
itself of all objects. If that causes an object’s retain count to be zero,
so be it; the object is destroyed in the usual way. So autoreleasing an
object is just like releasing it, but with a proviso, “later, not right this
second.”
In general, autoreleasing and the autorelease pool are merely an
implementation detail. You can’t see them; they are just part of how
ARC works. But sometimes, on very rare occasions, you might want
to drain the autorelease pool yourself. Consider the following code
(it’s slightly artificial, but that’s because demonstrating the need to
drain the autorelease pool isn’t easy):
func test() { 
    let path = Bundle.main.path(forResource:"001", ofType: "png")! 
    for j in 0 ..< 50 { 
        for i in 0 ..< 100 { 
            let im = UIImage(contentsOfFile: path) 
        } 
    } 
}
That method does something that looks utterly innocuous; it loads an
image. But it loads it repeatedly in a loop. As the loop runs, memory

--- Page 999 ---
climbs constantly (Figure 12-1); by the time our method comes to an
end, our app’s memory usage has reached almost 34MB. This is not
because the images aren’t being released each time through the loop;
it’s because a lot of intermediate objects — things you’ve never even
heard of, such as NSPathStore2 objects — are secondarily generated
by our call to init(contentsOfFile:) and are autoreleased. As we
keep looping, those objects are all sitting there, piling up in the
autorelease pool by the tens of thousands, waiting for the pool to be
drained. When our code finally comes to an end, the autorelease pool
is drained, and our memory usage drops precipitately back down to
almost nothing.
Figure 12-1. Memory usage grows during a loop
Granted, 34MB isn’t exactly a massive amount of memory. But you
may imagine that a more elaborate inner loop might generate more
and larger autoreleased objects, and that our memory usage could
potentially rise quite significantly. It would be nice to have a way to
drain the autorelease pool manually now and then during the course
of a loop with many iterations. Swift provides such a way — the
global autoreleasepool function, which takes a single argument
that you’ll supply as an anonymous function using trailing closure
syntax. Before the anonymous function is called, a special temporary
autorelease pool is created, and is used for all autoreleased objects
thereafter. After the anonymous function exits, the temporary

--- Page 1000 ---
autorelease pool is drained and goes out of existence. Here’s the same
method with an autoreleasepool call wrapping the inner loop:
func test() { 
    let path = Bundle.main.path(forResource:"001", ofType: "png")! 
    for j in 0 ..< 50 { 
        autoreleasepool { 
            for i in 0 ..< 100 { 
                let im = UIImage(contentsOfFile: path) 
            } 
        } 
    } 
}
The difference in memory usage is dramatic: memory holds roughly
steady at less than 2MB (Figure 12-2). Setting up and draining the
temporary autorelease pool probably involves some overhead, so if
possible you may want to divide your loop into an outer and an inner
loop, as shown in the example, so that the autorelease pool is not set
up and torn down on every iteration.
Figure 12-2. Memory usage holds steady with an autorelease pool
Memory Management of Instance
Properties
Before ARC, managing memory for instance properties (Objective-C
instance variables, Chapter 10) was one of the trickiest parts of Cocoa

--- Page 1001 ---
programming. The correct behavior is to retain a reference type
object when you assign it to a property, and then release it when
either of these things happens:
You assign a different value to the same property.
The instance whose instance property this is goes out of existence.
Memory management for a property therefore had to be distributed in
two places:
The setter method for the property
The setter must release whatever object is currently the value of
the property, and must retain whatever object is being assigned to
that property. The exact details can be quite tricky (what if they
are the same object?), and before ARC it was easy for
programmers to get them wrong.
The owner’s dealloc method
This is the Objective-C equivalent of deinit. This method must
be implemented to release every object being retained as the
value of a property, or the object will leak when the owner goes
out of existence.
Fortunately, ARC understands all that, and in Swift the memory of
instance properties, like the memory of all variables, is managed
correctly for you.
That fact also gives us a clue as to how to release an object on
demand when you are holding it in an instance property. This is a
valuable thing to be able to do, because an object may be using a lot
of memory. You don’t want to put too great a strain on the device’s

--- Page 1002 ---
memory, so you want to release the object as soon as you’re done
with it. Also, when your app goes into the background and is
suspended, the Watchdog process will terminate it in the background
if it is found to be using too much memory; so you might want to
release this object when you are notified that the app is about to be
backgrounded.
You can’t call release explicitly, so you need another way to do it,
some way that is consonant with the design and behavior of ARC.
The solution is to assign something else — something small — to this
property. That causes the object that was previously the value of this
property to be released. A commonly used approach is to type this
property as an Optional. This means that nil can be assigned to it,
purely as a way of replacing the object that is the instance property’s
current value and releasing it.
Retain Cycles and Weak References
As I explained in Chapter 5, you can get yourself into a retain cycle
where two reference type objects have references to one another: for
example, each is the value of the other’s instance property. If such a
situation is allowed to persist until no other objects have a reference
to either of these objects, then neither can go out of existence,
because each has a retain count greater than zero and neither will “go
first” and release the other. Since these two objects, ex hypothesi, can
no longer be referred to by any object except one another, this
situation can now never be remedied — these objects are leaking.

--- Page 1003 ---
The solution is to step in and modify how the memory is managed for
one of these references. By default, a reference is a strong reference:
assigning to it retains the assigned value. In Swift, you can declare a
reference type variable as weak or as unowned to change the way its
memory is managed:
weak
When a reference is weak, ARC does not retain the object
assigned to it. This seems dangerous, because it means that the
object might go out of existence behind our backs, leaving us
with a dangling pointer and leading to a potential crash later on.
But ARC is very clever about this. A reference marked as weak
must be a var reference to an Optional. ARC keeps track of all
weak references and all objects assigned to them. When such an
object’s retain count drops to zero and the object is about to be
destroyed, just before the object’s deinit is called, ARC sneaks
in and assigns nil to the reference. Provided you handle the
Optional coherently (by coping with the fact that it might
suddenly be nil), nothing bad can happen.
unowned
An unowned reference is a different kettle of fish. When you mark
a reference as unowned, you’re telling ARC to take its hands off
completely: it does no memory management at all when
something is assigned to this reference. This really is dangerous
— if the object referred to goes out of existence, you really can
be left with a dangling pointer and you really can crash. That is
why you must never use unowned unless you know that the object
referred to will not go out of existence: unowned is safe, provided
the object referred to will outlive the object that refers to it. So an
unowned reference should point at all times to some single

--- Page 1004 ---
independent object, retained in some other way, without which
the referrer cannot exist at all.
A weak reference is commonly used to connect an object to its
delegate (Chapter 11):
class ColorPickerController : UIViewController { 
    weak var delegate: ColorPickerDelegate? 
    // ... 
}
A delegate is an independent entity; there is usually no reason why an
object needs to claim ownership of its delegate. Indeed, an object is
usually its delegate’s servant, not its owner, and ownership, if there is
any, runs the other way; Object A might create and retain Object B,
and make itself Object B’s delegate:
let cpc = ColorPickerController(colorName:colorName, color:c) 
cpc.delegate = self 
self.present(cpc, animated: true) // retains cpc
There’s no danger of a retain cycle in that code, because the delegat
e property is weak. This view controller (self) is not somehow
retaining itself.
Very rarely, you may encounter properties of built-in Cocoa classes
that keep weak references as non-ARC weak references (because they
are old and backward compatible, whereas ARC is new). Such
properties are declared in Objective-C using the keyword assign.
NSCache’s delegate property is declared like this:
@property (nullable, assign) id<NSCacheDelegate> delegate;

--- Page 1005 ---
In Swift, that declaration is translated like this:
unowned(unsafe) var delegate: NSCacheDelegate?
The Swift term unowned and the Objective-C term assign are
synonyms; they tell you that there’s no ARC memory management
here. The unsafe designation is a further warning inserted by Swift;
unlike your own code, where you won’t use unowned unless it is safe,
Cocoa’s unowned is potentially dangerous and you need to exercise
caution.
A reference such as an NSCache’s delegate can end up as a
dangling pointer, pointing at garbage, if the object to which that
reference was pointing has gone out of existence. If anyone tries to
send a message by way of such a reference, the app will then crash.
This is the delegate, so what usually happens is that Cocoa tries to
send it a delegate message. The tell-tale sign of such a crash is that EX
C_BAD_ACCESS is reported somewhere in objc_msgSend (Figure 12-
3).
Figure 12-3. A crash from messaging a dangling pointer
Figuring out the cause of a crash like that can be quite difficult,
especially since the crash itself typically takes place long after the

--- Page 1006 ---
point where the real mistake occurred, namely that some object went
out of existence while a reference to it continued to exist. You might
not even know what object went out of existence. (This is the sort of
situation in which you might need to “turn on zombies” in order to
debug, as I’ll describe at the end of this chapter.)
Non-ARC weak references of this kind are few and far between in
Cocoa nowadays; but they were once relatively common, so the
earlier the iOS version on which you’re running, the more likely you
are to encounter one. Fortunately, it’s easy to avoid a dangling pointer
by making sure there is always something to point to. With an
NSCache’s delegate, if the delegate object is about to go out of
existence at a time when the NSCache instance still exists, we would
assign nil (or some other object) to the delegate property, rendering
it harmless.
Unusual Memory Management Situations
This section discusses some situations that call for some special
memory management handling on your part.
Notification Observers
Recall the example I gave in Chapter 11, where you register with the
notification center by calling addObserver(forName:object:queu
e:using:), like this:
let ob = NotificationCenter.default.addObserver( 
    forName: .MPMusicPlayerControllerNowPlayingItemDidChange, 
    object: nil, queue: nil) { _ in 

--- Page 1007 ---
        self.updateNowPlayingItem() 
        // ... and so on ... 
    } 
self.observers.insert(ob as! NSObject)
I didn’t tell you at the time, but that code has the potential to cause a
serious memory leak. The reason is that the observer token object
(ob) returned from the registration call is retained by the notification
center until you unregister it. (I regard this as something of a dirty
trick on the notification center’s part; I think I understand Apple’s
reasoning in designing things this way, but I also think they reasoned
incorrectly.)
So the observer token object is likely to leak — but that isn’t the
serious part. The serious part is that the observer token object is also
retaining the view controller (self) through the anonymous function.
The reason is that functions are closures, and this function refers to s
elf. So the view controller is leaking along with the observer token.
That’s bad. A view controller together with its properties, including
its view, constitutes a heavyweight object and needs to go out
existence when it is no longer needed. You cannot solve the problem
merely by unregistering the observer in the view controller’s deinit,
because ex hypothesi deinit isn’t going to be called; that is what
leaking means.
The solution to the leakage of self is to mark self as weak or
(preferably) unowned in the anonymous function. Now deinit will
be called and the view controller can go out of existence in good
order. But we must still remember to unregister the observer token
object, because otherwise the observer token itself will still leak, and

--- Page 1008 ---
its function can be called again even though self no longer exists
(and if we marked self as unowned, the app will crash at that
moment with a dangling pointer). A complete solution looks
something like this:
var observers = Set<NSObject>() 
override func viewDidLoad() { 
    super.viewDidLoad() 
    let ob = NotificationCenter.default.addObserver( 
        forName: .MPMusicPlayerControllerNowPlayingItemDidChange, 
        object: nil, queue: nil) { [unowned self] _ in 
  
            self.updateNowPlayingItem() 
            // ... and so on ... 
        } 
    self.observers.insert(ob as! NSObject) 
} 
deinit { 
    for ob in self.observers { 
        NotificationCenter.default.removeObserver(ob) 
  
    } 
}
If you omit unowned self, then self will leak (and deinit will
never be called).
If you omit removeObserver, then any observers will leak, and
we can crash if the notification center later sends a notification to
an observer with an unowned reference to a self that no longer
exists.
KVO Observers
The NSKeyValueObservation observer object that you get when you
call observe(_:options:changeHandler:) (Chapter 11) is quite

--- Page 1009 ---
similar to the observer token object you get from the notification
center. You maintain a reference to the observer object, because
otherwise the notification message won’t arrive. And you’ll probably
want to let the observer object just go out of existence when you
yourself go out of existence, because it will then unregister itself
automatically, which is exactly what you want.
The problem is that if your notification function refers to self, that’s
a retain cycle, because you are retaining an observer whose function
is also retaining you. Therefore you won’t go out of existence, so the
observer won’t go out of existence either and won’t be automatically
unregistered. The solution, once again, is to mark self as unowned in
the notification function:
var obs = Set<NSKeyValueObservation>() 
func registerWith(_ mc:MyClass1) { 
    let opts : NSKeyValueObservingOptions = [.old, .new] 
    let ob = mc.observe(\.value, options: opts) { 
        [unowned self] obj, change in 
        print(self) // potential leak 
    } 
    obs.insert(ob) 
}
Timers
The class documentation for Timer (Chapter 10) says that “run loops
maintain strong references to their timers”; it then says of scheduled
Timer(timeInterval:target:selector:userInfo:repeats:)
that “The timer maintains a strong reference to target until it (the
timer) is invalidated.” This should set off alarm bells in your head:
“Danger, Will Robinson, danger!” The documentation is warning you

--- Page 1010 ---
that as long as a repeating timer has not been invalidated, the target is
being retained by the run loop; the only way to stop this is to send the
invalidate message to the timer. (With a non-repeating timer, the
problem arises less starkly, because the timer invalidates itself
immediately after firing.)
Moreover, the target: argument is probably self. This means that
you (self) are being retained, and cannot go out of existence until
you invalidate the timer. So when will you that? You can’t do it in
your deinit implementation, because as long as the timer is
repeating and has not been sent the invalidate message, deinit
won’t be called. You therefore need to find another appropriate
moment for sending invalidate to the timer, such as viewDidDisap
pear:
var timer : Timer! 
override func viewWillAppear(_ animated: Bool) { 
    super.viewWillAppear(animated) 
    self.timer = Timer.scheduledTimer(timeInterval: 1, target: self, 
        selector: #selector(fired), userInfo: nil, repeats: true) 
    self.timer.tolerance = 0.1 
} 
@objc func fired(_ t:Timer) { 
    print("timer fired") 
} 
override func viewDidDisappear(_ animated: Bool) { 
    super.viewDidDisappear(animated) 
    self.timer.invalidate() 
}
Instead, a more flexible approach is to call the scheduledTimer(wit
hTimeInterval:repeats:block:) class method. Now there is no
retained target: — but there is a retained function. If the timer is a

--- Page 1011 ---
repeating timer, you are retaining it so that you can invalidate it later,
but the timer is retaining the function, and if that function involves a
reference to self, it will retain self, causing a retain cycle. But we
know what to do about that! Mark self as weak or unowned in the
function. Now you can invalidate the timer in deinit. This is similar
to the two-part solution I described earlier for notification observer
token objects:
var timer : Timer! 
override func viewDidLoad() { 
    super.viewDidLoad() 
    self.timer = Timer.scheduledTimer(withTimeInterval: 1, repeats: tru
e) { 
        [unowned self] t in // * 
        self.fired(t) 
    } 
} 
func fired(_ t:Timer) { 
    print("timer fired") 
} 
deinit { 
    self.timer.invalidate() // * 
}
Other Unusual Situations
Other Cocoa objects with unusual memory management behavior
will usually be called out clearly in the documentation. A
CAAnimation object retains its delegate; this is exceptional and can
cause serious trouble if you’re not conscious of it (as usual, I speak
from bitter experience). There are also situations where the
documentation fails to warn of any special memory management
considerations, but you can wind up with a retain cycle anyway.

--- Page 1012 ---
Discovering the problem can be tricky. Areas of Cocoa that have
given me trouble include UIKit Dynamics (a UIDynamicBehavior’s a
ction handler) and WebKit (a WKWebKit’s
WKScriptMessageHandler).
Three Foundation collection classes — NSPointerArray,
NSHashTable, and NSMapTable — are similar respectively to
NSMutableArray, NSMutableSet, and NSMutableDictionary, except
that (among other things) their memory management policy is up to
you. An NSHashTable created with the weakObjects class method
maintains ARC-weak references to its elements, meaning that they
are replaced by nil if the retain count of the object to which they
were pointing has dropped to zero. You may find uses for these
classes as a way of avoiding retain cycles.
Nib Loading and Memory Management
When a nib loads, it instantiates its nib objects (Chapter 7). What
happens to these instantiated objects? A view retains its subviews, but
what about the top-level objects, which are not subviews of any
view? They do not have elevated retain counts; if someone doesn’t
immediately retain them, they’ll simply vanish in a puff of smoke.
If you don’t want that to happen — and if you did, why would you be
loading this nib in the first place? — you need to capture a reference
to the top-level objects instantiated from the nib. There are two ways
of doing that.

--- Page 1013 ---
The first approach is to capture the result of the nib-loading code.
When a nib is loaded by calling Bundle’s loadNibNamed(_:owner:o
ptions:) or UINib’s instantiate(withOwner:options:), an
array is returned consisting of the top-level objects instantiated by the
nib-loading mechanism. So it’s sufficient to retain this array, or the
objects in it. We did that in Chapter 7 when we loaded a nib and
assigned the result to a variable, like this:
let arr = Bundle.main.loadNibNamed("View", owner: nil)! 
let v = arr[0] as! UIView 
self.view.addSubview(v)
The other possibility is to configure the nib owner with outlets that
will retain the nib’s top-level objects when they are instantiated. We
did that in Chapter 7 when we set up an outlet like this:
class ViewController: UIViewController { 
    @IBOutlet var coolview : UIView!
We then loaded the nib with this view controller as owner:
Bundle.main.loadNibNamed("View", owner: self) 
self.view.addSubview(self.coolview)
In the first line, the nib-loading mechanism instantiates the top-level
view from the nib and assigns it to self.coolview. Since self.cool
view is a strong reference, it retains the view, and the view is still
there when we insert it into the interface in the second line.
In real life, @IBOutlet properties that will be set by the loading of a
nib are usually marked weak. Such outlet properties work properly as

--- Page 1014 ---
long as the object referred to will be retained by someone else — for
instance, because it’s already a subview of your view controller’s
main view. A view controller retains its main view, and a view is
retained by its superview, so the nib-loading process will cause this
view to be retained, and there is no need for your @IBOutlet property
to retain it as well.
Memory Management of CFTypeRefs
A CFTypeRef is a pure C analog to an Objective-C object. In
Objective-C, CFTypeRef types are distinguished by the suffix Ref at
the end of their name; in Swift, this Ref suffix is dropped. For
instance, a CGContextRef is a CFTypeRef, and is known in Swift as
a CGContext.
A CFTypeRef is a pointer to an opaque C struct (see Appendix A),
where “opaque” means that the struct has no directly accessible
components. This struct acts as a pseudo-object; a CFTypeRef is
analogous to an object type. In Objective-C, the fact that this thing is
not an object is particularly obvious, because the code that operates
upon a CFTypeRef is not object-oriented. A CFTypeRef has no
properties or methods, and you do not send any messages to it; you
work with CFTypeRefs entirely through global C functions. In
Swift’s Core Graphics overlay, however, those global C functions are
hand-tweaked to look like methods; for instance, the CGContextDraw
LinearGradient C function is called, in Swift, by sending drawLine
arGradient(_:start:end:options:) to a CGContext pseudo-
object, just as if a CGContext were an object and drawLinearGradie
nt were an instance method.

--- Page 1015 ---
Here’s some actual Swift code for drawing a gradient; con is a
CGContext, sp is a CGColorSpace, and grad is a CGGradient (all of
them being CFTypeRefs):
let con = UIGraphicsGetCurrentContext()! 
let locs : [CGFloat] = [ 0.0, 0.5, 1.0 ] 
let colors : [CGFloat] = [ 
    0.8, 0.4, // starting color, transparent light gray 
    0.1, 0.5, // intermediate color, darker less transparent gray 
    0.8, 0.4, // ending color, transparent light gray 
] 
let sp = CGColorSpaceCreateDeviceGray() 
let grad = CGGradient(colorSpace: sp, 
    colorComponents: colors, locations: locs, count: 3)! 
con.drawLinearGradient(grad, 
    start: CGPoint(x:89,y:0), end: CGPoint(x:111,y:0), options:[])
Despite being only a pseudo-object, a CFTypeRef is a reference type,
and its memory must be managed in just the same way as that of a
real object. Therefore, a CFTypeRef pseudo-object has a retain count!
And this retain count works exactly as for a true object, in accordance
with the golden rule of memory management. A CFTypeRef must be
retained when it comes within the sphere of influence of an owner
who wants it to persist, and it must be released when that owner no
longer needs it.
In Objective-C, the golden rule, as applied to CFTypeRefs, is that if
you obtained a CFTypeRef object through a function whose name
contains the word Create or Copy, its retain count has been
incremented. In addition, if you are worried about the object
persisting, you’ll retain it explicitly by calling the CFRetain function
to increment its retain count. To balance your Create, Copy, or CFRet

--- Page 1016 ---
ain call, you must eventually release the object. By default, you’ll do
that by calling the CFRelease function; some CFTypeRefs, however,
have their own dedicated object release functions — for CGPath, for
instance, there’s a dedicated CGPathRelease function. There’s no
ARC management of CFTypeRefs in Objective-C, so you have to do
all of this yourself, explicitly.
In Swift, however, you will never need to call CFRetain, or any form
of CFRelease; indeed, you cannot. Swift will do it for you, behind
the scenes, automatically.
Think of CFTypeRefs as living in two worlds: the CFTypeRef world
of pure C, and the memory-managed object-oriented world of Swift.
When you obtain a CFTypeRef pseudo-object, it crosses the bridge
from the CFTypeRef world into the Swift world. From that moment
on, until you are done with it, it needs memory management. Swift is
aware of this, and for the most part, Swift itself will use the golden
rule and will apply correct memory management. The code I showed
earlier for drawing a gradient is in fact memory-management
complete. In Objective-C, we would have to release sp and grad,
because they arrived into our world through Create calls; if we failed
to do this, they would leak. In Swift, however, there is no need,
because Swift will do it for us. (See Appendix A for more about how
objects move between the CFTypeRef world and the memory-
managed object world.)
Working with CFTypeRefs in Swift, then, is much easier than in
Objective-C. In Swift, you can treat CFTypeRef pseudo-objects as
actual objects! You can assign a CFTypeRef to a property in Swift, or

--- Page 1017 ---
pass it as an argument to a Swift function, and its memory will be
managed correctly; in Objective-C, those are tricky things to do.
It is still possible, though, to receive a CFTypeRef through some API
that lacks memory management information. Such a value will come
forcibly to your attention, because it will arrive into Swift, not as a
CFTypeRef, but as an Unmanaged generic wrapping the actual
CFTypeRef. That situation alerts you to the fact that Swift does not
know how to proceed with the memory management of this pseudo-
object. You will be unable to use the CFTypeRef until you extract it
by calling the Unmanaged object’s takeRetainedValue or takeUnre
tainedValue method. You will call whichever method tells Swift
how to manage the memory for this object correctly. For a
CFTypeRef with an incremented retain count (usually acquired
through a function with Create or Copy in its name), call takeRetai
nedValue; otherwise, call takeUnretainedValue.
Property Memory Management Policies
In Objective-C, a @property declaration (see Chapter 10) includes a
statement of the memory management policy implemented by the
corresponding setter accessor method. It is useful to be aware of this
and to know how such policy statements are translated into Swift.
Earlier I said that a UIViewController retains its view (its main
view). How do I know this? Because the @property declaration tells
me so:
@property(null_resettable, nonatomic, strong) UIView *view;

--- Page 1018 ---
The term strong means that the setter retains the incoming UIView
object. The Swift translation of this declaration doesn’t add any
attribute to the variable:
var view: UIView!
The default in Swift is that a variable referring to a reference object
type is a strong reference. This means that it retains the object. You
can safely conclude from this declaration that a UIViewController
retains its view.
The possible memory management policies for a Cocoa property are:
strong, retain (no Swift equivalent term)
The default. The two terms are pure synonyms; retain is the
term inherited from pre-ARC days. Assignment to this property
releases the existing value (if any) and retains the incoming value.
copy (Swift @NSCopying)
The same as strong or retain, except that the setter copies the
incoming value by sending copy to it; the incoming value must be
an object of a type that adopts NSCopying, to ensure that this is
possible. The copy, which has an increased retain count already,
becomes the new value.
weak (Swift weak)
An ARC-weak reference. The incoming object value is not
retained, but if it goes out of existence behind our back, ARC will
magically substitute nil as the value of this property, which must
be typed as an Optional declared with var.
assign (Swift unowned(unsafe))

--- Page 1019 ---
No memory management. This policy is inherited from pre-ARC
days, and is inherently unsafe (hence the additional unsafe
warning in the Swift translation of the name): if the object
referred to goes out of existence, this reference will become a
dangling pointer and can cause a crash if you subsequently try to
use it.
The copy policy is used by Cocoa particularly when an immutable
class has a mutable subclass (such as NSString and NSMutableString,
or NSArray and NSMutableArray; see Chapter 10). The idea is to
deal with the danger of the setter’s caller passing an object of the
mutable subclass. This is possible because, in accordance with the
substitution principle of polymorphism (Chapter 4), wherever an
instance of a class is expected, an instance of its subclass can be used
instead. It would be bad if this were to happen, because now the
caller might keep a reference to the incoming value and, since it is in
fact mutable, could later mutate it behind our back. To prevent this,
the setter calls copy on the incoming object; this creates a new
instance, separate from the object provided — and belonging to the
immutable class.
In Swift, this problem is unlikely to arise with strings and arrays,
because on the Swift side these are value types (structs) and are
effectively copied when assigned, passed as an argument, or received
as a return value. Cocoa’s NSString and NSArray property
declarations, when translated into Swift as String and Array property
declarations, don’t show any special marking corresponding to
Objective-C copy. But Cocoa types that are not bridged to Swift
value types do show a marking: @NSCopying. The declaration of the a
ttributedText property of a UILabel appears like this in Swift:

--- Page 1020 ---
@NSCopying var attributedText: NSAttributedString?
NSAttributedString has a mutable subclass,
NSMutableAttributedString. You’ve probably configured this
attributed string as an NSMutableAttributedString, and now you’re
assigning it as a UILabel’s attributedText. The UILabel doesn’t
want you keeping a reference to this mutable string and mutating it in
place, since that would change the value of the property without
passing through the setter. It copies the incoming value to ensure that
what it has is a separate immutable NSAttributedString.
You’ll want to do the same thing in your own code, and you can.
Simply mark your property with the @NSCopying attribute; Swift will
enforce the copy policy and will take care of the actual copying for
you whenever this property is assigned to:
class StringDrawer { 
    @NSCopying var attributedString : NSAttributedString! 
    // ... 
}
If, as is sometimes the case, your own class wants the internal ability
to mutate the value of this property while preventing a mutable value
from arriving from outside, put a private computed property façade in
front of it whose getter transforms it to the corresponding mutable
type:
class StringDrawer { 
    @NSCopying var attributedString : NSAttributedString! 
    private var mutableAttributedString : NSMutableAttributedString! { 
        get { 
            if self.attributedString == nil {return nil} 

--- Page 1021 ---
            return NSMutableAttributedString( 
                attributedString:self.attributedString) 
        } 
        set { 
            self.attributedString = newValue 
        } 
    } 
    // ... 
}
@NSCopying can be used only for instance properties of classes, not
of structs or enums — and only in the presence of Foundation,
because that is where the NSCopying protocol is defined, which the
type of a variable marked as @NSCopying must adopt.
Debugging Memory Management
Mistakes
Though far less likely to occur under ARC (and Swift), memory
management mistakes can still occur, especially because a
programmer is apt to assume that they can’t. Experience suggests that
you should use every tool at your disposal to ferret out possible
mistakes. Here are some of those tools (and see Chapter 9):
The memory gauge in the Debug navigator charts memory usage
whenever your app runs, allowing you to observe possible
memory leakage or other unwarranted heavy memory use. Note
that memory management in the Simulator is not necessarily
indicative of reality! Always observe the memory gauge with the
app running on a device before making a judgment.
Instruments (Product → Profile) has excellent tools for discerning
leaks and tracking memory management of individual objects

--- Page 1022 ---
(Leaks, Allocations).
Good old caveman debugging can help confirm that your objects
are behaving as you want them to. Implement deinit with a prin
t call. If it isn’t called, your object is not going out of existence.
This technique can reveal problems that even Instruments will not
directly expose.
Memory graphing (“Memory Debugging”) will draw you a picture
of the ownership relations between your objects; circular
references are usually easy to spot. In conjunction with Malloc
Stack Logging, you can trace object ownership through the actual
retain calls.
Dangling pointers are particularly difficult to track down, but they
can often be located by “turning on zombies.” This is easy in
Instruments with the Zombies template (on a device).
Alternatively, edit the Run action in your scheme, switch to the
Diagnostics tab, and check Enable Zombie Objects. The result is
that an object that goes out of existence is replaced by a “zombie”
that will report to the console if a message is sent to it (“message
sent to deallocated instance”). Moreover, the zombie knows what
kind of object it replaces, so you can learn what got deallocated.
Be sure to turn zombies back off when you’ve finished tracking
down your dangling pointers. Don’t use zombies with the Leaks
instrument: zombies are leaks.
The Address Sanitizer (also in the scheme’s Run action’s
Diagnostics tab) lets you debug even more subtle forms of
memory misuse. Here we’re doing a Very Bad Thing, writing
directly into memory that doesn’t belong to us:
let b = UnsafeMutablePointer<CGFloat>.allocate(capa
city:3) 

--- Page 1023 ---
b.initializeFrom([0.1, 0.2, 0.3]) 
b[4] = 0.4
That code probably won’t crash; it corrupts memory silently,
which is even worse. But if we run our app under Address
Sanitizer, it detects the problem and reports a heap buffer
overflow.

--- Page 1024 ---
Chapter 13. Communication
Between Objects
As soon as an app grows to more than a few objects, puzzling
questions can arise about how to send a message or communicate
data between one object and another. It may require some planning to
construct your code so that all the pieces fit together and information
can be shared as needed at the right moment. This chapter presents
some organizational considerations that will help you arrange for
coherent communication between objects.
Visibility Through an Instance Property
One object’s ability to communicate with another often comes down
to one object being able to see another. If the object Manny needs to
be able to find the object Jack repeatedly and reliably over the long
term so as to be able to send Jack messages, Manny will presumably
need a way of seeing Jack in the first place.
One obvious solution is an instance property of Manny whose value
is Jack. An instance property is appropriate particularly when Manny
and Jack share certain responsibilities or supplement one another’s
functionality. Here are some commonly occurring cases where one
object needs to have an instance property pointing at another:
The application object and its delegate

--- Page 1025 ---
A table view and its data source
A view controller and the view that it controls
Manny may have an instance property pointing to Jack, but this does
not necessarily imply that Manny needs to assert ownership of Jack
as a matter of memory management policy (see Chapter 12). Here are
some common situations in which one object has a property pointing
to another object, but does not retain that object:
An object does not typically retain its delegate or its data source.
An object that implements the target–action pattern, such as a
UIControl, does not retain its target.
By using a weak reference and typing the property as an Optional,
and then treating the Optional coherently and safely, Manny can keep
a reference to Jack without owning Jack (while coping with the
possibility that his supposed reference to Jack will turn out to be
nil). On the other hand, sometimes ownership is appropriate and
crucial. A view controller is useless without a view to control, and its
view truly belongs to the view controller and to no one else; once a
view controller has a view, it will retain it, releasing it only when it
itself goes out of existence.
Objects can perform two-way communication without both of them
holding references to one another. It may be sufficient for one of
them to have a reference to the other — because the former, as part of
a message to the latter, can include a reference to himself. Manny
might send a message to Jack where one of the parameters is a
reference to Manny; this might merely constitute a form of

--- Page 1026 ---
identification, or an invitation to Jack to send a message back to
Manny if Jack needs further information while doing whatever this
method does. Manny makes himself, as it were, momentarily visible
to Jack; Jack should not wantonly retain Manny (especially since
there’s an obvious risk of a retain cycle). Again, this is a common
pattern:
The parameter of the delegate message textFieldShouldBeginE
diting(_:) is a reference to the UITextField that sent the
message.
The first parameter of a target–action message is a reference to the
control that sent the message.
Visibility by Instantiation
Every instance comes from somewhere and at someone’s behest:
some object sent a message commanding this instance to come into
existence in the first place. The commanding object therefore has a
reference to the new instance at the moment of instantiation. When
Manny creates Jack, Manny has a reference to Jack.
That simple fact can serve as the starting point for establishing future
communication. If Manny creates Jack and knows that he (Manny)
will need a reference to Jack later on, Manny can keep the reference
that he obtained by creating Jack in the first place.
Or it might be the other way around: Manny creates Jack and knows
that Jack will need a reference to Manny later on, so Manny can
supply that reference immediately after creating Jack, and Jack will

--- Page 1027 ---
then keep it. Delegation is a case in point. Manny may create Jack
and immediately make himself Jack’s delegate, as in my example
code in Chapter 11:
let cpc = ColorPickerController(colorName:colorName, color:c) 
cpc.delegate = self
When Manny creates Jack, it might not be a reference to Manny
himself that Jack needs, but to something that Manny knows or has.
You will presumably endow Jack with a method or property so that
Manny can hand over that information. In fact, if Jack simply cannot
live without the information, it might be reasonable to endow Jack
with an initializer that requires this information as part of the very act
of creation.
This example (Chapter 11) comes from a table view controller. The
user has tapped a row of the table. In response, we create a secondary
table view controller, a TracksViewController instance; we hand it the
data it will need, and display the secondary table view:
override func tableView(_ tableView: UITableView, 
    didSelectRowAt indexPath: IndexPath) { 
        delay(0.1) { 
            let t = TracksViewController( 
                mediaItemCollection: self.albums[indexPath.row]) 
            self.navigationController?.pushViewController(t, animated: t
rue) 
        } 
}
In that code, I instantiate the TracksViewController by calling its
initializer, init(mediaItemCollection:), which requires me to

--- Page 1028 ---
hand over the media item collection that the view controller will need
as the basis of its table view. And where did this initializer come
from? I made it up! I have deliberately devised TracksViewController
to have a designated initializer init(mediaItemCollection:),
making it virtually obligatory for a TracksViewController to have
access, from the moment it comes into existence, to the data it needs.
A similar situation is when a segue in a storyboard is triggered. There
are two view controllers that may need to meet — the view
controllers at the two ends of the segue, the source view controller
and the destination view controller. This is parallel to the situation
where one view controller creates another view controller and
presents it, but there’s an important difference: with a triggered segue,
the source view controller doesn’t create the destination view
controller. But it probably still needs a reference to the destination
view controller, very early in the life of the latter, so that it can hand
over any needed information. How will it get that reference?
At the moment the segue is triggered, the source view controller
already exists, and the segue knows what view controller it is; and the
segue itself instantiates the destination view controller. So the segue
immediately turns to the source view controller and hands it a
reference to the destination view controller — for example, by calling
the source view controller’s prepare(for:sender:) method. This is
the source view controller’s chance to obtain a reference to the newly
instantiated destination view controller — and to make itself the
destination view controller’s delegate, or hand it any needed
information, and so forth.

--- Page 1029 ---
In the first situation, one view controller creates another view
controller instance. In the second situation, the source view controller
of a segue is brought together with the destination view controller by
the prepare(for:sender:) event. In each case, the first view
controller, for one brief shining moment, has a reference to the
second view controller. Therefore it takes advantage of that moment
to hand the second view controller instance the information it needs.
There will be no better moment to do this. Knowing the moment, and
taking care not to miss it, is part of the art of data communication.
Getting a Reference
So much for what happens when another object first comes into
existence. But sometimes you know that another object already exists
somewhere out there, but you don’t know how to refer to it. That kind
of situation can be a particular source of frustration.
Let’s say you’re a view controller and there’s some other view
controller you need to talk to. But you didn’t instantiate the other
view controller, and you are not the source view controller for the
segue that instantiated the other view controller. You may know a lot
about this other view controller — you know what its class is, and
you can probably see its view sitting there in the interface when you
run the app — but you cannot get hold of it in code.
Here’s what not to do in that situation: You know the class of the
view controller you’re looking for, so you make an instance of that
class. That won’t do you any good! The instance you want to talk to
is a particular instance that already exists. There’s no point making

--- Page 1030 ---
another instance. If you lose your car in a parking lot, the solution is
not to build another car of the same model; the solution is to find
your car.
For example, in a real-life iOS app, you will have a root view
controller, which will be an instance of some type of
UIViewController. Let’s say it’s an instance of the ViewController
class. Once your app is up and running, this instance already exists.
Now suppose we are in some other view controller, and we want to
talk to the ViewController instance that is serving as the root view
controller of the app. It would be counterproductive to try to speak to
the root view controller by instantiating the ViewController class:
let theVC = ViewController() // legal but pointless
All that does is to make a second, different instance of the
ViewController class, and your messages to that instance will be
wasted, as it is not the instance of ViewController that you wanted to
talk to. That particular instance already exists; what you want is to
get a reference to that already existing instance. But how? Here are
some considerations that will help you.
Visibility by Relationship
It is not the class of an already existing object that will get you a
reference to that object, but rather the relationship between you and
that object. Objects may acquire the ability to see one another
automatically by virtue of their position in a containing structure.
Before worrying about how to supply one object with a reference to

--- Page 1031 ---
another, consider whether there may already be a chain of references
leading from one to the other.
A subview can see its superview, through its superview property. A
superview can see all its subviews, through its subviews property,
and can pick out a specific subview through that subview’s tag
property, by calling the viewWithTag(_:) method. A subview in a
window can see its window, through its window property. Working
your way up or down the view hierarchy by means of these
properties, it may be possible to obtain the desired reference.
A view controller can see its view through its view property, and
from there can work its way down to subviews to which it may not
have an outlet. What about going in the other direction? A responder
(Chapter 11) can see the next object up the responder chain, through
the next property — which also means, because of the structure of
the responder chain, that a view controller’s main view can see the
view controller.
View controllers are themselves part of a hierarchy and therefore can
see one another. If a view controller is currently presenting a view
through a second view controller, the latter is the former’s presented
ViewController, and the former is the latter’s presentingViewCont
roller. If a view controller is the child of a UINavigationController,
the latter is its navigationController. A UINavigationController’s
visible view is controlled by its visibleViewController. And so
forth.
Global Visibility

--- Page 1032 ---
Some objects are globally visible — that is, they are visible to all
other objects. Object types themselves are an important example. As I
pointed out in Chapter 4, it is perfectly reasonable to use a Swift
struct with static members as a way of providing globally available
namespaced constants (“Struct as Namespace”).
Classes sometimes have class methods or properties that vend
singleton instances. Some of these singletons, in turn, have properties
pointing to other objects, making those other objects likewise
globally visible. Any object can see the singleton UIApplication
instance as UIApplication.shared. So any object can also see the
app’s primary window, because that is the first element of the
singleton UIApplication instance’s windows property. And any object
can see the app delegate, because that is the application’s delegate
property. And the chain continues: any object can see the app’s root
view controller, because that is the primary window’s rootViewCont
roller — and from there, as I said in the previous section, we can
navigate the view controller hierarchy and the view hierarchy.
So now we know how to solve the problem I posed earlier of getting
a reference to the app’s root view controller. We start with the
globally visible shared application instance:
let app = UIApplication.shared
From there we can get the window:
let window = app.windows.first

--- Page 1033 ---
That window owns the root view controller, and will hand us a
reference to it through its rootViewController property:
let vc = window?.rootViewController
And voilà — a reference to our app’s root view controller. To obtain
the reference to this persistent instance, we have created, in effect, a
chain leading from the known to the unknown, from a globally
available class to the particular desired instance.
You can make your own objects globally visible by attaching them to
a globally visible object. For example, a public property of the app
delegate, which you are free to create, is globally visible by virtue of
the app delegate being globally visible (by virtue of the shared
application being globally visible).
Another globally visible object is the shared defaults object obtained
as UserDefaults.standard. This object is the gateway to storage
and retrieval of user defaults, which is similar to a dictionary (a
collection of values named by keys). The user defaults are
automatically saved when your application quits and are
automatically available when your application is launched again later,
so they are one of the ways in which your app maintains information
between launches. But, being globally visible, they are also a conduit
for communicating values within your app.
In one of my apps there’s a preference setting I call Default.hazySt
ripy. This determines whether a certain visible interface object (a
card in a game) is drawn with a hazy fill or a stripy fill. This is a

--- Page 1034 ---
setting that the user can change, so there is a preferences interface
allowing the user to make this change. When the user displays this
preferences interface, I examine the Default.hazyStripy setting in
the user defaults to configure the preferences interface to reflect it in
a segmented control (called self.hazyStripy):
func setHazyStripy () { 
    let hs = UserDefaults.standard 
        .object(forKey:Default.hazyStripy) as! Int 
    self.hazyStripy.selectedSegmentIndex = hs 
}
Conversely, if the user interacts with the preferences interface,
tapping the hazyStripy segmented control to change its setting, I
respond by changing the actual Default.hazyStripy setting in the
user defaults:
@IBAction func hazyStripyChange(_ sender: Any) { 
    let hs = self.hazyStripy.selectedSegmentIndex 
    UserDefaults.standard.set(hs, forKey: Default.hazyStripy) 
}
But here’s the really interesting part. The preferences interface is not
the only object that uses the Default.hazyStripy setting in the user
defaults; the drawing code that actually draws the hazy-or-stripy-
filled card also uses it, so as to know how the card should draw itself!
When the user leaves the preferences interface and the card game
reappears, the cards are redrawn — consulting the Default.hazyStr
ipy setting in UserDefaults in order to do so:
override func draw(_ rect: CGRect) { 
    let hazy : Bool = UserDefaults.standard 

--- Page 1035 ---
        .integer(forKey:Default.hazyStripy) == HazyStripy.hazy.rawValue 
    CardPainter.shared.drawCard(self.card, hazy:hazy) 
}
There is no need for the card object and the view controller object
that manages the preferences interface to be able to see one another,
because they can both see this common object, the Default.hazyStr
ipy user default. UserDefaults becomes, in itself, a global conduit for
communicating information from one part of my app to another.
Notifications and Key–Value Observing
Notifications (Chapter 11) can be a way to communicate between
objects that are conceptually distant from one another without
bothering to provide any way for one to see the other. All they really
need to have in common is a knowledge of the name of the
notification. Every object can see the notification center — it is a
globally visible object — so every object can arrange to post or
receive a notification.
Using a notification in this way may seem lazy, an evasion of your
responsibility to architect your objects sensibly. But sometimes one
object doesn’t need to know, and indeed shouldn’t know, what object
(or objects) it is sending a message to.
Recall the example I gave in Chapter 11. In a simple card game app,
the game needs to know when a card is tapped. A card, when it is
tapped, knowing nothing about the game, simply emits a virtual
shriek by posting a notification; the game object has registered for
this notification and takes over from there:

--- Page 1036 ---
NotificationCenter.default.post(name: Self.tappedNotification, object: s
elf)
Here’s another example, taking advantage of the fact that
notifications are a broadcast mechanism. In one of my apps, the app
delegate may detect a need to tear down the interface and build it
back up again from scratch. If this is to happen without causing
memory leaks (and all sorts of other havoc), every view controller
that is currently running a repeating Timer needs to invalidate that
timer (Chapter 12). Rather than my having to work out what view
controllers those might be, and endowing every view controller with
a method that can be called, I simply have the app delegate shout
“Everybody stop timers!” by posting a notification. All my view
controllers that run timers have registered for this notification, and
they know what to do when they receive it.
By the same token, Cocoa itself provides notification versions of
many delegate and action messages. The app delegate has a method
for being told when the app goes into the background, but other
objects might need to know this too; those objects can register for the
corresponding notification.
Similarly, key–value observing can be used to keep two conceptually
distant objects synchronized with one another: a property of one
object changes, and the other object hears about the change. As I said
in Chapter 11, entire areas of Cocoa routinely expect you to use KVO
when you want to be notified of a change in an object property. You
can configure the same sort of thing with your own objects.

--- Page 1037 ---
The Combine Framework
There is some commonality between mechanisms such as the
notification center and key–value observing. In both cases, you
register with some other object to receive a certain message whenever
that other object cares to send it. Basically, you’re opening and
configuring a pipeline of communication, and leaving it in place until
you no longer need it. Looked at in that way, notifications and key–
value observing seem closely related to one another. In fact, the
target–action mechanism of reporting control events seems related as
well. So does a Timer. So does delayed performance.
The Combine framework, introduced in Swift 5.1 and iOS 13, offers
to unify these architectures (and others) under a single head. At its
heart, Combine depends upon an abstract notion of publish-and-
subscribe, and reifies that abstraction with two protocols, Publisher
and Subscriber:
Publisher
A publisher promises to provide a certain kind of a value, perhaps
repeatedly, at some time in the future.
Subscriber
A Subscriber registers itself with (subscribes to) a Publisher to
receive its value whenever that value may come along.
When a Subscriber subscribes to a Publisher, here’s what happens:
1. The Publisher responds by handing the Subscriber a
Subscription (yet another protocol).

--- Page 1038 ---
2. The Subscriber can then use the Subscription to ask the
Publisher for a value.
3. The Publisher can respond by sending, whenever it cares to, a
value to the Subscriber. It can do this as many times as it likes.
4. In some situations, the entire connection can be cancelled when
the Subscriber no longer wishes to receive values.
That’s a rather elaborate-sounding dance, but in most cases you won’t
experience it that way. You won’t experience the dance at all! Instead,
you’ll just hook up a built-in subscriber directly to a built-in publisher
and all the right things will happen.
To illustrate, I’ll start with a trivial example. One of the simplest
forms of publisher is a Subject. Every time you call send(_:) on a
Subject, handing it a value, it sends that value to its subscribers.
There are just two kinds of Subject:
PassthroughSubject
Produces the value sent to it with send.
CurrentValueSubject
Like a PassthroughSubject, except that it has a value at the outset,
and produces it to any new subscriber.
Let’s make a Subject:
let pass = PassthroughSubject<String,Never>() 
pass.send("howdy")
That compiles and runs, but we don’t know that anything happened
because we have no subscriber. There are just two built-in

--- Page 1039 ---
independent subscribers, and each can be created with a convenience
method sent to a publisher; the method subscribes the subscriber to
the publisher and returns it:
sink
Takes a function to be called whenever a value is received. The
function takes a single parameter, namely the value.
assign
Takes a Swift key path and an object. Whenever a value is
received, assigns that value to the property of that object
designated by the key path.
So here’s a complete publish-and-subscribe example:
let pass = PassthroughSubject<String,Never>() 
let sink = pass.sink { 
    print($0) 
} 
pass.send("howdy") // howdy
That works, in the sense that "howdy" appears in the console; but it
still isn’t a very realistic example. In real life, we’re never going to
make a publisher, subscribe to it, and make it publish, all within the
immediate local scope of a single series of commands. In a realistic
scenario:
The publisher belongs to, and is vended by, one object.
The subscriber is created and attached to the publisher by a
different object.

--- Page 1040 ---
If the publisher publishes at all, that will happen at some unknown
future time. Therefore the subscriber needs to persist long enough
to wait for the publisher to publish.
To simulate that, let’s store our publisher and subscriber in instance
properties, and let’s make the publisher publish only after a delay:
let pass = PassthroughSubject<String,Never>() 
var storage = Set<AnyCancellable>() 
override func viewDidLoad() { 
    super.viewDidLoad() 
    let sink = self.pass.sink { 
        print($0) 
    } 
    sink.store(in: &self.storage) 
    delay(1) { 
        self.pass.send("howdy") // howdy 
    } 
}
In that code, the Subject publisher persists long enough for us to
make it publish one second later, because it is assigned to an instance
property. And the sink subscriber is also assigned to an instance
property; in particular, it is added to a Set of AnyCancellable, using
the store(in:) method. The result is that when we come along one
second later and tell the Subject publisher to publish, the sink
subscriber still exists, inside the storage Set, and receives the
published value and prints it.
To help you take advantage of the Combine framework in your Cocoa
code, a number of Foundation and Cocoa types vend Combine
publishers, such as:

--- Page 1041 ---
The notification center
A KVO compliant property
A computed property declared with the @Published property
wrapper
The Timer class
A Scheduler (used for delayed performance; DispatchQueue,
OperationQueue, and RunLoop are all Schedulers)
A URLSession (for obtaining a value via the network)
Besides publishers and subscribers, there are also operators. An
operator is a publisher that is somewhat like a subscriber, in that it
can be attached to another publisher. The real power of the Combine
framework lies in the operators. By chaining operators, you construct
a pipeline that passes along only the information you’re really
interested in; the logic of analyzing, filtering, and transforming that
information is pushed up into the pipeline itself.
To illustrate, I’ll use the notification center as my source of data.
Let’s go back to my example of a Card view that emits a virtual
shriek when it is tapped by posting a notification:
static let tapped = Notification.Name("tapped") 
@objc func tapped() { 
    NotificationCenter.default.post(name: Self.tapped, object: self) 
}
Now let’s say, for purposes of the example, that what the game is
interested in when it receives one of these notifications is the string
value of the name property of the Card that posted the notification.

--- Page 1042 ---
Getting that information is a two-stage process. First, we have to
register to receive notifications at all:
NotificationCenter.default.addObserver(self, 
    selector: #selector(cardTapped), name: Card.tapped, object: nil)
Then, when we receive a notification, we have to look to see that its o
bject really is a Card, and if it is, fetch its name property and do
something with it:
@objc func cardTapped(_ n:Notification) { 
    if let card = n.object as? Card { 
        let name = card.name 
        print(name) // or something 
    } 
}
Now let’s do the same thing using the Combine framework. We
obtain a publisher from the notification center by calling its publish
er method. But we don’t stop there. We don’t want to receive a
notification if the object isn’t a Card, so we use the compactMap
operator to cast it safely to Card — and if it isn’t a Card, the pipeline
just stops as if nothing had happened. And we only want the Card’s n
ame, so we use the map operator to get it. Here’s the result:
let cardTappedCardNamePublisher = 
    NotificationCenter.default.publisher(for: Card.tapped) 
        .compactMap {$0.object as? Card} 
        .map {$0.name}
Let’s say that cardTappedCardNamePublisher is an instance
property of our view controller. Then what we now have in this
instance property is a publisher that publishes the string name of a

--- Page 1043 ---
Card if that Card posts the tapped notification, and otherwise does
nothing. Do you see what I mean when I say that the logic is pushed
up into the pipeline?
Finally, let’s arrange to receive that string, by subscribing to the
publisher:
let sink = self.cardTappedCardNamePublisher.sink { 
    print($0) 
} 
sink.store(in: &self.storage)
Here’s another example. You may have noticed that I didn’t list
controls (UIControl) among the built-in publishers. This means we
can’t automatically replace the control target–action mechanism
using the Combine framework. However, with just a little
modification, we can turn a control into a publisher. I’ll demonstrate
with a switch control (UISwitch). It has an isOn property, which is
changed when the user toggles the switch on or off. The target–action
way to learn that this has happened is through the switch’s .valueCh
anged control event. Let’s write a UISwitch subclass where we vend
a publisher and funnel the isOn value through it (I’ll use the new iOS
14 UIAction notation):
class MySwitch : UISwitch { 
    @Published var isOnPublisher = false 
    required init?(coder: NSCoder) { 
        super.init(coder:coder) 
        self.isOnPublisher = self.isOn 
        let action = UIAction {[unowned self] _ in 
            self.isOnPublisher = self.isOn 
        } 

--- Page 1044 ---
        self.addAction(action, for: .valueChanged) 
    } 
}
That code illustrates the @Published property wrapper. This creates a
publisher behind the scenes, and vends it through the property
wrapper’s dollar-sign projectedValue (“Property Wrappers”). With
our subclass, the way to be kept informed about changes to the
switch’s isOn property is to subscribe to its publisher, namely $isOnP
ublisher.
So let’s subscribe to it! Suppose we are the view controller that
ultimately owns this switch. And suppose we have an outlet to the
switch:
@IBOutlet var mySwitch : MySwitch!
Then we, the view controller, can subscribe to that publisher:
let sink = self.mySwitch.$isOnPublisher.sink { 
    print($0) 
} 
sink.store(in: &self.storage)
But wait — doesn’t that look awfully familiar? Yes, it does — and
that’s the point. Using Combine, we’ve effectively reduced the
notification center mechanism and the control target–action
mechanism to the same mechanism.
Even more of the power of the Combine framework emerges when
we build complex pipelines. To illustrate, let’s combine (sorry about
that) the notification center pipeline and the switch pipeline. Imagine

--- Page 1045 ---
that our interface consists of Cards along with a switch. When the
switch is on, the cards are interactive: the user can tap one, and we
hear about it. When the switch is off, the user’s taps do nothing.
To implement this, we can put the notification center publisher and
the switch publisher together into a single pipeline. The Combine
publisher that does that is CombineLatest:
lazy var combination = 
    Publishers.CombineLatest( 
        self.cardTappedCardNamePublisher, 
        self.mySwitch.$isOnPublisher 
    )
What we now have is a publisher that channels the pipelines from our
other two publishers into one. It remembers every value that last
arrived from either source, and when it gets a new value, it emits a
tuple consisting of both values. In our case, that’s a (String,Bool).
However, that’s not what we actually want to have coming down the
pipeline at us. We still want just the string name of the tapped card.
So we’ll use the map operator to extract it:
lazy var combination = 
    Publishers.CombineLatest( 
        self.cardTappedCardNamePublisher, 
        self.mySwitch.$isOnPublisher 
    ) 
    .map { $0.0 }
Now we’re getting just the string name, but we’re getting too many
string names; the switch isn’t having any effect. The pipeline is

--- Page 1046 ---
emitting values in response to user taps even when the switch is off!
The whole idea of combining these two publishers was to eliminate
any output when the switch is off. So we’ll interpose the filter
operator to block any tuples whose Bool is false:
lazy var combination = 
    Publishers.CombineLatest( 
        self.cardTappedCardNamePublisher, 
        self.mySwitch.$isOnPublisher 
    ) 
    .filter { $0.1 } 
    .map { $0.0 }
This is looking much better. If the user taps while the switch is on, we
get the card name. If the user taps while the switch is off, nothing
happens. But there’s still one little problem. The CombineLatest
publisher publishes if it gets a value from either of its source
publishers. That means we don’t just get a value when the user taps a
Card; we also get a value when the user toggles the switch. We don’t
want that value to come out the end of the pipeline; we just want to
use it to allow or prevent the arrival of the Card name.
What we want to do here is compare two values: the new tuple
coming down the pipeline, and the previous tuple that came down the
pipeline most recently. If the difference between the new tuple and
the old tuple is merely that the Bool changed, we don’t want to emit a
value from the pipeline. The way to obtain both the current value and
the previous value is with the scan operator. I’ll use that operator to
pass both the old switch value and the new switch value down the
pipeline. Then, in the filter operator, I’ll block any value unless
both the old switch value and the new switch value are true:

--- Page 1047 ---
lazy var combination = 
    Publishers.CombineLatest( 
        self.cardTappedCardNamePublisher, 
        self.mySwitch.$isOnPublisher 
    ) 
    .scan(("",true,true)) { ($1.0, $0.2, $1.1) } 
    .filter { $0.1 && $0.2 } 
    .map { $0.0 }
Our goal is accomplished. If the user taps a Card while the switch is
on, the pipeline produces its name. If the user taps a Card while the
switch is off, or toggles the switch, nothing happens.
These examples have only scratched the surface of what the Combine
framework can do; but they demonstrate its spirit. And the potential
benefits are profound. In Chapter 11 I complained that the event-
driven nature of the Cocoa framework means that you’re bombarded
with events through different entry points at different times, so that
state has to be maintained in shared instance properties, and
understanding the implications of any single entry point method call
can be difficult. The Combine framework offers the potential of
funneling events into pipelines whose logic can be manipulated
internally, so that what comes out is just the information you need
when you need it.
TIP
There isn’t room in this book for a full discussion of the Combine framework;
for more, see https://www.apeth.com/UnderstandingCombine/, where I’ve
written an online tutorial about Combine.

--- Page 1048 ---
Alternative Architectures
In real life, one way to improve communication between objects in an
app of any complexity is to plan the internal architecture of the app
appropriately. My goal in this section is not to recommend this or that
alternative architecture, but rather to make you aware of some of the
possibilities and how they can ease the pain of communicating
between objects in your app.
Model–View–Controller
The naïve standard architecture implied by Cocoa’s classes is called
Model–View–Controller (MVC). In this terminology, model is the
data; view is what the user sees and interacts with; and controller is
the code that mediates between them, deciding what data to display to
the user and how, and responding to the user’s actions by modifying
the data.
The name view controller implies that a UIViewController is a
controller. Each scene of the app corresponds to one view controller,
and the view controllers do all the work of moving data around the
app. If one view controller pushes or presents another, it hands the
needed data “forward” to that view controller. When a pushed or
presented view controller goes out of existence, it hands the needed
data “back” to the view controller that pushed or presented it.
Simple MVC, on its own, has some unfortunate consequences. As
soon as an app consists of more than one or two view controllers, or
if there is a need to access data that cannot easily be handed back and
forth in this way, we get into the sort of difficulties that I’ve been

--- Page 1049 ---
describing in this chapter. Moreover, this architecture has a tendency
to lead to very large view controller classes, which can make the code
hard to read — because functionality is hard to find and trace and
understand — and hard to maintain. It can also make the code hard to
test.
Router and Data Space
The fact is that view controllers exist; we’re stuck with them (unless
you opt to drop UIKit programming altogether and go with SwiftUI,
as I’ll describe in the next section). One key step towards making
view controllers tractable is to get the business of navigation from
one view controller to another out of the hands of the view controllers
themselves. The idea here is that no view controller should know
about the existence of any other view controller. Such knowledge
constitutes a leakage of responsibility. Instead, we need some
centralized mechanism to which we can turn and ask to go to a
different scene, whatever that may turn out to mean. This mechanism
is usually called the router; some architectures refer to it as the
coordinator, or flow coordinator. (For a basic example, take a look at
URLNavigator on GitHub.)
Using a router means you’re almost certainly going to have to
abandon storyboard segues, or at least automatic segues. That may be
disappointing, but such is the price that must be paid for separation of
responsibilities. The whole idea is that all navigation must be
performed by way of the central mechanism; an automatically
triggered segue would go behind the router’s back. Indeed, a
complication arises because UIKit wants to perform “back”

--- Page 1050 ---
navigation automatically. Both a navigation controller’s Back button
and dismissal of a presented view controller threaten to take place
without consulting our code at all; you might have to take definite
steps to make sure that that doesn’t happen.
When a view controller doesn’t know anything about other view
controllers, it doesn’t know what data the next view controller needs.
The router therefore also has the responsibility for communicating
any needed data to the next view controller. We can imagine the
router turning to the first view controller and asking it for the data
and passing it along to the next view controller; but at that point we
may start to wonder why a view controller is maintaining any real
data in the first place. Why isn’t there just the data belonging to the
app as a whole?
The idea here is that perhaps we could put the data in some
centralized global location, where anyone can access it. I call this
centralized location the data space. The Combine framework is a
great way to organize access to the data space. The data space can use
Combine pipelines to vend an automatic messaging mechanism. If
something changes the data, all subscribers hear about it instantly,
and the state of the app remains synchronized everywhere.
Model–View–Presenter
A further key insight is the realization that, in the Model–View–
Controller division of responsibilities, a view controller should
perhaps be considered View, not Controller. (Your eyes will be
opened to this notion if you watch a wonderful YouTube video by

--- Page 1051 ---
Dave DeLong.) On this basis, all the logic for deciding what to show
the user and how to respond to user actions can be moved out of the
view controller into another class, which we may call the Presenter.
The Presenter knows nothing of the details of the visible interface,
and the view controller knows nothing of the Model. The Presenter is
the one that knows about and talks to the Model; at the same time, the
Presenter and the view controller communicate with one another
solely in terms of intent.
For example, let’s say the data represents a bank account. The
Presenter might consult the Model and then say to the view
controller: “Here is a number. Display it to the user, as being the
user’s current balance.” The Presenter knows nothing of how the
view controller will do that. The view controller, meanwhile, is
responsible for making that number visible to the user, and no more.
The view controller knows that the interface has a UILabel for this
purpose, and it formats the number and displays it in the label. It
knows nothing of where the number came from.
Going the other way, when the user does something, such as tapping
a button, the view controller will interpret that button in terms of
intent, and will say to the Presenter: “Here is what the user wants to
do.” The Presenter is then responsible for the action logic of deciding
how to proceed, which might involve consulting or changing the
Model.
This approach has many advantages. The view controller is pared
down to the status of an intermediary; it musters the visible interface
and communicates with the Presenter, and that’s all it does. So view

--- Page 1052 ---
controllers are smaller and simpler. It is now far easier for you to find
your code, because it will be readily evident what are view controller
concerns and what are Presenter concerns. Moreover, the Presenter is
testable: given a certain intent as input, does it respond correctly as
output? Your unit tests can ask questions like that, without involving
the any interface.
Another sign of the Presenter’s power is that, when used in
conjunction with a router, the Presenter usually doesn’t have to
import UIKit. It knows nothing of views or view controllers! It
embodies the pure logic of a scene’s behavior without reference to
anything extraneous.
However, the app as a whole has now become more elaborate. Every
scene consists of a little cluster of instances. In addition to the view
controller, there is a corresponding Presenter. Every time the router
creates and configures a new view controller, it must also create the
corresponding Presenter and hook the two together correctly. The
need for this assembly step is part of the price that must be paid for
the resulting simplicity and testability.
Protocols and Reactive Programming
In my discussion of Model–View–Presenter, I have avoided
specifying the exact mechanism by which the View (meaning the
view controller) and the corresponding Presenter will communicate
with one another. The most obvious approach is that each of them has
methods that the other is allowed to call. To make this contract
explicit, as well as to facilitate testing, it’s probably a good idea to

--- Page 1053 ---
express these public interfaces as protocols — one stating what the
view controller is allowed to say to the Presenter, and another stating
what the Presenter is allowed to say to the view controller.
It might also be nice to make this communication more automatic.
For instance, we could put a setter observer on some property of the
view controller, so that when a user action changes that property, the
change is relayed directly to the Presenter. Similarly, a change in
some property of the Presenter could be relayed directly to the view
controller.
One can then imagine going even further and replacing the property
observers with a “reactive” mechanism. Before iOS 13, this
mechanism typically comes from some third-party library; nowadays,
we can use the Combine framework. If we make the same sort of
connection between the Presenter and the data, we end up with a kind
of automatic data flow throughout the app. Ideally, the interface
should depend directly on the data.
VIPER
An even more extreme separation of responsibilities is the VIPER
architecture, which stands for View–Interactor–Presenter–Entity–
Router. Despite the alphabet soup, this architecture is really just a
separation of the Presenter into multiple objects. The Presenter itself
communicates with the view controller and maintains local state; it
does no “real work.” The Interactor is the Presenter’s conduit to the
data, and there is a wireframe that is the Presenter’s conduit to the
router.

--- Page 1054 ---
VIPER is arguably too much of a good thing, and in my experience it
is more a religious aspiration than a practical tool. Still, used
correctly, it makes finding your code dead easy. For a good
introduction to VIPER, see https://github.com/infinum/iOS-VIPER-
Xcode-Templates.
SwiftUI
The SwiftUI framework is a wholesale alternative to Cocoa. It
operates on a programming paradigm that’s completely different from
Cocoa’s, and offers the promise of writing iOS apps in a totally
different way — not to mention that the same code might be reusable
on Apple TV, Apple Watch, and desktop Macs. SwiftUI as a whole is
outside the scope of this book; it needs a book of its own. The subject
here is how objects see and communicate with one another.
To illustrate how SwiftUI deals with communication, let’s start with
the prototypical “Hello World” app:
struct ContentView : View { 
    var body: some View { 
        Text("Hello World") 
    } 
}
That code puts the text “Hello World” in the middle of the screen. But
how? It doesn’t seem to contain any runnable code. Well, actually it
does: body is a computed property, and the curly braces that surround
Text("Hello World") are its getter (with return omitted). The
interface is constructed in code and returned. But that’s not quite

--- Page 1055 ---
accurate; it isn’t the interface that’s returned — it’s a description of
the interface.
In SwiftUI, there is no storyboard; there are no nibs; there are no
outlets. There is no UIViewController; there isn’t even a UIView.
Text is a mere struct, and View is just a protocol. A SwiftUI View is
extremely lightweight, and is barely persistent. There are no entry
points other than the body property getter, which is merely the answer
to an occasional question, “What should this view look like at this
moment?”
The most pervasive object-oriented pattern in SwiftUI is that one
View instantiates another View. Our simple “Hello World” app
consists entirely of our ContentView instantiating a Text object in its
body getter. This is the same pattern of visibility by instantiation that
I discussed at the start of this chapter: when Manny creates Jack,
Manny has a reference to Jack and can hand Jack any information
that Jack needs in order to do his job. We do not have to get a
reference to something in order to customize its appearance; we
customize its appearance as part of its initialization. There is no need
for the ContentView to get a reference to the Text in order to tell it
what its visible content (“Hello World”) should be; the ContentView
creates the Text with that content.
Function Builders and Modifiers
SwiftUI’s syntax for constructing interfaces is declarative and
functional rather than imperative and sequential. To illustrate, I’ll add

--- Page 1056 ---
a button to the interface. I’ll declare the button without giving it any
functionality:
struct ContentView : View { 
    var body: some View { 
        HStack { 
            Text("Hello World") 
            Spacer() 
            Button("Tap Me") { 
                // does nothing 
            } 
        }.frame(width: 200) 
    } 
}
The Text object returned by the body getter has been replaced by an
HStack, which lines up views horizontally. Inside the HStack’s curly
braces are three objects in series: a Text, a Spacer, and a Button. That
seems impossible syntactically. What’s happening? The curly braces
after HStack are the body of an anonymous function, supplied using
trailing closure syntax as a parameter to HStack’s initializer. That
initializer is allowed to “list” three objects because it is fed to a
ViewBuilder, which is a function builder (“Function Builders”); the
ViewBuilder wraps up those objects in a TupleView, and that is what
is returned from the anonymous function.
The frame method being called on the HStack determines the width
of the HStack on the screen. What’s interesting about it is that it is a
method. Instead of getting a reference to the HStack object and
setting a property of that object, we apply a method directly to that
object. This sort of method is called a modifier, and it returns in effect
the very same instance to which it was sent. The modified instance is

--- Page 1057 ---
of a more complex type, but this complexity is hidden from us by
type erasure and ultimately by the body reverse generic return type so
me View (see “Reverse Generics”). And modifiers can be chained,
just like operators in the Combine framework; the effect is that we
describe the object in more and more detail. If we wanted our text-
and-button HStack to have a yellow background with 20-pixel
margins, we could write:
HStack { 
    Text("Hello World") 
    Spacer() 
    Button("Tap Me") { 
        // does nothing 
    } 
}.frame(width: 200) 
.padding(20) 
.background(Color.yellow)
State Properties
At this point, you may be saying: “Fine, I see how visibility by
instantiation is sufficient when all you want to do is create the app’s
initial interface; you configure a view’s initial appearance in its
initializer. But what about when the interface needs to change over
the course of the app’s lifetime?” Amazingly, the answer is the same:
SwiftUI still handles everything through a view’s initializer. But how
can that be?
To demonstrate, let’s give our button some functionality. In particular,
the user should be able to tap the button to toggle the text between
“Hello World” and “Goodbye World.” Here’s how to do that:

--- Page 1058 ---
struct ContentView : View { 
    @State var isHello = true 
  
    var greeting : String { 
        self.isHello ? "Hello" : "Goodbye" 
  
    } 
    var body: some View { 
        HStack { 
            Text(self.greeting + " World") 
            Spacer() 
            Button("Tap Me") { 
                self.isHello.toggle() 
  
            } 
        }.frame(width: 200) 
        .padding(20) 
        .background(Color.yellow) 
    } 
}
We have declared an isHello instance property on which the
interface depends — in this case, whether the text should read
“Hello World” or “Goodbye World.” Crucially, this instance
property is declared with the @State property wrapper. This
means that if the value of isHello changes, whatever depends
upon it will be recalculated. So in our code, whenever isHello
changes, the body getter will be called again.
For simplicity and clarity, we also declare a computed instance
property greeting that translates the Bool of the @State property
isHello into a corresponding string.
The button’s action — what it should do when tapped — is
supplied as an anonymous function, using trailing closure syntax,
as part of its initializer. That action changes the value of the @Sta
te property isHello. When the @State property isHello
changes in response to the tapping of the button, the body getter is
called again — and the Text content is freshly calculated and

--- Page 1059 ---
takes on its new value. The new result is returned and displayed,
and so we have achieved what we set out to accomplish: tapping
the button changes the text displayed on the screen.
Notice what did not happen in that example:
The button did not use a target–action architecture: there is no
separate target to send a message to, and there is no separate
action function. Instead, the action function is part of the button.
The action function did not talk to the Text to change what it
displays; it talked only to the @State property.
The @State property has no setter observer that talks to the Text.
Instead, the change in the @State property effectively flows
“downhill” to the body of the View, automatically.
In that code, there are no event handlers, no events, and no action
handlers. And there are no references from one object to another!
There is no problem of communicating data from one object to
another, because objects don’t try to communicate with one another.
There is just a View and its state at any given moment.
Moreover, view state in SwiftUI can be maintained only through @St
ate properties. A View stored property can’t be settable; a view is a
struct and isn’t mutable. A @State property, on the other hand, is a
computed property backed by a property wrapper whose underlying
State struct is mutable. In this way, SwiftUI forces you to clarify the
locus of state throughout your app.
Another important lesson of our code is that View objects are
ephemeral. A View’s body getter can be called at any time; it

--- Page 1060 ---
generates some Views, like our Text, that describe the interface and
are then thrown away. You never know how often a View’s body may
be called; you never know how often a View struct like our
ContentView will be created anew. And you don’t need to know! All
that matters is that you can instantly describe the interface based on
the state.
Bindings
Some views have even tighter coupling with a @State. To illustrate,
I’ll replace the Button in our example with a Toggle:
struct ContentView : View { 
    @State var isHello = true 
    var greeting : String { 
        self.isHello ? "Hello" : "Goodbye" 
    } 
    var body: some View { 
        VStack { 
            Text(self.greeting + " World") 
            Spacer() 
            Toggle("Friendly", isOn: $isHello) // * 
        }.frame(width: 150, height: 100) 
        .padding(20) 
        .background(Color.yellow) 
    } 
}
A Toggle is drawn as a labeled UISwitch. When the user changes the
switch, the Text changes in the interface. But how?
A Toggle takes a Binding in its initializer. The State property wrapper
vends a Binding property as its dollar-sign projectedValue. Our @St

--- Page 1061 ---
ate property is isHello, so its binding is $isHello. We handed that
binding to the Toggle when we initialized it. When the user changes
the UISwitch value, that binding’s value is toggled. That change takes
place in the @State property, and so, once again, the Text changes
accordingly.
That is somewhat similar to what we did in the earlier discussion of
the Combine framework, where we modified a UISwitch to vend a
Publisher of its own isOn value — except that in SwiftUI, the
communication between the @State property and the Toggle is two-
way and automatic by way of the binding. Our Toggle has no action
function, and doesn’t need one, because it is tightly integrated with a
Bool property through a binding.
Passing Data Downhill
So far, the only objects our ContentView has created are instances of
built-in types — Text, Button, Spacer, Toggle. But what if you
wanted to create an instance of a custom type? How would you pass
data from the View that does the creating to the View that is created?
In exactly the same way that we’ve been doing it up to now! You give
your custom type a property, and you set that property as part of the
custom type’s initialization.
That is legal, even though a View is an immutable struct whose stored
properties cannot be set, because we are not mutating the struct; we
are initializing it. It is also easy, because a View is just a struct.
Typically, you won’t even bother to write an initializer for your
custom View; the implicit memberwise initializer will be sufficient.

--- Page 1062 ---
In this example, we present modally a secondary view, an instance of
a Greeting struct that we ourselves have defined:
struct ContentView : View { 
    @State var isHello = true 
    var greeting : String { 
        self.isHello ? "Hello" : "Goodbye" 
    } 
    @State var showSheet = false 
    var body: some View { 
        VStack { 
            Button("Show Message") { 
                self.showSheet.toggle() 
            }.sheet(isPresented: $showSheet) { 
                Greeting(greeting: self.greeting) // * 
            } 
            Spacer() 
            Toggle("Friendly", isOn: $isHello) 
        }.frame(width: 150, height: 100) 
        .padding(20) 
        .background(Color.yellow) 
    } 
} 
struct Greeting : View { 
    let greeting : String 
    var body: some View { 
        Text(greeting + " World") 
    } 
}
The sheet modifier is the SwiftUI equivalent of a Cocoa presented
view controller. It describes a view that we intend to present modally.
Whether it is actively presenting that view modally depends upon a
binding to a Bool, which we have supplied by adding a @State
property called showSheet. The Button toggles showSheet to true,

--- Page 1063 ---
and the binding $showSheet toggles to true in response, and causes
the view to be presented.
The view we want to present is a wrapper for a Text that will display
the “Hello World” or “Goodbye World” greeting; we have named that
wrapper view Greeting, and we instantiate it in an anonymous
function that we supply as the last parameter to the sheet modifier,
using trailing closure syntax. When we instantiate Greeting, we must
also configure the Greeting instance we are creating. We do that
through the Greeting initializer. The Greeting struct belongs to us, so
we’re free to give it a greeting property, and Swift synthesizes the
memberwise initializer with a greeting: parameter. All we have to
do is set that property as we create the Greeting. Once again, the data
flows “downhill.”
Passing Data Uphill
What about when the data needs to flow “uphill” out of the secondary
view back to the view that presented it? This is the sort of problem
that you’d solve in Cocoa programming using the protocol-and-
delegate pattern (“Implementing Delegation”). In SwiftUI, you
simply “lend” the secondary view the binding from a @State
property.
Suppose our Greeting view is to contain a text field (SwiftUI
TextField) in which is to be entered the user’s name, and that this
information is to be communicated back to our ContentView. Then
ContentView would contain another @State property:
@State var name = ""

--- Page 1064 ---
And Greeting would contain a @Binding property:
@Binding var username : String
When ContentView initializes Greeting, the memberwise initializer
now has a username: parameter that takes a string Binding; we hand
it the binding from the @State property:
Button("Show Message") { 
    self.showSheet.toggle() 
}.sheet(isPresented: $showSheet) { 
    Greeting(greeting: self.greeting, 
             username: self.$name) 
}
And Greeting’s TextField is initialized with that binding:
TextField("Your Name", text:$username) 
    .frame(width:200) 
    .textFieldStyle(RoundedBorderTextFieldStyle())
Whatever the user types in this text field in the Greeting view flows
“uphill” through the username binding, which is the @State property
name binding, and changes the value of the @State property name
back in the ContentView. And now the data flows “downhill” once
more: the ContentView body getter will be called again, and all views
that depend upon this @State property will change to match.
Once again, what’s most significant in that example is what we didn’t
do. We didn’t get a reference from the Greeting back to the
ContentView. The Greeting didn’t call any method of the
ContentView. It didn’t set a property of the ContentView. It set its

--- Page 1065 ---
own property, username. Communication between objects takes place
through bindings in SwiftUI. They are like little pipelines from one
object to another — and the object at one end (our Greeting) doesn’t
have to know anything about what’s at the other end.
Custom State Objects
You can construct your own state object by writing a custom class
that conforms to the ObservableObject protocol. For example, your
app’s data might reside in, or be accessed through, an
ObservableObject. To use it, you can assign an instance of your class
into a @StateObject property. Then you can access its properties
directly. Any properties of an ObservableObject that are marked with
the @Published attribute will behave like @State properties: when a
@Published property changes, your body getter that references it is
called again, and you can access an associated binding through the
dollar-sign projectedValue of the underlying StateObject property
wrapper struct.
To illustrate, suppose we want the name entered into the text field by
the user to persist between launches. We can implement that
functionality using an ObservableObject. To get started, I’ll write a
simple NameSaver class with a username property:
class NameSaver : ObservableObject { 
    @Published var username: String = "" 
    // ... 
}

--- Page 1066 ---
An ObservableObject has an objectWillChange property that is a
Publisher; in fact, it is a Subject, as I described in the earlier
discussion of the Combine framework. The objectWillChange
property is synthesized automatically, so we don’t have to declare it
(though we can if we want to). Being a Subject, it notifies its
subscribers whenever its send method is called. A @Published
property of an ObservableObject automatically calls that send
method. It is also itself a Publisher — or rather, its dollar-sign projec
tedValue is a Publisher. So if our Views refer to a NameSaver
instance in a @StateObject property, they will automatically be
updated when the NameSaver’s username changes. Our NameSaver
will be the ultimate “source of truth” for the username.
In our ContentView, there is no longer a @State String property
called name; it is replaced by a @StateObject NameSaver property
called nameSaver, which is the new “source of truth”:
@StateObject var nameSaver = NameSaver()
When we need to access the value of the NameSaver username
property, we do so directly:
Text(self.nameSaver.username.isEmpty ? "" : 
    greeting + ", " + self.nameSaver.username)
When we need a binding to the NameSaver username property, we
pass through the binding from nameSaver, namely $nameSaver:
Button("Show Message") { 
    self.showSheet.toggle() 
}.sheet(isPresented: $showSheet) { 

--- Page 1067 ---
    Greeting(greeting: self.greeting, 
             username: self.$nameSaver.username) 
}
The app now works exactly as it did before. But if that was all we
wanted, why did we create NameSaver in the first place? We did it so
that we can give NameSaver further functionality — namely, to save
the username to disk. Let’s add that functionality to NameSaver now.
The idea here is to back the username property with a file on disk.
When a NameSaver is initialized, I’ll have it read the username value
from disk. And when the username value changes, I want it to be
written to disk. To ensure that, I’ll construct a Combine pipeline that
subscribes to the username publisher and responds to changes by
saving the new value.
Here’s a slightly simplified version of the resulting code:
var storage = Set<AnyCancellable>() 
var fileURL : URL? { /* return URL of text file on disk */ } 
init() { 
    self.username = self.read() ?? "" 
    self.$username 
        .sink { self.save($0) } 
        .store(in: &self.storage) 
} 
func read() -> String? { 
    if let url = self.fileURL { 
        return try? String(contentsOf: url, encoding: .utf8) 
    } 
    return nil 
}

--- Page 1068 ---
func save(_ newName: String) { 
    if let url = self.fileURL { 
        try? newName.write(to: url, atomically: true, encoding: .utf8) 
    } 
}
Presto! The username that the user types in the TextField is now
saved to disk and persists between launches.

--- Page 1069 ---
Appendix A. C, Objective-C,
and Swift
The APIs for Cocoa and its associated frameworks are written in
Objective-C or its underlying base language, C. Messages that you
send to Cocoa using Swift are being translated for you into Objective-
C. Objects that you send and receive back and forth across the
Swift/Objective-C bridge are Objective-C objects. Some objects that
you send from Swift to Objective-C are even being translated for you
into other object types, or into nonobject types.
This appendix summarizes the relevant linguistic features of C and
Objective-C, and describes how Swift interfaces with those features. I
do not explain here how to write Objective-C! For example, I’ll talk
about Objective-C methods and method declarations, because you
need to know how to call an Objective-C method from Swift; but I’m
not going to explain how to call an Objective-C method using
Objective-C.
The C Language
Objective-C is a superset of C; to put it another way, C provides the
linguistic underpinnings of Objective-C. Everything that is true of C
is true also of Objective-C. It is possible, and often necessary, to write
long stretches of Objective-C code that are, in effect, pure C. Some of

--- Page 1070 ---
the Cocoa APIs are written in C. Therefore, in order to know about
Objective-C, it is necessary to know about C.
The C language was evolved during the early 1970s at Bell Labs in
conjunction with the creation of Unix. The reference manual, The C
Language by Brian Kernighan and Dennis M. Ritchie, was published
in 1978, and remains one of the best computer books ever written.
C statements, including declarations, must end in a semicolon.
Variables must be declared before use. A variable declaration consists
of a data type name followed by the variable name, optionally
followed by assignment of an initial value:
int i; 
double d = 3.14159;
The C typedef statement starts with an existing type name and
defines a new synonym for it:
typedef double NSTimeInterval;
C Data Types
C is not an object-oriented language; its data types are not objects
(they are scalars). The basic built-in C data types are all numeric:
char (one byte), int (four bytes), float and double (floating-point
numbers), and varieties such as short (short integer), long (long
integer), unsigned short, and so on. Objective-C adds NSInteger,
NSUInteger (unsigned), and CGFloat. The C bool type is actually a
numeric, with zero representing false; Objective-C adds BOOL,

--- Page 1071 ---
which is also a numeric. Even the C native text type (string) is
actually a null-terminated array of char, and I’ll discuss it later.
Swift supplies numeric types that interface directly with C numeric
types, even though Swift’s types are objects and C’s types are not.
Swift type aliases provide names that correspond to the C type
names: a Swift CBool (Bool) is a C bool, a Swift CChar (Int8) is a C
char, a Swift CInt (Int32) is a C int, a Swift CFloat (Float) is a C
float, and so on. Swift Int interchanges with NSInteger; Swift UInt
interchanges with NSUInteger. CGFloat is adopted as a Swift type
name. Swift ObjCBool represents Objective-C BOOL, but it is not a
Bool; to derive the Bool, take its boolValue. (You can, however,
assign a Swift Bool literal where an ObjCBool is expected, because
ObjCBool adopts ExpressibleByBooleanLiteral.)
A major difference between C and Swift is that C (and therefore
Objective-C) implicitly coerces when values of different numeric
types are assigned, passed, compared to, or combined with one
another; Swift doesn’t, so you must coerce explicitly to make types
match exactly, as I described in Chapter 3.
C Enums
A C enum is numeric; values are some sort of integer, and can be
implicit (starting from 0) or explicit. Enums arrive in various forms
into Swift, depending on how they are declared.
OLD-FASHIONED C ENUM
This is the simplest and oldest form:

--- Page 1072 ---
enum State { 
    kDead, 
    kAlive 
}; 
typedef enum State State;
(The typedef in the last line merely allows C programs to use the
term State as the name of this type instead of the more verbose enum
State.) In C, the enumerand names kDead and kAlive are not
“cases” of anything; they are not namespaced. They are constants,
and as they are not explicitly initialized, they represent 0 and 1
respectively. An enum declaration can specify the integer type
further; this one doesn’t, so the values are typed in Swift as UInt32.
This old-fashioned sort of C enum arrives as a Swift struct adopting
the RawRepresentable protocol, and its enumerands (here, kDead and
kAlive) arrive into Swift as synonyms for instances of the State
struct with an appropriate rawValue (here, 0 and 1 respectively). The
result is that you can use the enumerand names as a medium of
interchange wherever a State enum arrives from or is expected by C.
If a C function setState takes a State enum parameter, you can call
it with one of the State enumerand names:
setState(kDead)
Observe that there are no namespaces in this story! The enumerands
are bare names, not members of the State struct; you say kDead, not S
tate.kDead. If you are curious about what integer is represented by
the name kDead, you have to take its rawValue. You can also create
an arbitrary State value by calling its init(rawValue:) initializer —

--- Page 1073 ---
there is no check to see whether this value is one of the defined
constants. But you aren’t expected to do either of those things.
NS_ENUM
Starting back in Xcode 4.4, a C enum notation was introduced that
uses the NS_ENUM macro:
typedef NS_ENUM(NSInteger, UIStatusBarAnimation) { 
    UIStatusBarAnimationNone, 
    UIStatusBarAnimationFade, 
    UIStatusBarAnimationSlide, 
};
That notation both specifies the integer type and associates a type
name with this enum as a whole. Swift imports an enum declared this
way as a Swift enum with the name and raw value type intact; the
enumerand names become namespaced case names, with the common
prefix subtracted:
enum UIStatusBarAnimation : Int { 
    case none 
    case fade 
    case slide 
}
Going the other way, a Swift enum with an Int raw value type can be
exposed to Objective-C using the @objc attribute:
@objc enum Star : Int { 
    case blue 
    case white 
    case yellow 

--- Page 1074 ---
    case red 
}
Objective-C sees that as an enum with type NSInteger and
enumerand names StarBlue, StarWhite, and so on.
In the special case where the NS_ENUM type name ends in Error, it
arrives into Swift as a struct conforming to Error. Here’s the start of
an enum declaration from the Core Location framework:
typedef NS_ENUM(NSInteger, CLError) { 
    kCLErrorLocationUnknown = 0, 
    kCLErrorDenied, 
    kCLErrorNetwork, 
    // ... 
};
The result is that when Objective-C throws an NSError whose
domain is kCLErrorDomain and whose code is kCLErrorLocationUn
known, Swift can catch it by saying catch CLError.locationUnkno
wn.
A knotty problem arises when you write a Swift switch statement that
exhausts a C enum tag’s cases. What if, in a future release, the C code
is changed to add a case to this enum? If that happens, and if your
“exhaustive” switch receives an unknown case, you’ll crash. But
Swift is ready with a solution:
When you compile your code, you’ll be warned by the compiler
that this enum “may have additional unknown values.” To remove
the warning, you add a default case. Normally, the compiler
would warn you that your default case will never be executed,

--- Page 1075 ---
because your switch is exhaustive; but in this situation, your
switch might not be exhaustive some day, so that warning doesn’t
appear.
In addition, you mark the default case with the @unknown
attribute. This tells the compiler that you think your switch is
exhaustive (without the default), and you’d like to be warned if
it isn’t. If your switch isn’t exhaustive, you’ll get the warning
now; if some day a new case is added to the enum, you’ll get the
warning then, and you can silence it by adding the new case to
your switch.
Let’s demonstrate. Here’s a C enum:
typedef NS_ENUM(NSInteger, TestEnum) { 
    TestEnumOne 
    TestEnumTwo 
};
This arrives into Swift as an enum called TestEnum. Here’s an
exhaustive switch over a TestEnum:
switch test { // test is a TestEnum 
case .one : break 
case .two : break 
} // compiler warns
We get a warning from the compiler. Our switch looks exhaustive,
but in the future it might not be. So we add an @unknown default
case, and the warning goes away:
switch test { // test is a TestEnum 
case .one : break 
case .two : break 

--- Page 1076 ---
@unknown default: break 
}
Suppose the C enum later acquires another case (case .three). No
problem! Our Swift switch is crash-proof, because there’s a default
case. Even better, when we compile against the C code, our Swift
switch will get another warning, telling us that the switch is no longer
exhaustive.
If the Objective-C code is our own, and if we’re sure that the C enum
will never acquire a new case, we can mark it with NS_CLOSED_ENUM
instead of NS_ENUM; this will cause Swift to treat TestEnum like an
ordinary Swift enum.
TIP
Some enums in the Swift standard library and Foundation overlays are marked
as open to future additional cases in the same way as NS_ENUM.
NS_OPTIONS
Another variant of C enum notation, using the NS_OPTIONS macro, is
suitable for bitmasks:
typedef NS_OPTIONS(NSUInteger, UIViewAutoresizing) { 
    UIViewAutoresizingNone                 = 0, 
    UIViewAutoresizingFlexibleLeftMargin   = 1 << 0, 
    UIViewAutoresizingFlexibleWidth        = 1 << 1, 
    UIViewAutoresizingFlexibleRightMargin  = 1 << 2, 
    UIViewAutoresizingFlexibleTopMargin    = 1 << 3, 
    UIViewAutoresizingFlexibleHeight       = 1 << 4, 

--- Page 1077 ---
    UIViewAutoresizingFlexibleBottomMargin = 1 << 5 
};
An enum declared like that arrives into Swift as a struct adopting the
OptionSet protocol. The OptionSet protocol adopts the
RawRepresentable protocol, so this is a struct with a rawValue
instance property holding the underlying integer. The C enum case
names are represented by static properties, each of whose values is an
instance of this struct; the names of these static properties are
imported with the common prefix subtracted. In Swift, this struct is
namespaced by nesting it into the UIView class as
UIView.AutoresizingMask:
struct AutoresizingMask : OptionSet { 
    init(rawValue: UInt) 
    static var flexibleLeftMargin: UIView.AutoresizingMask { get } 
    static var flexibleWidth: UIView.AutoresizingMask { get } 
    static var flexibleRightMargin: UIView.AutoresizingMask { get } 
    static var flexibleTopMargin: UIView.AutoresizingMask { get } 
    static var flexibleHeight: UIView.AutoresizingMask { get } 
    static var flexibleBottomMargin: UIView.AutoresizingMask { get } 
}
When you say something like UIView.AutoresizingMask.flexibl
eLeftMargin, it looks as if you are initializing a case of a Swift
enum, but in fact this is an instance of the UIView.AutoresizingMask
struct, whose rawValue property has been set to the value declared
by the original C enum — which, for .flexibleLeftMargin, is
1<<0. Because a static property of this struct is an instance of the
same struct, you can, as I explained in “Inference of Type Name with
Static/Class Members”, omit the struct name when supplying a static
property name where the struct is expected:

--- Page 1078 ---
self.view.autoresizingMask = .flexibleWidth
Because this is an OptionSet struct, you can represent and manipulate
the bitmask as if it were a Set:
self.view.autoresizingMask = [.flexibleWidth, .flexibleHeight]
TIP
In Objective-C, where an NS_OPTIONS enum is expected, you pass 0 to indicate
that no options are provided. In Swift, where a corresponding struct is expected,
you pass [] (an empty set) or omit the options: parameter entirely. Some NS_O
PTIONS enums have an explicit option that means 0; Swift sometimes won’t
bother to import its name, because passing [] means the same thing. To set a
UIView.AutoresizingMask value to UIViewAutoresizingNone in Swift, set it
to [] (not .none).
GLOBAL STRING CONSTANTS
The names of many Objective-C global string constants (referred to
jokingly by Apple as stringly typed) are namespaced by importing
them into Swift as static struct properties. This is accomplished by
means of the NS_STRING_ENUM and NS_EXTENSIBLE_STRING_ENUM
Objective-C macros. For example, the names of the
NSAttributedString attribute keys used to be simple global string
constants (type NSString*):
NSString* const NSFontAttributeName; 
NSString* const NSParagraphStyleAttributeName; 
NSString* const NSForegroundColorAttributeName; 
// ... and so on ...

--- Page 1079 ---
This meant that they were global string constants in Swift as well.
Now, however, they are typed as NSAttributedStringKey values:
NSAttributedStringKey const NSFontAttributeName; 
NSAttributedStringKey const NSParagraphStyleAttributeName; 
NSAttributedStringKey const NSForegroundColorAttributeName; 
// ... and so on ...
NSAttributedStringKey, in Objective-C, is just a synonym for
NSString, but it is marked with the NS_EXTENSIBLE_STRING_ENUM
macro:
typedef NSString * NSAttributedStringKey NS_EXTENSIBLE_STRING_ENUM;
The result is that these names are imported into Swift as namespaced
static properties of an NSAttributedString.Key struct with names like
.name, .paragraphStyle, and so on. Moreover, a dictionary that
expects these keys has a key type of NSAttributedString.Key, so you
can write compact code like this:
self.navigationController?.navigationBar.titleTextAttributes = [ 
    .font: UIFont(name: "ChalkboardSE-Bold", size: 20)!, 
    .foregroundColor: UIColor.darkText 
]
C Structs
A C struct is a compound type whose elements can be accessed by
name using dot-notation after a reference to the struct:
struct CGPoint { 
   CGFloat x; 
   CGFloat y; 

--- Page 1080 ---
}; 
typedef struct CGPoint CGPoint;
After that declaration, it becomes possible to talk like this in C:
CGPoint p; 
p.x = 100; 
p.y = 200;
A C struct arrives wholesale into Swift as a Swift struct, which is
thereupon endowed with Swift struct features. CGPoint in Swift has
CGFloat instance properties x and y, but it also magically acquires
the implicit memberwise initializer! In addition, a zeroing initializer
with no parameters is injected; saying CGPoint() makes a CGPoint
whose x and y are both 0. Extensions can supply additional features,
and the Swift CoreGraphics header adds a few to CGPoint:
extension CGPoint { 
    static var zero: CGPoint { get } 
    init(x: Int, y: Int) 
    init(x: Double, y: Double) 
}
As you can see, a Swift CGPoint has additional initializers accepting
Int or Double arguments, along with another way of making a zero
CGPoint, CGPoint.zero. CGSize is treated similarly. CGRect is
particularly well endowed with added methods and properties in
Swift.
The fact that a Swift struct is an object, while a C struct is not, does
not pose any problems of communication. You can assign or pass a
Swift CGPoint where a C CGPoint is expected, because CGPoint

--- Page 1081 ---
came from C in the first place. The fact that Swift has endowed
CGPoint with object methods and properties doesn’t matter; C
doesn’t see them. All C cares about are the x and y elements of this
CGPoint, which are communicated from Swift to C without
difficulty.
C Pointers
A C pointer is an integer designating the location in memory (the
address) where the real data resides. Allocating and disposing of that
memory is a separate matter. The declaration for a pointer to a data
type is written with an asterisk after the data type name; a space can
appear on either or both sides of the asterisk. These are equivalent
declarations of a pointer-to-int:
int *intPtr1; 
int* intPtr2; 
int * intPtr3;
The type name itself is int* (or, with a space, int *). Objective-C,
for reasons that I’ll explain later, uses C pointers heavily, so you’re
going to be seeing that asterisk a lot if you look at any Objective-C.
A C pointer arrives into Swift as an UnsafePointer or, if writable, an
UnsafeMutablePointer; this is a generic, and is specified to the actual
type of data pointed to. (A pointer is “unsafe” because Swift isn’t
managing the memory for, and can’t even guarantee the integrity of,
what is pointed to.)

--- Page 1082 ---
To illustrate, here’s an Objective-C UIColor method declaration; I
haven’t discussed this syntax yet, but just concentrate on the types in
parentheses:
- (BOOL) getRed: (CGFloat *) red 
    green: (CGFloat *) green 
    blue: (CGFloat *) blue 
    alpha: (CGFloat *) alpha;
CGFloat is a basic numeric type. The type CGFloat * states (despite
the space) that these parameters are all CGFloat* — that is, pointer-
to-CGFloat.
The Swift translation of that declaration looks, in effect, like this:
func getRed(_ red: UnsafeMutablePointer<CGFloat>, 
    green: UnsafeMutablePointer<CGFloat>, 
    blue: UnsafeMutablePointer<CGFloat>, 
    alpha: UnsafeMutablePointer<CGFloat>) -> Bool
UnsafeMutablePointer in this context is used like a Swift inout
parameter: you declare and initialize a var of the appropriate type
beforehand, and then pass its address as argument by way of the &
prefix operator. When you pass the address of a reference in this way,
you are in fact creating and passing a pointer:
var r : CGFloat = 0 
var g : CGFloat = 0 
var b : CGFloat = 0 
var a : CGFloat = 0 
c.getRed(&r, green: &g, blue: &b, alpha: &a)

--- Page 1083 ---
It’s fine to take the address of a variable reference and hand it to a C
function that returns immediately, as we are doing here; but do not
persist such an address yourself. If r is a CGFloat, saying let rPtr
= &r would be a really bad idea; the compiler will warn, and in future
this warning is slated to be promoted to be an error. If you need to do
that sort of thing, call some form of withUnsafePointer, which
takes an anonymous function within which the pointer is valid.
In C, to access the memory pointed to by a pointer, you use an
asterisk before the pointer’s name: *intPtr is “the thing pointed to
by the pointer intPtr.” In Swift, you use the pointer’s pointee
property. In this example, we receive a stop parameter typed
originally as a BOOL*, a pointer-to-BOOL; in Swift, it’s an UnsafeMut
ablePointer<ObjCBool>. To set the BOOL at the far end of this
pointer, we set the pointer’s pointee:
// mas is an NSMutableAttributedString, r is an NSRange, f is a UIFont 
mas.enumerateAttribute(.font, in: r) { value, r, stop in 
    if let value = value as? UIFont, value == f  { 
        // ... 
        stop.pointee = true 
    } 
}
The most general type of C pointer is pointer-to-void (void*), also
known as the generic pointer. The term void here means that no type
is specified; it is legal in C to use a generic pointer wherever a
specific type of pointer is expected, and vice versa. In effect, pointer-
to-void casts away type checking as to what’s at the far end of the
pointer. This will appear in Swift as a “raw” pointer, either
UnsafeRawPointer or UnsafeMutableRawPointer.

--- Page 1084 ---
Raw pointers are even more unsafe than normal pointers; not only the
lifetime and extent of the memory pointed to, but also the type of
what’s in that memory, is now your responsibility. As far as the
pointer is concerned, what the memory contains is just bytes. You can
cast a typed unsafe pointer to a raw unsafe pointer, but not the other
way. Instead, starting with a raw pointer, you can load an object from
an address within the memory, or you can bind the memory to derive
a typed pointer to the same memory:
// buff is a CVImageBuffer 
if let baseAddress = CVPixelBufferGetBaseAddress(buff) { 
    // baseAddress is an UnsafeMutableRawPointer 
    let addrptr = baseAddress.assumingMemoryBound(to: UInt8.self) // * 
    // addrptr is an UnsafeMutablePointer<UInt8> 
    // ... 
}
C Arrays
A C array contains a fixed number of elements of a single data type.
Under the hood, it is a contiguous block of memory sized to
accommodate this number of elements of this data type. For this
reason, the name of an array in C is the name of a pointer to the first
element of the array. If arr has been declared as an array of int, the
term arr can be used wherever a value of type int* (a pointer-to-int)
is expected. The C language will indicate an array type either by
appending square brackets to a reference or as a pointer.
For example, the C function CGContextStrokeLineSegments is
declared like this:

--- Page 1085 ---
void CGContextStrokeLineSegments(CGContextRef c, 
   const CGPoint points[], 
   size_t count 
);
The square brackets in the second line tell you that the second
parameter is a C array of CGPoints. A C array carries no information
about how many elements it contains, so to pass this C array to this
function, you must also tell the function how many elements the array
contains; that’s what the third parameter is for. A C array of CGPoint
is a pointer to a CGPoint, so this function’s declaration is translated
into Swift like this:
func __strokeLineSegments( 
    between points: UnsafePointer<CGPoint>?, 
    count: Int)
Now, you’re not really expected to call that function. The CGContext
Swift overlay provides a pure Swift version, strokeLineSegments,
which takes a Swift array of CGPoint with no need to provide a coun
t; and the original CGContextStrokeLineSegments has been marked
NS_REFINED_FOR_SWIFT to generate the two underscores and hide it
from you. But let’s say you wanted to call __strokeLineSegments
anyway. How would you do it?
To call __strokeLineSegments and pass it a C array of CGPoints, it
would appear that you need to make a C array of CGPoints. A C array
is not, by any stretch of the imagination, a Swift array; so how on
earth will you do this? Surprise! You don’t have to. Even though a
Swift array is not a C array, you can pass a pointer to a Swift array
here. In this example, you don’t even need to pass a pointer; you can

--- Page 1086 ---
pass a reference to a Swift array itself. And since this is not a mutable
pointer, you can declare the array with let; indeed, you can even
pass a Swift array literal! No matter which approach you choose,
Swift will convert to a C array for you as the argument crosses the
bridge from Swift to C:
let c = UIGraphicsGetCurrentContext()! 
let arr = [ 
    CGPoint(x:0,y:0), 
    CGPoint(x:50,y:50), 
    CGPoint(x:50,y:50), 
    CGPoint(x:0,y:100), 
] 
c.__strokeLineSegments(between: arr, count: arr.count)
However, you can form a C array if you really want to. This is where
the “Unsafe” in an unsafe pointer really comes into play: you must
manage the memory yourself, explicitly, and getting it right is
entirely up to you. First, you set aside the block of memory by
declaring an UnsafeMutablePointer of the desired type and calling the
class method allocate(capacity:) with the desired number of
elements. Then you populate (technically, initialize) that memory.
You will also be responsible for undoing all of that later; you
deinitialize the memory and deallocate it. The best way to ensure that
is to configure the block of memory and then immediately complete
the memory management in a defer block:
let ptr = UnsafeMutablePointer<CGPoint>.allocate(capacity:4) 
ptr.initialize(repeating: .zero, count: 4) 
defer { 
    ptr.deinitialize(count:4) 
    ptr.deallocate() 
}

--- Page 1087 ---
Now that memory management is configured, you can manipulate the
element values. In this instance, we want to write real CGPoint values
into the memory block. You could do this by manipulating the point
ee, but you can also use subscripting, which might be a lot more
convenient. Be careful to stay within the block of memory you have
configured! There’s no range checking, and writing outside memory
you own can mysteriously wreck your program later:
ptr[0] = CGPoint(x:0,y:0) 
ptr[1] = CGPoint(x:50,y:50) 
ptr[2] = CGPoint(x:50,y:50) 
ptr[3] = CGPoint(x:0,y:100)
Finally, since the UnsafeMutablePointer is a pointer, you pass it, not a
pointer to it, as argument:
let c = UIGraphicsGetCurrentContext()! 
c.__strokeLineSegments(between: ptr, count: 4)
The same convenient subscripting is available when you receive a C
array. In this example, col is a UIColor; comp is typed as an
UnsafePointer to CGFloat. That is really a C array of CGFloat, and so
you can access its elements by subscripting:
if let comp = col.cgColor.__unsafeComponents, 
    let sp = col.cgColor.colorSpace, 
    sp.model == .rgb { 
        let red = comp[0] 
        let green = comp[1] 
        let blue = comp[2] 
        let alpha = comp[3] 
        // ... 
}

--- Page 1088 ---
C Strings
The native C string type is not a distinct type; it is a null-terminated
array of char. Therefore it may be typed in Swift as [Int8] or [CCha
r], because CChar is Int8, or as UnsafePointer<Int8> or UnsafePo
inter<CChar>, because a C array is a pointer to the first element of
the array. These representations are effectively interchangeable.
A C string can’t be formed as a literal in Swift, but you can pass a
Swift String where a C string is expected; in this example, takeCStr
ing is a C function that takes a C string:
let s = "hello" 
takeCString("hello") // fine 
takeCString(s) // fine too
If you have to, you can form a real C string in Swift. The Swift
Foundation overlay provides the cString(using:) method:
let arrayOfCChar : [CChar]? = s.cString(using: .utf8) 
takeCString(arrayOfCChar!)
Swift String provides the utf8CString property, a ContiguousArra
y<CChar>; you can turn that into a pointer with the withUnsafeBuff
erPointer method:
let contiguousArrayOfCChar : ContiguousArray<CChar> = s.utf8CString 
contiguousArrayOfCChar.withUnsafeBufferPointer { ptr -> Void in 
    takeCString(ptr.baseAddress!) 
}
More simply, you can call the String withCString method:

--- Page 1089 ---
s.withCString { ptr -> Void in 
    takeCString(ptr) 
}
In the other direction, a UTF-8 C string can be rendered into a Swift
String by way of a Swift String initializer such as init(cString:)
or init?(validatingUTF8:). To specify some other encoding, call
the static method decodeCString(_:as:). In this example, returnC
String is a C function that returns a C string:
let result : UnsafePointer<Int8> = returnCString() 
let resultString : String = String(cString: result)
C Functions
A C function declaration starts with the return type (which might be v
oid, meaning no returned value), followed by the function name,
followed by a parameter list — parentheses containing comma-
separated pairs consisting of the type followed by the parameter
name. The parameter names are purely internal. C functions are
global, and Swift can call them directly.
Here’s the C declaration for an Audio Services function:
OSStatus AudioServicesCreateSystemSoundID( 
    CFURLRef inFileURL, 
    SystemSoundID* outSystemSoundID)
An OSStatus is basically an Int32. A CFURLRef is a CFTypeRef
(“Memory Management of CFTypeRefs”) and is called CFURL in
Swift. A SystemSoundID is a UInt32, and the * makes this a C

--- Page 1090 ---
pointer, as we already know. The whole thing translates directly into
Swift:
func AudioServicesCreateSystemSoundID( 
    _ inFileURL: CFURL, 
    _ outSystemSoundID: UnsafeMutablePointer<SystemSoundID>) -> OSStatus
CFURL is (for reasons that I’ll explain later) interchangeable with
NSURL and Swift URL; so here we are, calling this C function in
Swift:
let sndurl = Bundle.main.url(forResource: "test", withExtension: "aif")! 
var snd : SystemSoundID = 0 
AudioServicesCreateSystemSoundID(sndurl as CFURL, &snd)
STRUCT FUNCTIONS
Most of the commonly used C global functions in Cocoa operate on a
struct; they have the name of that struct as the first element of their
name, and have that struct itself as their first parameter. In Swift,
where structs are objects, these functions are often transformed into
methods on the struct.
For example, in Objective-C, the way to construct a CGRect from
scratch is with the CGRectMake function, and the way to divide a
CGRect is with the CGRectDivide function:
CGRect rect = CGRectMake(10,10,100,100); 
CGRect arrow; 
CGRect body; 
CGRectDivide(rect, &arrow, &body, arrowHeight, CGRectMinYEdge);

--- Page 1091 ---
In Swift, CGRectMake is overshadowed by the CGRect struct
initializer init(x:y:width:height:), and CGRectDivide is
overshadowed by the CGRect divided method:
let rect = CGRect(x: 10, y: 10, width: 100, height: 100) 
let (arrow, body) = rect.divided(atDistance: arrowHeight, from: .minYEdg
e)
POINTER-TO-FUNCTION
In C, a function has a type based on its signature, and the name of a
function is a reference to the function, and so it is possible to pass a
function — sometimes termed a pointer-to-function — by using the
function’s name where a function of that type is expected.
Here’s the declaration for a C function from the Audio Toolbox
framework:
OSStatus AudioServicesAddSystemSoundCompletion(SystemSoundID inSystemSou
ndID, 
    CFRunLoopRef __nullable inRunLoop, 
    CFStringRef __nullable inRunLoopMode, 
    AudioServicesSystemSoundCompletionProc inCompletionRoutine, 
    void * __nullable inClientData)
(I’ll explain the term __nullable later.) What’s an
AudioServicesSystemSoundCompletionProc? Here’s how it’s
declared:
typedef void (*AudioServicesSystemSoundCompletionProc)( 
    SystemSoundID ssID, 
    void* __nullable clientData);

--- Page 1092 ---
In the first line, the asterisk and name in parentheses means that this
is the name of a pointer-to-function. A SystemSoundID is a UInt32.
So this declaration means that an
AudioServicesSystemSoundCompletionProc is a pointer to a function
taking two parameters (typed UInt32 and pointer-to-void) and
returning no result.
Amazingly, you can pass a Swift function where a C pointer-to-
function is expected! As always when passing a function, you can
define the function separately and pass its name, or you can form the
function inline as an anonymous function. If you’re going to define
the function separately, it cannot be a method. A function defined at
the top level of a file is fine; so is a function defined locally within a
function.
So here’s my AudioServicesSystemSoundCompletionProc, declared
at the top level of a file:
func soundFinished(_ snd:UInt32, _ c:UnsafeMutableRawPointer?) { 
    AudioServicesRemoveSystemSoundCompletion(snd) 
    AudioServicesDisposeSystemSoundID(snd) 
}
And here’s my code for playing a sound file as a system sound,
including a call to AudioServicesAddSystemSoundCompletion:
let sndurl = Bundle.main.url(forResource: "test", withExtension: "aif")! 
var snd : SystemSoundID = 0 
AudioServicesCreateSystemSoundID(sndurl as CFURL, &snd) 
AudioServicesAddSystemSoundCompletion(snd, nil, nil, soundFinished, nil) 
AudioServicesPlaySystemSound(snd)

--- Page 1093 ---
Objective-C
Objective-C is built on top of C. It adds some syntax and features, but
it continues at the same time to use C syntax and data types, and
remains C under the hood.
The Objective-C language was created by Brad Cox and Tom Love in
the early 1980s to furnish C with the object-oriented capabilities of
Smalltalk. Its adoption by NeXT, under the leadership of Steve Jobs,
drove the evolution toward the mature form of the language during
the late 1980s, spearheaded by Steve Naroff. In 1997, when Jobs had
returned to Apple and Apple acquired NeXT, Objective-C became the
language of Mac OS X Cocoa. Cocoa Touch, created for the iPhone a
decade later, still uses Objective-C; that’s why your use of Swift in
programming iOS and UIKit depends upon Swift’s interoperability
with Objective-C.
Unlike Swift, Objective-C has no namespaces. For this reason,
different frameworks distinguish their contents by starting the names
of types, functions, and constants with distinct prefixes. The “CG” in
“CGFloat” stands for Core Graphics, because it is declared in the
Core Graphics framework. The “NS” in “NSString” stands for
NeXTStep, the framework that later became Cocoa.
Objective-C Objects and C Pointers
All the data types and syntax of C are part of Objective-C. But
Objective-C is object-oriented, so it needs a way of adding objects to
C. It does this by taking advantage of C pointers. C pointers
accommodate having anything at all at the far end of the pointer;

--- Page 1094 ---
management of whatever is pointed to is a separate matter, and that’s
just what Objective-C takes care of. Objective-C object types are
expressed using C pointer syntax.
Here’s the Objective-C declaration for the addSubview: method:
- (void)addSubview:(UIView *)view;
I haven’t discussed Objective-C method declaration syntax yet, but
focus on the type declaration for the view parameter, in parentheses:
it is UIView*. This appears to mean “a pointer to a UIView.” It does
mean that — and it doesn’t. What’s at the far end of the pointer is
certainly a UIView instance. But all Objective-C object references
are pointers. The fact that this is a pointer is merely a consequence of
the fact that it’s an object.
The Swift translation of this method declaration doesn’t appear to
involve any pointers:
func addSubview(_ view: UIView)
In general, in Swift, you will simply pass a reference to a class
instance where Objective-C expects a class instance; the asterisk used
in Objective-C to express the fact that this is an object won’t matter.
What you pass as argument when calling addSubview(_:) from
Swift is a UIView instance — which is exactly what Objective-C
expects. There is, of course, a sense in which you are passing a
pointer when you pass a class instance — because classes are
reference types! A class instance is actually seen the same way by

--- Page 1095 ---
both Swift and Objective-C; the difference is that Swift doesn’t use
pointer notation.
Objective-C’s id type is a general pointer to an object — the object
equivalent of C pointer-to-void. Any object type can be assigned or
cast to or from an id. Because id is itself a pointer, a reference
declared as id doesn’t use an asterisk; it is rare (though not
impossible) to encounter an id*.
Objective-C Objects and Swift Objects
Objective-C objects are classes and instances of classes. They arrive
into Swift more or less intact. You won’t have any trouble
subclassing Objective-C classes or working with instances of
Objective-C classes. (For how Swift sees Objective-C properties and
accessors, see Chapter 10.)
Going the other way, when Objective-C expects an object, it expects
a class or an instance of a class, and Swift can provide it. But what
Objective-C means by a class, in general, is a subclass of NSObject.
Every other kind of object known to Swift has to be bridged or boxed
in order to survive the journey into Objective-C’s world. Moreover,
many features of Swift are meaningless to Objective-C, and those
features are invisible to Objective-C. Objective-C can’t see any of the
following:
Swift enums, except for an @objc enum with an Int raw value
Swift structs, except for structs that come ultimately from C or
that are bridged to Objective-C classes

--- Page 1096 ---
Swift classes not derived from NSObject
Swift protocols not marked @objc
Protocol extensions
Generics
Tuples
Nested types
Nothing in that list can be directly exposed to Objective-C — and, by
implication, nothing that involves anything in that list can be exposed
to Objective-C. Suppose we have a class MyClass not derived from
NSObject. Then if your UIViewController subclass has a property
typed as MyClass, that property cannot be exposed to Objective-C;
and if your UIViewController subclass has a method that receives or
returns a value typed as MyClass, that method cannot be exposed to
Objective-C.
Nevertheless, you are perfectly free to use such properties and
methods, even in a class (such as a UIViewController subclass) that is
exposed to Objective-C. Objective-C simply won’t be able to see
those aspects of the class that would be meaningless to it.
Exposure of Swift to Objective-C
Since Swift 4, invisibility of Swift code to Objective-C is the norm.
With a few exceptions, even if Objective-C can theoretically see a
thing, it won’t see it unless you explicitly expose it to Objective-C.
You do that with the @objc attribute.

--- Page 1097 ---
Let’s talk first about the exceptions. These are things in your Swift
code that Objective-C will be able to see automatically, without an
explicit @objc attribute:
A class derived from NSObject. Such a class will be declared in
Swift either as subclassing NSObject itself or as subclassing some
NSObject subclass, typically a class defined by Cocoa (such as
UIViewController).
Within such a class, an override of a method defined in Objective-
C (such as UIViewController’s viewDidLoad) or defined in Swift
but marked @objc.
Within such a class, an implementation of a member of a protocol
adopted by the class, if the protocol is defined in Objective-C
(such as NSCoding’s init(coder:)) or defined in Swift but
marked @objc.
Within such a class, an instance property marked @IBOutlet or @I
BInspectable or @NSManaged, or a method marked @IBAction
(see Chapter 7).
Otherwise, to expose to Objective-C a property, method, or protocol,
mark it with @objc. The compiler will stop you if you try to expose to
Objective-C something that it is unable to see (such as a property
whose type Objective-C cannot see or cannot understand). A protocol
marked as @objc automatically becomes a class protocol.
A useful trick, if you have several methods that you need to expose
explicitly to Objective-C, is to clump them into an extension that is
itself marked @objc; there is then no need to mark those methods
individually with @objc. If most or all of a class’s members are to be
exposed to Objective-C, you can mark the class @objcMembers;

--- Page 1098 ---
again, there is then no need to mark those members individually with
@objc. Conversely, if a class member would be exposed to Objective-
C and you want to prevent this, you can mark it @nonobjc.
There are two additional uses of @objc:
Expose a member of a nonObjective-C class
Even if a class is not exposed to Objective-C, it can be useful to
mark a member of that class with @objc so that your Swift code
can take advantage of Objective-C language features with regard
to that member. A Timer using the target–action pattern
(Chapter 11) can have a method of a nonObjective-C class as its a
ction, but only if that method is marked @objc, because the
method is specified with a selector (Chapter 2) and selectors are
an Objective-C feature.
Change the Objective-C name of something
When you mark something with @objc, you can add parentheses
containing the name by which you want Objective-C to see this
thing. You are free to do this even for a class or a class member
that Objective-C can see already. An example appeared in
Chapter 10 when I changed the name by which Objective-C sees
a property accessor. When using this feature, you bypass Swift’s
behind-the-scenes name mangling designed to prevent clashes
with any existing Objective-C names, so you must take
responsibility for avoiding such a clash yourself.

--- Page 1099 ---
TIP
Class members marked @objc, @IBAction, and @IBOutlet can be marked priv
ate to speed up compilation and reduce the footprint of the class’s exposure to
Objective-C. However, as I mentioned in Chapter 5, you shouldn’t do that with
an implementation of an optional member of an adopted Objective-C protocol.
Bridged Types and Boxed Types
Swift will convert certain native nonclass types to their Objective-C
class equivalents for you. The following native Swift structs are
bridged to Objective-C class types:
String to NSString
Numbers (and Bool) to NSNumber
Array to NSArray
Dictionary to NSDictionary
Set to NSSet
Bridging has two immediate practical consequences for your code:
Parameter passing
You can pass an instance of the Swift struct where the Objective-
C class is expected. In fact, in general you’ll rarely even
encounter the Objective-C class, because the Swift rendering of
the API will display it as the Swift struct: if an Objective-C
method takes an NSString, you’ll see it in Swift as taking a
String, and so on.

--- Page 1100 ---
Casting
You can cast between the Swift struct and the Objective-C class.
When casting from Swift to Objective-C, this is not a downcast,
so the bare as operator is all you need. But casting from
Objective-C to Swift, except for NSString to String, involves
adding type information — NSNumber wraps some specific
numeric type, and the collection types contain elements of some
specific type — so you might need to cast down with as! or as?
in order to specify that type.
Also, certain common Objective-C structs that can easily be wrapped
by NSValue in Objective-C are bridged to NSValue in Swift. The
common structs are CGPoint, CGSize, CGRect, CGAffineTransform,
UIEdgeInsets, UIOffset, NSRange, CATransform3D, CMTime,
CMTimeMapping, CMTimeRange, MKCoordinate, and
MKCoordinateSpan.
In addition, various Cocoa Foundation classes are overlaid by Swift
types whose names are the same but without the “NS” prefix. Often,
extra functionality is injected to make the type behave in a more
Swift-like way; and, where appropriate, the Swift type may be a
struct, allowing you to take advantage of Swift value type semantics.
NSMutableData, for instance, becomes otiose, because Data, the
overlay for Objective-C NSData, is a struct with mutating methods
and can be declared with let or var. And Date, the overlay for
Objective-C NSDate, adopts Equatable and Comparable, so that an
NSDate method like earlierDate: can be replaced by the min
function.

--- Page 1101 ---
The Swift overlay types are all bridged to their Foundation
counterparts. The Swift rendering of an Objective-C API will show
you the Swift overlay type rather than the Objective-C type: a Cocoa
method that takes or returns an NSDate in Objective-C will take or
return a Date in Swift, and so on. If necessary, you can cast between
bridged types; for example, you can turn a Date into an NSDate with
as.
Objective-C id is rendered as Any in Swift. This means that
wherever an Objective-C API accepts an id parameter, that parameter
is typed in Swift as Any and can be passed any Swift value whatever.
If that value is of a bridged type, the bridge is crossed automatically,
just as if you had cast explicitly with as. A String becomes an
NSString, an Array becomes an NSArray, a number is wrapped in an
NSNumber, a CGPoint or other common struct is wrapped in an
NSValue, a Data becomes an NSData, and so forth.
The same rule applies when you pass a Swift collection to Objective-
C, with regard to the collection’s elements. If an element is of a
bridged type, the bridge is crossed automatically. The typical case in
point is when you pass a Swift array to Objective-C: an array of Int
becomes an NSArray of NSNumbers; an array of CGPoint becomes
an NSArray of NSValues; for an array with an Optional element type,
any nil elements become NSNull instances (Chapter 10).
What happens when an object tries to cross the bridge from Swift to
Objective-C, but that instance is not of a bridged type? (Such an
object might be an enum, a struct of a nonbridged type, or a class that
doesn’t derive from NSObject.) On the one hand, Objective-C can’t

--- Page 1102 ---
do anything with this object. On the other hand, the object needs to be
allowed to cross the bridge somehow, especially because you, on the
Swift side, might ask for the object back again later, and it needs to
be returned to you intact.
To illustrate, suppose Person is a struct with a firstName and a last
Name property. Then you might need to be able to do something like
this:
// lay is a CALayer 
let p = Person(firstName: "Matt", lastName: "Neuburg") 
lay.setValue(p, forKey: "person") 
// ... time passes ... 
if let p2 = lay.value(forKey: "person") as? Person { 
    print(p2.firstName, p2.lastName) // Matt Neuburg 
}
Amazingly, this works. How? The answer, in a nutshell, is that Swift
boxes this object into something that Objective-C can see as an
object, even though Objective-C can’t do anything with that object
other than store and retrieve it. How Swift does this is irrelevant; it’s
an implementation detail, and none of your business. It happens that
in this case the Person object is wrapped up in a _SwiftValue, but
that name is unimportant; what’s important is that it is an Objective-C
object, wrapping the value we provided. In this way, Objective-C is
able to store the object for us, in its box, and hand it back to us intact
upon request. Like Pandora, Objective-C will cope perfectly well as
long as it doesn’t look in the box!
Objective-C Methods

--- Page 1103 ---
In Objective-C, method parameters can (and nearly always do) have
external names, and the name of a method as a whole is not distinct
from the external names of the parameters: the parameter names are
part of the method name, with a colon appearing where each
parameter would need to go. Here’s a typical Objective-C method
declaration from Cocoa’s NSString class:
- (NSString *)stringByReplacingOccurrencesOfString:(NSString *)target 
                                        withString:(NSString *)replaceme
nt
The Objective-C name of that method is:
stringByReplacingOccurrencesOfString:withString:
A declaration for an Objective-C method has three parts:
Either + or -, meaning that the method is a class method or an
instance method, respectively.
The data type of the return value, in parentheses. It might be void,
meaning no returned value.
The name of the method, split after each colon so as to make room
for the parameters. Following each colon is the data type of the
parameter, in parentheses, followed by a placeholder (internal)
name for the parameter.
RENAMIFICATION
When Swift calls an Objective-C method, there’s an obvious
mismatch between the rules and conventions of the two languages:

--- Page 1104 ---
Swift method names
A Swift method is a function; the base name of the function is
followed by parentheses, and if the function’s parameters have
external names (labels), they appear inside the parentheses, like
this: swiftFunction(parameter:).
Objective-C method names
An Objective-C method name involves no parentheses and has no
separate base name. If the method takes parameters, the parameter
names, each followed by a colon, constitute the name of the
method; the first thing in the name is just the name of the first
parameter, like this: objCMethodWithParameter:. (If it takes no
parameters, its name is just its name with no colon.)
To cope with this mismatch, Swift renders the Objective-C method’s
name more Swift-like by a process called renamification, which is
performed by a component called the Clang importer, mediating
between the two languages. The renamification rules are rather
elaborate, but you don’t need to know the details; you can get a
general sense of how they behave from an example. Here’s how the
renamification rules transform the stringByReplacingOccurrences
OfString:withString: method into a Swift function:
1. Swift prunes redundant initial type names. We’re starting with a
string, and it’s obvious from the return type that a string is
returned, so there’s no point saying string at the start. We are
left with byReplacingOccurrencesOfString:withString:.
2. Swift prunes initial by. That’s a common Cocoa locution, but
Swift finds it merely verbose. Now we’re down to replacingO
ccurrencesOfString:withString:.

--- Page 1105 ---
3. Swift prunes redundant final type names. It’s obvious that the
parameters are strings, so there’s no point saying string at the
end of the parameter names. That leaves replacingOccurrenc
esOf:with:.
4. Finally, Swift decides where to split the first parameter name
into the Swift base name and the external first parameter name.
Here, Swift sees that the first parameter name now ends with a
known preposition, of, so it splits before that preposition.
Here’s the resulting renamification of that method:
func replacingOccurrences(of target:String, with replacement:String)
And here’s an actual example of calling it:
let s = "hello" 
let s2 = s.replacingOccurrences(of: "ell", with:"ipp") 
// s2 is now "hippo"
If the Objective-C method being renamified belongs to you, you can
intervene manually and tell Swift how to renamify this method, by
appending NS_SWIFT_NAME(...) to the declaration (before the
semicolon), where what’s inside the parentheses is a Swift function
reference. Here’s an example:
- (void) triumphOverThing: (Thing*) otherThing NS_SWIFT_NAME(triumph(ove
r:));
The Clang importer would normally renamify that in Swift as:
func triumphOverThing(_ otherThing: Thing)

--- Page 1106 ---
Presumably that’s because the importer doesn’t understand over as a
preposition. But by intervening manually, we’ve told it to use this
instead:
func triumph(over otherThing: Thing)
INTERNAL PARAMETER NAMES
When you call an Objective-C method from Swift, Objective-C’s
internal names for the parameters don’t matter; you don’t use them,
and you don’t need to know or care what they are. The internal names
do appear in the Swift declaration of the method, and they might
even help you understand what the method does; but they are not
involved in the call. This is the Objective-C declaration of a method:
- (NSString *)stringByReplacingOccurrencesOfString:(NSString *)target 
                                        withString:(NSString *)replaceme
nt
And this is the Swift translation of that declaration:
func replacingOccurrences(of target:String, with replacement:String)
But the call site looks like this:
let s2 = s.replacingOccurrences(of: "ell", with: "ipp")
When you override an Objective-C method in Swift, code completion
will suggest internal names corresponding to the Objective-C internal
names, but you are free to change them. Here’s the Objective-C
declaration of the UIViewController prepareForSegue:sender:
instance method:

--- Page 1107 ---
- (void)prepareForSegue:(UIStoryboardSegue *)segue sender:(nullable id)s
ender;
When you override that method in your UIViewController subclass,
the suggested template, in accordance with the renamification rules,
looks like this:
override func prepare(for segue: UIStoryboardSegue, sender: Any?) { 
    // ... 
}
But the internal names are local variable names for your use inside
the function body, and Objective-C doesn’t care about them; so you
can change them. This is a valid (but weird) override of prepareForS
egue:sender: in Swift:
override func prepare(for war: UIStoryboardSegue, sender bow: Any?) { 
    // ... 
}
REVERSE RENAMIFICATION
Now let’s talk about what happens going the other way: How does
Objective-C see methods declared in Swift? The simplest case is
when the first parameter has no external name. Here’s a Swift method
intended as the action method of a button in the interface:
@IBAction func doButton(_ sender: Any?) { 
    // ... 
}
That method is seen by Objective-C as doButton:. That is the
canonical form for an action method with one parameter, and for that

--- Page 1108 ---
reason I like to declare my action methods along those lines.
If a Swift method’s first parameter does have an external name, then,
as seen by Objective-C, that external name is appended to the Swift
base name following an inserted preposition with. Here’s a Swift
method:
func makeHash(ingredients stuff:[String]) { 
    // ... 
}
That method is seen by Objective-C as makeHashWithIngredients:.
But if the external name of the first parameter is a preposition, then it
is appended directly to the Swift base name. Here’s another Swift
method:
func makeHash(of stuff:[String]) { 
    // ... 
}
That method is seen by Objective-C as makeHashOf:.
OVERLOADING
Unlike Swift, Objective-C does not permit overloading of methods.
Two ViewController instance methods called myMethod: returning no
result, one taking a CGFloat parameter and one taking an NSString
parameter, would be illegal in Objective-C. Therefore, two such Swift
methods, though legal as far as Swift is concerned, would be illegal if
they were both visible to Objective-C.

--- Page 1109 ---
So if methods are overloads of one another in Swift, don’t expose
more than one of those methods to Objective-C.
VARIADICS
Objective-C has its own version of a variadic parameter. The
NSArray instance method arrayWithObjects: is declared like this:
+ (id)arrayWithObjects:(id)firstObj, ... ;
Unlike Swift, such methods in Objective-C must somehow be told
explicitly how many arguments are being supplied. Many such
methods, including arrayWithObjects:, use a nil terminator; that
is, the caller supplies nil after the last argument, and the callee
knows when it has reached the last argument because it encounters ni
l. A call to arrayWithObjects: in Objective-C would look
something like this:
NSArray* pep = [NSArray arrayWithObjects: manny, moe, jack, nil];
Objective-C cannot call (or see) a Swift method that takes a variadic
parameter. Swift, however, can call an Objective-C method that takes
a variadic parameter, provided it is marked NS_REQUIRES_NIL_TERMI
NATION. And in fact, arrayWithObjects: is marked in this way, so
you can say NSArray(objects:1, 2, 3) and Swift will supply the
missing nil terminator.
INITIALIZERS AND FACTORIES
Objective-C initializer methods are instance methods; actual
instantiation is performed using the NSObject class method alloc,

--- Page 1110 ---
for which Swift has no equivalent (and doesn’t need one), and the
initializer message is sent to the instance that results. Here’s how you
create a UIColor instance by supplying red, green, blue, and alpha
values in Objective-C:
UIColor* col = [[UIColor alloc] initWithRed:0.5 green:0.6 blue:0.7 alph
a:1];
The name of that initializer, in Objective-C, is initWithRed:green:
blue:alpha:. It’s declared like this:
- (UIColor *)initWithRed:(CGFloat)red green:(CGFloat)green 
    blue:(CGFloat)blue alpha:(CGFloat)alpha;
In short, an initializer method, to all outward appearances, is just an
instance method like any other in Objective-C.
Swift, nevertheless, is able to detect that an Objective-C initializer is
an initializer, because the name is special — it starts with init!
Therefore, Swift is able to translate an Objective-C initializer into a
Swift initializer. The word init is stripped from the start of the
method name, and the preposition with, if it appears, is stripped as
well. What’s left is the external name of the first parameter.
So Swift translates the initializer initWithRed:green:blue:alpha:
from Objective-C into the Swift initializer init(red:green:blue:a
lpha:), which is declared like this:
init(red: CGFloat, green: CGFloat, blue: CGFloat, alpha: CGFloat)
And you’d call it like this:

--- Page 1111 ---
let col = UIColor(red: 0.5, green: 0.6, blue: 0.7, alpha: 1.0)
The same principle operates in reverse: a Swift initializer init(valu
e:) is visible to and callable by Objective-C under the name initWit
hValue:.
TIP
If you’re in charge of the Objective-C header being imported into Swift, be sure
to mark your designated initializers as NS_DESIGNATED_INITIALIZER so that
Swift can distinguish them. To block an initializer explicitly from being
imported into Swift, mark it NS_UNAVAILABLE.
There is a second way to create an instance in Objective-C. Very
commonly, a class will supply a class method that is a factory for
instances. For example, the UIColor class has a class factory method
colorWithRed:green:blue:alpha:, declared as follows:
+ (UIColor*) colorWithRed: (CGFloat) red green: (CGFloat) green 
                     blue: (CGFloat) blue alpha: (CGFloat) alpha;
Swift detects a factory method of this kind by some pattern-matching
rules — a class method that returns an instance of the class, and
whose name begins with the name of the class, stripped of its prefix
— and translates it as an initializer, stripping the class name (and the
with) from the start of the first parameter name. If the resulting
initializer exists already, as it does in this example, then Swift treats
the factory method as superfluous and suppresses it completely! The
Objective-C class method colorWithRed:green:blue:alpha: isn’t

--- Page 1112 ---
callable from Swift, because it would be identical to init(red:gree
n:blue:alpha:) which already exists.
ERROR POINTERS
There’s a specialized pattern in Objective-C where a method
returning a BOOL or an object takes an NSErrorPointer parameter —
that is, an NSError**, the Objective-C equivalent of an inout Error.
The idea is that if there’s an exception, the method returns false or n
il respectively, and sets the NSError parameter by indirection. This
is Objective-C’s way of solving the problem that it can return only
one value (there are no tuples).
For example, NSString has an initializer declared in Objective-C like
this:
- (instancetype)initWithContentsOfFile:(NSString *)path 
                              encoding:(NSStringEncoding)enc 
                                 error:(NSError **)error;
And here is some Objective-C code that calls that initializer:
NSError* err; 
NSString* s = [[NSString alloc] initWithContentsOfFile:f 
                  encoding:NSUTF8StringEncoding 
                  error:&err]; 
if (s == nil) { 
    NSLog(@"%@", err); 
}
As you can see, the whole procedure really is a lot like using a Swift
inout parameter. An NSError variable is prepared beforehand, and
its address is passed to the initializer as the error: argument. After

--- Page 1113 ---
the call, we test the initializer’s result for nil explicitly, to see
whether the initialization succeeded; if it didn’t, we can examine the
NSError variable to see what the error was. This is an annoyingly
elaborate but necessary dance in Objective-C.
In Swift, an Objective-C method that takes an NSError** and returns
a nullable object or a BOOL is automatically recast to take advantage
of the error mechanism. The error: parameter is stripped from the
Swift translation of the declaration, and is replaced by a throws
marker:
init(contentsOfFile path: String, encoding enc: String.Encoding) throws
If there are no other parameters besides the NSError** and the
parameter name ends withError:, those words are stripped to form
the base name of the Swift method, which takes no parameters.
If you call a throws method that belongs to Objective-C and the
Objective-C method returns nil or false, Swift sees that as a throw
and throws the error that the Objective-C method returned by
indirection. If the Objective-C method gets the pattern wrong and
returns nil or false but forgets to set the NSError, Swift just makes
up an error (_GenericObjCError.nilError) and throws it anyway.
If the Objective-C method returns a BOOL, Swift portrays it as
returning no result, as the presence or absence of an error is
dispositive.
The same method bridging works also in reverse: a Swift throws
method that is exposed to Objective-C is seen as taking an NSError*

--- Page 1114 ---
* parameter.
Selectors
A Cocoa Objective-C method will sometimes expect as parameter the
name of a method that Cocoa is to call later. Such a name is called a
selector. For example, the Objective-C UIControl addTarget:actio
n:forControlEvents: method can be called as a way of telling a
button in the interface, “From now on, whenever you are tapped, send
this message to this object.” The object is the target: parameter.
The message, the action: parameter, is a selector. The target object
implements this method; Cocoa will call this method on the target
object.
You may imagine that, if this were a Swift method, you’d be passing
a function here. But a selector is not the same as a function. It’s just a
name. Objective-C, unlike Swift, is so dynamic that it is able at
runtime to construct and send an arbitrary message to an arbitrary
object based on the name alone. Still, a selector is not exactly a
string, either; it’s a separate object type, designated in Objective-C
declarations as SEL and in Swift declarations as Selector.
You can create a Selector by calling the Selector initializer, which
takes a string. In the following examples, b is a UIButton:
b.addTarget(self, action: Selector("doNewGame:"), for: .touchUpInside)
As a shorthand, you can even pass a string literal where a Selector is
expected, even though a Selector is not a string:

--- Page 1115 ---
b.addTarget(self, action: "doNewGame:", for: .touchUpInside)
But don’t do either of those things! Forming a literal selector string
by hand is an invitation to form the string incorrectly, resulting in a
selector that at best will fail to work, and at worst will cause your app
to crash. Swift solves this problem by providing #selector syntax
(described in Chapter 2):
b.addTarget(self, action: #selector(doNewGame), for: .touchUpInside)
The use of #selector syntax has numerous advantages. In addition
to translating the method name to a selector for you, the compiler can
check for the existence of the method in question, and can stop you
from telling Objective-C to use a selector to call a method that isn’t
exposed to Objective-C (which would cause a crash at runtime).
Indeed, #selector syntax means that you will probably never need
to form a selector from a string! Nevertheless, you can do so if you
really want to. The rules for deriving an Objective-C name string
from a Swift method name are completely mechanical:
1. The string starts with everything that precedes the left
parenthesis in the method name (the base name).
2. If the method takes no parameters, stop. That’s the end of the
string.
3. If the method’s first parameter has an external parameter name,
append With and a capitalized version of that name, unless it is
a preposition, in which case append a capitalized version of it
directly.
4. Add a colon.

--- Page 1116 ---
5. If the method takes exactly one parameter, stop. That’s the end
of the string.
6. If the method takes more than one parameter, add the external
names of all remaining parameters, with a colon after each
external parameter name.
Observe that this means that if the method takes any parameters, its
Objective-C name string will end with a colon. Capitalization counts,
and the name should contain no spaces or other punctuation except
for the colons.
To illustrate, here are some Swift method declarations, with their
Objective-C name strings given in a comment:
func sayHello() -> String         // "sayHello" 
func say(_ s:String)              // "say:" 
func say(string s:String)         // "sayWithString:" 
func say(of s:String)             // "sayOf:" 
func say(_ s:String, times n:Int) // "say:times:"
CFTypeRefs
A CFTypeRef is a pointer to an opaque struct that acts as a pseudo-
object. (I talked about CFTypeRef pseudo-objects and their memory
management in Chapter 12.) CFTypeRef functions are global C
functions. Swift can call C functions, and before Swift 3 introduced
renamification, CFTypeRef code looked almost as if Swift were C:
// before Swift 3: 
let con = UIGraphicsGetCurrentContext()! 
let sp = CGColorSpaceCreateDeviceGray() 
  
// ... colors and locs are arrays of CGFloat ... 
let grad = CGGradientCreateWithColorComponents (sp, colors, locs, 3) 
  

--- Page 1117 ---
CGContextDrawLinearGradient ( 
  
    con, grad, CGPointMake(89,0), CGPointMake(111,0), [])
Notice that the “subject” of each function call appears at the start of
the name:
CGColorSpaceCreateDeviceGray creates a CGColorSpace
pseudo-object.
CGGradientCreateWithColorComponents creates a CGGradient
pseudo-object; the first parameter is the CGColorSpace pseudo-
object.
CGContextDrawLinearGradient draws a gradient in a
CGContext pseudo-object; the first parameter is the CGContext
pseudo-object, and the second parameter is the CGGradient
pseudo-object.
Nowadays, as part of renamification, many commonly used
CFTypeRef functions, especially in the Core Graphics framework, are
recast as if the “subject” CFTypeRef objects were genuine class
instances, with the functions themselves as initializers and instance
methods. Those lines are recast in Swift like this (thanks to the
mighty power of NS_SWIFT_NAME):
let con = UIGraphicsGetCurrentContext()! 
let sp = CGColorSpaceCreateDeviceGray() 
  
// ... colors and locs are arrays of CGFloat ... 
let grad = CGGradient(colorSpace: sp, 
  
    colorComponents: colors, locations: locs, count: 3) 
con.drawLinearGradient(grad, 
  
    start: CGPoint(x:89,y:0), end: CGPoint(x:111,y:0), options:[])
In that code:

--- Page 1118 ---
CGColorSpaceCreateDeviceGray is unchanged.
CGGradientCreateWithColorComponents is turned into a
CGGradient pseudo-object initializer, with external parameter
names.
CGContextDrawLinearGradient is turned into an instance
property of a CGContext pseudo-object, with external parameter
names.
Many CFTypeRefs are toll-free bridged to corresponding Objective-C
object types. CFString and NSString, CFNumber and NSNumber,
CFArray and NSArray, CFDictionary and NSDictionary are all toll-
free bridged (and there are many others). Such pairs are
interchangeable by casting. This is much easier in Swift than in
Objective-C. In Objective-C, ARC memory management doesn’t
apply to CFTypeRefs; therefore you must perform a bridging cast, to
tell Objective-C how to manage this object’s memory as it crosses
between the memory-managed world of Objective-C objects and the
unmanaged world of C and CFTypeRefs. But in Swift, CFTypeRefs
are memory-managed, and so there is no need for a bridging cast;
you can just cast, plain and simple.
In this code from one of my apps, I’m using the ImageIO framework.
This framework has a C API (which has not been renamified) and
uses CFTypeRefs. CGImageSourceCopyPropertiesAtIndex returns
a CFDictionary whose keys are CFStrings. The easiest way to obtain
a value from a dictionary is by subscripting, but you can’t do that
with a CFDictionary, because it isn’t an object — so I cast it to a
Swift dictionary. The key kCGImagePropertyPixelWidth is a

--- Page 1119 ---
CFString, and yet when I try to use it directly in a subscript, Swift
allows me to do so:
let d = CGImageSourceCopyPropertiesAtIndex(src, 0, nil) as! [AnyHashabl
e:Any] 
let width = d[kCGImagePropertyPixelWidth] as! CGFloat
Similarly, in this code, I form a dictionary d using CFString keys —
and then I pass it to the CGImageSourceCreateThumbnailAtIndex
function where a CFDictionary is expected:
let d : [AnyHashable:Any] = [ 
    kCGImageSourceShouldAllowFloat : true, 
    kCGImageSourceCreateThumbnailWithTransform : true, 
    kCGImageSourceCreateThumbnailFromImageAlways : true, 
    kCGImageSourceThumbnailMaxPixelSize : w 
] 
let imref = CGImageSourceCreateThumbnailAtIndex(src, 0, d as CFDictionar
y)!
A CFTypeRef is a pointer (to a pseudo-object), so it is
interchangeable with C pointer-to-void. This can result in a
perplexing situation in Swift. If a C API casts a CFTypeRef as a
pointer-to-void, Swift will see it as an UnsafeRawPointer. How can
you cast between this and the actual CFTypeRef? You cannot use the
memory binding technique that I used earlier to turn an
UnsafeRawPointer into an UnsafePointer generic, because the
CFTypeRef does not lie at the far end of the pointer; it is the pointer.
We might simply call the global unsafeBitCast function, but that’s
dangerous (as the name suggests), because it gives the resulting
CFTypeRef no memory management. The correct approach is to pass

--- Page 1120 ---
through an Unmanaged generic to apply memory management; its fr
omOpaque static method takes an UnsafeRawPointer, and its toOpaqu
e instance method yields an UnsafeMutableRawPointer. (I owe this
technique to Martin R.; see
http://stackoverflow.com/a/33310021/1187415.)
To illustrate, I’ll repeat the earlier example where I called CGImageSo
urceCopyPropertiesAtIndex, but this time I won’t cast to a Swift
dictionary; I’ll work with the result as a CFDictionary to extract the
value of its kCGImagePropertyPixelWidth key. To do so, I’ll call CF
DictionaryGetValue, which takes an UnsafeRawPointer parameter
and returns an UnsafeRawPointer result. To form the parameter, I’ll
cast a CFString to an UnsafeMutableRawPointer; to work with the
result, I’ll cast an UnsafeRawPointer to a CFNumber. No one in his
right mind would ever write this code, but it does work:
let result = CGImageSourceCopyPropertiesAtIndex(src, 0, nil)! 
let key = kCGImagePropertyPixelWidth // CFString 
let p1 = Unmanaged.passUnretained(key).toOpaque() // UnsafeMutableRawPoi
nter 
let p2 = CFDictionaryGetValue(result, p1) // UnsafeRawPointer 
let n = Unmanaged<CFNumber>.fromOpaque(p2!).takeUnretainedValue() // CFN
umber 
var width : CGFloat = 0 
CFNumberGetValue(n, .cgFloatType, &width) // width is now 640.0
Blocks
A block is a C language feature introduced by Apple starting in iOS
4. It is very like a C function, but it behaves as a closure and can be
passed around as a reference type. A block, in fact, is parallel to a
Swift function, and the two are interchangeable: you can pass a Swift

--- Page 1121 ---
function where a block is expected, and when a block is handed to
you by Cocoa it appears as a function.
In C and Objective-C, a block declaration is signified by the caret
character (^), which appears where an asterisk would appear in a C
pointer-to-function declaration. The NSArray instance method sorte
dArrayUsingComparator: takes an NSComparator parameter, which
is defined through a typedef like this:
typedef NSComparisonResult (^NSComparator)(id obj1, id obj2);
That says: “An NSComparator is a block taking two id parameters
and returning an NSComparisonResult.” In Swift, therefore, that typ
edef is translated as the function signature (Any, Any) -> Compari
sonResult. It is then trivial to supply a function of the required type
as argument when you call sortedArray(comparator:) in Swift:
let arr = ["Mannyz", "Moey", "Jackx"] 
let arr2 = (arr as NSArray).sortedArray { s1, s2 in 
    let c1 = String((s1 as! String).last!) 
    let c2 = String((s2 as! String).last!) 
    return c1.compare(c2) 
} // [Jackx, Moey, Mannyz]
In many cases, there won’t be a typedef, and the type of the block
will appear directly in a method declaration. Here’s the Objective-C
declaration for a UIView class method that takes two block
parameters:
+ (void)animateWithDuration:(NSTimeInterval)duration 
    animations:(void (^)(void))animations 
    completion:(void (^ __nullable)(BOOL finished))completion;

--- Page 1122 ---
In that declaration, animations: is a block taking no parameters (vo
id) and returning no value, and completion: is a block taking one
BOOL parameter and returning no value. Here’s the Swift translation:
class func animate(withDuration duration: TimeInterval, 
    animations: @escaping () -> Void, 
    completion: ((Bool) -> Void)? = nil)
That’s a method that you would call, passing a function as argument
where a block parameter is expected (and see Chapter 2 for an
example of actually doing so). Here’s a method that you would
implement, where a function is passed to you. This is the Objective-C
declaration:
- (void)webView:(WKWebView *)webView 
    decidePolicyForNavigationAction:(WKNavigationAction *)navigationActi
on 
    decisionHandler:(void (^)(WKNavigationActionPolicy))decisionHandler;
You implement this method, and it is called when the user taps a link
in a web view, so that you can decide how to respond. The third
parameter is a block that takes one parameter — a
WKNavigationActionPolicy, which is an enum — and returns no
value. The block is passed to you as a Swift function, and you
respond by calling the function to report your decision:
func webView(_ webView: WKWebView, 
    decidePolicyFor navigationAction: WKNavigationAction, 
    decisionHandler: @escaping (WKNavigationActionPolicy) -> Void) { 
        // ... 
        decisionHandler(.allow) 
}

--- Page 1123 ---
A C function is not a block, but you can also use a Swift function
where a C function is expected, as I demonstrated earlier. Going in
the other direction, to declare a type as a C pointer-to-function, mark
the type as @convention(c). Here are two Swift method
declarations:
func blockTaker(_ f:() -> ()) {} 
func functionTaker(_ f:@convention(c)() -> ()) {}
Objective-C sees the first as taking a block, and the second as taking
a pointer-to-function.
API Markup
In the early days of Swift, its static strict typing was a poor match for
Objective-C’s dynamic loose typing, and this made the Swift versions
of Objective-C methods ugly and unpleasant:
Too many Optionals
In Objective-C, any object instance reference can be nil. But in
Swift, only an Optional can be nil. The default solution was to
use implicitly unwrapped Optionals as the medium of object
interchange between Objective-C and Swift. But this was ugly,
and a blunt instrument, especially because most objects arriving
from Objective-C were never in fact going to be nil.
Too many umbrella collections
In Objective-C, a collection type such as NSArray can contain
elements of multiple object types, and the collection itself is
agnostic as to what types of elements it contains. But a Swift
collection type can contain elements of just one type, and is itself

--- Page 1124 ---
typed according to that element type. The default solution was for
every collection to arrive from Objective-C typed as having
AnyObject elements; it then had to be cast down explicitly on the
Swift side. This was infuriating. You would ask for a view’s subv
iews and get back an Array of AnyObject, which then had to be
cast down to an Array of UIView — when nothing could be more
obvious than that a view’s subviews would in fact all be UIView
objects.
These problems were subsequently solved by modifying the
Objective-C language to permit markup of declarations in such a way
as to communicate to Swift a more specific knowledge of what to
expect.
NULLABILITY
An Objective-C object type can be marked as nullable or nonnull,
to specify, respectively, that it might or will never be nil. In the same
way, C pointer types can be marked __nullable or __nonnull.
Using these markers generally obviates the need for implicitly
unwrapped Optionals as a medium of interchange; every type can be
either a normal type or a simple Optional, and if it’s an Optional,
there’s a good reason for it. Implicitly unwrapped Optionals are a rare
sight in the Cocoa APIs nowadays.
If you’re writing an Objective-C header file and you don’t mark up
any of it as to nullability, you’ll return to the bad old days: Swift will
see your types as implicitly unwrapped Optionals. Here’s an
Objective-C method declaration:
- (NSString*) badMethod: (NSString*) s;

--- Page 1125 ---
In the absence of markup, Swift sees that as:
func badMethod(_ s: String!) -> String!
Clearly our Objective-C needs some markup! As soon as your header
file contains any markup, the Objective-C compiler will complain
until it is completely marked up. As a shortcut, you can mark an
entire stretch of your header file with a default nonnull setting, so
that only the exceptional nullable types will need explicit markup,
like this:
NS_ASSUME_NONNULL_BEGIN 
- (NSString*) badMethod: (NSString*) s; 
- (nullable NSString*) goodMethod: (NSString*) s; 
NS_ASSUME_NONNULL_END
Swift sees that with no implicitly unwrapped Optionals:
func badMethod(_ s: String) -> String 
func goodMethod(_ s: String) -> String?
You can use the Clang analyzer (Product → Analyze) to help audit
the correctness of your nullability markup, but in the end it’s your
responsibility to tell the truth. If you still want a type to appear as an
implicitly unwrapped Optional (perhaps because you’re just not sure
what the truth is), mark it null_unspecified.
LIGHTWEIGHT GENERICS
To mark an Objective-C collection type as containing a certain type
of element, the element type can appear in angle brackets (<>)

--- Page 1126 ---
between the name of the collection type and the asterisk. Here’s an
Objective-C method that returns an array of strings:
- (NSArray<NSString*>*) pepBoys;
Swift sees the return type of that method as [String], and there will
be no need to cast it down.
In the declaration of an actual Objective-C collection type, a
placeholder name stands for the type in angle brackets. The
declaration for NSArray starts like this:
@interface NSArray<ObjectType> 
- (NSArray<ObjectType> *)arrayByAddingObject:(ObjectType)anObject; 
// ...
The first line says that we’re going to use ObjectType as the
placeholder name for the element type. The second line says that the
arrayByAddingObject: method takes an object of the element type
and returns an array of the element type. If a particular array is
declared as NSArray<NSString*>*, the ObjectType placeholder
would be resolved to NSString*. Apple refers to this sort of markup
as a lightweight generic, and you can readily see why.
In Swift, classes marked up as lightweight generics are imported into
Swift as actual generics even if they are not bridged collection types.
Suppose I declare my own Objective-C class, parallel to NSArray:
@interface Thing<ObjectType> : NSObject 
- (void) giveMeAThing:(nonnull ObjectType)anObject; 
@end

--- Page 1127 ---
The Thing class arrives into Swift declared as a generic:
class Thing<ObjectType> : NSObject where ObjectType : AnyObject {
Thing has to be instantiated by resolving the generic somehow. Often,
it will be resolved explicitly:
let t = Thing<NSString>() 
t.giveMeAThing("howdy") // an Int would be illegal here
Bilingual Targets
It is legal for a target to be a bilingual target — one that contains both
Swift files and Objective-C files. A bilingual target can be useful for
various reasons:
You might want to take advantage of Objective-C language
features.
You might want to incorporate third-party code written in
Objective-C.
You might want to incorporate your own existing code written in
Objective-C.
Your app itself may have been written in Objective-C originally,
and now you want to migrate part of it (or all of it, in stages) into
Swift.
The key question is how, within a single target, Swift and Objective-
C hear about one another’s code in the first place.

--- Page 1128 ---
Objective-C, unlike Swift, has a visibility problem already:
Objective-C files cannot automatically see one another. Instead, each
Objective-C file that needs to see another Objective-C file must be
instructed explicitly to see that file, usually with an #import directive
at the top of the first file:
In order to prevent unwanted exposure of private information, an
Objective-C class declaration is conventionally spread over two
files: a header file (.h) containing the @interface section, and a
code file (.m) containing the @implementation section.
Also conventionally, only .h files are ever imported. If
declarations of class members, constants, and so forth are to be
public, they are placed in a .h file.
Visibility of Swift and Objective-C to one another depends upon
those conventions: it works through .h files. There are two directions
of visibility, and they operate separately through two special
Objective-C header files:
How Swift sees Objective-C
When you add a Swift file to an Objective-C target, or an
Objective-C file to a Swift target, Xcode offers to create a
bridging header. This is a .h file in the project. Its default name is
derived from the target name — such as MyCoolApp-Bridging-
Header.h — but the name is arbitrary and can be changed,
provided you change the target’s Objective-C Bridging Header
build setting to match. (Similarly, if you decline the bridging
header and you decide later that you want one, create a .h file
manually and point to it in the target’s Objective-C Bridging
Header build setting.) An Objective-C .h file will then be visible
to Swift if you #import it in this bridging header.

--- Page 1129 ---
How Objective-C sees Swift
When you build your target, the appropriate top-level declarations
of all your Swift files are automatically translated into Objective-
C and are used to construct a generated interface header within
the Intermediates build folder for this target, deep inside your
DerivedData folder. For a target called MyCoolApp, the
generated interface header is called MyCoolApp-Swift.h. The
name may involve some transformation; a space in the target
name is translated into an underscore. You can examine or change
the header name with the target’s Objective-C Generated Interface
Header Name build setting. The generated interface header is how
your Swift code is exposed to Objective-C in general (even in a
single-language Swift project); your own Objective-C files will
be able to see your Swift declarations if you #import the
generated interface header into each Objective-C file that needs to
see them.
To sum up:
The bridging header is visible in your project navigator; you write
an #import statement here to make your Objective-C declarations
visible to Swift.
The generated interface header is squirreled away in the
DerivedData folder; you #import it to make your Swift
declarations visible to your Objective-C code.
Here’s an actual example. Let’s say that I’ve added to my Swift
target, called MyCoolApp, a Thing class written in Objective-C. It is
distributed over two files, Thing.h and Thing.m. Then:
For Swift code to see the Thing class, I need to #import "Thing.
h" in the bridging header (MyCoolApp-Bridging-Header.h).

--- Page 1130 ---
For Thing class code to see my Swift declarations, I need to #impo
rt "MyCoolApp-Swift.h" (the generated bridging header) at the
top of Thing.m.
That’s how Objective-C and Swift are able to see one another; but
what do Objective-C and Swift see when they see one another?
Xcode makes it easy to find out, using the code editor’s Related Items
menu (Control-1). It contains a Generated Interface hierarchical
menu:
In an Objective-C header file (such as Thing.h), the Generated
Interface menu lists the Swift interface. Choose it to see how these
Objective-C declarations are translated into Swift.
In a Swift file, the Generated Interface menu lists the Objective-C
generated interface header. Choose it to see how your target’s
Swift declarations are translated into Objective-C.
Before Swift existed, all my iOS apps were written in Objective-C.
When Swift came along, I translated those apps into Swift. I quickly
developed a step-by-step procedure for doing that; here it is:
1. Pick a .m file to be translated into Swift. Objective-C cannot
subclass a Swift class, so if you have defined both a class and
its subclass in Objective-C, start with the subclass. (Leave the
app delegate class for last.)
2. Remove that .m file from the target. To do so, select the .m file
and use the File inspector.
3. In every Objective-C file that #imports the corresponding .h
file, remove that #import statement and import in its place the
generated interface header (if you aren’t importing it in this file
already).

--- Page 1131 ---
4. If you were importing the corresponding .h file in the bridging
header, remove the #import statement.
5. Create the .swift file for this class. Make sure it is added to the
target.
6. In the .swift file, declare the class and provide stub declarations
for all members that were being made public in the .h file. If
this class needs to adopt Cocoa protocols, adopt them; you may
have to provide stub declarations of required protocol methods
as well. If this file needs to refer to any other classes that your
target still declares in Objective-C, import their .h files in the
bridging header.
7. The project should now compile! It doesn’t work, of course,
because you have not written any real code in the .swift file. But
who cares about that? Time for a beer!
8. Now fill out the code in the .swift file. My technique is to
translate more or less line-by-line from the original Objective-C
code at first, even though the outcome is not particularly
idiomatic or Swifty.
9. When the code for this .m file is completely translated into
Swift, build and run and test. If the runtime complains
(probably accompanied by crashing) that it can’t find this class,
find all references to it in the nib editor and reenter the class’s
name in the Identity inspector (and press Tab to set the change).
Save and try again.
10. On to the next .m file! Repeat all of the above steps.
11. When all of the other files have been translated, translate the
app delegate class. At this point, if there are no Objective-C
files left in the target, you can delete the main.m file (replacing
it with a @main attribute in the app delegate class declaration)
and the .pch (precompiled header) file.

--- Page 1132 ---
Your app should now run, and is rewritten in pure Swift (or is, at
least, as pure as you intend to make it). Now go back and think about
the code, making it more Swifty and idiomatic. You may well find
that things that were clumsy or tricky in Objective-C can be made
much neater and clearer in Swift.
You can also do a partial conversion of an Objective-C class by
extending it in Swift. That can be useful as a stage along the path to
total conversion, or you might quite reasonably write only one or two
methods of an Objective-C class in Swift, just because Swift makes it
so much easier to say or understand certain kinds of thing. However,
Swift cannot see the Objective-C class’s members unless they are
made public, so methods and properties that you were previously
keeping private in the Objective-C class’s .m file may have to be
declared in its .h file.

--- Page 1133 ---
Index
A
ABI stability, From Project to Built App
aborting, Aborting the whole program
access control (see privacy)
access, exclusive, Exclusive Access to Value Types
accessibility, Interface Tests, Interface testing and accessibility
accessors, Accessors, Properties, and Key–Value Coding
Accounts preferences, Version Control, Obtaining a Developer
Program Membership, The Distribution Certificate
actions, Action Connections, Actions
Combine framework, The Combine Framework
connections, Action Connections
handler, Actions
misconfiguring, Misconfigured Actions
nil-targeted, Nil-Targeted Actions
selector, Actions
target, Actions
Ad Hoc distribution, Distribution, Ad Hoc distribution
address operator, Modifiable Parameters, C Pointers

--- Page 1134 ---
Address Sanitizer, Debugging Memory Management Mistakes
adopt a protocol, Protocols
allCases, Enum Case Iteration
Allocations instrument, Instruments
allSatisfy, Array enumeration and transformation
ampersand (see address operator)
anonymous functions, Anonymous Functions
abbreviated syntax, Anonymous Function Abbreviated Syntax
capture list, Stored anonymous functions
define-and-call, Define-and-Call
inline, Using Anonymous Functions Inline
parameter list and return type, Anonymous Functions
retain cycles, Stored anonymous functions
throws, Throwing and catching errors
trailing closures, Anonymous Function Abbreviated Syntax
Any, Any
AnyClass, AnyClass
AnyHashable, Swift Dictionary and Objective-C NSDictionary
AnyObject, AnyObject-Object identity
object identity, Object identity
suppressing type checking, Suppressing type checking
API, Preface
public, Private and Fileprivate

--- Page 1135 ---
tweaking, Why Optionals?, Failable initializers, API Markup
app
bundle, From Project to Built App
delegate, How an App Gets Going
launch process, The App Launch Process
name, Renaming Parts of a Project, Property List Settings,
Submission to the App Store
localizing, Creating Localized Content
registering, Manual Signing
signing, Signing an App
target, The Target
version number, Property List Settings
without main storyboard, App Without a Storyboard
App Store, Submission to the App Store
distribution, Distribution
App Store Connect, TestFlight distribution, Submission to the
App Store
append, String, Basic array properties and methods
Apple ID, Obtaining a Developer Program Membership
ARC, Memory Management
(see also memory management)
archive
app, Making an Archive

--- Page 1136 ---
documentation, The Documentation Window
object, NSData, Codable
arguments, Function Parameters and Return Value
passed on launch, Arguments and Environment Variables
arithmetic operators, Arithmetic operations
Array, Array
arrays, Array-Swift Array and Objective-C NSArray
bridging, Swift Array and Objective-C NSArray, NSValue,
NSArray and NSMutableArray, Bridged Types and Boxed
Types
C arrays, C Arrays
casting, Array casting and type testing
concatenating, Basic array properties and methods
declaration, Array
enumerating, Array enumeration and transformation
equality, Array comparison
flattening, Basic array properties and methods, Array
enumeration and transformation
indexing, Array subscripting
initializers, Array
literal, Array
mutating, Array subscripting
nested, Nested arrays

--- Page 1137 ---
Optional, Array casting and type testing, Array enumeration
and transformation
properties and methods, Basic array properties and methods
randomizing, Basic array properties and methods
searching, Basic array properties and methods
sorting, Basic array properties and methods
subscripting, Array subscripting
testing all elements, Array enumeration and transformation
testing element type, Array casting and type testing
transforming, Array enumeration and transformation
uniquing, Set
ArraySlice, Array subscripting
arrow operator, Function Parameters and Return Value
as, Casting Down, Protocol Type Testing and Casting, Switch
statement
assert, Aborting the whole program
assertion, Testing
asset catalog, From Project to Built App, Resources in an asset
catalog, Icons in the app
assignment, Variables
compound, Arithmetic operations
conditional, Conditional evaluation
multiple, Tuple

--- Page 1138 ---
assistant, Assistant panes
associated type, Generic Declarations
chains, Associated Type Chains
associated value, Associated Values, Switch statement, While
loops, For loops
Attributes inspector, The Inspectors Pane, Inspectors
attributes, custom, Property Wrappers
auditing, Why Optionals?, Failable initializers, API Markup
authors, Version Control
autoclosure, Aborting the whole program
autocompletion, Autocompletion and Placeholders
automatic signing, Automatic Signing
automatic variables, Variable Scope and Lifetime
autorelease, Autorelease Pool
availability, Class Documentation Pages
available, Backward Compatibility
awakeFromNib, Additional Configuration of Nib-Based
Instances
B
backslash, String, Key Paths
backward compatibility, Backward Compatibility
bag, NSSet and Friends
balancing delimiters, Editing

--- Page 1139 ---
base class, Subclass and Superclass
base name, External Parameter Names
Behaviors preferences, The Navigator Pane
beta testing, TestFlight distribution
bilingual target, Bilingual Targets
binary numbers, Int
Binding, Bindings
binding, conditional, Conditional binding, While loops, Guard
Bitbucket, Version Control
bitmasks, Option sets, NS_OPTIONS
bitwise operators, Arithmetic operations, Option sets
(see also option sets)
blame, Version Control
blocks
C, Function as Value, Blocks
flow control, Flow Control
body of a function, Function Parameters and Return Value
bookmarking a line of code, Navigation
Bool, Bool
BOOL, NSNumber
Boolean operators, Bool
boxing, Bridged Types and Boxed Types
branching, Branching-Conditional evaluation

--- Page 1140 ---
conditional binding, Conditional binding
conditional evaluation, Conditional evaluation
if, If construct
if case, If case
short-circuiting, Short-circuiting and labels
switch, Switch statement
break, Short-circuiting and labels
Breakpoint navigator, The Navigator Pane
breakpoints, Breakpoints
bridged types, Some Foundation Classes, Bridged Types and
Boxed Types
Any and id, Any, Bridged Types and Boxed Types
AnyObject and id, AnyObject
Array and NSArray, Swift Array and Objective-C NSArray,
NSArray and NSMutableArray, Bridged Types and Boxed
Types
array elements, Swift Array and Objective-C NSArray,
NSValue, Bridged Types and Boxed Types
casting, Bridging to Objective-C
CFTypeRefs, CFTypeRefs
Dictionary and NSDictionary, Swift Dictionary and Objective-
C NSDictionary
Error and NSError, Throwing and catching errors

--- Page 1141 ---
Foundation, Some Foundation Classes, Bridged Types and
Boxed Types
number and NSNumber, NSNumber
Set and NSSet, NSSet and Friends
String and NSString, String, NSString and Friends
struct and NSValue, NSValue, Bridged Types and Boxed Types
bridging header, Bilingual Targets
build, Ground of Being, New Project
configurations, Configurations
phases, Build Phases
settings, Build Settings
bundle
app, From Project to Built App
display name, Renaming Parts of a Project, Creating Localized
Content
framework, Frameworks, SDKs, and Packages
identifier, New Project
test, Testing
C
C, The C Language-Pointer-to-function
(see also Objective-C)
arrays, C Arrays
blocks, Blocks

--- Page 1142 ---
data types, C Data Types
enums, Old-fashioned C enum
functions, C Functions
numeric types, Other numeric types
pointer-to-function, Pointer-to-function, Blocks
pointer-to-void, C Pointers
pointers, C Pointers
strings, C Strings
structs, NSValue, C Structs
Calendar, NSDate and Friends
call stack, Return, The Navigator Pane, Paused at a breakpoint
callAsFunction, Instance as Function
calling a function, Functions, Function Parameters and Return
Value
canvas, The Nib Editor Interface, Canvas
Capabilities pane, Automatic Signing
capitalization, Variables
capture list, Stored anonymous functions
captured variable references, Closures
preserving, Closure Preserving Captured Environment
setting, Closure Setting a Captured Variable
case
enum, Enums

--- Page 1143 ---
switch statement, Switch statement
CaseIterable, Enum Case Iteration
casting, Casting-Bridging to Objective-C
safely, Type Testing and Casting Down Safely, Switch
statement
categories, Categories and Extensions
caveman debugging, Caveman Debugging
certificate, Signing an App
distribution, The Distribution Certificate
exporting, The Distribution Certificate
obtaining manually, Manual Signing
CFTypeRefs, CFTypeRefs
memory management, Memory Management of CFTypeRefs
chains
associated type, Associated Type Chains
Optional, Optional chains
change bars, Version Control
Character, Character and String Index
character sequence, Character and String Index
characters vs. codepoints, String
characters, escaped, String
class
changing in nib, Inspectors

--- Page 1144 ---
clusters, Immutable and Mutable
documentation page, Class Documentation Pages
members, Instances
methods, Methods
NSObject, The Secret Life of NSObject
vs. static methods, Static methods vs. class methods
properties, Variable Scope and Lifetime, How properties are
accessed
vs. static properties, Static properties vs. class properties
protocols, Class Protocols
classes, Classes-Static properties vs. class properties
(see also object types)
class methods, Static methods vs. class methods
class properties, Static properties vs. class properties
deinitializers, Class Deinitializer
documentation, Class Documentation Pages
generic, subclassing, Explicit Specialization
hierarchy, Subclass and Superclass
inheritance, Inheritance
initializers, Class Initializers
inheritance, Subclass initializers
instances, Value Types and Reference Types
multiple references, Class instance references are pointers

--- Page 1145 ---
mutating, Reference Type Modifiable Parameters, Class
instances are mutable
methods, overriding, Overriding
extensions, Extensions
preventing, Overriding, Public and Open
omitting type name, Raw Values
polymorphism, Polymorphism
properties, overriding, Class Properties
reference types, Value Types and Reference Types
static methods, Static methods vs. class methods
static properties, Static properties vs. class properties
subclass and superclass, Subclass and Superclass
subclassing, preventing, Inheritance, Public and Open
subscripts, overriding, The keyword super
umbrella type, Umbrella Types, AnyClass
vs. structs, Classes
cleaning, Clean
closures, Closures-Escaping Closures
(see also anonymous functions)
captured variable references, Closures
preserving, Closure Preserving Captured Environment
setting, Closure Setting a Captured Variable
escaping, Escaping Closures, Class instances are mutable

--- Page 1146 ---
returned from function, Function Returning Function
Cocoa, Cocoa Classes
actions, Actions
categories, Categories and Extensions
data sources, Data Sources
delegation, Delegation
events, Cocoa Events
Foundation classes, Some Foundation Classes
key–value coding, Key–Value Coding
key–value observing, Key–Value Observing
memory management, Memory Management
notifications, Notifications
protocols, Protocols
responder chain, The Responder Chain
subclassing, Subclassing, Subclassing
Codable, Codable
code
bookmarking, Navigation
change bars, Version Control
completion, Autocompletion and Placeholders
coverage, Unit Tests
editing, Text Editing Preferences
folding, Display

--- Page 1147 ---
font, Editing and Navigating Your Code
indentation, Indentation
location, Functions, Cocoa Events, Swamped by Events
navigating, Navigation
refactoring, Refactoring and Structure Editing
searching, Finding
selecting, Multiple Selection
signing (see signing an app)
snippets, Snippets
strings, localizing, Creating Localized Content
Code Review editor, Version Control
codepoints, Unicode, String
vs. characters, String
coercion, Numeric coercion
numeric, Numeric coercion, C Data Types
Range and NSRange, NSRange
String and Int, String
collections
Foundation, NSIndexSet-Immutable and Mutable
memory management, How Cocoa Objects Manage Memory,
Other Unusual Situations
Swift, Collection Types-Swift Set and Objective-C NSSet
colon

--- Page 1148 ---
adopting protocol, Protocols
argument label, External Parameter Names
enum raw value type, Raw Values
generic type constraint, Type Constraints
key–value, Dictionary
label, Short-circuiting and labels
parameter name, Function Parameters and Return Value
superclass, Inheritance
ternary operator, Conditional evaluation
variable type, Variable Declaration
Combine framework, The Combine Framework-The Combine
Framework
comma
arguments, Function Parameters and Return Value
array literal, Array
condition list, Conditional binding
dictionary literal, Dictionary
generic constraints, Where Clauses
generic placeholders, Generic Declarations
parameters, Function Parameters and Return Value
protocol, Protocols, Adopting a Library Protocol
switch case, Switch statement
tuples, Tuple

--- Page 1149 ---
variadics, Variadic Parameters
comments, Ground of Being
documentation, Quick Help
MARK, Display, Navigation
communication, Communication Between Objects
bindings, Bindings
Combine framework, The Combine Framework, Custom State
Objects
getting a reference, Getting a Reference
key–value observing, Notifications and Key–Value Observing
notifications, Notifications and Key–Value Observing
SwiftUI, SwiftUI
visibility
by instantiation, Visibility by Instantiation
by relationship, Visibility by Relationship
global, Global Visibility
through instance property, Visibility Through an Instance
Property
compactMap, Array enumeration and transformation
Comparable, Type Constraints
synthesizing, Comparable
compare, Equality, Hashability, and Comparison
comparison operators, Comparison

--- Page 1150 ---
ComparisonResult, Equality, Hashability, and Comparison
compatibility, backward, Backward Compatibility
compilation, conditional, Conditional Compilation
compile error, Ground of Being
(see also errors, compiler)
Compile Sources build phase, Build Phases
compiler, Ground of Being
completion
code, Autocompletion and Placeholders
type-over, Editing
compliant, key–value coding, Key–Value Coding
Components preferences, Schemes and Destinations
composition of protocols, Protocol Composition
compound assignment operators, Arithmetic operations
computed
properties, Computed Properties
property wrappers, Property Wrappers, Property Wrappers
variable initialization, Computed Variable Initialization
variables, Computed Variables
concatenating
arrays, Basic array properties and methods
strings, String
condition list, Conditional binding

--- Page 1151 ---
conditional
assignment, Conditional evaluation
binding, Conditional binding, While loops, Guard
compilation, Conditional Compilation
conformance, Extending Generics
evaluation, Conditional evaluation
initialization, Variable Declaration
conditions, Bool, Flow Control
configurations, Configurations
conform to a protocol, Protocols
connections, Connections
action, Action Connections
between nibs, Connections Between Nibs — Not!
creating, The Nib Owner, More Ways to Create Outlets, Action
Connections
deleting, Deleting an Outlet
outlet, Outlets, How Outlets Work
Connections inspector, The Inspectors Pane, Automatically
Configured Nibs, Deleting an Outlet
console, The Navigator Pane, Caveman Debugging
Console application, Caveman Debugging
constants, Variables, Variable Declaration, Struct as Namespace
global string, Global string constants

--- Page 1152 ---
constraints, type, Type Constraints
extensions, Extending Generics
multiple, Where Clauses
contains, Character and String Index, Range, Basic array
properties and methods
continue, Short-circuiting and labels
control events, Action Connections, Actions
control flow (see flow control)
convenience initializers, Kinds of class initializer
convention(c), Blocks
Copy Bundle Resources build phase, Build Phases
copying instances, Class instance references are pointers
count, String, Basic array properties and methods, Set
covariant, Polymorphism, Generic Invariance
coverage, code, Unit Tests
crash
class not key–value coding compliant, Outlet–property name
mismatch, Key–Value Coding, How Outlets Work
could not cast value, Type Testing and Casting Down Safely
deallocated object, Retain Cycles and Weak References
loaded nib but view outlet was not set, No view outlet
not enough bits, Other numeric types
simultaneous accesses, Exclusive Access to Value Types

--- Page 1153 ---
unexpectedly found nil, The keyword nil, No outlet in the nib
unrecognized selector, Selectors, Misconfigured Actions
creating
action connection, Action Connections
enum, Enums
instance, Instances, Variadic Parameters, Initializers
outlet, More Ways to Create Outlets
curly braces, Ground of Being, Function Parameters and Return
Value, Anonymous Functions, Computed Variables, Setter
Observers, String, Object Type Declarations and Features, How
to write an initializer, Subscripts, Class Deinitializer, Declaring a
Protocol, Extensions, Flow Control
currying, Curried Functions
custom attributes, Property Wrappers
CustomNSError, Throwing and catching errors
CustomReflectable, Introspection
CustomStringConvertible, Adopting a Library Protocol
cycle through a sequence, For loops
D
dance, weak–strong, Stored anonymous functions
dangling pointers, Principles of Cocoa Memory Management
Data, NSData
data sources, Data Sources
data tips, Paused at a breakpoint

--- Page 1154 ---
Date, NSDate and Friends
DateComponents, NSDate and Friends
DateFormatter, NSDate and Friends
DateInterval, NSDate and Friends
dates, NSDate and Friends
debug bar, The Navigator Pane
Debug navigator, The Navigator Pane, Paused at a breakpoint,
Gauges
Debug pane, The Navigator Pane, Paused at a breakpoint
debugger, Xcode, The Xcode Debugger
debugging, Debugging-Paused at a breakpoint
memory management, Memory Debugging, Debugging
Memory Management Mistakes
Decimal, NSNumber
decimal point, Double
declaration
arrays, Array
dictionaries, Dictionary
enums, Enums
extensions, Extensions
functions, Function Parameters and Return Value
generics, Generic Declarations
jumping to, Symbol Declarations

--- Page 1155 ---
object types, Object Type Declarations and Features
operators, Operators
protocols, Declaring a Protocol
sets, Set
variables, Variable Declaration
decoding and encoding, Codable
default, Switch statement
unknown, NS_ENUM
defer, Defer statement
deferred initialization, Why Optionals?, Deferred initialization of
properties
define-and-call, Define-and-Call
deinit, Class Deinitializer
not called, Memory Management of Reference Types,
Notification Observers
delayed performance, Delayed Performance
delegate, Delegation
memory management, Retain Cycles and Weak References
delegating initializers, Delegating initializers
delegation (see delegate)
deleting an outlet, Deleting an Outlet
delimiters, balancing, Editing
dependencies, Environmental Dependencies

--- Page 1156 ---
Deployment Target build setting, Permissible Runtime
Environment
description, Adopting a Library Protocol
designated initializers, Kinds of class initializer, Subclass
initializers
destinations, Schemes and Destinations
developer member center, Signing an App
Development Assets build setting, Build Action
development certificate, Manual Signing
development provisioning profile, Automatic Signing
device
registering, Automatic Signing, Manual Signing
running on, Running on a Device
type, Device Type
Devices and Simulators window, Managing Development
Certificates and Devices
dictionaries, Dictionary-Swift Dictionary and Objective-C
NSDictionary
casting, Dictionary casting and comparison
creating, Dictionary
declaration, Dictionary
enumerating, Basic dictionary properties and enumeration
equality, Dictionary casting and comparison
keys, Basic dictionary properties and enumeration

--- Page 1157 ---
hashable, Dictionary
literals, Dictionary
merging, Basic dictionary properties and enumeration
mutating, Dictionary subscripting
properties, Basic dictionary properties and enumeration
subscripting, Dictionary subscripting
testing type, Dictionary casting and comparison
transformations, Basic dictionary properties and enumeration
unordered, Dictionaries have no order
values, Basic dictionary properties and enumeration
Dictionary, Dictionary
didSet, Setter Observers
dispatch table, Actions
dispatch, dynamic, Polymorphism
display name, Renaming Parts of a Project, Creating Localized
Content
distributing your app, Distribution
distribution provisioning profile, The Distribution Profile
do, Nested scopes
do...catch, Throwing and catching errors
dock, Document Outline
document outline, Document Outline
document tabs, Tabs and windows

--- Page 1158 ---
documentation, Documentation-Internet Resources
archive, The Documentation Window
class, Class Documentation Pages
comments, Quick Help
delegate, Cocoa Delegation
immutable vs. mutable classes, Immutable and Mutable
protocols, Protocols
searching, The Documentation Window
window, Documentation
dollar sign, Property Wrappers, Bindings
doom, pyramid of, Conditional binding
dot-notation, Everything Is an Object?, Namespaces
function references, Function Reference Scope
key paths, Cocoa Key Paths
Optionals, Optional chains
tuples, Tuple
Double, Double
downcasting (see casting)
drawing
text, NSString and Friends
view, Subclassing
drop, Array enumeration and transformation

--- Page 1159 ---
dropFirst, Character and String Index, Basic array properties
and methods
dropLast, Character and String Index, Basic array properties
and methods
dump, Introspection, Caveman Debugging
dynamic
dispatch, Polymorphism
members, Dynamic Membership
properties, Key–Value Observing Example
E
early exit, Jumping
editing
code, Editing and Navigating Your Code
project, The Target
storyboard, The Nib Editor Interface
target, The Target
xib file, Document Outline
editor, The Editor
nib, Nib Files
panes, Editor panes
Empty Window example project, New Project, Canvas,
Subclassing
encoding and decoding, Codable

--- Page 1160 ---
endIndex, Character and String Index, Basic array properties
and methods
entitlements, Signing an App, Automatic Signing
entry point
code, The Entry Point, Swamped by Events
storyboard, Document Outline
enumerate a sequence, For loops
enumerated, Tuple, Array enumeration and transformation, For
loops
enums, Enums-Why Enums?
(see also object types)
associated value, Associated Values, Switch statement, While
loops, For loops, Equatable
C enums, Old-fashioned C enum
cases, Enums
enumerating, Enum Case Iteration
Comparable, Comparable
declaration, Enums
equality, Enums, Associated Values, Equatable
indirect, Advantages of value types vs. reference types
initializers, Enum Initializers
initializing, Enums
methods, Enum Methods

--- Page 1161 ---
omitting type name, Enums
properties, Enum Properties
raw value, Raw Values
subscripts, Enum Methods
environment overrides (debug bar), Running in the Simulator
environment variables, Arguments and Environment Variables
equal sign, Variables
equality
Objective-C, Equality, Hashability, and Comparison
operators, Comparison
Swift, Synthesized Protocol Implementations
Equatable, Associated Values, Extending Generics, Basic array
properties and methods, Dictionary
synthesizing, Synthesized Protocol Implementations
Error, Throwing and catching errors
ErrorPointer, Error pointers
errors, Throwing and catching errors-Throwing and catching
errors
catching, Throwing and catching errors
Objective-C, Error pointers
throwing, Throwing and catching errors
asynchronous, Result
errors, compiler

--- Page 1162 ---
ambiguous, Overloading
cannot convert value to specified type, Contradictory
Resolution Is Impossible
cannot find self in scope, Property initialization and self
cannot invoke index, Basic array properties and methods
cannot use instance member, Property initialization and self
custom, The Navigator Pane
escaping closure captures mutating self, Class instances are
mutable
expected declaration, Functions
expressions are not allowed, Functions
heterogeneous collection, Array
initializer requirement, Implicitly Required Initializers
initializing from a metatype value, Type as Value
overlapping accesses, Exclusive Access to Value Types
protocol can only be used, Type Constraints
required initializer must be provided, Implicitly Required
Initializers
return from initializer, How to write an initializer
self used, Referring to self
unable to infer return type, Anonymous Function Abbreviated
Syntax
use of unresolved identifier self, Property initialization and self
value must be unwrapped, Optional

--- Page 1163 ---
escaped characters, String
escaping, Escaping Closures, Class instances are mutable
evaluation, conditional, Conditional evaluation
event-based programming, Swamped by Events
events, Action Connections, Cocoa Events
exception breakpoint, Breakpoints
exclamation mark, Unwrapping an Optional, Implicitly
unwrapped Optional, Optional chains, Casting Down, Optional
methods
exclusive access, Exclusive Access to Value Types
exit, early, Jumping
explicit specialization, Explicit Specialization
explicit variable type, Variable Declaration
exporting certificates, The Distribution Certificate
exporting from an archive, Making an Archive
ExpressibleByLiteral, Expressible by Literal
extend (see extensions)
extensions, Extensions, How Swift Uses Extensions
(see also categories)
declaring, Extensions
generics, Extending Generics
type constraints, Extending Generics
object types, Extensions, Extensions

--- Page 1164 ---
overrides, Extensions
protocols, Extending Protocols, How You Use Extensions
restrictions on, Extensions
structs, Extensions
external parameter names, External Parameter Names
initializers, How to write an initializer
methods, Objective-C Methods
subscripts, Subscripts
F
factory
functions, Function Returning Function
instances, From self to Type
Objective-C class method, Initializers and factories
failable initializers, Failable initializers, Subclass initializers
fallthrough, Switch statement, Short-circuiting and labels
false, Bool
fatal (see crash)
fatalError, Aborting the whole program
File inspector, The Inspectors Pane
file templates, Code Files
file, Swift, structure, The Structure of a Swift File
fileprivate, Privacy
File’s Owner, The Nib Owner

--- Page 1165 ---
filter, Array enumeration and transformation, Basic dictionary
properties and enumeration
final, Inheritance, Overriding
Find navigator, The Navigator Pane, Finding
finding, Finding
(see also searching)
first, Character and String Index, Basic array properties and
methods
First Responder proxy object, Nil-Targeted Actions
firstIndex, Character and String Index, Basic array properties
and methods
Fix-it, Fix-it and Live Syntax Checking
flag, Bool
flatMap, Optional map and flatMap, Array enumeration and
transformation
flavors (of object type), Three Flavors of Object Type
Float, Other numeric types
flow control, Flow Control-Guard
branching, Branching
(see also branching)
jumping, Jumping
(see also jumping)
looping, Loops
(see also looping)

--- Page 1166 ---
folder-linked group, Groups
renaming, Renaming Parts of a Project
folders in an Xcode project, Contents of the Project Folder,
Resources in the Project navigator
folding, code, Display
font, NSString and Friends
for, For loops
for case, For loops
for...in, For loops
forced unwrap operator, Unwrapping an Optional
forEach, Array enumeration and transformation
format string, Caveman Debugging
Foundation framework, Modules, Some Foundation Classes
frameworks, Modules, Frameworks, SDKs, and Packages
creating, Frameworks, SDKs, and Packages
linking, Frameworks, SDKs, and Packages
Swift, From Project to Built App
function builders, Function Builders
function in function, Function in Function
functional events, Reasons for Events
functions, Functions, Functions-Selectors
anonymous, Anonymous Functions
(see also anonymous functions)

--- Page 1167 ---
base name, External Parameter Names
body, Function Parameters and Return Value
C blocks, Blocks
C functions, C Functions
calling, Functions, Function Parameters and Return Value
closures, Closures
curried, Curried Functions
declaration, Functions, Function Parameters and Return Value
default parameter values, Default Parameter Values
define-and-call, Define-and-Call
dynamic, Dynamic Membership
external parameter names, External Parameter Names
generic, Generic Declarations
global, The Structure of a Swift File, Modules
C, overshadowed, Struct functions
class method instead, Extensions
ignored parameters, Ignored Parameters
instances as, Instance as Function
internal parameter names, Function Parameters and Return
Value
local, Function in Function
mathematical, Arithmetic operations
modifiable parameters, Modifiable Parameters

--- Page 1168 ---
overloading, Overloading
recursion, Recursion
reference, Function References and Selectors
result, Function Parameters and Return Value
ignoring, Function Parameters and Return Value
rethrows, Throwing and catching errors
return type, Function Parameters and Return Value
returned from function, Function Returning Function
signature, Function Signature
throws, Throwing and catching errors
calling, Throwing and catching errors
trailing closures, Anonymous Function Abbreviated Syntax
type, Function as Value
values, Function as Value
variadic parameters, Variadic Parameters
where clauses, Extending Generics
G
garbage collection, Memory Management of Reference Types
gauges, The Navigator Pane, Profiling
generated interface, The Editor
header, Bilingual Targets
generic pointer, C Pointers
generics, Generics-Where Clauses

--- Page 1169 ---
adopting protocol conditionally, Extending Generics
associated type chains, Associated Type Chains
classes, subclassing, Explicit Specialization
declaration, Generic Declarations
explicit specialization, Explicit Specialization
extensions, Extending Generics
functions, Generic Declarations
object types, Generic Declarations
polymorphism, Generic Invariance
protocols, Generic Declarations
constraining associated type, Where Clauses
resolution, Generics
contradictory, Contradictory Resolution Is Impossible
explicit, Explicit Specialization
reverse, Reverse Generics
specialization, Generics
(see also generics, resolution)
type constraints, Type Constraints
extensions, Extending Generics
multiple, Where Clauses
type, telling compiler, Type Constraints
where clauses, Where Clauses
extensions, Extending Generics

--- Page 1170 ---
methods, Extending Generics
getter, Computed Variables
Objective-C, Accessors, Properties, and Key–Value Coding,
Swift Accessors
Git, Version Control
GitHub, Frameworks, SDKs, and Packages, Version Control
GitLab, Version Control
global
constants, Struct as Namespace
functions, The Structure of a Swift File, Modules
C, overshadowed, Struct functions
class method instead, Extensions
variables, The Structure of a Swift File, Variable Scope and
Lifetime
initialization, Lazy Initialization
globally visible instances, Global Visibility
golden rule of memory management, Rules of Cocoa Memory
Management
groups, The Navigator Pane, Groups
blue, Resources in the Project navigator
folder-linked, Groups
renaming, Renaming Parts of a Project
guard, Guard

--- Page 1171 ---
guard case, Guard
guard let, Guard
H
hand-tweaking the APIs, Why Optionals?, Failable initializers,
API Markup
handlers, Function as Value
(see also functions)
hash, Equality, Hashability, and Comparison
hash character, String
hashability
Objective-C objects, Equality, Hashability, and Comparison
Swift objects, Hashable
Hashable, Dictionary, Set
synthesizing, Hashable
Hasher, Hashable, Equality, Hashability, and Comparison
hashValue, Dictionary, Hashable
hasPrefix, String
hasSuffix, String
header files, Header Files
bridging, Bilingual Targets
Core Graphics, How Swift Uses Extensions
generated interface, Bilingual Targets
jumping to, Header Files

--- Page 1172 ---
Objective-C, Bilingual Targets
Swift, Modules, Header Files
heads-up display, The Nib Owner
hexadecimal number, Int
hierarchy
class, Subclass and Superclass
view, Document Outline
History inspector, The Inspectors Pane, Version Control
HUD, The Nib Owner
I
IBAction, Action Connections
IBInspectable, Additional Configuration of Nib-Based Instances
IBOutlet, The Nib Owner
weak, Nib Loading and Memory Management
icons, From Project to Built App, Icons in the app
id, Umbrella Types, Objective-C Objects and C Pointers
identifiers and reserved words, Privacy
Identity inspector, The Inspectors Pane, Inspectors
identity operator, Object identity
identity, developer, Signing an App
if, If construct
if case, If case
if let, Conditional binding

--- Page 1173 ---
immutable Objective-C classes, Immutable and Mutable
implicit initializer, Initializers, Struct Initializers, Kinds of class
initializer
implicitly unwrapped Optional, Implicitly unwrapped Optional
import statement, The Structure of a Swift File, Frameworks,
SDKs, and Packages
in, Anonymous Functions
index
array, Array subscripting
enumerate with, Tuple, Array enumeration and
transformation, For loops
string, Character and String Index, Range
IndexSet, NSIndexSet
indices, Basic array properties and methods, For loops
indirect, Advantages of value types vs. reference types
inferred variable type, Variable Declaration
learning, Other numeric types
Info.plist, From Project to Built App, Property List Settings,
Property List Settings
settings dependent on device type, Device Type
informal protocols, Informal Protocols
inheritance, Inheritance
init, How to write an initializer
with self, Delegating initializers

--- Page 1174 ---
with super, Subclass initializers
with type reference, From self to Type
init(coder:), Implicitly Required Initializers
initialization
properties, How to write an initializer, Properties
deferred, Why Optionals?, Deferred initialization of
properties
lazy, Property initialization and self
self, Property initialization and self
variables, Variables, Variable Declaration
computed, Computed Variable Initialization
conditional, Variable Declaration
lazy, Lazy Initialization
Optionals, The keyword nil
initializers, Variadic Parameters, Initializers
class, Class Initializers
communication through, Visibility by Instantiation
convenience, Kinds of class initializer
delegating, Delegating initializers
designated, Kinds of class initializer
enum, Enum Initializers
failable, Failable initializers, Subclass initializers
implicit, Initializers

--- Page 1175 ---
class, Kinds of class initializer
enum, Enums
struct, Struct Initializers
inheritance, Subclass initializers
Objective-C, Initializers and factories
overriding, Subclass initializers
property wrapper, Property Wrappers
recursive, Delegating initializers
required, Required initializers, From self to Type, Implicitly
Required Initializers
struct, Struct Initializers
inout, Modifiable Parameters
input, Function Parameters and Return Value
insert, Character and String Index, Basic array properties and
methods
Inspectors pane, The Inspectors Pane
instance
methods, Instances, Methods
properties, Instances, Variable Scope and Lifetime, How
properties are accessed
variables, Objective-C, Accessors, Properties, and Key–Value
Coding
instances, Instances, Instances-The Keyword self, Getting a
Reference

--- Page 1176 ---
as functions, Instance as Function
communication (see communication)
copying, Class instance references are pointers
creation, Instances, Variadic Parameters, Initializers, Getting a
Reference
getting a reference, Getting a Reference
globally visible, Global Visibility
initial, The Entry Point
lifetime, Getting a Reference
literals instead, Expressible by Literal
multiple references, Class instance references are pointers
mutating, Reference Type Modifiable Parameters, Class
instances are mutable
nib-based, Loading a Nib
additional configuration, Additional Configuration of Nib-
Based Instances
memory management, Nib Loading and Memory
Management
relationships between, Visibility by Relationship
state, Why Instances?
type, Polymorphism
learning, From Instance to Type
telling compiler, Casting
testing, Type Testing and Casting Down Safely

--- Page 1177 ---
instantiation, Instances, Variadic Parameters, Initializers,
Getting a Reference
nib-based, Nib Files
visibility by, Visibility by Instantiation
Instruments, Profiling, Debugging Memory Management
Mistakes
Int, Int
Interface Builder, Nib Files
interface tests, Testing
internal, Privacy
internal identity principle, Polymorphism
internal parameter names, Function Parameters and Return
Value
internationalization (see localization)
internet as documentation, Internet Resources
interpolation, string, String, Adopting a Library Protocol
custom, Custom String Interpolation
interval operators, Range
introspection, Introspection, Optional Members, Key–Value
Coding
iOS Deployment Target build setting, Permissible Runtime
Environment
is, Type Testing and Casting Down Safely, Protocol Type Testing
and Casting

--- Page 1178 ---
isEmpty, String, Basic array properties and methods, Set
isEqual, Equality, Hashability, and Comparison
Issue navigator, The Navigator Pane
issues, live, Fix-it and Live Syntax Checking
iteration, Flow Control
iTunes Connect (see App Store Connect)
J
joined, String, Basic array properties and methods
JSON, Codable
jump bar, The Editor, Navigation
Debug pane, Paused at a breakpoint
documentation, Class Documentation Pages
menu, sections, Navigation
nib editor, Document Outline
Related Items menu, The Editor
jumping, Jumping-Guard
aborting, Aborting the whole program
break, Short-circuiting and labels
continue, Short-circuiting and labels
fallthrough, Short-circuiting and labels
guard, Guard
label, Short-circuiting and labels
return, Return

--- Page 1179 ---
throw, Throwing and catching errors
K
Key Bindings preferences, The Project Window
key paths
Cocoa, Cocoa Key Paths
Swift, Key Paths
keyboard shortcuts in Xcode, The Project Window
keys (dictionary), Dictionary
KeyValuePairs, Dictionaries have no order
key–value coding, Key–Value Coding
key–value observing, Key–Value Observing
Published instead, The Combine Framework
retain cycles, KVO Observers
key–value pairs, Dictionary
KVC, Key–Value Coding
KVO, Key–Value Observing
L
labels
flow control, Short-circuiting and labels
function call, External Parameter Names
(see also external parameter names)
nib editor, Document Outline
changed by outlet, The Nib Owner

--- Page 1180 ---
tuples, Tuple
last, Character and String Index, Basic array properties and
methods
lastIndex, Character and String Index, Basic array properties
and methods
launch images, Launch images
launch nib, Launch images
launch process of an app, The App Launch Process
layer, configuring in the nib, Additional Configuration of Nib-
Based Instances
lazy
initialization, Lazy Initialization
instance properties, Property initialization and self
loading of views, Loading a Main View Nib
sequence, For loops
Leaks instrument, Instruments
leaks, memory, Memory Management of Reference Types,
Gauges, Memory Debugging, Principles of Cocoa Memory
Management, Retain Cycles and Weak References
let, Variables, Variable Declaration, Class instances are mutable
Library, Canvas
lifetime, Variables, Scope and Lifetime
(see also scope)
lifetime events, Reasons for Events

--- Page 1181 ---
lightweight generics, Swift Array and Objective-C NSArray,
Lightweight generics
line, Ground of Being
linking, Frameworks, SDKs, and Packages
literals
array, Array
dictionary, Dictionary
expressible by, Expressible by Literal
logging, Caveman Debugging
numeric, Int
string, String
multiline, String
raw, String
live issues, Fix-it and Live Syntax Checking
LLDB, Paused at a breakpoint
loading a nib, Nib Files, Loading a Nib
local variables, Variable Scope and Lifetime
Locale, NSDate and Friends
localization, Localization-Testing Localization
LocalizedError, Throwing and catching errors
Logger, Caveman Debugging
logging, Caveman Debugging
logical operators, Bool

--- Page 1182 ---
looping, Flow Control, Loops-For loops
for, For loops
short-circuiting, Short-circuiting and labels
while, While loops
lowercased, String
M
main
attribute (@main), The Entry Point
function, Objective-C, The Entry Point
storyboard, Nib Files, How an App Gets Going
app without, App Without a Storyboard
swift file, Functions, The Entry Point
view of view controller, Document Outline
loaded from nib, Loading a Main View Nib
mangling, name, Exposure of Swift to Objective-C
map, Optional map and flatMap, Array enumeration and
transformation
mapValues, Basic dictionary properties and enumeration
MARK comments, Display, Navigation
Markdown, Quick Help
marketing icon, Marketing icon
math functions, Arithmetic operations
max, Basic array properties and methods

--- Page 1183 ---
Measurement, NSMeasurement and Friends
MeasurementFormatter, NSMeasurement and Friends
member center, Signing an App
members, Object Members
memberwise initializer, Struct Initializers, Refactoring and
Structure Editing
memory graph, Memory Debugging
memory leaks, Memory Management of Reference Types,
Gauges, Memory Debugging, Principles of Cocoa Memory
Management, Retain Cycles and Weak References
memory management, Memory Management-Exclusive Access to
Value Types, Memory Management-Debugging Memory
Management Mistakes
anonymous functions, Stored anonymous functions
ARC, What ARC Is and What It Does
autorelease pool, Autorelease Pool
CFTypeRefs, Memory Management of CFTypeRefs
collections, How Cocoa Objects Manage Memory, Other
Unusual Situations
dangling pointers, Principles of Cocoa Memory Management
debugging, Debugging Memory Management Mistakes
delegates, Retain Cycles and Weak References
golden rule, Rules of Cocoa Memory Management
graph, Memory Debugging

--- Page 1184 ---
key–value observing, KVO Observers
leaks, Memory Management of Reference Types, Memory
Debugging, Principles of Cocoa Memory Management
mutable Objective-C classes, Property Memory Management
Policies
nib-loaded objects, Nib Loading and Memory Management
nilifying unsafe references, Retain Cycles and Weak References
notifications, Notification Observers
ownership, Rules of Cocoa Memory Management
properties, Memory Management of Instance Properties
Objective-C, Property Memory Management Policies
protocol references, Memory management of protocol-typed
references
retain cycles, Memory Management of Reference Types, Retain
Cycles and Weak References
retains, unusual, Other Unusual Situations
timers, Timers
Unmanaged, Memory Management of CFTypeRefs
unowned references, Unowned references, Retain Cycles and
Weak References
unsafe references, Retain Cycles and Weak References
UnsafePointer, C Arrays
weak references, Weak references, Retain Cycles and Weak
References

--- Page 1185 ---
merging dictionaries, Basic dictionary properties and
enumeration
messages, Everything Is an Object?
Optionals, Optional chains
self, The Keyword self
sending optionally, Optional methods, Optional Members
metatype, Type as Value
methods, Object Members, Methods
(see also functions)
class, Methods
enums, Enum Methods
external parameter names, Objective-C Methods
inheritance, Inheritance
instance, Instances, Methods
secret life, Methods
mutating, Enum Methods, Struct Methods, Class instances are
mutable
Objective-C, Objective-C Methods
omitting type name, Raw Values
optional, Optional Protocol Members, Optional Members
overriding, Overriding
extensions, Extensions
polymorphism, Polymorphism

--- Page 1186 ---
preventing, Overriding, Public and Open
selectors, Selectors
static, Methods
vs. class, Static methods vs. class methods
structs, Struct Methods
where clauses, Extending Generics
min, Basic array properties and methods
minimap, Canvas, Navigation
Mirror, Introspection
Model–View–Controller, Model–View–Controller
Model–View–Presenter, Model–View–Presenter
modifiers, Function Builders and Modifiers
modules, The Structure of a Swift File, Modules, Frameworks,
SDKs, and Packages
privacy, Public and Open
multiple selection, Multiple Selection
mutable Objective-C classes, Immutable and Mutable
NSCopying, Property Memory Management Policies
mutating
instance, Reference Type Modifiable Parameters, Class
instances are mutable
methods, Enum Methods, Struct Methods, Class instances are
mutable

--- Page 1187 ---
MVC, Model–View–Controller
N
name mangling, Exposure of Swift to Objective-C
namespaces, Namespaces, Nested Object Types, Struct as
Namespace, Extensions
Objective-C, Objective-C
navigating code, Navigation
Navigator pane, The Navigator Pane
nested
arrays, Nested arrays
scopes, Nested scopes
types, Namespaces, Object Type Declarations and Features,
Nested Object Types
Never, Aborting the whole program
NeXTStep, Nib Files
nib editor, Nib Files
nib files, Nib Files, Nib Files-Additional Configuration of Nib-
Based Instances
dependent on device type, Device Type
launch, Launch images
loading, Loading a Nib
localizing, Creating Localized Content
nib objects, Document Outline

--- Page 1188 ---
nib owner, The Nib Owner
nib-based instantiation, Nib Files, Nib Loading and Memory
Management
additional configuration, Additional Configuration of Nib-
Based Instances
nib-loading mechanism, Loading a Nib
nil, The keyword nil
Objective-C collections, NSNull
signaling failure, Why Optionals?
signaling no data, Why Optionals?, Deferred initialization of
properties
unwrapping, The keyword nil
nil-coalescing operator, Conditional evaluation
nil-targeted actions, Nil-Targeted Actions
nilifying unsafe references, Retain Cycles and Weak References
nonnull, Nullability
nonobjc, Exposure of Swift to Objective-C
Notification, Notifications
Notification.Name, Notifications
forming from string, Posting a Notification
NotificationCenter, Notifications
notifications, Notifications
appropriate, Posting a Notification, Notifications and Key–
Value Observing

--- Page 1189 ---
Combine framework, The Combine Framework
posting, Posting a Notification
registering, Selector-based registration
retain cycles, Notification Observers
unregistering, Unregistering, Notification Observers
NSArray, Swift Array and Objective-C NSArray, NSArray and
NSMutableArray
NSAttributedString, NSString and Friends
NSCoder, Codable
NSCoding, Implicitly Required Initializers
NSCopying, Protocols, Property Memory Management Policies
NSCountedSet, NSSet and Friends
NSDecimalNumber, NSNumber
NSDictionary, Swift Dictionary and Objective-C NSDictionary,
NSDictionary and NSMutableDictionary
NSError, Throwing and catching errors
NSErrorPointer, Error pointers
NSHashTable, Other Unusual Situations
NSKeyedArchiver, NSData, Codable
NSLog, Caveman Debugging
NSMapTable, Other Unusual Situations
NSMutableArray, Swift Array and Objective-C NSArray,
NSArray and NSMutableArray

--- Page 1190 ---
NSMutableDictionary, Swift Dictionary and Objective-C
NSDictionary, NSDictionary and NSMutableDictionary
NSMutableOrderedSet, NSSet and Friends
NSMutableSet, NSSet and Friends
NSMutableString, NSString and Friends
NSNotFound, NSNotFound
NSNull, NSNull
NSNumber, NSNumber
NSObject, Subclass and Superclass, The Secret Life of NSObject-
The Secret Life of NSObject
comparison, Equality, Hashability, and Comparison
equality, Equality, Hashability, and Comparison
hashability, Equality, Hashability, and Comparison
NSObjectProtocol, The Secret Life of NSObject
NSOrderedSet, NSSet and Friends
NSPointerArray, Other Unusual Situations
NSRange, NSRange
NSRegularExpression, NSString and Friends
NSSet, NSSet and Friends
NSString, String, NSString and Friends
NSValue, NSValue
NS_ENUM, NS_ENUM
NS_OPTIONS, NS_OPTIONS

--- Page 1191 ---
NS_SWIFT_NAME, Renamification
nullable, Nullability
numeric
literals, Int
types
C, Other numeric types, C Data Types
Swift, Numbers
O
objc, Selectors, Optional Protocol Members, Suppressing type
checking, Private and Fileprivate, Memory management of
protocol-typed references, Swift Accessors, NS_ENUM, Exposure
of Swift to Objective-C
ObjcBool, C Data Types
objcMembers, Exposure of Swift to Objective-C
object types, Object Types-Static properties vs. class properties
comparison, Comparing Types
declaration, Object Type Declarations and Features
definition over multiple files, Extensions
extensions, Extensions
flavors, Three Flavors of Object Type
generic, Generic Declarations
extensions, Extending Generics
initializers, Initializers

--- Page 1192 ---
methods, Methods
nested, Nested Object Types
Objective-C, Objective-C Objects and Swift Objects
passing or assigning, Type as Value
polymorphism, From self to Type
printing, From Instance to Type
properties, Properties
reference vs. value, Value Types and Reference Types
references to, From Instance to Type
Objective-C, Objective-C Objects and C Pointers
scope, Object Type Declarations and Features
subscripts, Subscripts
umbrella types, Umbrella Types
Objective-C, C, Objective-C, and Swift-Lightweight generics
(see also bridged types)
accessors, Computed Properties, Accessors, Properties, and
Key–Value Coding
categories, Categories and Extensions
class factory methods, Initializers and factories
collections, NSIndexSet-Immutable and Mutable, Lightweight
generics
comparison, Equality, Hashability, and Comparison
equality, Equality, Hashability, and Comparison

--- Page 1193 ---
hashability, Equality, Hashability, and Comparison
header files, Bilingual Targets
id, Umbrella Types, Objective-C Objects and C Pointers
immutable vs. mutable classes, Immutable and Mutable
initializers, Initializers and factories
instance variables, Accessors, Properties, and Key–Value
Coding
lightweight generics, Swift Array and Objective-C NSArray,
Lightweight generics
methods, Objective-C Methods
internal parameter names, Internal parameter names
overloading, Overloading
renamification, Renamification
variadic parameters, Variadics
namespaces, Objective-C
object references, Objective-C Objects and C Pointers
object types, Objective-C Objects and Swift Objects
Optionals, Why Optionals?
properties, Accessors, Properties, and Key–Value Coding
protocols, Protocols
selectors, Selectors
subscripts, NSArray and NSMutableArray-NSSet and Friends
Swift

--- Page 1194 ---
class member exposure, Exposure of Swift to Objective-C
invisible features, Objective-C Objects and Swift Objects
target, bilingual, Bilingual Targets
translating app into, Bilingual Targets
objects, Everything Is an Object?
(see also object types)
communication (see communication)
graphing, Memory Debugging
same, Object identity
Objects library, Canvas
ObservableObject, Custom State Objects
observers, setter, Setter Observers
octal numbers, Int
opaque types, Reverse Generics
open, Privacy
operator syntax, Everything Is an Object?, Operators
operators, Operators-Operators
arithmetic, Arithmetic operations
custom, Operators
bitwise, Arithmetic operations, Option sets
(see also option sets)
Boolean, Bool
Combine framework, The Combine Framework

--- Page 1195 ---
comparison, Comparison
compound assignment, Arithmetic operations
creating, Operators
declaration, Operators
equality, Comparison
custom, Synthesized Protocol Implementations
identity, Object identity
interval, Range
nil-coalescing, Conditional evaluation
overriding, Operators
precedence, Arithmetic operations, Operators
ternary, Conditional evaluation
unwrap, Unwrapping an Optional, Optional chains
Optimization Level build setting, Configurations
optimizing, Profiling
option sets, Option sets, NS_OPTIONS
empty, Option sets
optional
message sending, Optional methods, Optional Members
methods, Optional Protocol Members, Optional Members
properties, Optional Protocol Members
unwrap operator, Optional chains
Optional chains, Optional chains

--- Page 1196 ---
Optionals, Optional-Why Optionals?
array of, Array casting and type testing, Array enumeration
and transformation
casting, Type Testing and Casting Optionals
chain, Optional chains
comparison, Comparison with Optional
creating, Optional
declaration, Optional
deferred initialization, Why Optionals?, Deferred initialization
of properties
double-wrapped, Optional properties, Basic array properties
and methods
empty, The keyword nil
enum, Associated Values, Generics
equality, Comparison with Optional
flatMap, Optional map and flatMap
implicitly unwrapped, Implicitly unwrapped Optional,
Nullability
initialization, The keyword nil
map, Optional map and flatMap
messages to, Optional chains
nil, The keyword nil
Objective-C, Why Optionals?
properties, Deferred initialization of properties

--- Page 1197 ---
type, Optional
testing, Type Testing and Casting Optionals
unwrapping, Unwrapping an Optional, The keyword nil,
Conditional binding, Switch statement, Conditional evaluation,
While loops, Guard
wrapping, Optional
OptionSet, Option sets, NS_OPTIONS
organization identifier, New Project
Organizer window, Making an Archive
orientation of interface, Property List Settings
OSLog, Caveman Debugging
outlet collections, Outlet Collections
outlets, Outlets
creating, More Ways to Create Outlets
deleting, Deleting an Outlet
key–value coding, How Outlets Work
misconfiguring, Misconfigured Outlets
output, Function Parameters and Return Value
overflow, Arithmetic operations
overlay, Swift, Some Foundation Classes, Bridged Types and
Boxed Types
overloading, Overloading
Objective-C, Overloading

--- Page 1198 ---
overriding, Overriding
extensions, Extensions
initializers, Subclass initializers
polymorphism, Polymorphism
preventing, Overriding, Public and Open
overscroll, Display
owner
memory management, Rules of Cocoa Memory Management
nib, The Nib Owner
P
packages, Swift, Frameworks, SDKs, and Packages
pane, editor, Editor panes
assistant, Assistant panes
parameter list, Function Parameters and Return Value
anonymous function, Anonymous Functions
omitting, Anonymous Function Abbreviated Syntax
parameters, Function Parameters and Return Value
default values, Default Parameter Values
external names, External Parameter Names
initializers, How to write an initializer
methods, Objective-C Methods
subscripts, Subscripts
functions as, Function as Value

--- Page 1199 ---
ignoring, Ignored Parameters
internal names, Function Parameters and Return Value
modifiable, Modifiable Parameters
variadic, Variadic Parameters
parentheses
calling a function, Function Parameters and Return Value
coercion, Numeric coercion
declaring a function, Function Parameters and Return Value
instantiating an object type, Instances, Variadic Parameters,
Initializers
order of operations, Bool, Arithmetic operations
signifying Void, Void Return Type and Parameters, Tuple
tuples, Tuple
partial range, Range, Array subscripting, Basic array properties
and methods, Dictionary, Switch statement
patterns, switch statement, Switch statement
persistence (see lifetime)
persisting references, Memory Management of Reference Types
pipeline
Combine framework, The Combine Framework
SwiftUI binding, Passing Data Uphill
placeholders
code, Autocompletion and Placeholders

--- Page 1200 ---
generic, Generics
(see also generics)
nib editor (see proxy objects)
pointee, Called by Objective-C with Modifiable Parameters, C
Pointers
pointer-to-void, C Pointers
pointers, Calling Objective-C with Modifiable Parameters, Class
instance references are pointers, Objective-C Objects and C
Pointers, CFTypeRefs
C, C Pointers
dangling, Principles of Cocoa Memory Management
generic, C Pointers
raw, C Pointers
polymorphism, Polymorphism
generics, Generic Invariance
pool, autorelease, Autorelease Pool
popFirst, Basic array properties and methods
popLast, Basic array properties and methods
Portal, Signing an App
posting a notification, Notifications
precedence, Operators
precondition, Aborting the whole program
prefix, Character and String Index, Basic array properties and
methods, Array enumeration and transformation

--- Page 1201 ---
presenter, Model–View–Presenter
previews, video, Screenshots and Video Previews
print, Ground of Being, Variadic Parameters, Adopting a Library
Protocol, Caveman Debugging
(see also logging)
privacy, Privacy, Privacy-Privacy Rules
private, Privacy
product name, New Project
production certificate, The Distribution Certificate
profile (see provisioning profile)
profiling, Profiling
project, Anatomy of an Xcode Project
file, Contents of the Project Folder
folder, Project File and Dependents, Renaming Parts of a
Project
renaming, Renaming Parts of a Project
templates, New Project, Backward Compatibility
backward compatible, Backward Compatibility
window, The Project Window
tabs and windows, Tabs and windows
Project navigator, The Navigator Pane, Navigation
projected value, Property Wrappers

--- Page 1202 ---
properties, Object Members, Variable Scope and Lifetime,
Properties
(see also variables)
accessors, Swift Accessors
binding, Bindings
class, Variable Scope and Lifetime, How properties are
accessed
communication through, Visibility Through an Instance
Property
computed, Computed Properties
(see also variables, computed)
property wrappers, Property Wrappers, Property Wrappers
self, Property initialization and self
dynamic, Dynamic Membership, Key–Value Observing
Example
enums, Enum Properties
initialization, How to write an initializer, Property
initialization and self
classes, Class Initializers
computed, Computed Variable Initialization
deferred, Why Optionals?, Deferred initialization of
properties
lazy, Lazy Initialization of Instance Properties
inspectable, Additional Configuration of Nib-Based Instances

--- Page 1203 ---
instance, Instances, Variable Scope and Lifetime, How
properties are accessed
memory management, Memory Management of Instance
Properties
Objective-C, Accessors, Properties, and Key–Value Coding
memory management, Property Memory Management
Policies
omitting type name, Raw Values
Optional, Deferred initialization of properties
optional, Optional Protocol Members
overriding, Class Properties
private, Privacy
releasing, Memory Management of Instance Properties
state, State Properties
static, Variable Scope and Lifetime, How properties are
accessed
initialization, Lazy Initialization
struct, Struct as Namespace
vs. class, Static properties vs. class properties
structs, Struct Properties
property list, target (see Info.plist)
property lists, Property Lists
property wrappers, Property Wrappers, Property Wrappers
initializing, Property Wrappers

--- Page 1204 ---
projected value, Property Wrappers
wrapped value, Property Wrappers
protocols, Protocols-Expressible by Literal, Protocols
adopter, Generic Declarations
adopting, Protocols
associated type, Generic Declarations
chaining, Associated Type Chains
constraining, Where Clauses
casting, Protocol Type Testing and Casting
class, Class Protocols
composition, Protocol Composition
conditional conformance, Extending Generics
conforming to, Protocols
declaration, Declaring a Protocol
delegate, Implementing Delegation
documentation, Protocols
extensions, Extending Protocols, How You Use Extensions
constraining associated type, Extending Generics
invisible to Objective-C, Cocoa Delegation
generic, Generic Declarations
constraining associated type, Where Clauses
implicitly required initializers, Implicitly Required Initializers
informal, Informal Protocols

--- Page 1205 ---
memory management, Memory management of protocol-typed
references
Objective-C, Protocols
optional members, Optional Protocol Members, Optional
Members
synthesizing, Synthesized Protocol Implementations
testing type, Protocol Type Testing and Casting
provisioning profile, Signing an App
development, Automatic Signing
distribution, The Distribution Profile
universal, Automatic Signing
proxy objects, Document Outline, The Nib Owner
public, Privacy
Published, The Combine Framework
Publisher, The Combine Framework
pyramid of doom, Conditional binding
Q
query events, Reasons for Events
question mark, Optional, Optional chains, Type Testing and
Casting Down Safely, Optional methods, Switch statement,
Conditional evaluation
Quick Help, The Inspectors Pane, Quick Help
Quick Look a variable, Paused at a breakpoint
quotes, String

--- Page 1206 ---
R
random, Arithmetic operations
randomElement, Basic array properties and methods
Range, Range
ranges, Range
coercion to NSRange, NSRange
indexing with, Range, Array subscripting
iterating in reverse, Operators
partial, Range, Array subscripting, Basic array properties and
methods, Dictionary, Switch statement
string, String, Extensions, NSRange
raw pointer, C Pointers
raw value, Raw Values
RawRepresentable, Raw Values
read-only variables, Computed Variables
Real, Arithmetic operations
recursion, Recursion
recursive
initializers, Delegating initializers
references, Advantages of value types vs. reference types
reduce, Array enumeration and transformation
refactoring, Refactoring and Structure Editing
reference types, Value Types and Reference Types

--- Page 1207 ---
memory management, Memory Management
references, Variables, Variables and Simple Types
functions, Function References and Selectors
getting, Getting a Reference
object types, From Instance to Type
Objective-C, Objective-C Objects and C Pointers
persisting, Memory Management of Reference Types
recursive, Advantages of value types vs. reference types
same object, Class instance references are pointers, Object
identity
strong, Memory Management of Reference Types
unowned, Unowned references, Retain Cycles and Weak
References
unsafe, Retain Cycles and Weak References
weak, Weak references, Retain Cycles and Weak References
registering
app, Manual Signing
device, Automatic Signing, Manual Signing
for a notification, Selector-based registration
for key–value observing, Registration and Notification
regular expressions, NSString and Friends
Related Items menu, The Editor
release, Rules of Cocoa Memory Management

--- Page 1208 ---
releasing a property, Memory Management of Instance
Properties
remove, Character and String Index, Basic array properties and
methods
removeFirst, Basic array properties and methods
removeLast, Basic array properties and methods
removeSubrange, Range
removeValue, Dictionary subscripting
renamification, Renamification
renaming a project, Renaming Parts of a Project
replaceSubrange, Range
replacing, Finding
Report navigator, The Navigator Pane, Unit Tests
required initializers, Required initializers, From self to Type,
Implicitly Required Initializers
reserved words, Privacy
resolution, screen, Device Type
resolving a generic, Generics, Explicit Specialization
resources, Resources
app bundle, Resources in the Project navigator
asset catalog, Resources in an asset catalog
dependent on build type, Build Action
dependent on device type, Device Type

--- Page 1209 ---
Swift package, Frameworks, SDKs, and Packages
responder, The Responder Chain
chain, The Responder Chain
responds, Optional Members
Result, Result
result of a function, Function Parameters and Return Value
ignoring, Function Parameters and Return Value
retain, Rules of Cocoa Memory Management
retain count, Principles of Cocoa Memory Management
retain cycles, Memory Management of Reference Types, Retain
Cycles and Weak References
anonymous functions, Stored anonymous functions
key–value observing, KVO Observers
notifications, Notification Observers
timers, Timers
retains, unusual, Other Unusual Situations
rethrows, Throwing and catching errors
return, Function Parameters and Return Value
function from function, Function Returning Function
omitting, Function Parameters and Return Value, Anonymous
Function Abbreviated Syntax
type
anonymous function, Anonymous Functions

--- Page 1210 ---
function, Function Parameters and Return Value
reverse generics, Reverse Generics
reversed, Range, Basic array properties and methods
root class, Subclass and Superclass
root view controller, How an App Gets Going
router, Router and Data Space
run, Ground of Being, New Project
device, Running on a Device
Simulator, Running in the Simulator
S
sample code, Apple’s, Sample Code
scalars, Everything Is an Object?, NSNumber, C Data Types
Scanner, NSString and Friends
scene
delegate, How an App Gets Going
dock, Document Outline
storyboard, Document Outline
window, How an App Gets Going, Backward Compatibility
Scheme pop-up menu, Schemes and Destinations
schemes, Schemes and Destinations
renaming, Renaming Parts of a Project
scientific notation, Double
scope, Scope and Lifetime

--- Page 1211 ---
exiting early, Jumping
nested, Nested scopes
object types, Object Type Declarations and Features
variable, Variable Scope and Lifetime
screen resolution, Device Type
screencasts, Screenshots and Video Previews
screenshots, Persisting screenshots, Screenshots and Video
Previews
SDKs, Schemes and Destinations, Frameworks, SDKs, and
Packages
older, Backward Compatibility
searching
arrays, Basic array properties and methods
code, Finding
documentation, The Documentation Window
symbols, Symbol Declarations
selection, multiple, Multiple Selection
Selector, Selectors
selectors, Selectors, Selectors
self, The Keyword self
escaping functions, Escaping Closures, Class instances are
mutable, Stored anonymous functions
initializers, Referring to self, Kinds of class initializer

--- Page 1212 ---
instance methods, The Keyword self, Object Type Declarations
and Features
polymorphism, Polymorphism
property initialization, Property initialization and self
static/class methods, Object Type Declarations and Features
type name with, Type as Value
type of, From self to Type
Self, From self to Type, Generic Declarations, Associated Type
Chains
semicolon, Ground of Being
sequence
array initializer, Array
character, Character and String Index
cycling through, For loops
enumerating with index, Tuple, For loops
function, For loops
generating, For loops
lazy, For loops
range indexing, Range
transforming, For loops
Sequence, For loops
serialization, Property Lists
Set, Set

--- Page 1213 ---
sets, Set-Swift Set and Objective-C NSSet, NSSet and Friends
declaration, Set
equality, Set
hashable elements, Set
NSObject, Equality, Hashability, and Comparison
initializers, Set
literals, Set
mutating, Set
operations, Set
option sets, Option sets, NS_OPTIONS
ordered, NSSet and Friends
sampling, Set
transformations, Set
unordered, Set
setter, Computed Variables
Objective-C, Accessors, Properties, and Key–Value Coding,
Swift Accessors
observers, Setter Observers
shared application instance, How an App Gets Going
short-circuiting, Short-circuiting and labels
shuffle, Basic array properties and methods
side effects, Function Parameters and Return Value
signature of a function, Function Signature

--- Page 1214 ---
signing an app, Signing an App
automatic, Automatic Signing
manual, Manual Signing
signposts, Instruments
Simulator, Running in the Simulator
singleton, Singleton
Size inspector, The Inspectors Pane, Inspectors
slice, Array subscripting
snippets
creating, Snippets
Snippets library, Snippets
structural, Refactoring and Structure Editing
some, Reverse Generics
sort, Basic array properties and methods
sorted, Basic array properties and methods
Source Control navigator, The Navigator Pane, Version Control
Source Control preferences and menu, Version Control
specializing a generic, Generics, Explicit Specialization
splatting, Variadic Parameters
split, Character and String Index, Basic array properties and
methods
square brackets, Subscripts, Array, Dictionary
stack, call, Return, The Navigator Pane, Paused at a breakpoint

--- Page 1215 ---
startIndex, Character and String Index, Basic array properties
and methods
starts, Basic array properties and methods
State, Property Wrappers, State Properties
state of an instance, Why Instances?
statement, Ground of Being
static
members, Instances
methods, Methods
vs. class methods, Static methods vs. class methods
properties, Variable Scope and Lifetime, How properties are
accessed
initialization, Lazy Initialization
struct, Struct as Namespace
vs. class properties, Static properties vs. class properties
stepping, Paused at a breakpoint
stored variables, Computed Variables
storyboard files, Nib Files
(see also main storyboard)
compiled, From Project to Built App
dependent on device type, Device Type
editing, The Nib Editor Interface
entry point, Document Outline

--- Page 1216 ---
launch, Launch images
stride, For loops
String, String
String.Index, Character and String Index
stringly typed, Global string constants
strings, String-Range
attributed, NSString and Friends
C strings, C Strings
characters, Character and String Index
coercion, String
comparison, String
concatenating, String
constants, global, Global string constants
drawing, NSString and Friends
equality, String
format, Caveman Debugging
indexing, Character and String Index, Range
initializers, String
interpolation, String, Adopting a Library Protocol
custom, Custom String Interpolation
length, String, String
literals, String
multiline, String

--- Page 1217 ---
raw, String
modifying, Range
notification names, Posting a Notification
range, String, NSRange
searching, String
substrings, String-Range, NSString and Friends
Unicode, String
strong references, Memory Management of Reference Types
structs, Structs-Struct as Namespace
(see also object types)
bridged to Objective-C classes, NSValue, Bridged Types and
Boxed Types
C structs, NSValue, C Structs
initializers, Struct Initializers
extensions, Extensions
methods, Struct Methods
omitting type name, Raw Values
properties, Struct Properties
static properties, Struct as Namespace
subscripts, Struct Methods
vs. classes, Classes
styled text, NSString and Friends
subclass, Subclass and Superclass

--- Page 1218 ---
subclassing
Cocoa, Subclassing, Subclassing
preventing, Inheritance, Public and Open
UILabel, Subclassing
UIView, Subclassing, Subclassing
UIViewController, Subclassing, Subclassing
Subscriber, The Combine Framework
subscripting, Character and String Index, Range, Array
subscripting, Dictionary subscripting
Objective-C, NSArray and NSMutableArray-NSSet and
Friends
subscripts, Subscripts
classes, The keyword super
enums, Enum Methods
overriding, The keyword super
structs, Struct Methods
subsort, Basic array properties and methods
substitution principle, Polymorphism
Substring, Character and String Index
subview, Document Outline
suffix, Character and String Index, Basic array properties and
methods
super, The keyword super

--- Page 1219 ---
initializers, Subclass initializers
superclass, Subclass and Superclass
superview, Document Outline
supported interface orientations, Property List Settings
swapAt, Basic array properties and methods
swapping variables, Tuple
Swift, The Architecture of Swift-Exclusive Access to Value Types
header, Modules
history, Preface
Objective-C bilingual target, Bilingual Targets
overlay (Foundation), Some Foundation Classes, Bridged
Types and Boxed Types
packages, Frameworks, SDKs, and Packages
Swift Numerics (package), Arithmetic operations
SwiftUI, The Scope of This Book, Property Wrappers, Reverse
Generics, Nib Files, SwiftUI-Custom State Objects
bindings, Bindings
Combine framework, Custom State Objects
function builders, Function Builders and Modifiers
modifiers, Function Builders and Modifiers
state properties, State Properties
visibility by instantiation, SwiftUI
switch, Switch statement, NS_ENUM

--- Page 1220 ---
swizzling, Key–Value Observing Example
Symbol navigator, The Navigator Pane, Navigation
symbolic breakpoint, Breakpoints
symbols, searching for, Symbol Declarations
syntax checking, Fix-it and Live Syntax Checking
synthesizing protocols, Synthesized Protocol Implementations
system version, Backward Compatibility
T
tabs, Tabs and windows
target, The Target
bilingual, Bilingual Targets
framework, Frameworks, SDKs, and Packages
test, Testing
Targeted Device Family build setting, Permissible Runtime
Environment
target–action, Actions
team, Obtaining a Developer Program Membership
templates
file, Code Files
project, New Project
backward compatible, Backward Compatibility
ternary operator, Conditional evaluation
test bundle, Testing

--- Page 1221 ---
Test Failure breakpoint, Unit Tests
Test navigator, The Navigator Pane, Unit Tests
testable, Unit Tests
TestFlight, TestFlight distribution
tests, Testing-Massaging the Report
asynchronous, Unit Tests
performance, Unit Tests
report, Massaging the Report
screenshots, Persisting screenshots
skipping, Testing
target, Testing
test plans, Test Plans
UI, Interface Tests
unit, Unit Tests
thinning an app, Ad Hoc distribution
throw, Throwing and catching errors
throws, Throwing and catching errors
Time Profiler instrument, Instruments
timers, Timer
retain cycles, Timers
times, NSDate and Friends
top level, The Structure of a Swift File, Modules
(see also global)

--- Page 1222 ---
top-level objects (nib), Document Outline
trailing closures, Anonymous Function Abbreviated Syntax
true, Bool
try, Throwing and catching errors
tuples, Tuple
tweaking the APIs, Why Optionals?, Failable initializers, API
Markup
type
checking, suppressing, Suppressing type checking
constraints, Type Constraints
multiple, Where Clauses
eraser, Swift Dictionary and Objective-C NSDictionary
function, Function as Value
instance vs. variable, Polymorphism
name, omitting, Enums
of instance, testing, Type Testing and Casting Down Safely
opaque, Reverse Generics
Optional, Optional
placeholders, Generics
(see also generics)
references, From Instance to Type
variable, Variables, Variable Declaration
Type, Type as Value

--- Page 1223 ---
type alias, Function as Value, Tuple
type(of:), From Instance to Type
type-over completions, Editing
typecasting (see casting)
types, Object Type Declarations and Features
(see also object types)
U
UDID, Signing an App
UI tests, Testing
UIApplication, How an App Gets Going
UIApplicationMain, How an App Gets Going
UIBackgroundTaskIdentifier, Variable Declaration
UIControl, Action Connections, Actions
UILabel, Subclassing
UIPickerView, Data Sources
UIResponder, The Responder Chain
UISceneSession, How an App Gets Going, Backward
Compatibility
UIView, Subclassing, Subclassing
(see also views)
UIViewController, Subclassing, Subclassing
(see also view controller)
UIWindowScene, How an App Gets Going

--- Page 1224 ---
umbrella types, Umbrella Types
underflow, Arithmetic operations
underscore
argument label, External Parameter Names
assignment to, Function Parameters and Return Value, Tuple
mop-up switch case, Switch statement
parameter name, Ignored Parameters, Function References
and Selectors
anonymous function, Anonymous Function Abbreviated
Syntax
property wrapper instance, Property Wrappers
Unicode, String
UnicodeScalar, String
unique an array, Set
Unit, NSMeasurement and Friends
unit tests, Testing
universal app, Permissible Runtime Environment
universal provisioning profile, Automatic Signing
unknown default, NS_ENUM
Unmanaged, Memory Management of CFTypeRefs
unowned references, Unowned references, Retain Cycles and
Weak References
unregistering

--- Page 1225 ---
for a notification, Unregistering, Notification Observers
for key–value observing, Unregistering, KVO Observers
unsafe references, Retain Cycles and Weak References
UnsafeMutablePointer, Calling Objective-C with Modifiable
Parameters, C Pointers
UnsafeMutableRawPointer, C Pointers
UnsafePointer, C Pointers
memory management, C Arrays
UnsafeRawPointer, C Pointers
casting to CFTypeRef, CFTypeRefs
unwrapping an Optional, Unwrapping an Optional
updateValue, Dictionary subscripting
uppercased, String
URL, NSString and Friends
User Defined Runtime Attributes, Additional Configuration of
Nib-Based Instances
user events, Reasons for Events
UserDefaults, Struct as Namespace, Global Visibility
nonproperty-list types in, Codable
UTF-8, UTF-16, UTF-32, String
V
value types, Value Types and Reference Types
memory management, Exclusive Access to Value Types

--- Page 1226 ---
values (dictionary), Dictionary
var, Variables, Variable Declaration, Class instances are mutable
variables, Variables, Variables and Simple Types-Built-In Simple
Types
coercion, Numeric coercion
computed, Computed Variables
declaration, Variables, Variable Declaration
initialization, Variable Declaration
initialization, computed, Computed Variable Initialization
façade, Computed Properties
functions as value of, Function as Value
global, The Structure of a Swift File, Variable Scope and
Lifetime
initialization, Lazy Initialization
initialization, Variables
Optional, The keyword nil
lazy, Lazy Initialization
lifetime, Variables, Variable Scope and Lifetime
local, Variable Scope and Lifetime
read-only, Computed Variables
scope, Variable Scope and Lifetime
setter observers, Setter Observers
stored, Computed Variables

--- Page 1227 ---
swapping, Tuple
type, Variables, Variable Declaration
vs. instance type, Polymorphism
variables list, The Navigator Pane, Paused at a breakpoint
variadic parameters, Variadic Parameters
Objective-C, Variadics
version control, Version Control
version string, Property List Settings
video previews, Screenshots and Video Previews
view controller, Document Outline, Loading a Main View Nib
initial, How an App Gets Going, Document Outline, Loading a
View Controller Nib
view debugging, Paused at a breakpoint
views, Nib Files
drawing, Subclassing
VIPER, VIPER
visibility, Scope and Lifetime
(see also scope)
by instantiation, Visibility by Instantiation
by relationship, Visibility by Relationship
through instance property, Visibility Through an Instance
Property
Void, Void Return Type and Parameters, Tuple

--- Page 1228 ---
void, C Pointers
W
warnings, compiler, Ground of Being
additional unknown values, Switch statement, NS_ENUM
code will never be executed, Function Parameters and Return
Value
custom, The Navigator Pane
result of call is unused, Function Parameters and Return Value
switch must be exhaustive, NS_ENUM
trailing closure is confusable with the body of the statement,
For loops
weak references, Weak references, Retain Cycles and Weak
References
weak–strong dance, Stored anonymous functions
where, Where Clauses, Extending Generics, Switch statement,
For loops
while, While loops
while case, While loops
while let, While loops
wildcard provisioning profile, Automatic Signing
willSet, Setter Observers
window tabs, Tabs and windows
withUnsafePointer, C Pointers
wrapped value, Property Wrappers

--- Page 1229 ---
wrappers, property, Property Wrappers, Property Wrappers
X
XC wildcard provisioning profile, Automatic Signing
xcloc bundle, Exporting
Xcode, Anatomy of an Xcode Project-Submission to the App
Store
(see also nib editor)
xib files, Nib Files
editing, Document Outline
xliff files, Localization
Z
zip, Dictionary
zombies, Debugging Memory Management Mistakes

--- Page 1230 ---
About the Author
Matt Neuburg started programming computers in 1968, when he
was 14 years old, as a member of a literally underground high school
club, which met once a week to do timesharing on a bank of PDP-10s
by way of primitive teletype machines. He also occasionally used
Princeton University’s IBM-360/67, but gave it up in frustration
when one day he dropped his punch cards. He majored in Greek at
Swarthmore College, and received his PhD from Cornell University
in 1981, writing his doctoral dissertation (about Aeschylus) on a
mainframe. He proceeded to teach Classical languages, literature, and
culture at many well-known institutions of higher learning, most of
which now disavow knowledge of his existence, and to publish
numerous scholarly articles unlikely to interest anyone. Meanwhile
he obtained an Apple IIc and became hopelessly hooked on
computers again, migrating to a Macintosh in 1990. He wrote some
educational and utility freeware, became an early regular contributor
to the online journal TidBITS, and in 1995 left academe to edit
MacTech magazine. In August 1996 he became a freelancer, which
means he has been looking for work ever since. He is the author of
Frontier: The Definitive Guide, REALbasic: The Definitive Guide,
and AppleScript: The Definitive Guide, as well as Programming iOS
14 (all for O’Reilly Media).

--- Page 1231 ---
Colophon
The animal on the cover of iOS 14 Programming Fundamentals with
Swift is a harp seal (Pagophilus groenlandicus), a scientific name that
translates to “ice-lover from Greenland.” These animals are native to
the northern Atlantic and Arctic Oceans, and spend most of their time
in the water, only going onto ice packs to give birth and molt. As
earless (“true”) seals, their streamlined bodies and energy-efficient
swimming style make them well-equipped for aquatic life. While
eared seal species like sea lions are powerful swimmers, they are
considered semiaquatic because they mate and rest on land.
The harp seal has silvery-gray fur, with a large black marking on its
back that resembles a harp or wishbone. They grow to be 5–6 feet
long, and weigh 300–400 pounds as adults. Due to their cold habitat,
they have a thick coat of blubber for insulation. A harp seal’s diet is
very varied, including several species of fish and crustaceans. They
can remain underwater for an average of 16 minutes to hunt for food
and are able to dive several hundred feet.
Harp seal pups are born without any protective fat, but are kept warm
by their white coat, which absorbs heat from the sun. After nursing
for 12 days, the seal pups are abandoned, having tripled their weight
due to their mother’s high-fat milk. In the subsequent weeks until
they are able to swim off the ice, the pups are very vulnerable to
predators and will lose nearly half of their weight. Those that survive
reach maturity after 4–8 years (depending on their sex) and have an
average lifespan of 35 years.

--- Page 1232 ---
Harp seals are hunted commercially off the coasts of Canada,
Norway, Russia, and Greenland for their meat, oil, and fur. Though
some of these governments have regulations and enforce hunting
quotas, it is believed that the number of animals killed every year is
underreported. Public outcry and efforts by conservationists have
resulted in a decline in market demand for seal pelts and other
products, however.
Many of the animals on O’Reilly covers are endangered; all of them
are important to the world.
The cover illustration is by Karen Montgomery, based on a black and
white engraving from Wood’s Animate Creation. The cover fonts are
Gilroy Semibold and Guardian Sans. The text font is Adobe Minion
Pro; the heading font is Adobe Myriad Condensed; and the code font
is Dalton Maag’s Ubuntu Mono.