--- Page 2 ---
Practical Mobile Forensics
Fourth Edition
Forensically investigate and analyze iOS, Android, and Windows 10
devices
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rohit Tamma
Oleg Skulkin
Heather Mahalik
Satish Bommisetty
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 3 ---
 
 
 
 
 
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI

--- Page 4 ---
 
  

--- Page 5 ---
Practical Mobile Forensics Fourth
Edition
Copyright © 2020 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any
means, without the prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in critical articles or
reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy of the information presented. However, the
information contained in this book is sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the authors, nor Packt Publishing or
its dealers and distributors, will be held liable for any damages caused or alleged to have been caused directly or indirectly by this
book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the companies and products mentioned in this
book by the appropriate use of capitals. However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
 
Commissioning Editor: Vijin Boricha
Acquisition Editor: Rohit Rajkumar
Content Development Editor: Ronn Kurien
Senior Editor: Rahul Dsouza
Technical Editor: Dinesh Pawar
Copy Editor: Safis Editing
Project Coordinator: Vaidehi Sawant
Proofreader: Safis Editing
Indexer: Rekha Nair
Production Designer: Deepika Naik
First published: July 2014
Second edition: May 2016
Third edition: January 2018
Fourth edition: April 2020
 
Production reference: 1090420
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham
B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-83864-752-0
www.packt.com

--- Page 6 ---
 
Packt.com
Subscribe to our online digital library for full access to over 7,000 books
and videos, as well as industry leading tools to help you plan your personal
development and advance your career. For more information, please visit
our website.

--- Page 7 ---
Why subscribe?
Spend less time learning and more time coding with practical eBooks
and Videos from over 4,000 industry professionals
Improve your learning with Skill Plans built especially for you
Get a free eBook or video every month
Fully searchable for easy access to vital information
Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published,
with PDF and ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version
at www.packt.com and as a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount
on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us at customercare@packtpub.com for more
details.
At www.packt.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign
up for a range of free newsletters, and receive exclusive discounts and
offers on Packt books and eBooks. 

--- Page 8 ---
Contributors

--- Page 9 ---
About the authors
Rohit Tamma is a senior program manager currently working with
Microsoft. With over 10 years of experience in the field of security, his
background spans management and technical consulting roles in the areas
of application and cloud security, mobile security, penetration testing, and
secure coding. Rohit has also co-authored Learning Android Forensics,
from Packt, which explain various ways to perform forensics on mobile
platforms. You can contact him on Twitter at @RohitTamma.
I want to sincerely thank Satish Bommisetty, my ex-colleague and mentor, who inspired me early in
my career and supported me throughout the journey of this book. I also want to thank the Packt team
for their continued support and help in taking this book to the fourth edition. And finally, this book is
for my parents, to whom I owe everything.
 
Oleg Skulkin is a senior digital forensic analyst at Group-IB, one of the
global leaders in preventing and investigating high-tech crimes and online
fraud. He holds a number of certifications, including GCFA, GCTI, and
MCFE. Oleg has also co-authored Windows Forensics Cookbook,
and Learning Android Forensics, both from Packt, as well as many blog
posts and articles on digital forensics, incident response, and threat hunting
that you can find online. You can contact him on Twitter at @oskulkin.
I would like to thank my family and the Group-IB Digital Forensics and Incident Response Team for
their love and support, as well as the Packt team and my co-authors for making this book possible.
Heather Mahalik is the senior director of digital intelligence at Cellebrite.
She is a senior instructor and author for the SANS Institute, and she is also
the course lead for the FOR585 Smartphone Forensic Analysis In-Depth
course. With 18 years of experience in digital forensics, she continues to
thrive on smartphone investigations, digital forensics, forensic course
development and instruction, and research on application analysis and
smartphone forensics.

--- Page 10 ---
 
 
 
Satish Bommisetty is a security architect currently working with JDA. His
primary areas of interest include web and mobile application security, cloud
security, and iOS forensics. He has presented at security conferences, such
as ClubHACK and C0C0n. Satish is one of the top bug bounty hunters and
is listed in the halls of fame of Google, Facebook, PayPal, Microsoft,
Yahoo, Salesforce, and more, for identifying and reporting their security
vulnerabilities. You can reach him on Twitter at @satishb3.

--- Page 11 ---
About the reviewers
Igor Mikhaylov has been working as a forensic examiner for 22 years.
During this time, he has attended a lot of seminars and training classes by
top digital forensic companies (such as Guidance Software, AccessData,
and Cellebrite) and forensic departments of government organizations of
the Russian Federation. He has experience and skills in computer forensics,
incident response, cell phone forensics, chip-off forensics, malware
forensics, data recovery, digital image analysis, video forensics, and big
data. He has written three tutorials on cell phone forensics and incident
response for Russian forensic examiners.
 
Detective Chad Prda has served in law enforcement for over 16 years.
Throughout his distinguished career he has obtained several certifications,
including Advanced Peace Officer, Advanced Interview and Interrogation,
and Expert in Mobile Forensics. Detective Prda served on S.W.A.T. for 8
years as a firearms instructor and a lead marksman (sniper).
He later moved into criminal investigations, specializing in social media
investigations, mobile forensics, and cellular mapping, as well as testifying
in several criminal cases as an expert witness and studying at the United
States Secret Service National Computer Forensics Institute.

--- Page 12 ---
Packt is searching for authors like
you
If you're interested in becoming an author for Packt, please visit authors.packt
pub.com and apply today. We have worked with thousands of developers and
tech professionals, just like you, to help them share their insight with the
global tech community. You can make a general application, apply for a
specific hot topic that we are recruiting an author for, or submit your own
idea.

--- Page 13 ---
Table of Contents
Title Page
Copyright and Credits
Practical Mobile Forensics Fourth Edition
About Packt
Why subscribe?
Contributors
About the authors
About the reviewers
Packt is searching for authors like you
Preface
Who this book is for
What this book covers
To get the most out of this book
Download the color images
Conventions used
Disclaimer
Get in touch
Reviews
1. Introduction to Mobile Forensics
The need for mobile forensics
Understanding mobile forensics
Challenges in mobile forensics
The mobile phone evidence extraction process
The evidence intake phase
The identification phase
The legal authority
Data that needs to be extracted
The make, model, and identifying information for the device
Data storage media
Other sources of potential evidence
The preparation phase
The isolation phase
The processing phase

--- Page 14 ---
The verification phase
The documenting and reporting phase
The archiving phase
Practical mobile forensic approaches
Understanding mobile operating systems&#xA0;
Android
iOS
Windows Phone
Mobile forensic tool leveling system
Manual extraction
Logical analysis
Hex dump
Chip-off
Micro read
Data acquisition methods
Physical acquisition
Logical acquisition
Manual acquisition
Potential evidence stored on mobile phones
Examination and analysis
Rules of evidence
Good forensic practices
Securing the evidence
Preserving the evidence
Documenting the evidence and changes
Reporting
Summary
1. Section 1: iOS Forensics
2. Understanding the Internals of iOS Devices
iPhone models and hardware
Identifying the correct hardware model
Understanding the iPhone hardware
iPad models and hardware
Understanding the iPad hardware
The HFS Plus and APFS filesystems
The HFS Plus filesystem
The HFS Plus volume

--- Page 15 ---
The APFS filesystem
The APFS structure
Disk layout
The iPhone OS
The iOS architecture
iOS security
Passcodes, Touch ID, and Face ID
Code signing
Sandboxing
Encryption
Data protection
Address Space Layout Randomization (ASLR)
Privilege separation
Stack-smashing protection
Data Execution Prevention (DEP)
Data wiping
Activation Lock
The App Store
Jailbreaking
Summary
3. Data Acquisition from iOS Devices
Operating modes of iOS devices
Normal mode
Recovery mode
DFU mode
Setting up the forensic environment
Password protection and potential bypasses
Logical acquisition
Practical logical acquisition with libimobiledevice
Practical logical acquisition with the Belkasoft Acquisition Tool
Practical logical acquisition with Magnet ACQUIRE
Filesystem acquisition
Practical jailbreaking
Practical filesystem acquisition with free tools
Practical filesystem acquisition with Elcomsoft iOS Forensic Toolkit
Summary
4. Data Acquisition from iOS Backups

--- Page 16 ---
Working with iTunes backups
Creating and analyzing backups with iTunes
Understanding the backup structure
info.plist
manifest.plist
status.plist
manifest.db
Extracting unencrypted backups
iBackup Viewer
iExplorer
Handling encrypted backup files
Elcomsoft Phone Breaker
Working with iCloud backups
Extracting iCloud backups
Summary
5. iOS Data Analysis and Recovery
Interpreting iOS timestamps
Unix timestamps
Mac absolute time
WebKit/Chrome time
Working with SQLite databases
Connecting to a database
Exploring SQLite special commands
Exploring standard SQL queries
Accessing a database using commercial tools
Key artifacts &#x2013; important iOS database files
Address book contacts
Address book images
Call history
Short Message Service (SMS) messages
Calendar events
Notes
Safari bookmarks and history
Voicemail
Recordings
Device interaction
Phone numbers

--- Page 17 ---
Property lists
Important plist files
Other important files
Local dictionary
Photos
Thumbnails
Wallpaper
Downloaded third-party applications
Recovering deleted SQLite records
Summary
6. iOS Forensic Tools
Working with Cellebrite UFED Physical Analyzer
Features of Cellebrite UFED Physical Analyzer
Advanced logical acquisition and analysis with&#xA0;Cellebrite UFED
Physical Analyzer
Working with Magnet AXIOM
Features of&#xA0;Magnet AXIOM
Logical acquisition and analysis with Magnet AXIOM
Working with Belkasoft Evidence Center
Features of&#xA0;Belkasoft Evidence Center
Logical acquisition and analysis with&#xA0;Belkasoft Evidence Center
Working with Elcomsoft Phone Viewer
Features of Elcomsoft Phone Viewer
Filesystem analysis with Elcomsoft Phone Viewer
Summary
2. Section 2: Android Forensics
7. Understanding Android
The evolution of Android
The Android architecture
The Linux kernel layer
The Hardware Abstraction Layer
Libraries
Dalvik Virtual Machine (DVM)
ART
The Java API framework layer
The system apps layer
Android security

--- Page 18 ---
Secure kernel
The permission model
Application sandbox
Secure IPC
Application signing
Security-Enhanced Linux (SELinux)
FDE
Android Keystore
TEE
Verified Boot
The Android file hierarchy
The Android filesystem
Viewing filesystems on an Android device
Common filesystems found on Android
Flash memory filesystems
Media-based filesystems
Pseudo filesystems
Summary
8. Android Forensic Setup and Pre-Data Extraction Techniques
Setting up a forensic environment for Android
Installing the software
Installing the Android platform tools
Creating an Android virtual device
Connecting an Android device to a workstation
Identifying the device cable
Installing device drivers
Accessing the connected device
The Android debug bridge
USB debugging
Accessing the device using adb
Detecting connected devices
Killing the local ADB server
Accessing the adb shell
Basic Linux commands
Handling an Android device
Screen lock bypassing techniques
Using ADB to bypass the screen lock

--- Page 19 ---
Deleting the gesture.key file
Updating the settings.db file
Checking for the modified recovery mode and ADB connection
Flashing a new recovery partition
Using automated tools
Using Android Device Manager
Bypass using Find My Mobile (for Samsung phones only)
Smudge attack
Using the forgot password/forgot pattern option
Bypassing third-party lock screens by booting into safe mode
Secure USB debugging bypass using ADB keys
Secure USB debugging bypass in Android 4.4.2
Crashing the lock screen UI in Android 5.x
Other techniques
Gaining root access
What is rooting?
Understanding the rooting process
Rooting an Android device
Root access - ADB shell
Summary
9. Android Data Extraction Techniques
Understanding data extraction techniques
Manual data extraction
Logical data extraction
ADB pull data extraction
Using SQLite Browser to view the data
Extracting device information
Extracting call logs
Extracting SMS/MMS
Extracting browser history information
Analysis of social networking/IM chats
ADB backup extraction
ADB dumpsys extraction
Using content providers
Physical data extraction
Imaging an Android phone
Imaging a memory (SD) card

--- Page 20 ---
Joint Test Action Group
The chip-off technique
Summary
10. Android Data Analysis and Recovery
Analyzing and extracting data from Android image files using the Autopsy
tool
The Autopsy platform
Adding an image to Autopsy
Analyzing an image using Autopsy
Understanding techniques to recover deleted files from the SD card and th
e internal memory
Recovering deleted data from an external SD card
Recovering data deleted from the internal memory
Recovering deleted files by parsing SQLite files
Recovering files using file-carving techniques
Recovering contacts using your Google account
Summary
11. Android App Analysis, Malware, and Reverse Engineering
Analyzing&#xA0;widely used Android apps to retrieve valuable data
Facebook Android app analysis
WhatsApp Android app analysis
Skype Android app analysis
Gmail Android app analysis
Google Chrome Android app analysis
Techniques to reverse engineer an Android application
Extracting an APK file from an Android device
Steps to reverse engineer Android apps
Android malware
Types of Android malware
How does Android malware spread?
Identifying Android malware
Summary
3. Section 3: Windows Forensics and Third-Party Apps
12. Windows Phone Forensics
Windows Phone OS
Windows 10 Mobile security model
Chambers

--- Page 21 ---
Encryption
Capability-based model
App sandboxing
Windows Phone filesystem
Data acquisition
Commercial forensic tool acquisition methods
Extracting data without the use of commercial tools
SD card data extraction methods
Key artifacts for examination
Extracting contacts and SMS
Extracting call history
Extracting internet history
Summary
13. Parsing Third-Party Application Files
Introduction to third-party applications
Chat applications
GPS applications
Secure applications
Financial applications
Social networking applications
Encoding versus encryption
iOS, Android, and Windows Phone application data storage
iOS applications
Android applications
Windows Phone applications
Forensic methods used to extract third-party application data
Commercial tools
Oxygen Forensic Detective
Magnet AXIOM
UFED Physical Analyzer
Open source/free tools
Working with Autopsy
Other methods of extracting application data
Summary
Other Books You May Enjoy
Leave a review - let other readers know what you think

--- Page 22 ---
Preface
Mobile phone forensics is the science of retrieving data from a mobile
phone under forensically sound conditions. This is the fourth edition of our
successful Practical Mobile Forensics book that delves into the concepts of
mobile forensics and its importance in today’s world.
This book focuses on teaching you the latest forensic techniques in the
investigation of mobile devices across various mobile platforms. You will
learn forensic techniques on multiple OS versions, including iOS 12, iOS
13, Android 9, Android 10, and Windows 10. You will delve into the latest
open source and commercial mobile forensic tools, enabling you to analyze
and retrieve data effectively. You will learn how to inspect the device,
retrieve data from the cloud, and successfully document reports of your
investigations. You will explore reverse engineering of applications and
ways to identify malware. You will also come across parsing popular third-
party applications such as Facebook and WhatsApp.
By the end of this book, you will have mastered various mobile forensic
techniques to analyze and extract data from mobile devices with the help of
open source solutions.

--- Page 23 ---
Who this book is for
This book is intended for forensic examiners with little or only basic
experience in mobile forensics or open source solutions for mobile
forensics. This book will also be useful for computer security professionals,
researchers, and anyone seeking a deeper understanding of mobile internals.
Some understanding of digital forensics practices would be helpful.

--- Page 24 ---
What this book covers
Chapter 1, Introduction to Mobile Forensics, introduces you to the concepts
of mobile forensics, its core values, and the challenges involved. This
chapter also provides an overview of the practical approaches and best
practices involved in performing mobile forensics.
Chapter 2, Understanding the Internals of iOS Devices, provides an insight
into iOS forensics. You will learn about the filesystem layout, security
features, and the way files are stored on an iOS device.
Chapter 3, Data Acquisition from iOS Devices, discusses tools that will help
you obtain data from iOS devices to later examine forensically. Not all tools
are created equal, so it's important to understand the best tools to get the job
done properly.
Chapter 4, Data Acquisition from iOS Backups, discusses iOS device backup
files in detail, including user, forensic, encrypted, and iCloud backup files,
and the methods to conduct your forensic examination.
Chapter 5, iOS Data Analysis and Recovery, goes further into forensic
investigation by showing the examiner how to analyze the data recovered
from the backup files. Areas containing data of potential evidentiary value
will be explained in detail.
Chapter 6, iOS Forensic Tools, for familiarity purposes, walks you through
the use of a number of commercial tools, such as Elcomsoft iOS Forensic
Toolkit, Cellebrite (UFED4PC, Touch, and Physical Analyzer), BlackLight,
Oxygen Forensic Detective, AccessData MPE+, EnCase, Belkasoft
Evidence Center, MSAB XRY, and many more, which are available for
forensic acquisition and the analysis of iOS devices. This chapter provides
details of the processes required to perform acquisitions and analysis of iOS
devices.

--- Page 25 ---
Chapter 7, Understanding Android, introduces the fundamentals of the
Android platform, its built-in security features, and its filesystem. This
chapter establishes the basic forensic knowledge that will be helpful in the
next chapters.
Chapter 8, Android Forensic Setup and Pre-Data Extraction Techniques, tells
you what to consider when setting up a digital forensic examination
environment. Step-by-step information about rooting an Android device and
bypassing the screen lock feature is provided in this chapter. 
Chapter 9, Android Data Extraction Techniques, helps you to identify the
sensitive locations on an Android device and explains various logical and
physical techniques that can be applied to the device in order to extract the
necessary information.
Chapter 10,  Android Data Analysis and Recovery, explains how to extract
relevant data, such as call logs, text messages, and browsing history from an
image file. We will also cover data recovery techniques, with which we can
recover data that's been deleted from a device.
Chapter 11, Android App Analysis, Malware, and Reverse Engineering,
explains that while the data extraction and data recovery techniques
discussed in earlier chapters provide access to valuable data, app analysis in
this chapter helps us to acquire information about the specifics of an
application, such as preferences and permissions.
Chapter 12, Windows Phone Forensics, discusses Windows Phones, which do
not occupy much of the mobile market space. Therefore, most forensic
practitioners are unfamiliar with the data formats, embedded databases, and
other artifacts that exist on the device. This chapter provides an overview of
Windows Phone forensics, describing various methods of acquiring and
examining data on Windows mobile devices.
Chapter 13, Parsing Third-Party Application Files, introduces you to the
various applications seen on Android devices, iOS devices, and Windows
Phones. Each application will vary due to versions and devices, but their

--- Page 26 ---
underlying structures are similar. We will look at how the data is stored and
why preference files are important to your investigation.

--- Page 27 ---
To get the most out of this book
Ensure that you have a test mobile device on which you can experiment
with the techniques explained in the book. Do not try these techniques on
your personal phone. 
Some of the techniques explained in the book, such as rooting a device, are
specific to the brand and the OS running on the device. Ensure that you
research and gather sufficient information before trying these techniques.
If you are using the digital version of this book, we advise you to type
the commands yourself. Doing so will help you avoid any potential
errors related to the copying and pasting of code.

--- Page 28 ---
Download the color images
We also provide a PDF file that has color images of the
screenshots/diagrams used in this book. You can download it here: http://ww
w.packtpub.com/sites/default/files/downloads/9781838647520_ColorImages.pdf

--- Page 29 ---
Conventions used
There are a number of text conventions used throughout this book.
CodeInText: Indicates code words in text, database table names, folder names,
filenames, file extensions, pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and
Twitter handles. Here is an example: "Mount the downloaded WebStorm-
10*.dmg disk image file as another disk in your system."
A block of code is set as follows:
html, body, #map {
 height: 100%; 
 margin: 0;
 padding: 0
}
When we wish to draw your attention to a particular part of a code block,
the relevant lines or items are set in bold:
[default]
exten => s,1,Dial(Zap/1|30)
exten => s,2,Voicemail(u100)
exten => s,102,Voicemail(b100)
exten => i,1,Voicemail(s0)
Any command-line input or output is written as follows:
$ mkdir css
$ cd css
Bold: Indicates a new term, an important word, or words that you see on
screen. For example, words in menus or dialog boxes appear in the text like
this. Here is an example: "Select System info from
the Administration panel."
Warnings or important notes appear like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.

--- Page 30 ---
Disclaimer
The information within this book is intended to be used only in an ethical
manner. Do not use any information from the book if you do not have
written permission from the owner of the equipment. If you perform illegal
actions, you are likely to be arrested and prosecuted to the full extent of the
law. Packt Publishing does not take any responsibility if you misuse any of
the information contained within the book. The information herein must
only be used while testing environments with proper written authorization
from the appropriate persons responsible.

--- Page 31 ---
Get in touch
Feedback from our readers is always welcome.
General feedback: If you have questions about any aspect of this
book, mention the book title in the subject of your message and email us
at customercare@packtpub.com.
Errata: Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our
content, mistakes do happen. If you have found a mistake in this book, we
would be grateful if you would report this to us. Please visit www.packtpub.com/
support/errata, selecting your book, clicking on the Errata Submission Form
link, and entering the details.
Piracy: If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on
the internet, we would be grateful if you would provide us with the location
address or website name. Please contact us at copyright@packt.com with a link
to the material.
If you are interested in becoming an author: If there is a topic that you
have expertise in and you are interested in, either writing or contributing to
a book, please visit authors.packtpub.com.

--- Page 32 ---
Reviews
Please leave a review. Once you have read and used this book, why not
leave a review on the site that you purchased it from? Potential readers can
then see and use your unbiased opinion to make purchase decisions, we at
Packt can understand what you think about our products, and our authors
can see your feedback on their book. Thank you!
For more information about Packt, please visit packt.com.

--- Page 33 ---
Introduction to Mobile Forensics
There is no doubt that mobile devices have become part of our lives and
have revolutionized the way we do most of our activities. As a result, a
mobile device is now a huge repository that holds sensitive and personal
information about its owner. This has, in turn, led to the rise of mobile
device forensics, a branch of digital forensics that deals with retrieving data
from a mobile device. This book will help you understand forensic
techniques on three main platforms—Android, iOS, and Windows. We will
go through various methods that can be used to collect evidence from
different mobile devices.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
The need for mobile forensics
Understanding mobile forensics
Challenges in mobile forensics
The mobile phone evidence extraction process
Practical mobile forensic approaches
Potential evidence stored on mobile phones
Examination and analysis
Rules of evidence
Good forensic practices

--- Page 34 ---
The need for mobile forensics
According to Statista reports (statista.com), the number of mobile phone
users in the world is expected to pass 5 billion by 2020. The world is
witnessing technology and user migration from desktops to mobile phones.
Most of the growth in the mobile market can be attributed to the continued
demand for smartphones.
According to an Ericsson report, global mobile data traffic will reach 71
exabytes per month by 2022, from 8.8 exabytes in 2017, a compound
annual growth rate of 42 percent. Smartphones of today, such as Apple's
iPhone and the Samsung Galaxy series, are compact forms of computers
with high performance, huge storage, and enhanced functionality. Mobile
phones are the most personal electronic device that a user accesses. They
are used to perform simple communication tasks, such as calling and
texting, while still providing support for internet browsing, email, taking
photos and videos, creating and storing documents, identifying locations
with GPS services, and managing business tasks.
As new features and applications are incorporated into mobile phones, the
amount of information stored on devices is continuously growing.
Mobile phones have become portable data carriers, keeping track of all your
movements. With the increasing prevalence of mobile phones in people's
daily lives and in crime, data acquired from phones has become an
invaluable source of evidence for investigations relating to criminal, civil,
and even high-profile cases. It is rare to conduct a digital forensic
investigation that does not include a phone. Mobile device call logs and
GPS data were used to help solve the attempted bombing in Times Square,
New York, in 2010.
The details of the case can be found at https://www.forensicon.com/forensics-blotter/cell-phone-email
-forensics-investigation-cracks-nyc-times-square-car-bombing-case/.

--- Page 35 ---
The science behind recovering digital evidence from mobile phones is
called mobile forensics, and we will be looking into it in the next section.
Digital evidence is defined as information and data that is stored on,
received by, or transmitted by an electronic device that is used for
investigations. Digital evidence encompasses any and all digital data that
can be used as evidence in a case.

--- Page 36 ---
Understanding mobile forensics
Digital forensics is a branch of forensic science focusing on the recovery
and investigation of raw data residing in electronic or digital devices. The
goal of the process is to extract and recover any information from a digital
device without altering the data present on the device. Over the years,
digital forensics has grown along with the rapid growth of computers and
various other digital devices. There are various branches of digital forensics
based on the type of digital device involved, such as computer forensics,
network forensics, and mobile forensics.
Mobile forensics is a branch of digital forensics that deals with the
acquisition and recovery of evidence from mobile devices. Forensically
sound is a term used extensively in the digital forensics community to
qualify and justify the use of a particular forensic technology or
methodology. One of the core principles that drive sound forensic
examination is that the original evidence must not be altered in any form.
This is extremely difficult with mobile devices. Some forensic tools require
a communication vector with the mobile device, and thus standard write
protection will not work during forensic acquisition.
Other forensic acquisition methods may involve detaching a chip or
installing a custom bootloader on the mobile device prior to extracting data
for forensic examination. In cases where examination or data acquisition is
not possible without changing the configuration of the device, the procedure
and the changes must be carefully tested and documented for later
reference. Following proper methodology and guidelines is crucial in
examining mobile devices as doing so yields the most valuable data. As
with any evidence gathering, not following the proper procedure during the
examination can result in loss or damage of evidence or render it
inadmissible in court.
The mobile forensics process is broken down into three main categories—
seizure, acquisition, and examination/analysis. Forensic examiners face

--- Page 37 ---
some challenges while seizing the mobile device as a source of evidence. At
the crime scene, if the mobile device is found switched off, you as the
examiner should place the device in a Faraday bag to prevent changes
should the device automatically power on. Faraday bags are specifically
designed to isolate a phone from a network.
If the phone is found switched on, switching it off has a lot of concerns
attached to it. If the phone is locked by a PIN or password, or encrypted,
you will be required to bypass the lock or determine the PIN to access the
device. Mobile phones are networked devices and can send and receive data
through different sources, such as telecommunication systems, Wi-Fi access
points, and Bluetooth. So, if the phone is in a running state, a criminal could
securely erase the data stored on the phone by executing a remote wipe
command. When a phone is switched on, it should be placed in a Faraday
bag. If possible, prior to placing a mobile device in a Faraday bag, you
should disconnect it from the network to protect the evidence by enabling
flight mode and disabling all network connections (Wi-Fi, GPS, hotspots,
and so on). This will also preserve the battery, which will drain while in a
Faraday bag, and protect against leaks in the Faraday bag. Once the mobile
device is seized properly, the examiner may need several forensic tools to
acquire and analyze the data stored on the phone.
Mobile device forensic acquisition can be performed using multiple
methods, which will be defined later. Each of these methods affects the
amount of analysis required, which will be discussed in greater detail in the
upcoming chapters. Should one method fail, another must be attempted.
Multiple attempts and tools may be necessary in order to acquire the
maximum amount of data from the mobile device.
Mobile phones are dynamic systems that present a lot of challenges for us
in extracting and analyzing digital evidence. The rapid increase in the
number of different kinds of mobile phones from different manufacturers
makes it difficult to develop a single process or tool to examine all types of
devices. Mobile phones are continuously evolving as existing technologies
progress and new technologies are introduced. Furthermore, each mobile is
designed with a variety of embedded operating systems. Hence, special

--- Page 38 ---
knowledge and skills are required from forensic experts to acquire and
analyze the devices.

--- Page 39 ---
Challenges in mobile forensics
One of the biggest forensic challenges when it comes to the mobile
platform is the fact that data can be accessed, stored, and synchronized
across multiple devices. As data is volatile and can be quickly transformed
or deleted remotely, more effort is required for the preservation of this data.
Mobile forensics is different from computer forensics and presents unique
challenges to forensic examiners.
Law enforcement and forensic examiners often struggle to obtain digital
evidence from mobile devices. The following are some of the reasons for
this:
Hardware differences: The market is flooded with different models of
mobile phones from different manufacturers. Forensic examiners may
come across different types of mobile models that differ in size,
hardware, features, and operating system. Also, with a short product
development cycle, new models emerge very frequently. As the mobile
landscape changes with each passing day, it is critical for you to adapt
to all challenges and remain updated on mobile device forensic
techniques across various devices.
Mobile operating systems: Unlike personal computers, where
Windows has dominated the market for years, mobile devices widely
use more operating systems, including Apple's iOS, Google's Android,
RIM's BlackBerry OS, Microsoft's Windows Phone OS, HP's webOS,
and many others. Even within these operating systems, there are
several versions, which makes your task even more difficult.
Mobile platform security features: Modern mobile platforms contain
built-in security features to protect user data and privacy. These
features act as a hurdle during forensic acquisition and examination.
For example, modern mobile devices come with default encryption
mechanisms from the hardware layer to the software layer. You might
need to break through these encryption mechanisms to extract data
from the devices. The FBI versus Apple encryption dispute was a
watershed moment in this regard, where the security implementation

--- Page 40 ---
of Apple prevented the FBI from breaking into an iPhone seized from
an attacker in the San Bernardino case.
Preventing data modification: One of the fundamental rules in
forensics is to make sure that data on the device is not modified. In
other words, any attempt to extract data from the device should not
alter the data present on that device. But this is not practically possible
with mobiles, because just switching on a device can change the data
on that device. Even if a device appears to be in an off state,
background processes may still run. For example, in most mobiles, the
alarm clock still works even when the phone is switched off. A sudden
transition from one state to another may result in the loss or
modification of data.
Anti-forensic techniques: Anti-forensic techniques, such as data
hiding, data obfuscation, data forgery, and secure wiping, make
investigations on digital media more difficult.
Passcode recovery: If the device is protected with a passcode, the
forensic examiner needs to gain access to the device without damaging
the data on the device. While there are techniques to bypass the screen
lock, they may not always work on all versions of the OS.
Lack of resources: As mentioned earlier, with the growing number of
mobile phones, the amount of tools required by a forensic examiner
also increases. Forensic acquisition accessories, such as USB cables,
batteries, and chargers for different mobile phones, have to be
maintained in order to acquire those devices.
Dynamic nature of evidence: Digital evidence may be easily altered
either intentionally or unintentionally. For example, browsing an
application on a phone might alter the data stored by that application
on the device.
Accidental reset: Mobile phones provide features to reset everything.
Resetting a device accidentally while examining it may result in the
loss of data.
Device alteration: The possible ways to alter devices may range from
moving application data or renaming files to modifying the
manufacturer's operating system. In this case, the expertise of the
suspect should be taken into account.
Communication shielding: Mobile devices communicate over
cellular networks, Wi-Fi networks, Bluetooth, and infrared. As device

--- Page 41 ---
communication might alter the device data, the possibility of further
communication should be eliminated after seizing the device.
Lack of availability of tools: There is a wide range of mobile devices.
A combination of tools needs to be used, because a single tool may not
support all the devices or perform all the necessary functions. So,
choosing the right tool for a particular phone might be difficult.
Malicious programs: The device might contain malware or malicious
software, such as a virus or a Trojan. These programs may try to
spread over other devices over either a wired interface or a wireless
one.
Legal issues: Mobile devices might be involved in crimes that cross
geographical boundaries. In order to tackle these multi-jurisdictional
issues, the forensic examiner should be familiar with the nature of the
crime and the regional laws.
Let's have a look at the process of evidence extraction in the next section.

--- Page 42 ---
The mobile phone evidence
extraction process
Evidence extraction and the forensic examination of different mobile
devices may differ based on various factors. However, following a
consistent examination process will help the forensic examiner to ensure
that the evidence gathered from each phone is well documented and that the
results are reliable. There is no well-established standard process for mobile
forensics.
However, the following diagram provides an overview of process
considerations for the extraction of evidence from mobile devices. All
methods used when extracting data from mobile devices should be tested,
validated, and well documented:
Mobile phone evidence extraction process
A great resource for handling and processing mobile devices can be found at http://digita
l-forensics.sans.org/media/mobile-device-forensic-process-v3.pdf.
As shown in the preceding diagram, forensics on a mobile device includes
several phases, from the evidence intake phase to the archiving phase. The

--- Page 43 ---
following sections provide an overview of various considerations across all
the phases.

--- Page 44 ---
The evidence intake phase
The evidence intake phase is the starting phase and involves paperwork that
captures ownership information and the type of incident the mobile device
was involved in, and outlines the kind of data the requester is seeking.
Developing specific objectives for each examination is the critical part of
this phase. It serves to clarify your goals. Before the physical seizure
process begins, you should be familiar with federal, state, and local laws
pertaining to an individual's rights. If the right procedures are not followed,
the investigation may be considered illegal in a court of law. The procedure
and the legality may vary based on whether you are a government agent or
a private party. For example, in the US, fourth amendment rights prevent
any searching or seizure by a government agent without having a proper
search warrant. The search warrant should clearly authorize the seizure of
the mobile device as well as the kind of data that needs to be collected.
After a successful seizure, care should be taken to ensure that a chain of
custody is established not only for the device but also for the data
collected. 
According to NIST (https://csrc.nist.gov/), chain of custody refers to a process that tracks
the movement of evidence through its collection, safeguarding, and analysis life cycle
by documenting each person who handled the evidence, the date/time it was collected
or transferred, and the purpose of the transfer.
Also, while seizing the device, care should be taken not to modify any data
present on the device. At the same time, any opportunity to help the
investigation should not be missed. For example, at the time of seizing the
device, if the device is unlocked, then try to disable the passcode.

--- Page 45 ---
The identification phase
The forensic examiner should identify the following details for every
examination of a mobile device:
The legal authority
The data that needs to be extracted
The make, model, and identifying information for the device
Data storage media 
Other sources of potential evidence
We will discuss each of these in the following sections.

--- Page 46 ---
The legal authority
It is important for the forensic examiner to determine and document what
legal authority exists for the acquisition and examination of the device, as
well as any limitations placed on the media prior to the examination of the
device. For example, if the investigation on the device is being conducted
based on a warrant, the search should be limited only to those areas that are
defined in the warrant. In short, prior to the device seizure, you need to
answer the following questions:
If a search warrant does not exist, has the device owner consented to
the search?
If a search warrant exists, is the device included within the original
warrant?
If the device is included in the warrant, does it also define what data
can be collected?
If it's a corporate investigation, is the device owned by an individual or
his or her employer?
Does the corporate policy allow collection and subsequent analysis?

--- Page 47 ---
Data that needs to be extracted
You will identify how in-depth the examination needs to be based upon the
data requested. The goal of the examination makes a significant difference
in selecting the tools and techniques to examine the phone and increases the
efficiency of the examination process.

--- Page 48 ---
The make, model, and identifying
information for the device
As part of the examination, identifying the make and model of the phone
assists in determining what tools would work with the phone. When
available, it is recommended to capture the following details of the seized
device:
The device manufacturer
The device model number
The mobile device serial number
The color of the device
The wallpaper visible on the device screen or lock screen wallpaper
The presence of any hardware components (such as front camera,
headphone jack, and so on)
A description of any specific details unique to the device (scratches,
broken screen, and so on)
Next, let's look at data storage media.

--- Page 49 ---
Data storage media
Many mobile phones provide an option to extend memory with removable
storage devices. In cases when such removable media is found in a mobile
phone that is submitted for examination, the storage card should be
removed and processed using traditional digital forensic techniques. It is
wise to also acquire the card while in the mobile device to ensure that data
stored on both the handset memory and card are linked for easier analysis.
This will be discussed in detail in the upcoming chapters.

--- Page 50 ---
Other sources of potential evidence
Mobile phones act as good sources of fingerprint and other biological
evidence. Such evidence should be collected prior to the examination of the
mobile phone to avoid contamination issues, unless the collection method
will damage the device. Examiners should wear gloves when handling the
evidence.

--- Page 51 ---
The preparation phase
Once the mobile phone model is identified, the preparation phase involves
research regarding the particular mobile phone to be examined and the
appropriate methods and tools to be used for acquisition and examination.
This is generally done based on the device model, underlying operating
system, its version, and so on. Also, the tools that need to be used during an
examination will have to be determined based on the device in question as
well as on the scope and goals of the examination. 

--- Page 52 ---
The isolation phase
Mobile phones are, by design, intended to communicate via cellular phone
networks, Bluetooth, infrared, and wireless (Wi-Fi) network capabilities.
When a phone is connected to a network, new data is added to the phone
through incoming calls, messages, and application data, which modifies the
evidence on the phone.
Complete destruction of data is also possible through remote access or
remote wipe commands. For this reason, isolation of the device from
communication sources is important prior to the acquisition and
examination of the device. Network isolation can be done by placing the
phone in radio frequency shielding cloth and then putting the phone in
airplane or flight mode. Airplane mode disables a device's communication
channels, such as cellular radio, Wi-Fi, and Bluetooth. However, if the
device is screen-locked, then this is not possible. Also, since Wi-Fi is now
available in airplanes, some devices now have Wi-Fi access enabled in
airplane mode.
An alternate solution is isolation of the phone through the use of Faraday
bags, which block radio signals to or from the phone. Faraday bags contain
materials that block external static electrical fields (including radio waves).
Thus, Faraday bags shield seized mobile devices from external interference
to prevent wiping and tracking. To work more conveniently with seized
devices, Faraday tents and rooms also exist.

--- Page 53 ---
The processing phase
Once a phone has been isolated from communication networks, the actual
processing of the mobile phone begins. One of the challenges that you will
face in this phase is identifying which tools to use, as this is affected by a
variety of factors such as price, ease of use, applicability, and so on. Mobile
forensic software is highly expensive, and unlike with computer forensics,
you may sometimes have to use multiple tools to access data. While
selecting a tool, ensure that it has built-in features to maintain forensic
integrity. Maintaining forensic integrity requires a tool that packages
collected data in a format that probably cannot be easily modified or
altered.
The phone should be acquired using a tested method that is repeatable and
is as forensically sound as possible. Physical acquisition is the preferred
method as it extracts the raw memory data and the device is commonly
powered off during the acquisition process. On most devices, the smallest
number of changes occur to the device during physical acquisition. If
physical acquisition is not possible or fails, an attempt should be made to
acquire the filesystem of the mobile device. A logical acquisition should
always be performed as it may contain only the parsed data and provide
pointers to examine the raw memory image. These acquisition methods are
discussed in detail in later chapters.

--- Page 54 ---
The verification phase
After processing the phone, you need to verify the accuracy of the data
extracted from the phone to ensure that data has not been modified. The
verification of the extracted data can be accomplished in several ways:
Comparing the extracted data to the handset data: Check whether
the data extracted from the device matches the data displayed by the
device if applicable. The data extracted can be compared to that on the
device itself or a logical report, whichever is preferred. Remember,
handling the original device may make changes to the only evidence—
the device itself.
Using multiple tools and comparing the results: To ensure accuracy,
use multiple tools to extract the data and compare results.
Using hash values: All image files should be hashed after acquisition
to ensure that data remains unchanged. If filesystem extraction is
supported, you can extract the filesystem and then compute hashes for
the extracted files. Later, any individually extracted file hash is
calculated and checked against the original value to verify the integrity
of it. Any discrepancy in hash values must be explicable (for example,
the device was powered on and then acquired again, so the hash values
are different).

--- Page 55 ---
The documenting and reporting
phase
The forensic examiner is required to document, throughout the examination
process, everything related to what was done during acquisition and
examination. Once you complete the investigation, the results must go
through some form of peer review to ensure that the data is checked and the
investigation is complete. Your notes and documentation may include
information such as the following:
The examination start date and time
The physical condition of the phone
Photos of the phone and individual components
Phone status when received—turned on or turned off
Phone make and model
Tools used for the acquisition
Tools used for the examination
Data found during the examination
Notes from peer review
Throughout the investigation, it is important to make sure that the
information extracted and documented from a mobile device can be clearly
presented to any other examiner or to a court. Documentation is one of your
most important skills. Creating a forensic report of data extracted from a
mobile device during acquisition and analysis is important. This may
include data in both paper and electronic format.
Your findings must be documented and presented in a manner that means
that the evidence speaks for itself when in court. The findings should be
clear, concise, and repeatable. Timeline and link analysis, features offered
by many commercial mobile forensic tools, will aid in reporting and
explaining findings across multiple mobile devices. These tools allow you
to tie together the methods behind the communication of multiple devices.

--- Page 56 ---
The archiving phase
Preserving the data extracted from a mobile phone is an important part of
the overall process. It is also important that the data is retained in a usable
format for the ongoing court process, for future reference, should the
current evidence file become corrupt, and for record-keeping requirements.
Court cases may continue for many years before a final judgment is arrived
at, and most jurisdictions require that data be retained for long periods of
time for the purposes of appeals. As the field and methods advance, new
methods for pulling data out of a raw, physical image may surface, and then
you can revisit the data by pulling a copy from the archives.
Now that we have understood how the evidence extraction process works,
we will be looking into the different approaches in practical mobile
forensics.

--- Page 57 ---
Practical mobile forensic
approaches
Similar to any forensic investigation, there are several approaches that can
be used for the acquisition and examination/analysis of data from mobile
phones. The type of mobile device, the operating system, and the security
setting generally dictate the procedure to be followed in a forensic process.
Every investigation is distinct with its own circumstances, so it is not
possible to design a single definitive procedural approach for all cases. The
following details outline the general approaches followed in extracting data
from mobile devices.

--- Page 58 ---
Understanding mobile operating
systems 
One of the major factors in the data acquisition and examination/analysis of
a mobile phone is the operating system. From low-end mobile phones to
smartphones, mobile operating systems have come a long way with a lot of
features. Mobile operating systems directly affect how you can access the
mobile device. For example, Android gives terminal-level access whereas
iOS does not give such an option.
A comprehensive understanding of the mobile platform helps the forensic
examiner make sound forensic decisions and conduct a conclusive
investigation. While there is a large range of smart mobile devices, with the
demise of Blackberry, currently two main operating systems dominate the
market, namely Google Android and Apple iOS (followed by Windows
Phone at a distant third). More information can be found at https://www.idc.co
m/promo/smartphone-market-share/os. This book covers the forensic analysis of
these three mobile platforms. We will provide a brief overview of the
leading mobile operating systems.

--- Page 59 ---
Android
Android is a Linux-based operating system, and it's a Google open source
platform for mobile phones. Android is the world's most widely used
smartphone operating system. Sources show that Apple's iOS stands second
(https://www.idc.com/promo/smartphone-market-share/os). Android was developed
by Google as an open and free option for hardware manufacturers and
phone carriers. This makes Android the software of choice for companies
who require a low-cost, customizable, lightweight operating system for
their smart devices without developing a new operating system from
scratch.
Android's open nature has further encouraged developers to build a large
number of applications and upload them onto Google Play. Later, end users
can download the applications from Android Market, which makes Android
a powerful operating system. It is estimated that the Google Play Store has
3.3 million apps at the time of writing this book. More details on Android
are covered in Chapter 7, Understanding Android.

--- Page 60 ---
iOS
iOS, formerly known as the iPhone operating system, is a mobile operating
system developed and distributed solely by Apple Inc. iOS is evolving into
a universal operating system for all Apple mobile devices, such as iPad,
iPod Touch, and iPhone. iOS is derived from macOS and hence is based on
a Unix-like operating system. iOS manages the device hardware. The
technologies required to implement native applications are also provided by
iOS. It also ships with various system applications, such as Mail and Safari,
which provide standard system services to the user. iOS-native applications
are distributed through the App Store, which is closely monitored by Apple.
More details about iOS are covered in Chapter 2, Understanding the
Internals of iOS Devices.

--- Page 61 ---
Windows Phone
Windows Phone is a proprietary mobile operating system developed by
Microsoft for smartphones and pocket PCs. It is the successor to Windows
Mobile and is primarily aimed at the consumer market rather than the
enterprise market. The Windows Phone operating system is similar to the
Windows desktop operating system, but it is optimized for devices with a
small amount of storage. Windows Phone basics and forensic techniques are
discussed in Chapter 12, Windows Phone Forensics.

--- Page 62 ---
Mobile forensic tool leveling system
Mobile phone forensic acquisition and analysis involves manual effort and
the use of automated tools. There are a variety of tools that are available for
performing mobile forensics. All the tools have their pros and cons, and it is
fundamental that you understand that no single tool is sufficient for all
purposes. So, understanding the various types of mobile forensic tools is
important for forensic examiners.
When identifying the appropriate tools for the forensic acquisition and
analysis of mobile phones, a mobile device forensic tool classification
system developed by Sam Brothers (shown in the following diagram)
comes in handy for examiners:
Cellular phone tool leveling pyramid (Sam Brothers, 2009)
The objective of the mobile device forensic tool classification system is to
enable an examiner to categorize forensic tools based on the examination
methodology of the tool. As you move from the bottom of the pyramid to

--- Page 63 ---
the top, the methods and tools used for analysis generally become more
technical and sophisticated and require longer analysis times. There are
advantages and disadvantages of different techniques used at each layer.
The forensic examiner should be aware of these issues before he or she
applies a particular technique. Evidence can be destroyed completely if the
given method or tool is not properly utilized. This risk increases as you
move up in the pyramid. Thus, proper training is required to obtain the
highest success rate in data extraction from mobile devices.
Each existing mobile forensic tool can be classified under one or more of
the five levels. The following sections contain a detailed description of each
level.

--- Page 64 ---
Manual extraction
The manual extraction method involves simply scrolling through the data
on the device and viewing the data on the phone directly through the use of
the device's keypad or touchscreen. The information discovered is then
photographically documented. The extraction process is fast and easy to
use, and it will work on almost every phone. This method is prone to human
error, such as missing certain data due to unfamiliarity with the interface. At
this level, it is not possible to recover deleted information and grab all the
data.
There are some tools, such as Project-A-Phone, that have been developed to
help an examiner to easily document a manual extraction. However, this
might also result in the modification of data. For example, viewing an
unread SMS will mark it as read.

--- Page 65 ---
Logical analysis
Logical analysis involves connecting the mobile device to forensic
hardware or to a forensic workstation via a USB cable, an RJ-45 cable,
infrared, or Bluetooth. Once connected, the computer initiates a command
and sends it to the device, which is then interpreted by the device's
processor. Next, the requested data is received from the device's memory
and sent back to the forensic workstation. Later, you can review the data.
Most of the forensic tools currently available work at this level of the
classification system. The extraction process is fast and easy to use and
requires little training for you. On the flip side, the process may write data
to the mobile and might change the integrity of the evidence. In addition,
deleted data is not generally accessible with this procedure.

--- Page 66 ---
Hex dump
A hex dump, also referred to as a physical extraction, is achieved by
connecting a device to a forensic workstation and pushing unsigned code or
a bootloader into the phone and instructing the phone to dump memory
from the phone to the computer. Since the resulting raw image is in binary
format, technical expertise is required to analyze it. The process is
inexpensive, provides more data to the examiner, and allows the recovery of
deleted files from the device-unallocated space on most devices.

--- Page 67 ---
Chip-off
Chip-off refers to the acquisition of data directly from the memory chip
present in the device. At this level, the chip is physically removed from the
device and a chip reader or a second phone is used to extract data stored on
it. This method is more technically challenging, as a wide variety of chip
types are used in mobiles. The process is expensive and requires hardware-
level knowledge as it involves the desoldering and heating of the memory
chip. Training is required to successfully perform a chip-off extraction.
Improper procedures may damage the memory chip and render all data
unsalvageable. When possible, it is recommended that the other levels of
extraction are attempted prior to chip-off, since this method is destructive in
nature. Also, the information that comes out of memory is in a raw format
and has to be parsed, decoded, and interpreted. The chip-off method is
preferred in situations where it is important to preserve the state of memory
exactly as it exists on the device. It is also the only option when a device is
damaged but the memory chip is intact.
The chip on a device is often read using the Joint Test Action Group
(JTAG) method. The JTAG method involves connecting to Test Access
Ports (TAPs) on a device and forcing the processor to transfer the raw data
stored on the memory chip. The JTAG method is generally used with
devices that are operational but inaccessible using standard tools. Both of
these techniques also work even when the device is screen-locked.

--- Page 68 ---
Micro read
The micro read process involves manually viewing and interpreting data
seen on the memory chip. The examiner uses an electron microscope and
analyzes the physical gates on the chip and then translates the gate status to
0s and 1s to determine the resulting ASCII characters. The whole process is
time-consuming and costly, and it requires extensive knowledge and
training on memory and the filesystem. Due to the extreme technicalities
involved in micro read, it is only attempted for high-profile cases equivalent
to a national security crisis after all other levels of extraction techniques
have been exhausted. The process is rarely performed and is not well
documented at this time. Also, there are currently no commercial tools
available to perform a micro read.

--- Page 69 ---
Data acquisition methods
Data acquisition is the process of imaging or otherwise extracting
information from a digital device and other attached media. Acquiring data
from a mobile phone is not as simple as a standard hard drive forensic
acquisition. The following points break down the three types of forensic
acquisition methods for mobile phones: physical, logical, and manual.
These methods may have some overlap with a couple of levels discussed in
the mobile forensics tool leveling system. The amount and type of data that
can be collected will vary depending on the type of acquisition method
being used. While we cover these methods in detail in the upcoming
chapters, the following is a brief description of them.

--- Page 70 ---
Physical acquisition
Physical acquisition of a mobile device is nothing but a bit-by-bit copy of
the physical storage. With direct access to flash memory, information can be
acquired from the device through physical extraction. Flash memory is non-
volatile memory and is primarily used in memory cards and USB flash
drives as solid-state storage. The process creates a bit-for-bit copy of an
entire filesystem, similar to the approach taken in computer forensic
investigations. Physical acquisition is able to acquire all of the data present
on a device, including the deleted data, and access to unallocated space on
most devices.

--- Page 71 ---
Logical acquisition
Logical acquisition is about extracting logical storage objects, such as files
and directories, that reside on a filesystem. The logical acquisition of
mobile phones is performed using the device manufacturer's application
programming interface to synchronize the phone's contents with a
computer. Many forensic tools can perform a logical acquisition. It is much
easier for a forensic tool to organize and present data extracted through
logical acquisition. However, the forensic analyst must understand how the
acquisition occurs and whether the mobile was modified in any way during
the process. Depending on the phone and forensic tools used, all or some of
the data is acquired. A logical acquisition is easy to perform and only
recovers the files on a mobile phone and does not recover data contained in
unallocated space.

--- Page 72 ---
Manual acquisition
With mobile phones, physical acquisition is usually the best option, and
logical acquisition is the second-best option. Manual extraction should be
the last option when performing the forensic acquisition of a mobile phone.
Both logical and manual acquisition can be used to validate findings in the
physical data. During manual acquisition, the examiner utilizes the user
interface to investigate the contents of the phone's memory. The device is
used normally through keypad or touchscreen and menu navigation, and the
examiner takes pictures of each screen's contents. Manual extraction
introduces a greater degree of risk in the form of human error, and there is a
chance of deleting evidence. Manual acquisition is easy to perform and only
acquires the data that appears on a mobile phone.
Next, let's look at the amount of information that can be extracted from
mobile phones.

--- Page 73 ---
Potential evidence stored on mobile
phones
The range of information that can be obtained from mobile phones is
detailed in this section. Data on a mobile phone can be found in a number
of locations—SIM card, external storage card, and phone memory, for
example. In addition, the service provider also stores communication-
related information. This book primarily focuses on data acquired from a
phone's memory. Mobile device data extraction tools recover data from a
phone's memory. Even though data recovered during forensic acquisition
depends on the mobile model, in general, the following data is common
across all models and useful as evidence. Note that most of the following
artifacts contain timestamps:
Address book: This contains contact names, phone numbers, email
addresses, and so on.
Call history: This contains dialed, received and missed calls and call
duration.
SMS: This contains sent and received text messages.
MMS: This contains media files such as sent and received photos and
videos.
E-mail: This contains sent, drafted, and received email messages.
Web browser history: This contains the history of websites that have
been visited.
Photos: This contains pictures that were captured using the mobile
phone camera, those downloaded from the internet, and those
transferred from other devices.
Videos: This contains videos that are captured using the mobile
camera, those downloaded from the internet, and those transferred
from other devices.
Music: This contains music files downloaded from the internet and
those transferred from other devices.

--- Page 74 ---
Documents: This contains documents created using the device's
applications, those downloaded from the internet, and those transferred
from other devices.
Calendar: This contains calendar entries and appointments.
Network communication: This contains GPS locations.
Maps: This contains places the user visited, looked-up directions, and
searched and downloaded maps.
Social networking data: This contains data stored by applications,
such as Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, Google+, and WhatsApp.
Deleted data: This contains information deleted from the phone.
Next, we will have a quick look at the final step of investigation:
examination and analysis.

--- Page 75 ---
Examination and analysis
This is the ultimate step of the investigation, and it aims to uncover data
that is present on the device. Examination is done by applying well-tested
and scientific methods to conclusively establish results. The analysis phase
is focused on separating relevant data from the rest and probing for data that
is of value to the underlying case. The examination process starts with a
copy of the evidence acquired using some of the techniques described
previously, which will be covered in detail in coming chapters. Examination
and analysis using third-party tools is generally performed by importing the
device's memory dump into a mobile forensics tool that will automatically
retrieve the results. Understanding the case is also crucial to performing a
targeted analysis of the data. For example, a case about child pornography
may require focusing on all of the images present on the device rather than
looking at other artifacts.
It is important that you have a fair knowledge of how the forensic tools that
are used for examination work. Proficient use of the features and options
available in a tool will drastically speed up the examination process.
Sometimes, due to programming flaws in the software, a tool may not be
able to recognize or convert bits into a format comprehensible by you.
Hence, it is crucial that you have the necessary skills to identify such
situations and use alternate tools or software to construct the results. In
some cases, an individual may purposefully tamper with the device
information or may delete/hide some crucial data. Forensic analysts should
understand the limitations of their tools and sometimes compensate for
them to achieve the best possible results. 

--- Page 76 ---
Rules of evidence
Courtrooms rely more and more on the information inside a mobile phone
as vital evidence. Prevailing evidence in court requires a good
understanding of the rules of evidence. Mobile forensics is a relatively new
discipline, and laws dictating the validity of evidence are not widely known,
and they also differ from country to country. However, there are five
general rules of evidence that apply to digital forensics and need to be
followed in order for evidence to be useful. Ignoring these rules makes
evidence inadmissible, and your case could be thrown out. These five rules
are admissible, authentic, complete, reliable, and believable:
Admissible: This is the most basic rule and a measure of evidence
validity and importance. The evidence must be preserved and gathered
in such a way that it can be used in court or elsewhere. Many errors
can be made that could cause a judge to rule a piece of evidence as
inadmissible. For example, evidence that is gathered using illegal
methods is commonly ruled inadmissible.
Authentic: The evidence must be tied to the incident in a relevant way
to prove something. The forensic examiner must be accountable for the
origin of the evidence.
Complete: When evidence is presented, it must be clear and complete
and should reflect the whole story. It is not enough to collect evidence
that just shows one perspective of an incident. Presenting incomplete
evidence is more dangerous than not providing any evidence at all, as
it could lead to a different judgment.
Reliable: Evidence collected from the device must be reliable. This
depends on the tools and methodology used. The techniques used and
evidence collected must not cast doubt on the authenticity of the
evidence. If you used some techniques that cannot be reproduced, the
evidence is not considered unless those considering the evidence, such
as the judge and jury, are directed to do so. This would include
possible destructive methods such as chip-off extraction.

--- Page 77 ---
Believable: A forensic examiner must be able to explain, with clarity
and conciseness, what processes they used and how the integrity of the
evidence was preserved. The evidence presented by you must be clear,
easy to understand, and believable by the jury.
Now let's look at best practices.

--- Page 78 ---
Good forensic practices
Good forensic practices apply to the collection and preservation of
evidence. A lack of sound forensic practices may even render the evidence
collected useless before a court of law. The modification of evidence, either
intentional or accidental, can affect a case. So, understanding best practices
is critical for forensic examiners.

--- Page 79 ---
Securing the evidence
With advanced smartphone features such as Find My iPhone and remote
wipes, securing a mobile phone in a way such that it cannot be remotely
wiped is of great importance. Also, when the phone is powered on and has
service, it constantly receives new data. To secure the evidence, use the
right equipment and techniques to isolate the phone from all networks. With
isolation, the phone is prevented from receiving any new data that would
cause active data to be deleted. Depending on the case, other forensic
techniques such as fingerprint matching may need to be employed to
establish a connection between the device and its owner. If the device is not
handled in a secure manner, physical evidence may be unintentionally
tampered with and may be rendered useless.
It is also important to collect any peripherals, associated media, cables,
power adapters, and other accessories that are present at the scene. At the
scene of investigation, if the device is found to be connected to a personal
computer, pulling it directly would stop the data transfer. Instead, it is
recommended to capture the memory of the personal computer before
pulling the device, as this contains significant details in many cases.

--- Page 80 ---
Preserving the evidence
As evidence is collected, it must be preserved in a state that is acceptable in
court. Working directly on the original copies of evidence might alter it. So,
as soon as you recover a raw disk image or files, create a read-only master
copy and duplicate it. In order for evidence to be admissible, there must be
a scientific method to validate that the evidence submitted is exactly the
same as the original collected. This can be accomplished by creating a
forensic hash value of the image.
A forensic hash is used to ensure the integrity of an acquisition by calculating a
cryptographically strong and non-reversible value of the image/data.
After duplicating the raw disk image or files, compute and verify the hash
values for the original and the copy to ensure that the integrity of the
evidence is maintained. Any changes in hash values should be documented
and explicable. All further processing or examination should be performed
on copies of the evidence. Any use of the device might alter the information
stored on the handset. So, only perform the tasks that are absolutely
necessary.

--- Page 81 ---
Documenting the evidence and
changes
Whenever possible, a record of all visible data should be created. It is
recommended to photograph the mobile device along with any of the other
media found, such as cables, peripherals, and so on. This will be helpful if
questions arise later on about the environment. Do not touch or lay hands
on the mobile device when photographing it. Ensure that you document all
the methods and tools that are used to collect and extract the evidence.
Detail your notes so that another examiner can reproduce them. Your work
must be reproducible; if it is not, a judge may rule it inadmissible. It's
important to document the entire recovery process, including all the
changes made during the acquisition and examination. For example, if the
forensic tool used for the data extraction sliced up the disk image to store it,
this must be documented. All changes to the mobile device, including
power cycling and syncing, should be documented in your case notes.

--- Page 82 ---
Reporting
Reporting is the process of preparing a detailed summary of all the steps
taken and conclusions reached as part of an examination. Reporting should
include details about all the important actions performed by you, the results
of the acquisition, and any inferences drawn from the results. Most of the
forensic tools come with built-in reporting features that will autogenerate
the reports while providing scope for customization at the same time. In
general, a report may contain the following details:
Details of the reporting agency
Case identifier
Forensic investigator
Identity of the submitter
Date of evidence receipt
Details of the device seized for examination including serial number,
make, and model
Details of the equipment and tools used in the examination
Description of steps taken during examination
Chain of custody documentation
Details of findings or issues identified
Evidence recovered during the examination, ranging from chat
messages, browser history, and call logs to deleted messages, and so
on
Any images captured during the examination
Examination and analysis information
Report conclusion

--- Page 83 ---
Summary
Modern mobile devices store a wide range of information, such as SMS,
call logs, browser history, chat messages, location details, and so on. Hence
they are often a key factor in several criminal cases, reconstruction of
events, corporate and legal cases, and more. Mobile device forensics also
comes with its own challenges and concepts that fall outside the boundaries
of traditional digital forensics. Extreme care should be taken while handling
the device, right from the evidence intake phase to the archiving phase.
Examiners responsible for mobile devices must understand the different
acquisition methods and the complexities of handling data during analysis.
Extracting data from a mobile device is half the battle. The operating
system, security features, and type of smartphone will determine the
amount of access you have to the data. It is important to follow sound
forensic practices and make sure that the evidence is unaltered during the
investigation.
The next chapter will provide an insight into iOS forensics. You will learn
about the filesystem layout, security features, and the way files are stored
on an iOS device.

--- Page 84 ---
Section 1: iOS Forensics
This section will provide you with an overview of iOS devices such as
iPhones and iPads, as well as an overview of the operating systems and
filesystems they run. You will learn about the different types of forensic
acquisition methods, including logical acquisition and filesystem
acquisition, the process of jailbreaking, performing forensic analysis on the
most common artifact sources, and how to work with popular mobile
forensic software.
This section will consist of the following chapters:
Chapter 2, Understanding the Internals of iOS Devices
Chapter 3, Data Acquisition from iOS Devices
Chapter 4, Data Acquisition from iOS Backups
Chapter 5, iOS Data Analysis and Recovery
Chapter 6, iOS Forensic Tools

--- Page 85 ---
Understanding the Internals of iOS
Devices
According to Apple, there were 1.4 billion active Apple devices in 2019,
900 million of which were running on iOS. While iOS is the leading
operating system (OS) for tablets worldwide, Android continues to be the
leading OS for smartphones. Regardless of the statistics, if you are a
forensic examiner, the chances are that you will need to conduct an
examination of an iOS device.
In order to perform a forensic examination of an iOS device, you as the
examiner must understand the internal components and inner workings of
that device. Developing an understanding of the underlying components of
a mobile device will help you understand the criticalities involved in the
forensic process, including what data can be acquired, where the data is
stored, and what methods can be used to access the data from that device.
So, before we delve into the examination of iOS devices, it is necessary to
gain an understanding of the different models that exist and their internal
components. Throughout this book, we will perform forensic acquisition
and analysis on iOS devices, including the iPhone, iPad, and Apple Watch.
The goal of this chapter is to introduce you to iOS device technology. We
will cover details that may often get overlooked but will help you during
your forensic investigation. You must understand the different iOS devices
and how data is stored on these devices before you can successfully extract
it.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics in detail:
iPhone models and hardware
iPad models and hardware
The Hierarchical File System (HFS) Plus and Apple File System
(APFS) filesystems 

--- Page 86 ---
The iPhone OS

--- Page 87 ---
iPhone models and hardware
The iPhone is among the most popular smartphones on the market. Apple
released the first-generation iPhone in June 2007. Since the first release, the
iPhone became extremely popular due to its many groundbreaking features
and usability. The introduction of the iPhone has since redefined the entire
world of mobile computing. Consumers have started looking for faster and
more efficient phones. Various iPhone models now exist, with different
features and storage capabilities to serve consumer requirements.
The iPhones released since the third edition of Practical Mobile Forensics
—the iPhone XR, XS, XS Max, 11, and 11 Pro—can be challenging when it
comes to dealing with filesystem forensic acquisition methods. Just like the
devices released since the iPhone 5, there is no method or tool available to
physically recover data from these devices, unless they are jailbroken.
However, logical acquisition can be obtained if the iPhone is unlocked.
Acquisition methods for data extraction are available and will be discussed
in Chapter 3, Data Acquisition from iOS Devices, and Chapter 4, Data
Acquisition from iOS Backups. Now, let's learn how to identify the correct
hardware model.

--- Page 88 ---
Identifying the correct hardware
model
Before examining an iPhone, it is necessary to identify the correct hardware
model and the firmware version installed on the device. Knowing the
iPhone's details helps you to understand the criticalities and possibilities of
obtaining evidence from an iPhone. For example, in many cases, the device
passcode is required in order to obtain a logical image. Depending on the
iOS version, device model, and passcode complexity, it may be possible to
obtain the device passcode using a brute-force attack.
There are various ways to identify the hardware of a device. The easiest way
to identify the hardware of some devices is to observe the model
number displayed on the back of the device. To make this task even simpler,
you can use Apple's Knowledge Base articles. More information on iPhone
models can be found at https://support.apple.com/en-in/HT201296.
The firmware version of an iPhone can be found by accessing the Settings
option and then navigating to General | About | Software Version, as shown
in the following screenshot. The purpose of the firmware is to enable certain
features and assist with the general functioning of the device:

--- Page 89 ---
The iPhone About screen, displaying the software version 13.2
Alternatively, the ideviceinfo command-line tool that is available in the
libimobiledevice software library (http://www.libimobiledevice.org/) can be used to
identify the iPhone model and its iOS version.
To obtain the iPhone model and its iOS version information on a Windows
10 workstation, follow these steps:
1. Download the latest binaries from the following link: https://dev.azure.co
m/libimobiledevice-win32/imobiledevice-net/_build/results?buildId=419 (click on
Artifacts | Binaries to start downloading).
2. Unzip the archive with x86 or x64 binaries, depending on your
workstation's version.
3. Open Command Prompt and change the directory to the one with
binaries (use the cd command for this).
4. Connect the iPhone to your workstation using a Universal Serial Bus
(USB) cable (for the latest iOS versions, the passcode is also required),
and run the ideviceinfo command with the -s option, as shown in the
following code:
$ ideviceinfo -s

--- Page 90 ---
The output of the ideviceinfo command displays the iPhone identifier, its
internal name, and the iOS version, as shown in the following
screenshot:
The output from ideviceinfo displaying firmware version 13.2
Some other tools, such as iExplorer, will provide access to similar iOS
device information, as shown in the following screenshot. The methods for
recovering iPhone device information will work on iPad devices as well.
Here, iExplorer is being used to obtain device information from an iPhone:
 

--- Page 91 ---
iExplorer displaying device info
Every release of the iPhone comes with improved or newly added features.
As previously stated in this chapter, knowing the iPhone's details helps you
to understand the criticalities and possibilities of obtaining evidence from it.
You must know the model of the device to ensure that the tools and
methodologies being deployed support that particular iPhone. Additionally,
the internal storage size of the iPhone must be determined to ensure that the
evidence container is large enough for the entire forensic image. Most tools
will not alert you if there is not enough disk space on the evidence drive
until space has run out. This will waste time and force you to acquire the
device a second time. Finally, the network capabilities of the device must
also be noted so that you can properly isolate the device to prevent remote
accessing or wiping during the examination. This will be discussed further in
Chapter 3, Data Acquisition from iOS Devices.
Again, some familiarity with iPhone device hardware will aid you in
determining how to handle the device during a forensic investigation.

--- Page 92 ---
Certain models enforce full-disk encryption, while older models do not.
Encrypted devices require additional steps during an acquisition—if access
is even possible. You must be prepared for all hurdles you may be required
to clear during the acquisition and analytical stages of the investigation. In
addition to this, knowing the capabilities that the iPhone has—and the initial
and current iOS version—makes a difference in the data you will be able to
recover from the device. Apple is not consistent with data storage locations
across iOS versions. Therefore, you must know the original version installed
when the phone was first in use to ensure that the forensic tools do not
overlook data that could aid in the investigation. 
More information about identifying iPhone models can be found at https://su
pport.apple.com/en-us/HT201296.

--- Page 93 ---
Understanding the iPhone
hardware
The iPhone is a collection of modules, chips, and electronic components
from different manufacturers. Due to the complexities of the iPhone, the list
of hardware components is extensive, and each device should be researched
for internal components. 
For example, the iPhone 11 has an A13 Bionic processor; 64 GB, 128 GB,
or 256 GB storage; 4 GB of RAM; a 6.1-inch Liquid Retina liquid-crystal
display (LCD); and a dual-lens 12 MP rear camera array.
Internal images for all iPhones can be found in the teardown section of http
s://www.ifixit.com/Device/iPhone.

--- Page 94 ---
iPad models and hardware
The Apple iPhone changed the way cell phones are produced and used.
Similarly, the iPad, a version of the tablet computer introduced in January
2010, quashed the sales of notebooks. With the iPad, individuals can shoot
videos, take photos, play music, read books, browse the internet, and do
much more. Various iPad models now exist—for example, iPad Air 3 and
iPad Pro—with different features and storage capabilities. More
information on identifying iPad models can be found at https://support.apple.
com/en-in/HT201471.
As with the iPhone, not all versions of the iPad are supported for filesystem
acquisition. Additionally, Apple changes data storage locations in iOS
versions, which affects iPad devices as well. You must be aware of the
different models, the released and currently installed iOS version, the
storage capability, the network access vectors, and more.

--- Page 95 ---
Understanding the iPad hardware
One of the key factors of the success of Apple iOS devices is the proper
selection of their hardware components. Just like the iPhone, the iPad is
also a collection of modules, chips, and electronic components from
different manufacturers. Internal images for all iPads can be found in the
teardown section of https://www.ifixit.com/Device/iPad.

--- Page 96 ---
The HFS Plus and APFS
filesystems
To better understand the forensic process of an iOS device, it is useful to
know about the filesystem that is used. Originally, the filesystem used in the
iPhone and other Apple iOS devices was HFSX. This is a variation of HFS
Plus, with one major difference. HFSX is case-sensitive, whereas HFS Plus
is case-insensitive. Other differences will be discussed later in this chapter.
APFS was introduced in June 2016 as a replacement for HFS Plus and
became the default filesystem for iOS devices with the release of iOS 10.3,
and for macOS devices with the release of macOS 10.13.

--- Page 97 ---
The HFS Plus filesystem
In 1996, Apple developed a new filesystem, HFS, to accommodate the
storage of large datasets. In an HFS filesystem, the storage medium is
represented as volumes. HFS volumes are divided into logical blocks of 512
bytes. The logical blocks are numbered from first to last on a given volume
and will remain static with the same size as physical blocks—that is, 512
bytes. These logical blocks are grouped together into allocation blocks,
which are used by the HFS filesystem to track data in a more efficient way.
HFS uses a 16-bit value to address allocation blocks, which limits the
number of allocation blocks to 65,535. To overcome the inefficient
allocation of disk space and some of the limitations of HFS, Apple
introduced the HFS Plus filesystem (http://dubeiko.com/development/FileSystems/
HFSPLUS/tn1150.html).
The HFS Plus filesystem was designed to support larger file sizes. Sectors
on HFS volumes are usually 512 bytes in size. These sectors form
allocation blocks. The number of such blocks depends on the size of the
volume. HFS Plus uses block addresses of 32 bits to address allocation
blocks. HFS Plus uses journaling by default. Journaling is the process of
logging every transaction to the disk, which helps prevent filesystem
corruption. The key characteristics of the HFS Plus filesystem include the
following: efficient use of disk space, Unicode support for filenames,
support for name forks, file compression, journaling, dynamic resizing,
dynamic defragmentation, and an ability to boot on OSes other than
macOS.

--- Page 98 ---
The HFS Plus volume
The HFS Plus volume contains a number of internal structures to manage
the organization of data. These structures include a header, an alternate
header, and five special files: an allocation file, an extents overflow file, a
catalog file, an attributes file, and a startup file. Among the five files, three
files (the extents overflow file, the catalog file, and the attributes file) use a
B-Tree structure. This is a data structure that allows data to be efficiently
searched, viewed, modified, or removed. The HFS Plus volume structure is
shown in the following diagram:
 

--- Page 99 ---
The HFS Plus volume structure
The volume structure is described as follows:
Reserved (1024 bytes): This is reserved for bootloader information.
Volume Header: This stores volume information, such as the size of
allocation blocks, a timestamp of when the volume was created, and

--- Page 100 ---
metadata about each of the five special files.
Allocation File: This file is used to track which allocation blocks are
in use by the system. The file format consists of 1 bit for every
allocation block. If the bit is set, the block is in use. If it is not set, the
block is free.
Extents Overflow File: This file records the allocation blocks that are
allocated when the file size exceeds eight blocks, which helps in
locating the actual data when referred. Bad blocks are also recorded in
the file.
Catalog File: This file contains information about the hierarchy of
files and folders, which is used to locate any file and folder within the
volume.
Attributes File: This file contains inline data attribute records, fork
data attribute records, and extension attribute records.
Startup File: This file contains the information needed to assist in
booting a system that does not have HFS Plus support.
Alternate Volume Header: This is a backup of the volume header, and
it's mainly used for disk repairing.
Reserved (512 bytes): This is reserved for use by Apple, and it is used
during the manufacturing process.
Next, let's look at the APFS filesystem.

--- Page 101 ---
The APFS filesystem
APFS is a new filesystem for iOS, macOS, tvOS, and watchOS. It is a 64-
bit filesystem and supports over 9 quintillion files on a single volume. The
following is a list of its main features:
Clones: These are instantaneous copies of files or directories.
Modifications are written elsewhere and continue to share the
unmodified blocks; the changes are saved as deltas of the cloned file.
Snapshots: Point-in-Time (PIT) read-only instances of the
filesystem.
Space sharing: This allows multiple filesystems to share the same
underlying free space on a physical volume.
Encryption: There are three modes, as follows:
No encryption
Single-key encryption
Multi-key encryption with per-file keys for file data and a
separate key for sensitive metadata
Depending on the hardware, the Advanced Encryption Standard-
XEX-based tweaked codebook mode with ciphertext stealing
(AES-XTS) or the Advanced Encryption Standard-Cipher
Blocker Chaining (AES-CBC) encryption mode is used.
Crash protection: This is a novel copy-on-write metadata scheme; it's
used to ensure that filesystem updates are crash-protected.
Sparse files: These allow the logical size of files to be greater than the
physical space they occupy on the disk.
Fast directory sizing: This quickly computes the total space used by a
directory hierarchy, allowing it to be updated as the hierarchy evolves.

--- Page 102 ---
The APFS structure
So, APFS is structured in a single container that may contain one or more
volumes. The APFS structure is presented in the following diagram:
Overview of the APFS structure
Each filesystem structure in APFS starts with a block header. The block
header starts with a checksum (Fletcher's checksum algorithm is used) for
the whole block and also contains the copy-on-write version of the block, the
block ID, and the block type.
The APFS structure can be explained as follows:
The Container Superblock contains information on the block size, the
number of blocks and pointers to the space manager for this task, the

--- Page 103 ---
block IDs of all volumes, and a pointer to a block map B-Tree (which
contains entries for each volume, along with its ID and offset).
Nodes are used for storing different kinds of entries. They can be part
of a B-Tree or exist on their own and can contain either flexible or
fixed-sized entries.
The Space Man(ager) manages the allocated blocks in the APFS
container, and stores the number of free blocks and a pointer to the
Allocation Info File.
The Allocation Info File stores the allocation file's length, version, and
the offset.
The B-Trees manage multiple nodes and contain the offset of the root
node.
A Volume Superblock contains the name of the volume, its ID, and a
timestamp.
As for allocation files, they are simple bitmaps and do not have a block
header and type ID.

--- Page 104 ---
Disk layout
By default, the filesystem is configured as two logical disk partitions: the
system (root or firmware) partition and the user data partition.
The system partition contains the OS and all of the preloaded applications
used with the iPhone. The system partition is mounted as read-only unless
an OS upgrade is in progress or the device is jailbroken. The partition is
updated only when a firmware upgrade is performed on the device. During
this process, the entire partition is formatted by iTunes without affecting
any of the user data. The system partition takes only a small portion of
storage space, normally between 0.8 GB and 4 GB, depending on the size
of the NAND drive. As the system partition was designed to remain in a
factory state for the entire lifetime of the iPhone, there is typically little
useful evidentiary information that can be obtained from it. If the iOS
device is jailbroken, the files containing information regarding the jailbreak
and user data may be resident on the system partition. Jailbreaking an iOS
device allows the user root access to the device, but voids the manufacturer
warranty. Jailbreaking will be discussed later in this chapter.
The user data partition contains all the user-created data, ranging from
music and contacts to third-party application data. The user data partition
occupies most of the NAND memory and is mounted to
the /private/var directory on the device. Most of the evidentiary information
can be found in this partition. During a filesystem acquisition, the user data
partition contents should be captured and saved as a .tar file. Acquired data
can be easily extracted and parsed by most commercial mobile forensic
tools.

--- Page 105 ---
The iPhone OS
iOS is Apple's most advanced and feature-rich proprietary mobile OS. It
was released with the first generation of the iPhone. When introduced, it
was named iPhone OS, and it was later renamed iOS to reflect the unified
nature of the OS that powers all Apple iOS devices, such as the iPhone,
iPod touch, iPad, and Apple TV. iOS is derived from core OS X
technologies and is streamlined to be compact and efficient for mobile
devices.
It utilizes a multi-touch interface, where simple gestures are used to operate
and control the device, such as swiping your finger across the screen to
move to the successive page or pinching your fingers to zoom. In simple
terms, iOS assists with the general functioning of the device.

--- Page 106 ---
The iOS architecture
iOS is an intermediary between the device hardware components and the
applications on the screen. The applications don't interact with the
underlying hardware directly. Instead, they do it through a well-defined
system interface that protects them from hardware changes. This abstraction
makes it easy to build applications that work on devices with different
hardware capabilities.
The iOS architecture consists of four layers: the Cocoa Touch layer, the
Media layer, the Core Services layer, and the Core OS layer. Each layer
consists of several frameworks that help to build an application, as
illustrated in the following diagram:
The iOS layers
These layers can be described as follows:
Cocoa Touch: This layer contains the key frameworks required to
develop the visual interface for iOS applications. Frameworks in this

--- Page 107 ---
layer provide the basic application infrastructure and support key
technologies, such as touch-based input, multitasking, and many high-
level system services.
Media: This layer provides the graphics, audio, and video frameworks
to create the best multimedia experience available on a mobile device.
The technologies in this layer help developers to build applications
that look and sound great.
Core Services: This layer provides the fundamental system services
that are required for the applications. Not all of these services are used
by developers, though many parts of the system are built on top of
them. This layer contains technologies that enable support for location
services, iCloud, and social media.
Core OS: This layer is the base layer and sits directly on top of the
device hardware. This layer deals with low-level functionalities and
provides services such as networking (Berkeley Software
Distribution (BSD) sockets), memory management, threading
(Portable Operating System Interface (POSIX) threads), filesystem
handling, external accessories access, and Inter Process
Communication (IPC).
Now that we have learned about the iOS architecture, let's have a look at
iOS security.

--- Page 108 ---
iOS security
Newer versions of iOS have been designed with security at their core. At
the highest level, the iOS security architecture is as follows:

--- Page 110 ---
The iOS security architecture
Apple iOS devices such as iPhone, iPad, and iPod Touch are designed with
layers of security. Low-level hardware features safeguard from malware
attacks, and the high-level OS features prevent unauthorized use. A brief
overview of the iOS security features is provided in the following sections.

--- Page 111 ---
Passcodes, Touch ID, and Face ID
Passcodes restrict unauthorized access to the device. Once a passcode is set,
each time you turn on or wake up the device, it will ask for the passcode to
access the device. iOS devices support simple as well as complex
passcodes. iOS 9 released the option to use a six-digit simple passcode
instead of the legacy four-digit option. The iPhone 5S and later also
supports Touch ID fingerprints as a passcode, which are backed up with a
simple or complex passcode. The iPhone X and later support a new
biometric way of locking the device—Face ID—so that users can use their
faces as the passcodes. And it's even more secure, as the chance that a
stranger will unlock your iPhone with Touch ID is 1 in 50,000, but with
Face ID it is 1 in 1,000,000.

--- Page 112 ---
Code signing
Code signing prevents users from downloading and installing unauthorized
applications on the device. Apple says the following about it:
"Code Signing is the process by which your compiled iOS application is sealed and identified as
yours. Also, iOS devices won't run an application or load a library unless it is signed by a trusted
party. To ensure that all apps come from a known and approved source and have not been tampered
with, iOS requires that all executable code be signed using an Apple-issued certificate."

--- Page 113 ---
Sandboxing
Sandboxing mitigates post-code-execution exploitation by placing the
application into a tightly restricted area. Applications installed on the iOS
device are sandboxed, and one application cannot access the data stored by
another. Essentially, a sandbox is a mechanism that enforces fine-grained
controls that limit an application's access to files, network resources,
hardware, and more.

--- Page 114 ---
Encryption
On iOS devices (starting with the iPhone 4), the entire filesystem is
encrypted with a filesystem key, which is computed from the device's
unique hardware key. This key is stored in effaceable storage, which exists
between the OS and hardware levels of the device. This is the reason that
Joint Test Action Group (JTAG) and chip-off methods are not useful
acquisition methods, as the entire data dump will be encrypted.

--- Page 115 ---
Data protection
Data protection is designed to protect data at rest and to make offline
attacks difficult. It allows applications to leverage the user's device
passcode, in concert with the device hardware encryption, to generate a
strong encryption key. Later, the strong encryption key is used to encrypt
the data stored on the disk. This key protects data from unauthorized access
when the device is locked, so critical information is secured even if the
device is compromised.

--- Page 116 ---
Address Space Layout
Randomization (ASLR)
ASLR is an exploit mitigation technique introduced with iOS 4.3. ASLR
randomizes the application object's location in the memory, making it
difficult to exploit the memory corruption vulnerabilities.

--- Page 117 ---
Privilege separation
iOS runs with the principle of least privilege (PoLP). It contains two user
roles: root and mobile. The most important processes in the system run with
root user privileges. All other applications to which the user has direct
access, such as the browser and third-party applications, run with mobile
user privileges.

--- Page 118 ---
Stack-smashing protection
Stack-smashing protection is an exploit mitigation mechanism. It protects
the device against buffer overflow attacks by placing a random and known
value (called a stack canary) between a buffer and the control data on the
stack.

--- Page 119 ---
Data Execution Prevention (DEP)
DEP is an exploit mitigation technique mechanism through which a
processor can distinguish the portions of memory that are executable code
from data. For example, in a code injection attack, an attacker tries to inject
a vector and execute it. But DEP prevents this because it recognizes the
injected part as data and not code.

--- Page 120 ---
Data wiping
iOS provides the Erase All Content and Settings option to wipe the data on
an iPhone. This type of data wipe erases user settings and information by
removing the encryption keys that protect the data. As the encryption keys
are erased from the device, it is not possible to recover the deleted data, not
even during forensic investigations. Other wiping methods are available
that overwrite the data in the device memory. More information on wiping
can be found at https://support.apple.com/en-in/HT201274.

--- Page 121 ---
Activation Lock
Activation Lock, introduced with iOS 7, is a theft deterrent that works by
leveraging Find My iPhone. When Find My iPhone is enabled, it enables
Activation Lock, and a user's Apple ID and password will be required to
turn off Find My iPhone, to erase the device, and to reactivate it.

--- Page 122 ---
The App Store
The App Store is an application distribution platform for iOS, developed
and maintained by Apple. It is a centralized online store where users can
browse and download both free and paid apps. These apps expand the
functionality of a mobile device. As of the first quarter of 2019, there were
2.2 million applications in the App Store.
Apps available in the App Store are generally written by third-party
developers. Developers use Xcode and the iOS software development kit
(SDK) to develop applications. Later, they submit the app to Apple for
approval. Apple follows an extensive review process to check the app
against the company's guidelines. If Apple approves the app, it is published
to the App Store, where users can download or buy it. The strict review
process makes the App Store less prone to malware, but not 100% secure.
XcodeGhost, the Apple malware that infected 50 applications within the
Apple App Store, was detected in September 2015. This malware was built
into Xcode, which made it harder to detect, and was reported to affect more
than 500 million users worldwide. Once detected, Apple immediately
removed the infected applications.

--- Page 123 ---
Jailbreaking
Jailbreaking is the process of removing limitations imposed by Apple's
mobile OS through the use of software and hardware exploits. Jailbreaking
permits unsigned code to run and gain root access on the OS. The most
common reason for jailbreaking is to expand the limited feature set imposed
by Apple's App Store and to install unapproved apps. Jailbreaking can aid
in forensic acquisition but will void the user's warranty, potentially brick the
device, and may not support being restored to the factory settings.
If you jailbreak a device, it's best to assume that it will forever be jailbroken and the
warranty is no longer valid.
Many publicly available jailbreaking tools add an unofficial application
installer to the device, such as Cydia, which allows users to install many
third-party applications, tools, tweaks, and apps from an online file
repository. The software downloaded from Cydia opens up endless
possibilities on a device that a non-jailbroken device would never be able to
do. The most popular jailbreaking tools are Pangu, TaiG, Electra, and
Unc0ver. Not all iOS versions are jailbreakable. The following table will
help you to choose the appropriate jailbreak tool according to the device
you have and its iOS version:
Version Release date Tool
iPhone OS 1.0 June 29, 2007 (no name)
iPhone OS 2.0 July 11, 2008 PwnageTool

--- Page 124 ---
iPhone OS 3.0 June 17, 2009 PwnageTool
iOS 4.0 June 21, 2010 PwnageTool
iOS 5.0 October 12, 2011 redsn0w
iOS 6.0 September 19, 2012redsn0w
iOS 7.0 - 7.0.6 September 18, 2013evasi0n7
iOS 7.1 - 7.1.2 May 29, 2014 Pangu
iOS 8.0 - 8.1 September 17, 2014Pangu8
iOS 8.1.1 - 8.4 November 17, 2014TaiG, PP Jailbreak
iOS 8.4.1 August 13, 2015 EtasonJB
iOS 9.0  September 16, 2015Pangu9
iOS 9.1 October 21, 2015 Pangu9

--- Page 125 ---
iOS 9.3.5 August 25, 2016 Phoenix
iOS 10.0 - 10.1.1 September 13, 2016Yalu
iOS 11.0 - 11.1.2 September 19, 2017LiberiOS
iOS 11.0 - 11.1.2 September 19, 2017Electra1112
iOS 11.0 - 11.4.1 July 7, 2018 Electra1131
iOS 11.0 - 11.4.1 October 14, 2018 Unc0ver
iOS 12.0 - 12.2,
12.4 - 12.4.2 September 17, 2019Chimera, Unc0ver
iOS 12.3 - 13.2.3 November 10, 2019checkra1n
 
We have now learned about the jailbreaking process and have had a look at
the different jailbreaking tools currently available.

--- Page 126 ---
Summary
The first step in the forensic examination of an iOS device should be
identifying the device model. The model of an iOS device can be used to
help you as the examiner develop an understanding of the underlying
components and capabilities of the device, which can be used to drive the
methods for acquisition and examination. Legacy iOS devices should not be
disregarded, because they may surface as part of an investigation. You must
be aware of all iOS devices, as old devices are sometimes still in use and
may be tied to a criminal investigation.
The next chapter will provide tools that will aid in obtaining data from iOS
devices to later forensically examine. Not all tools are created equal, so it's
important to know the best tools to get the job done properly.

--- Page 127 ---
Data Acquisition from iOS Devices
An iOS device that's been recovered from a crime scene can be a rich
source of evidence. Think about how personal a smartphone is to a user;
nothing else that's digital comes close. We rarely leave our homes or even
walk around outside them without our smartphones within arm's reach. It's
literally a glimpse into the most personal aspects of a human, almost like a
diary of our everyday activity. According to several news references, Oscar
Pistorius' iPads were examined by a mobile expert and presented during his
trial to show his internet activity hours before the death of his girlfriend.
When an iOS device can provide access to a so-called smoking gun, you, as
the examiner, must ensure that you know how to properly handle, acquire,
and analyze the device.
There are different ways to acquire forensic data from an iOS device.
Though each method will have its pluses and minuses, the fundamental
principle of any acquisition method is to obtain as much data as possible.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
iOS device operating modes
Password protection and potential bypasses
Logical acquisition
Filesystem acquisition

--- Page 128 ---
Operating modes of iOS devices
Before we dive into forensic techniques and acquisition methods, it's
important to know the different operating modes of an iOS device. Many
forensic tools and methods require you to place the device in one of the
operating modes. Understanding the iOS device's operating modes is
required in order to perform a particular action on the device.
While most commercial tools will demonstrate the proper steps to get the
device in a particular mode, you must understand what that mode
represents. iOS devices are capable of running in different operating modes:
normal mode, recovery mode, and Device Firmware Update (DFU) mode.
Some forensic tools require you to know which mode the device is
currently utilizing. We will define each mode in this section.
Note that when the term iPhone is mentioned, it should be understood that the
statement remains true for all iOS devices.

--- Page 129 ---
Normal mode
When an iPhone is switched on, its operating system is booted; this mode is
known as normal mode. Most regular activities (calling, texting, and so on)
that are performed on an iPhone will be run in normal mode.
When an iPhone is turned on, internally, it goes through a secure boot
chain, as shown in the following diagram. This does not occur for
jailbroken devices. Each step in the boot-up process contains software
components that are cryptographically signed by Apple to ensure integrity:
A secure boot chain of an iPhone in normal mode
*The boot ROM, in turn, verifies whether the Low-Level Bootloader (LLB)
is signed by Apple and loads it. The LLB is loaded and verified by the boot
ROM, but this only occurs on devices with an A9 or earlier A-series
processor
The boot ROM, known as the secure ROM, is read-only memory (ROM)
and is the first significant piece of code that runs on an iPhone (https://www.a
pple.com/business/docs/iOS_Security_Guide.pdf). An explanation of the boot
process for iOS devices is defined in the following steps:

--- Page 130 ---
1. The boot ROM code contains the Apple root certificate authority
(CA) public key, which is used to verify the signature of the next stage
before allowing it to load.
2. When the iPhone is started, the application processor executes the code
from the boot ROM.
3. The boot ROM, in turn, verifies whether the Low-Level Bootloader
(LLB) is signed by Apple and loads it. The LLB is loaded and verified
by the boot ROM, but this only occurs on devices with an A9 or earlier
A-series processor.
4. When the LLB finishes its tasks, it verifies and loads the second-stage
boot loader (iBoot). iBoot verifies and loads the iOS kernel.
5. The iOS kernel, in turn, verifies and runs all the user applications.
When an iOS device is in this state, it's possible to gain a part that is
accessible to the user through forensic acquisition. Most often, this includes
a logical acquisition, which will be discussed later in this chapter.

--- Page 131 ---
Recovery mode
During the boot-up process, if one step is unable to load or verify the next
step, then the boot-up is stopped and the iPhone displays the screen shown
in the following screenshot:
iOS device recovery mode
This mode is known as recovery mode and is required to perform upgrades
or restore the iPhone. To enter recovery mode, perform the following steps:
1. Turn off the device.
2. Hold down the iPhone Home button and connect the device to a
computer via a USB cable. The device should turn on.
3. Continue holding the Home button until the Connect to iTunes screen
appears. Then, you can release the Home button (on a jailbroken iOS
device, this screen may appear with different icons). Most forensic
tools and extraction methods will alert you regarding the current state
of the iOS device.
4. To exit recovery mode, reboot the iPhone. On iPhone 6s and earlier,
this can be completed by holding down the Home and Sleep/Power
buttons until the Apple logo appears. On iPhone 7 and iPhone 7 Plus,
this can be done by holding the Side button and Volume Down button

--- Page 132 ---
together. On iPhone 8 and later, you do this by clicking the Volume Up
button, then clicking the Volume Down button, and then holding down
the Side button.
You can read more about recovery mode on iOS devices at https://support.apple.com/en-in/HT20
1263.
Normally, the process of rebooting returns the iPhone from recovery mode
to normal mode. This same methodology applies to the Apple Watch. You
may experience a situation where the iPhone constantly reboots into
recovery mode. This is known as a recovery loop. A recovery loop may
occur when the user or examiner attempts to jailbreak the iOS device and an
error occurs. To get the device out of a recovery loop, the device must be
connected to iTunes so that a backup can be restored to the device.
This makes changes to the evidence, so ensure that you have validated your acquisition
methods on a test device prior to attempting to use your methods on real evidence.

--- Page 133 ---
DFU mode
During the boot-up process, if the Boot ROM is unable to load or verify the
LLB or iBoot (on newer devices), the iPhone enters Device Firmware
Upgrade (DFU) mode. DFU mode is a low-level diagnostic mode and is
designed to perform firmware upgrades for iPhones.
To enter DFU mode, perform the following steps for iPhone 8 and later:
1. Connect the device to your workstation via a USB cable.
2. Press the Volume Up button and quickly release it.
3. Press the Volume Down button and quickly release it.
4. Hold the Side button and press the Volume Down button again.
5. After 5 seconds, release the Side button, but continue holding the
Volume Down button until you see the Recovery screen.
Follow these steps for iPhone 7:
1. Connect the device to your workstation via a USB cable.
2. At the same time, press and hold the Side and Volume Down buttons.
3. Release the Side button, but continue to hold the Volume Down button
until you see the Recovery screen.
Follow these steps for iPhone 6s and earlier:
1. Connect the device to your workstation via a USB cable.
2. At the same time, press and hold the Home and the Top (or Side)
buttons.
3. Release the Top (or Side) button and continue holding the Home
button. 
On iPhone 6s and earlier, nothing will be displayed on the screen when the device is in
DFU mode.
To verify whether the iPhone is in DFU mode on macOS, launch a System
Report and go to the USB option. You should see something similar to the

--- Page 134 ---
following screenshot:
The MacBook system information displaying a device in DFU mode
Next, we will have a quick look at the tools that are required to set up the
forensic environment.

--- Page 135 ---
Setting up the forensic environment
Nowadays, we have a few tools that can be used by mobile forensic
examiners to acquire and analyze iOS devices using both macOS and
Windows systems as the hosts. For example, Elcomsoft iOS Forensic
Toolkit has both macOS and Windows versions; as for free and open source
tools, the libimobiledevice library can be used – not only on macOS and
Windows forensic workstations, but even on Linux!
We are going to introduce you to these tools with hands-on exercises, of
course, including practical logical and filesystem acquisitions, and even
jailbreaking, later in this chapter. But let's start with password protection
and potential bypasses, since, without the passcode, we can't extract
anything from a modern iOS device.

--- Page 136 ---
Password protection and potential
bypasses
We want to start with the bad news: if you are examining an iPhone that
runs iOS 8 or newer, and especially if it's a newer device, for example, the
iPhone 6s, your chances of unlocking it are not good at all.
Of course, there are some hardware-based solutions, such as IP-BOX 3, but
all of them work only occasionally, and using one of them can even result in
bricking the device. With iOS 11, this problem becomes even more severe –
 even if the device under examination is not passcode protected, you will
need the passcode anyway as it must be entered to confirm the trust
between the device and your workstation.
So, what should a mobile forensic examiner do? Use the lockdown
files! The lockdown files, which are stored as a plist file on trusted
computers, allow you to trick the device into believing it's unlocked or
trusted on the forensic workstation.
The lockdown files are located in the following locations:
/var/db/lockdown on macOS
C:\ProgramData\Apple\Lockdown on Windows 7 and later releases
You must be aware that unlocking with a lockdown file only works if the
device was unlocked with a passcode at least once after the last reboot.
There are also some advanced techniques that exist. These include
fingerprint molds to trick Touch ID, masks to trick Face ID, and NAND
mirroring to bypass passcode entry limits. 
The first technique was first demonstrated by Jason Chaikin. He
demonstrated how to bypass Touch ID by lifting another person's

--- Page 137 ---
fingerprint with common molding materials, such as dental mold and Play-
Doh.
The second technique was demonstrated as a proof of concept by
the Vietnamese cybersecurity firm Bkav. They created a mask that can be
used to trick the Face ID feature using a combination of three-dimensional
printing, makeup, and two-dimensional images.
The last technique was demonstrated by Sergei Skorobogatov, a senior
research associate at the Cambridge Computer Laboratory's Security Group.
This technique allows you to bypass passcode entry limits by soldering off
the iPhone's flash memory chip and cloning it. This technique should work
on any iOS device up to iPhone 6s Plus.

--- Page 138 ---
Logical acquisition
A logical acquisition captures a part of what is accessible to the user; in
other words, what is included in an iTunes backup. It means that we won't
get any deleted files, but, thanks to SQLite databases' free lists and
unallocated space, we can recover deleted records, including SMS and other
chats, browsing history, and so on. We will discuss recovering SQLite data
and deleted artifacts in Chapter 5, iOS Data Analysis and Recovery.
Logical acquisition is the simplest way to ascertain whether the device is
unlocked as it simply uses the built-in backup mechanism. Most tools and
methods that support the logical acquisition of iOS devices will fail if the
device is locked. Some think that if a physical image is captured, there is
little to no need for a logical acquisition. However, not all data is parsed in a
physical image, which is why having access to a logical image, which
results in readable data, will assist you in digging deep into the physical
image for artifacts to support your forensic investigation.
Logical acquisition is the fastest, easiest, and cheapest way to gain access to
data stored on an iOS device. There are a variety of tools, ranging from
commercial to free, that are capable of capturing logical images. Most of
these tools require that the device be unlocked, or access to the plist file
from the host machine be readily available. 

--- Page 139 ---
Practical logical acquisition with
libimobiledevice
Having the theory under your belt is good, but putting this into practice is
much better. Let's create a logical image of an iPhone running iOS 13.2 with
libimobiledevice, which should already be installed on your workstation, as we
used it for device information gathering in the previous chapter.
OK, let's start:
1. First of all, let's make our backups encrypted. Connect the iOS device
to your workstation and start the Command Prompt. Change the
directory to the one containing libimobiledevice and type in the following
command:
idevicebackup2.exe backup encryption on <your_password>
2. If you see Backup encryption has been enabled successfully, then
you've done everything right and the backups will be encrypted. This
will help you, the forensics examiner, to gain more information
regarding users' passwords, Safari browsing history, and much more.
 
3. It's time to create the backup—our iOS device logical image. To do this,
type in the following command:
idevicebackup2 backup --full <the_folder_you_want_the_image_to_be_saved>
That's it. You can see the logical imaging process in the following
screenshot:

--- Page 140 ---
iPhone logical imaging with libimobiledevice
Next, let's look at logical acquisition with the Belkasoft Acquisition Tool.

--- Page 141 ---
Practical logical acquisition with
the Belkasoft Acquisition Tool
Since logical acquisition is the most common option for modern iOS
devices, we'll demonstrate how to use a few more free tools. The first one is
the Belkasoft Acquisition Tool. This tool can be used not only for iOS
device acquisition, but also for hard drives, and even cloud data.
Let's acquire an iPhone running iOS 13.2.3 using the Belkasoft Acquisition
Tool:
1. Launch the Belkasoft Acquisition Tool and choose the Mobile device
option:
Choosing the source
2. In the next window, choose the Apple option:

--- Page 142 ---
Choosing the mobile type
3. Now, choose the acquisition method and the image path:

--- Page 143 ---
Choosing the acquisition method
The tool is able to create an iTunes backup if the device isn't
jailbroken and perform filesystem extraction if it is.
4. Wait for the task to finish successfully. You will find your device's
logical image in the folder you chose in the previous step:

--- Page 144 ---
Creating the backup
The backup can be analyzed both by Belkasoft Evidence Center and by
many other mobile forensic tools.

--- Page 145 ---
Practical logical acquisition with
Magnet ACQUIRE
Another free tool capable of logical acquisition is ACQUIRE from Magnet
Forensics. Let's perform a logical acquisition again, this time using a device
running iOS 12.2:
1. Launch Magnet ACQUIRE and choose the device you want to image
from the list:

--- Page 146 ---
Choosing the device
2. Choose the type of image you want to acquire. We want to acquire a
logical image and our device is not jailbroken, so we are going to

--- Page 147 ---
choose the Quick option:
Choosing the image type
3. You can add a description of the evidence source if needed, and choose
the folder where you want the image to be saved:

--- Page 148 ---
Choosing the destination folder, image name, and image information
4. Wait for the tasks to finish successfully; you'll see a summary of the
acquisition process:

--- Page 149 ---
Creating the image
All extracted data will be saved to the destination folder in a ZIP archive.
Also, the destination folder will contain a TXT file with the acquisition's
process log and image information.
The next section will walk you through jailbreaking and filesystem
acquisition.

--- Page 150 ---
Filesystem acquisition
Secure Enclave has brought new challenges to iOS forensic examiners. We
can't extract the encryption keys that are required to decrypt the device
image, so performing physical acquisition is useless. But there is filesystem
acquisition. Unfortunately, in most cases, it requires the iOS device to be
jailbroken. The next section will show you how to jailbreak an iPhone
running iOS 11.4.1 with Electra and an iPhone running iOS 13.2 with
Checkra1n.

--- Page 151 ---
Practical jailbreaking
To perform filesystem acquisition, we need our iOS device to be jailbroken.
The steps to jailbreak an iOS device running 11.4.1 are as follows:
1. Download Electra from: https://github.com/coolstar/electra-ipas/raw/master/E
lectra1141-1.3.2.ipa.
2. Download Cydia Impactor (http://www.cydiaimpactor.com/), run it, and connect
the device to your workstation:
Running Cydia Impactor
3. Drag and drop the Electra IPA file to the Cydia Impactor window.
4. Type any Apple ID in the new window (you can register a new one for
every device you examine).
5. Log on with this Apple ID to https://appleid.apple.com/ and generate an
app-specific password under the Security section. Paste this password
into the next window. Wait for the process to finish.
 
6. On the phone, go to Settings | General | Device Management | Apple ID
and tap Trust:

--- Page 152 ---
Verifying the developer
7. Put the phone into Airplane mode, turn Siri off, and reboot the device.
8. Tap the Electra icon on the Springboard and then choose Jailbreak. If
the process finishes successfully, you will find the Cydia icon on the
Springboard:

--- Page 153 ---
Jailbreaking the device
Now, the phone is jailbroken and ready for filesystem acquisition.
Checkra1n is based on a bootrom vulnerability and exploit and supports a wide
range of iOS devices, even those running the latest (at the time of writing)
iOS 13.2. Here are the steps to jailbreak an iOS device running 13.2:
1. Download Checkra1n from: https://checkra.in/.

--- Page 154 ---
2. Run the application. At the time of writing, Checkra1n is only available
for macOS.
3. Connect the device and put it into DFU mode:
Putting the device into DFU mode
4. Wait for the exploitation process to finish:

--- Page 155 ---
Exploitation process
Once the device has been rebooted, you will find the checkra1n icon on the
Springboard – the device is now jailbroken and ready for filesystem
acquisition.
For more jailbreaking techniques, please refer to the Jailbreaking section of Chapter 2,
Understanding the Internals of iOS Devices.

--- Page 156 ---
Practical filesystem acquisition with
free tools
It's time to perform filesystem acquisition. All we'll need is iproxy from
libimobiledevice:
1. Open a Command Prompt window and run iproxy with the following
parameters:
2. Open another Command Prompt window, change the directory to the
one you want your image to be stored in, and run the following
command:
ssh root@127.0.0.1 -p 4444 "tar -cf - /private/var/" > userdata.tar
To connect via SSH, you will be prompted for the necessary password. The default
password for SSH is alpine.
Once the process has finished, you'll find the created filesystem image in the
directory you changed to before running the preceding command. It's a TAR
archive and can be opened with many archivers, such as 7-Zip:

--- Page 157 ---
Filesystem image contents
Next, let's look at the Elcomsoft iOS Forensic Toolkit.

--- Page 158 ---
Practical filesystem acquisition with
Elcomsoft iOS Forensic Toolkit
Of course, commercial tools are more stable and reliable. One of the tools
that's capable of filesystem acquisition is the Elcomsoft iOS Forensic
Toolkit. Here, we are going to acquire a jailbroken iOS device running iOS
12.4.3.
The steps to do this are as follows:
1. Connect the device to your workstation and start Toolkit.cmd.
2. Choose the port to use for SSH connection (the default is 22, but since
we used checkra1n for jailbreaking, the port is 44 instead) and type in
the password (the default is alpine):
3. To acquire the device filesystem, type F:

--- Page 159 ---
4. Choose the image name and start the process.
Once the process has finished, we'll have a filesystem image ready to be
analyzed with a mobile forensic tool of our choice.

--- Page 160 ---
Summary
The first step in iOS device forensic examination is to acquire the data from
the device. There are several different ways to acquire data from an iOS
device. This chapter covered logical and filesystem acquisition techniques,
as well as jailbreaking and methods to bypass passcodes. 
While filesystem acquisition is the best method for forensically obtaining a
majority of the data from iOS devices, backup files may exist or be the only
method to extract data from the device.
The next chapter will discuss iOS device backup files in detail, including
user, forensic, encrypted, and iCloud backup files, and the methods that you
can perform to conduct your forensic examination.

--- Page 161 ---
Data Acquisition from iOS
Backups
In the previous chapter, we covered techniques to acquire data from an iOS
device, which included logical and filesystem acquisition. This chapter
covers techniques to acquire a backup of files from the device onto a
computer or iCloud, using Apple's synchronization protocol. 
The physical acquisition of an iOS device provides the most data in an
investigation, but you can also find a wealth of information in iOS backups.
iOS device users have several options to back up the data present on their
devices. Users can choose to back up the data to their computer, using the
Apple iTunes software, or to the Apple cloud storage service known as
iCloud. Every time an iPhone is synced with a computer or to iCloud, it
creates a backup by copying the selected files from the device. The user can
determine what is contained in the backup, so some backups may be more
inclusive than others. Also, the user can back up to both a computer and
iCloud and the data derived from each location may differ. This often
occurs due to the limitations of iCloud's free storage. The user may simply
back up photos and contacts to iCloud but may take a complete backup of
all the data on their computer. As previously mentioned, physical
acquisition provides the best access to all data on the iOS device; however,
backups may be the only available source of digital evidence, especially if
we are dealing with the most recent iOS devices.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
Working with iTunes backups
Creating and analyzing backups with iTunes
Extracting unencrypted backups
Handling encrypted backup files
Working with iCloud backups

--- Page 162 ---
Working with iTunes backups
A wealth of information is stored on any computer that has been previously
synced with an iOS device. These computers, commonly referred to as host
computers, can have historical data and passcode bypass certificates. In a
criminal investigation, a search warrant can be obtained to seize a computer
that belongs to a suspect, in order to access the backup and lockdown
certificates. For all other cases, consent or permissible access is required.
iOS backup file forensics mainly involves analyzing an offline backup
produced by an iPhone or an iPad. Apple Watch data will be contained
within the iPhone backup to which it is synced.
The iTunes backup method is also useful in cases where other acquisition
types are not feasible. In this situation, you essentially create an iTunes
backup of the device and analyze it using forensic software. Thus, it is
important for you to completely understand the backup process and the tools
involved, to ensure tools are capable of creating a forensic backup without
contaminating the devices with other existing data in iTunes.
iPhone backup files can be created using the iTunes software, which is
available for the macOS and Windows platforms. iTunes is a free utility
provided by Apple for data synchronization and management between iOS
devices and the computer. iTunes uses Apple's proprietary synchronization
protocol to copy data from the iOS device to a computer. For example, an
iPhone can be synced with a computer using a cable or Wi-Fi. iTunes
provides an option for an encrypted backup, but, by default, it creates an
unencrypted backup whenever an iPhone is synced. Encrypted backups,
when cracked, provide additional access to data stored on the iOS device.
This will be discussed later in this chapter.
Users often create backup files to protect their data in the event that their
device is damaged or lost. Either a forensic backup is created to act as the
best evidence or data is simply extracted from existing iOS backup files to
search for legacy information. For example, if you are under investigation

--- Page 163 ---
and you delete files or wipe your iPhone, your backup files on your iCloud
and your Mac still exist. Depending on whether iTunes or iCloud was used,
multiple backups for the same device may exist. You will have to analyze
each backup forensically to uncover artifacts relating to the investigation.
iTunes is configured to automatically initiate the synchronization process
once the iOS device is connected to the computer. To avoid unintended data
exchange between the iOS device and the computer, disable the automatic
synchronization process before connecting your evidence to the forensic
workstation. The screenshot in Step 2 of the following process illustrates the
option that disables automatic syncing in iTunes version 12.9.4.102.
To disable auto-syncing in iTunes, perform the following steps:
1. Navigate to Edit | Preferences | Devices.
2. Check Prevent iPods, iPhones, and iPads from syncing automatically
and click on the OK button, as illustrated in the following screenshot:

--- Page 164 ---
Disabling automatic syncing in iTunes
3. As seen in the preceding screenshot, iOS backup files exist on the
system. If this were a forensic workstation, these backup files wouldn't
exist or would be permanently removed to prevent cross-contamination.

--- Page 165 ---
4. Once you verify the synchronization settings, connect the iOS device to
the computer using a Universal Serial Bus (USB) cable. If the
connected device is not protected with a passcode or it was already
connected to the computer recently, iTunes immediately recognizes the
device; otherwise, you'll have to enter the passcode. This can be
verified by the iPhone icon displayed on the left-hand side of the iTunes
interface, as illustrated in the following screenshot:

--- Page 166 ---
An iPhone recognized by iTunes
5. Before iTunes can access the iPhone, you must enable Trust between
the computer and the phone. You will be prompted to press Continue on
the computer (as highlighted in the following screenshot) and select

--- Page 167 ---
Trust on the iPhone. With iOS 11, you must also enter the device's
passcode:
iTunes prompts for access permissions
6. Once iTunes recognizes the device, a single click on the iPhone icon
displays the iPhone summary, including the iPhone's name, capacity,
firmware version, serial number, free space, and phone number. The
iPhone Summary page also displays the options to create backups. The
process of creating a backup will be discussed in the following section.
Now, we are ready to start backing up the device. The next section will walk
you through this process.

--- Page 168 ---
Creating and analyzing backups
with iTunes
In this section, we are going to walk you through backing up an iOS device
with Apple iTunes. We are using iTunes version 12.10.2.3 and an iPhone
running iOS version 13.2. Perform the following steps:
1. Connect the device and click on the iPhone icon displayed on the left-
hand side of the iTunes interface.
 
2. Go to the Backups section, where you can choose the backup
destination (local computer or iCloud), and whether it's encrypted, as
illustrated in the following screenshot:


--- Page 169 ---
iTunes Backups section
Encrypted iTunes backups contain data that unencrypted ones don't, including
passwords, Wi-Fi settings, and web browsing history, so make sure you are creating
encrypted backups for forensic purposes.
3. Click on the Back Up Now button and wait for the process to complete.
Once it's complete, the latest backup date and time will be changed.
If you want to use iTunes and save the backup to an external drive, observe
the following instructions (we are using iTunes version 12.10.2.3 and
Windows 10):
1. Rename the original backup folder.
2. Connect the external drive and create a backup folder on it.
3. Open Command Prompt and type the following command:
mklink /J "C:\Users\<username>\AppData\Roaming\Apple 
Computer\MobileSync\Backup" "f:\Backup"
4. Now, you can create a regular local backup, and it will be saved to your
external drive.
Now, we have the backup ready for further analysis. Let's look inside in
order to understand its structure.

--- Page 170 ---
Understanding the backup
structure
When the iPhone is backed up to a computer, the backup files are stored in
a backup directory, which exists as a 40-character hexadecimal string and
corresponds to the Unique Device Identifier (UDID) of the device. The
newest devices have changed the UDID format—now it's a 24-character
string, so their backups are named accordingly. The backup process may
take a considerable amount of time, depending on the size of the data stored
on the iPhone during the first backup. The location of the backup directory
in which your backup data is stored depends on the computer's operating
system. The following table displays a list of the common operating
systems and the default locations of the iTunes backup directory:
Operating
system Backup directory location
Windows XP C:\Documents and Settings\<username>\Application Data\Apple
Computer\MobileSync\Backup\
Windows
Vista/7/8/10
C:\Users\<username>\AppData\Roaming\Apple
Computer\MobileSync\Backup\
macOS
~/Library/Application Support/MobileSync/Backup/
(~ represents the home folder)

--- Page 171 ---
 
During the first sync, iTunes creates a backup directory and takes a
complete backup of the device. Currently, on subsequent syncs, iTunes only
backs up the files that are modified on the device and updates the existing
backup directory. This has not always been true since, in the past, a new
backup was created every time the iOS device was backed up. Also, when a
device is updated or restored, iTunes automatically initiates a backup and
takes a differential backup. A differential backup has the same name as the
backup directory but is appended with a dash (-), the International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) date of the backup, a dash (-),
and the time in a 24-hour format with seconds ([UDID]+ '-' + [Date]+'-'+[Time
stamp]).
The iTunes backup may make a copy of everything on the device, including
contacts, Short Message Service (SMS) messages, photos, calendars,
music, call logs, configuration files, documents, the keychain, network
settings, offline web application cache, bookmarks, cookies, application
data (if selected), and more. For example, emails and passwords will not be
extracted if the backup is not encrypted. The backup also contains device
details, such as the serial number, UDID, Subscriber Identification
Module (SIM) details, and phone number. This information can also be
used to prove a relationship between the backup and the mobile device.
The backup directory contains four standard files, along with the individual
files (up to iOS 9) or folders (iOS 10 and newer). Up to iOS 9, these four
files were info.plist, manifest.plist, status.plist, and manifest.mbdb, but starting
from iOS 10, we have the following standard files:
info.plist
manifest.plist
status.plist
manifest.db
These files store details about the backup and the device from which it was
derived.

--- Page 172 ---
info.plist
The info.plist file stores details about the backed-up device, and typically
contains the following information:
Applications: This is the list of applications installed on the device.
Build version: This is the iOS build version number.
Device name and display name: This is the name of the device, which
typically includes the owner's name.
GUID: This is the Globally Unique Identifier (GUID) of the device.
ICCID: This is the Integrated Circuit Card Identifier (ICCID), which
is the serial number of the SIM.
IMEI: This is the International Mobile Equipment Identity (IMEI),
which is used to uniquely identify the mobile phone.
Installed Applications: This is the list of installed applications.
Last backup date: This is the timestamp of the last successful backup.
MEID: This is the Mobile Equipment Identifier (MEID) of the device.
Phone Number: This is the phone number of the device at the time of
backup.
Product Name: This is the name of the device (for example, iPhone X).
Product type and product version: This is the device's model and firmware
version.
Serial Number: This is the serial number of the device.
Target Identifier and Unique Identifier: This is the UDID of the device.
iTunes Files: This contains information about photos, folders, voice
memos, and iTunes preferences.
iTunes Settings: This contains information about deleted applications
and applications library.
iTunes version: This is the version of iTunes used to create the backup.
Let's now take a look at the manifest.plist file.

--- Page 173 ---
manifest.plist
The manifest.plist file describes the contents of the backup, and typically
contains the following information:
Backup keybag: Backup keybag contains a set of data protection class keys
that are different from the keys in System keybag, and backed-up data is
re-encrypted with the new class keys. Keys in Backup keybag facilitate the
storage of backups in a secure manner.
Version: This is the backup version.
Date: This is the timestamp of when a backup was created or last
updated.
ManifestKey: This is the key used to encrypt manifest.db (wrapped with
protection class 4).
WasPasscodeSet: This identifies whether a passcode was set on the device
when it was last synced.
Lockdown: This contains device details, the last backup computer's name,
and other remote syncing profiles.
Applications: This is a list of third-party applications installed on the
backed-up device, their version numbers, and bundle identifiers.
IsEncrypted: This identifies whether the backup is encrypted. For
encrypted backups, the value is True; otherwise, it is False.
Next, we will look at the status.plist file.

--- Page 174 ---
status.plist
The status.plist file stores details about the backup status, and typically
contains the following information:
IsFullBackup: This identifies whether the backup was a full backup of the
device.
UUID: This is the UUID of the device.
Date: This is the timestamp of the last time the backup was modified.
BackupState: This identifies whether the backup is a new backup or one
that has been updated.
SnapshotState: This identifies whether the backup process has finished
successfully.
Now, we will look at the manifest.db file.

--- Page 175 ---
manifest.db
manifest.db is an SQLite database that contains a list of all the files and
folders extracted from the iPhone via the backup mechanism. The Files table
of the database includes the following columns:
fileID: This is a Secure Hash Algorithm 1 (SHA1) hash of the domain,
plus the - symbol and file or folder relative path. For
example, ae94e0607ca39a88c18aca095cb5b4f8471291a0 is the SHA1 hash for
CameraRollDomain-Media/PhotoData/Thumbnails/V2/DCIM/102APPLE.
domain: This is the domain to which the file or folder belongs (all files in
iOS are divided into multiple domains—for example,
CameraRollDomain and HomeDomain).
relativePath: This is the relative path to the file (including the filename)
or folder.
flags: These are the file flags.
file: This is an embedded .plist file. These .plist files include the
following important pieces of information, among others:
LastModified: This is the file's last modification timestamp in Unix
format.
Birth: This is the file creation timestamp in Unix format. The fields
are shown in the following screenshot:

--- Page 176 ---
The manifest.db contents
You can easily export this .plist embedded binary using, for example, DB
Browser for SQLite (DB4S). To do this, observe the following steps:
1. Open manifest.db using the Open Database button.
2. Go to the Browse Data tab.
3. Click on a cell from in the file column.
4. On the Edit Database Cell pane, use the Export button to save the data
as a .plist file, as illustrated in the following screenshot:

--- Page 177 ---
Exporting an embedded .plist file with DB4S
Since iOS 10, files are no longer named with 40-character hexadecimal
strings. Instead, you will see a list of folders named with 2-character
hexadecimal strings, which contain the files you used to see in previous
versions, as illustrated in the following screenshot:

--- Page 178 ---
iPhone backup files
Now that you understand the backup structure, let's learn how to extract
valuable data from it.

--- Page 179 ---
Extracting unencrypted backups
There are many free and commercial tools available to analyze data from
unencrypted backups. These tools analyze the manifest.db database, restore
the filenames, and create the file structure that users see on the iOS
device. Some popular tools include iBackup Viewer, iExplorer, and
commercial forensic tools such as Belkasoft Evidence Center, Magnet
AXIOM, and UFED Physical Analyzer.

--- Page 180 ---
iBackup Viewer
iBackup Viewer is a free tool for both Windows and macOS that can be
downloaded from http://www.imactools.com/iphonebackupviewer/.
The tool expects the backup to be located in the default location, but you can
change it to the location of your choice—for example, an external drive.
To extract the backup, observe the following steps:
1. If the backup you want to analyze is not saved in the default location,
click on the Preferences hyperlink on the main screen and choose the
correct location, as illustrated in the following screenshot:
Choosing the backup location
2. You will see the backups available in the location you chose. Click on
the one you want to examine.

--- Page 181 ---
You will see potential evidence sources that are available, including
contacts, call history, messages, the calendar, notes, voicemails, and
browsing history, as shown in the following screenshot:
Potential evidence sources
3. It's important to note that you can browse the backup as a filesystem,
using the Raw Data mode (the last icon in the previous screenshot), as
shown in the following screenshot:
The Raw Data mode
With the help of this tool, you can easily view and export files of interest. Of
course, it's not the only tool capable of solving such tasks. Let's look at
another one—iExplorer.

--- Page 182 ---
iExplorer
A free version of iExplorer is available at https://macroplant.com/iexplorer. This
tool supports both Windows and macOS and is capable of browsing iTunes
backups, too. Here is how to use it:
1. Launch iExplorer and click on Browse iTunes Backups.
2. To add a backup from a custom location, click on Add/Modify Backup
Location.
3. Now, click on the Add Backup Location button and choose the path, as
illustrated in the following screenshot:
Adding a custom path
4.  The backups from your custom location should now be available. 
Also, there is an interesting option—iExplorer can gather SQLite databases
for you. To do this, click on the Raw Databases button to take you to the

--- Page 183 ---
following screen (you will learn more about SQLite forensics in the
following chapter):
iExplorer Raw Databases option
You can also browse the backup as a list of files and folders with the help of
iExplorer; use the left pane for this. Also, you can use the Backup

--- Page 184 ---
Explorer button and then the main pane to browse the backup.
As you can see, there are enough tools capable of extracting valuable pieces
of data from an iTunes backup, even if it's encrypted. Of course, it's usually
possible if you know the password. But what if you don't? You will learn
how to bypass it in the next section.

--- Page 185 ---
Handling encrypted backup files
For encrypted backups, the backup files are encrypted using the Advanced
Encryption Standard-256 (AES-256) algorithm in the Cipher Block
Chaining (CBC) mode, with a unique key and a null initialization vector
(IV). The unique file keys are protected with a set of class keys from Backup
keybag. The class keys in Backup keybag are protected with a key derived from
the password set in iTunes through 10,000 iterations of the Password-
Based Key Derivation Function 2 (PBKDF2). In iOS 10.2 this
mechanism was upgraded, so now, there are 10,000,000 iterations.
Many free and commercial tools provide support for encrypted backup file
parsing if the password is known. Unfortunately, it's not always true, so
sometimes forensic examiners have to crack such passwords. The next
section will walk you through this process, with Elcomsoft Phone Breaker.

--- Page 186 ---
Elcomsoft Phone Breaker
Elcomsoft Phone Breaker is a graphics processing unit (GPU)-
accelerated commercial tool from Elcomsoft, developed for the Windows
platform. The tool can decrypt an encrypted backup file when the backup
password is not available. The tool provides an option to launch a password
brute-force attack on the encrypted backup if the backup password is not
available. Elcomsoft Phone Breaker tries to recover the plain-text password
that protects the encrypted backup, using a dictionary and brute-force
attacks. Passwords that are relatively short and simple can be recovered in a
reasonable amount of time. However, if the backup is protected with a strong
and complex password, breaking it can take forever.
The tool is available here (including free trial version): https://www.elcomsoft.co
m/eppb.html.
To brute-force the backup password, perform the following steps:
1. Launch the Elcomsoft Phone Breaker tool and the tool's main screen
will appear, as shown in the following screenshot:

--- Page 187 ---
Elcomsoft Phone Breaker's main screen
2. Navigate to Password Recovery Wizard | Choose source | iOS device
backup. Navigate to the backup file you want to crack, and select the
Manifest.plist file.
3. Configure the brute-force pattern in the Attacks section and click on the
Start button to start the brute-force attack, as illustrated in the following
screenshot:

--- Page 188 ---
Password recovery process
If the brute-force attack is successful, the tool displays the password on the
main screen.
If you have an iPhone running iOS 11 or later, and its passcode, you can
reset the actual password and make a backup with a new known password.
Here is how to do it:
1. On the iPhone, go to Settings | General | Reset.
2. Choose Reset All Settings and enter the device's passcode. It's
important to note that no data will be deleted.
3. Once the settings are reset, you can create a new backup with a
password of your choice.
If the Screen Time password is set, you will need it as well to reset the backup password.

--- Page 189 ---
Working with iCloud backups
iCloud is a cloud storage and cloud computing service by Apple, launched
in October 2011. The service allows users to keep data such as calendars,
contacts, reminders, photos, documents, bookmarks, applications, notes,
and more in sync across multiple compatible devices (iOS devices running
with iOS 5 or later; computers with macOS X 10.7.2 or later; and Microsoft
Windows), using a centralized iCloud account. The service also allows
users to wirelessly and automatically back up their iOS devices to iCloud.
iCloud also provides other services, such as Find My iPhone (to track a lost
phone and wipe it remotely) and Find My Friends (to share locations with
friends and notify the user when a device arrives at a certain location).
Signing up with iCloud is free, and is simple to perform with an Apple ID.
When you sign up for iCloud, Apple grants you access to 5 GB of free
remote storage. If you need more storage, you can purchase the upgrade
plan. To keep your data secure, Apple forces users to choose a strong
password when creating an Apple ID to use with iCloud. The password
must have a minimum of eight characters, including a number, an uppercase
letter, and a lowercase letter.
iOS devices running on iOS 5 and later allow users to back up the device
settings and data to iCloud. Data backed up includes photos, videos,
documents, application data, device settings, messages, contacts, calendars,
emails, and keychain, as shown in the following screenshot. You can turn
on iCloud backup on your device by navigating to Settings | Passwords &
Accounts | iCloud | iCloud:

--- Page 190 ---
iCloud backup options on the iPhone

--- Page 191 ---
iCloud can automatically back up your data when your phone is plugged in,
locked, and connected to Wi-Fi. That is to say, iCloud backups represent a
fresh and near-real-time copy of information stored on the device, as long
as space is available to create a current backup.
You can also initiate an iCloud backup from a computer by connecting the
device to iTunes and choosing the iCloud option. iCloud backups are
incremental; that is, once the initial iCloud backup is completed, all the
subsequent backups only copy the files that are changed on the device.
iCloud secures your data by encrypting it when it is transmitted over the
internet, storing it in an encrypted format on the server, and using secure
tokens for authentication.
Apple's built-in apps (for example, Mail and Contacts) use a secure token to
access iCloud services. Using secure tokens for authentication eliminates
the need to store the iCloud password on devices and computers.

--- Page 192 ---
Extracting iCloud backups
Online backups stored on the iCloud are commonly retrieved when the
original iOS device is damaged, upgraded, or lost. To extract a backup from
iCloud, you must know the user's Apple ID and password. With the known
Apple ID and password, you can log on to https://www.icloud.com/ and get
access to contacts, notes, emails, calendars, photos, reminders, and more.
You can also use forensic tools to extract data from iCloud. For example,
you can use Belkasoft Acquisition Tool, a free tool from Belkasoft that can
be downloaded from: https://belkasoft.com/get. 
To extract the iCloud data, perform the following steps:
1. Launch Belkasoft Acquisition Tool.
2. Choose the Cloud option.
3. Choose iCloud.
4. Type the Apple ID login and password, and click Next.
5. Choose the artifacts you want to download and the target folder in
which you want to place them, as illustrated in the following
screenshot:

--- Page 194 ---
Data types available for downloading
6. Enter the verification code.
7. Wait for the process to complete. You'll find the files in the folder
you've chosen.
If you prefer full backups, the best choice is Elcomsoft Phone Breaker.
To download the iCloud backup, follow these steps:
1. Launch Elcomsoft Phone Breaker.
2. Choose the Backups option.
3. Enter the Apple ID and password, or use a previously extracted token.
4. If Apple ID is protected with two-factor authentication (2FA), enter
the code in the corresponding field.
5. Choose the backup you want to download, as illustrated in the
following screenshot:

--- Page 195 ---
Choosing the backup for downloading
Once downloading is completed, you can analyze the backup with your tool
of choice—for example, one of the tools discussed throughout this chapter.

--- Page 196 ---
Summary
iOS device backups contain essential information that may be your only
source of evidence. Information stored in iOS backups includes photos,
videos, contacts, emails, call logs, user accounts and passwords,
applications, and device settings. This chapter explained how to create
backup files and retrieve data from iTunes and iCloud backups, including
encrypted backup files, wherever possible.
The following chapter, Chapter 5, iOS Data Analysis and Recovery, goes
further into the forensic investigation by showing you how to analyze the
data recovered from the backup files. 

--- Page 197 ---
iOS Data Analysis and Recovery
A key aspect of iOS-device forensics is to examine and analyze the data
acquired to interpret the evidence. In the previous chapters, you learned
various techniques to acquire data from iOS devices. Any type of acquired
image contains hundreds of data files that are often parsed by the tools
described in earlier chapters. Even when the data is parsed by the forensic
tool, a manual analysis may be required to uncover additional artifacts or to
simply validate your findings.
This chapter will help you understand how data is stored on iOS devices,
and it will walk you through the key artifacts that should be examined in
each investigation to recover the most data possible.
In this chapter, we will be covering the following topics:
Interpreting iOS timestamps
Working with SQLite databases
Key artifacts – important iOS database files
Property lists
Other important files
Recovering deleted SQLite records

--- Page 198 ---
Interpreting iOS timestamps
Before examining the data, it is important to understand different timestamp
formats that are used on iOS devices. Timestamps found on iOS devices are
presented either in the Unix timestamp or Mac absolute time format. You, as
the examiner, must ensure that the tools properly convert the timestamps.
Access to the raw SQLite files will allow you to verify these timestamps
manually. You'll learn how to decode each timestamp format in the next few
sections.

--- Page 199 ---
Unix timestamps
A Unix timestamp is the number of seconds that have elapsed since Unix
epoch time, which started at midnight on January 1, 1970. A Unix
timestamp can be converted easily, using the date command on a Mac
workstation or using an online Unix epoch converter, such as https://www.epoc
hconverter.com/.
The date command is shown in the following code snippet: 
$ date -r 1557479897
Fri May 10 12:18:17 MSK 2019
You may come across Unix timestamps in a millisecond or
nanosecond format as well. This is not a big problem; there are a number of
online converters, such as http://currentmillis.com/, as highlighted in the
following screenshot:
A Unix timestamp in milliseconds converted with http://currentmillis.com/

--- Page 200 ---
The Unix epoch is the most common format for iOS devices, but there are
others as well, including Mac absolute time and WebKit/Chrome time.

--- Page 201 ---
Mac absolute time
iOS devices adopted the use of Mac absolute time with iOS 5. Mac absolute
time is the number of seconds that have elapsed since Mac epoch time,
which started at midnight on January 1, 2001. The difference between the
Unix epoch time and the Mac time is exactly 978,307,200 seconds. It means
you can easily convert the Mac time to the Unix epoch and use the same
methods to finally convert it to a human-readable timestamp. Of course,
there are a few online converters, such
as https://www.epochconverter.com/coredata, as shown in the following screenshot:
A Mac timestamp converted with https://www.epochconverter.com/coredata
Of course, there are offline tools for timestamp conversion as well. We'll
introduce you to one of them in the next section.

--- Page 202 ---
WebKit/Chrome time
When analyzing iOS application data, especially for web browsers such as
Google Chrome, Safari, and Opera, you may face another timestamp format
—WebKit/Chrome time. This is the number of microseconds since midnight
on January 1, 1601. There is also an online converter for this: https://www.epoc
hconverter.com/webkit.
If you don't like or don't want to use online converters for some reason, you can also use
a free tool: Digital Detective's DCode. This tool can be used to convert timestamps in a
number of different formats, including Unix time (both seconds and milliseconds), Mac
absolute time, and WebKit/Chrome time, as shown in the following screenshot:
A WebKit/Chrome timestamp converted with DCode
Many commercial mobile forensic suites will easily convert extracted
timestamps for you automatically, but in some cases, it's extremely

--- Page 203 ---
important to validate it, so it's a must for you to clearly understand the
timestamp formats.

--- Page 204 ---
Working with SQLite databases
SQLite is an open source, in-process library that implements a self-
contained, zero-configuration, and transactional SQL database engine. This
is a complete database with multiple tables, triggers, and views that are
contained in a single cross-platform file. As SQLite is portable, reliable,
and small, it is a popular database format that appears on many mobile
platforms.
Apple iOS devices, as with other smartphones and tablets, make heavy use
of SQLite databases for data storage. Many of the built-in applications—
such as Phone, Messages, Mail, Calendar, and Notes—store data in SQLite
databases. Apart from this, third-party applications installed on the device
also leverage SQLite databases for data storage.
SQLite databases are created with or without a file extension. They
typically have the .sqlitedb or .db file extensions, but some databases are
given other extensions as well.
Data in SQLite files is broken up into tables that contain the actual data. To
access the data stored in the files, you need a tool that is able to read it.
Most commercial mobile forensic tools—such as Belkasoft Evidence
Center, Magnet AXIOM, and Cellebrite Universal Forensic Extraction
Device (UFED) Physical Analyzer—provide support for the examination of
SQLite databases. If you don't own one of these tools, some good free tools
are as follows:
DB Browser for SQLite (DB4S): This can be downloaded from htt
p://sqlitebrowser.org/.
SQLite command-line client: This can be downloaded from http://ww
w.sqlite.org/.
SQLiteStudio (https://sqlitestudio.pl): This is a free cross-platform
SQLite manager with support for Windows
9x/2k/XP/2003/Vista/7/8/10, macOS, and Linux.

--- Page 205 ---
SQLiteSpy: This is a free graphical user interface (GUI) tool for
Windows. You can download it from http://www.yunqa.de/delphi/doku.php/p
roducts/sqlitespy/index.
macOS includes the SQLite command-line utility (sqlite3) by default. This
command-line utility can be used to access individual files and run SQL
queries against a database. In the following sections, we will use both the
sqlite3 command-line utility and other SQLite tools and browsers to retrieve
data from various SQLite databases. Before retrieving the data, the basic
commands that you will need to learn are explained in the following
sections.

--- Page 206 ---
Connecting to a database
Manual examination of iOS SQLite database files is possible with the use
of free tools. The following is an example of how to examine a database
using native Mac commands in the Terminal:
1. Make sure that your device image is mounted as read-only to prevent
changes being made to the original evidence.
2. To connect to an SQLite database from the command line, run the
sqlite3 command in the Terminal by entering your database file. This
will give you an SQL prompt where you can issue SQL queries, as
shown in the following code block:
$ sqlite3 sms.db
SQLite version 3.28.0 2019-04-15 14:49:49
Enter ".help" for usage hints.
3. To disconnect, use the .exit command. This exits the SQLite client and
returns to the Terminal.
The next section will walk you through the analysis of databases, using
sqlite3 built-in commands.

--- Page 207 ---
Exploring SQLite special
commands
Once you connect to a database, you can use a number of built-in SQLite
commands that are known as dot commands and that can be used to obtain
information from the database files.
You can obtain the list of special commands by issuing the .help command in
the SQLite prompt. These are SQLite-specific commands, and they do not
require a semicolon at the end. The most commonly used dot commands
include the following:
.tables: This lists all of the tables within a database. The following
screenshot displays the list of tables found inside the sms.db database:
.schema table-name: This displays the SQL CREATE statement that was used to
construct the table. The following screenshot displays the schema for
the handle table from the sms.db database:
.dump table-name: This dumps the entire content of a table into SQL
statements. The example in the following screenshot displays the dump
of the handle table, which is found inside the sms.db database:

--- Page 208 ---
.output file-name: This redirects the output to a file on the disk instead of
showing it on the screen.
.headers on: This displays the column title whenever you issue a SELECT
statement.
.help: This displays the list of available SQLite dot commands.
.exit: This disconnects from the database and exits the SQLite
command shell.
.mode: This sets the output mode; it could be .csv, HTML, tabs, and so
on.
Make sure that there is no space between the SQLite prompt and the dot command;
otherwise, the entire command will be ignored.

--- Page 209 ---
Exploring standard SQL queries
In addition to the SQLite dot commands, standard SQL queries such as
SELECT, INSERT, ALTER, and DELETE can be issued to SQLite databases on the
command line. Unlike the SQLite dot commands, standard SQL queries
expect a semicolon at the end of the command.
Most of the databases that you will examine will contain only a reasonable
number of records, so you can issue a SELECT * statement, which prints all of
the data contained in the table. This will be covered in detail throughout this
chapter.

--- Page 210 ---
Accessing a database using
commercial tools
While a manual examination of iOS SQLite database files is possible with
the use of free tools, most examiners prefer commercial support prior to
digging manually into the files for examination. The following is an example
of how to examine a database using SQLite, which is included in Belkasoft
Evidence Center.
To open and analyze a database, you just need to follow a few simple steps,
listed here:
1. Launch Belkasoft Evidence Center and navigate to View | SQLite
Viewer, and choose the database file you want to examine.
2. Once the database is chosen, it's immediately opened with SQLite
Viewer and is ready to be examined, as illustrated in the following
screenshot:

--- Page 211 ---
sms.db database opened with Belkasoft Evidence Center's SQLite Viewer
Why does an examiner need to use such commercial viewers instead of free
and open-source ones? For example, this particular viewer supports even
damaged or partially overwritten SQLite databases. What's more, the tool
supports the extraction of data from freelists, Write-Ahead Log (WAL), and
unallocated space, as illustrated in the following screenshot:

--- Page 212 ---
Unallocated space of the database as seen in Belkasoft Evidence Center's SQLite Viewer
Of course, there are some free and open source tools available for SQLite
data recovery. You'll learn more about such tools in the following sections.

--- Page 213 ---
Key artifacts – important iOS
database files
Filesystems and backups that you extracted as per the instructions in Chapter
3, Data Acquisition from iOS Devices, and Chapter 4, Data Acquisition from
iOS Backups, should contain the following SQLite databases that may be
important to your investigation. If these files are not recovered, make sure
that you acquired the iOS device correctly. The files that are shown in the
following sections are extracted via logical acquisition from a device
running iOS. As Apple adds new features to the built-in applications with
every iOS release, the format of the files may vary for different iOS
versions. 

--- Page 214 ---
Address book contacts
The address book contains a wealth of information about the owner's
personal contacts. With the exception of third-party applications, the
address book contains contact entries for all of the contacts that are stored
on the device. The address book database can be found at
/HomeDomain/Library/AddressBook.sqlitedb. The AddressBook.sqlitedb file contains
several tables, of which the following three are of particular interest:
ABPerson: This contains the name, organization, notes, and more for each
contact.
ABMultiValue: This contains phone numbers, email addresses, website
Uniform Resource Locators (URLs), and more for the entries in the
ABPerson table. The ABMultiValue table uses a record_id file to associate the
contact information with a ROWID from the ABPerson table.
ABMultiValueLabel: This table contains labels to identify the kind of
information stored in the ABMultiValue table.
Some of the data stored within the AddressBook.sqlitedb file could be from
third-party applications. You should manually examine the application file
folders to ensure that all the contacts are accounted for and examined.
While all the following commands can be run natively on a Mac, we are
going to use DB4S to examine the most common databases found on iOS
devices. This is a free tool that simplifies the process and provides a clear
view of the data to you. Once the database is loaded, you can draft queries
to examine the data most relevant to you and export the address book into a
.csv file named AddressBook.csv, as shown in the following screenshot:

--- Page 215 ---
The AddressBook.sqlitedb file in DB4S
In the preceding screenshot, you can see the suggested query to parse data
from both the ABPerson and ABMultiValue tables. 

--- Page 216 ---
Address book images
In addition to the address book's data, each contact may contain an image
associated with it. This image is displayed on the screen whenever the user
receives an incoming call from a particular contact. These images can be
created by third-party applications that have access to the contacts on the
device. Often, the contact is linked to a third-party application profile
photo. The address book images database can be found at
/HomeDomain/Library/AddressBook/AddressBookImages.sqlitedb.
The address book images can be parsed manually, but using commercial
software makes this process much more practical. Most free and
commercial tools will provide access to the address book images. However,
some tools will not make the link between the graphic and the contact,
which may require some manual rebuilding. Sometimes, the free solutions
work best when parsing simple data from iOS devices. Next, we will
examine the address book images in iExplorer, which was introduced in Chap
ter 4, Data Acquisition from iOS Backups.
In the example in the following screenshot, iExplorer matched contact data
with the image automatically:

--- Page 217 ---
Examining address book images in iExplorer
The same thumbnails can be found in the ABThumbnailImage table, in the data
column. You can match the photo to the contact manually, using
the record_id column from the ABThumbnailImage table of AddressBookImages.sqlitedb
and the ROWID column from the ABPerson table of AddressBook.sqlitedb.

--- Page 218 ---
Call history
Phone or FaceTime calls placed, missed, and received by the user are logged
in the call history along with other metadata, such as call duration, and date
and time. The call history database can be found
at /HomeDomain/Library/CallHistoryDB/CallHistory.storedata. The CallHistory.storedata
file was introduced with iOS 8 and is currently in use at the time of writing
(iOS 13.2).
The ZCALLRECORD table in the CallHistory.storedata database contains the call
history. It's important to note that only a limited number of calls may be
stored in the active database. Just because the database removes the oldest
record when space is needed does not mean this data is deleted. It's simply in
the free pages of the SQLite database file, and it can be recovered using
forensic tools or manually. The most important columns in the ZCALLRECORD
table are the following:
ZDATE: This column contains the timestamps of calls in Mac absolute
time format.
ZDURATION: This column contains the duration of calls.
ZLOCATION: This column contains the locations of phone numbers.
ZADDRESS: This column contains the phone numbers.
ZSERVICE_PROVIDER: This column contains the service providers—for
example, Phone, WhatsApp, Telegram, and so on.
You can run the following queries in DB4S to parse the call history.
Afterward, you can export it into a .csv file, as shown in the following
screenshot:

--- Page 219 ---
Examining CallHistory.storedata in DB4S
This time, the query is quite simple as all columns of interest are in the same
table. Notice we used datetime to convert Mac absolute timestamps to human-
readable dates.

--- Page 220 ---
Short Message Service (SMS)
messages
The SMS database contains text and multimedia messages that were sent
from and received by the device, along with the phone number of the remote
party, date and time, and other carrier information. Starting with iOS 5,
iMessage data is also stored in the SMS database. iMessage allows users to
send SMS and Multimedia Messaging Service (MMS) messages over a
cellular or Wi-Fi network to other iOS or macOS users, thus providing an
alternative to SMS. The SMS database can be found at
/HomeDomain/Library/SMS/sms.db.
You can run the following queries in DB4S to parse the SMS messages.
Afterward, you can export it into a .csv file, as shown in the following
screenshot:

--- Page 221 ---
Examining sms.db in DB4S
There's another interesting subdirectory that can be found
at /HomeDomain/Library/SMS/—Drafts. Inside, there are more subfolders, each of
which contains a message.plist file. Each file is a property list with draft
messages the user started to type but didn't send. You'll learn more about
property lists in the next sections.

--- Page 222 ---
Calendar events
Calendar events that have been manually created by the user or synced
using a mail application or other third-party applications are stored in the
Calendar database. The Calendar database can be found at
/HomeDomain/Library/Calendar/Calendar.sqlitedb.
The CalendarItem table in the Calendar.sqlitedb file contains the calendar events
summary, description, start date, end date, and more. You can run the
following queries in DB4S to parse the calendar, as illustrated in the
following screenshot:
Examining calendar.sqlitedb in DB4S
As you can see, the CalendarItem table stores dates in Mac absolute time
format, so we added 978307200 to reveal actual timestamps, with the help of
the datetime function.

--- Page 223 ---
Notes
The Notes database contains the notes that are created by the user using the
device's built-in Notes application. Notes is the simplest application, often
containing the most sensitive and confidential information. The Notes
database can be found at /HomeDomain/Library/Notes/notes.sqlite.
The ZNOTE and ZNOTEBODY tables in the notes.sqlite file contain each note's title,
content, creation date, modification date, and more. You can run the
following queries to parse the Notes database:
Examining notes in DB4S
This query merges data from two tables, so we use ZOWNER from ZNOTEBODY, Z_PK
from ZNOTE, and a WHERE clause to do it.

--- Page 224 ---
Safari bookmarks and history
The Safari browser used on an iOS device allows users to bookmark their
favorite websites. The Bookmarks database can be found at
/HomeDomain/Library/Safari/Bookmarks.db. Bookmark data can be extracted with a
very simple query, as illustrated in the following screenshot:
Examining bookmarks in DB4S
Browsing history can be found in History.db, at /HomeDomain/Library/Safari/. The
most important pieces of information about visited websites can be extracted
from history_items and history_visits tables, as shown in the following
screenshot:

--- Page 225 ---
Examining history in DB4S
In addition to Safari, other browsers can be used to store data on an iOS
device. For this reason, we recommend using a tool built to parse internet
history, to ensure that data is not overlooked. Good forensic tools for solving
this task are AXIOM by Magnet Forensics, Physical Analyzer by Cellebrite,
and some others.

--- Page 226 ---
Voicemail
The Voicemail database contains metadata about each voicemail that
is stored on the device, which includes the sender's phone number, callback
number, timestamp and message duration, and more. The voicemail
recordings are stored as Adaptive Multi-Rate (AMR) audio files that can
be played by any media player that supports the AMR codec (for
example, QuickTime Player). The Voicemail database can be found
under /HomeDomain/Library/Voicemail/voicemail.db.

--- Page 227 ---
Recordings
The Recordings database contains metadata about each recording stored on the
device, which includes the timestamp, its duration, its location on the device,
and more. The database can be found at /MediaDomain/Media/Recordings. The
metadata can be extracted with the query shown in the following screenshot:
Examining recordings in DB4S
As you can see in the preceding screenshot, actual files with recordings are
stored in the same directory.

--- Page 228 ---
Device interaction
There is an SQLite database that records how the user interacts with
different applications. This database is called interactionC.db and is located
at /HomeDomain/Library/CoreDuet/People. The ZINTERACTIONS table contains
information about whether the user reads a message, sends a message,
performs a call, and so on. You can extract this information from the table
with the query shown in the following screenshot:
Examining interactions in DB4S
Also, make sure you examined the ZCONTACTS table—it contains information
about contacts who were involved in the user's interactions with the device,
if applicable.

--- Page 229 ---
Phone numbers
You can obtain information about all phone numbers utilized by the user,
even if they changed phones and restored from a backup, by analyzing
the CellularUsage.db file located at /WirelessDomain/Library/Databases. The query to
extract this data is shown in the following screenshot:
Extracting phone numbers
As you can see, there is not only phone numbers available, but also the
Subscriber Identity Module (SIM) card's Integrated Circuit Card
Identifier (ICCID).

--- Page 230 ---
Property lists
A property list, commonly referred to as a plist, is a structured data format
used to store, organize, and access various types of data on an iOS device as
well as a macOS device. plist files are binary-formatted, and they can be
viewed using a property List Editor, which is capable of reading or
converting the binary format to an American Standard Code for
Information Interchange (ASCII) format.
Plist files may or may not have a .plist file extension. To access the data
stored in these files, you need a tool that can read them. Some of the good
free tools include the following:
plist Editor Pro, which can be downloaded from http://www.icopybot.com/p
list-editor.htm.
The plutil command-line utility on macOS.
You can view plist files using Xcode. macOS includes the plutil command-
line utility by default. This command-line utility can easily convert the
binary-formatted files into human-readable files. In addition to this, most
commercial forensic tools include great support for parsing plist files.
The following screenshot displays the com.apple.mobile.ldbackup.plist file:

--- Page 231 ---
The com.apple.mobile.ldbackup.plist in plist Editor Pro
As you can see, this plist uncovers the last local and cloud backup dates (in
Mac absolute time, of course), the time zone it was created in, as well as the
fact that the backup is encrypted.

--- Page 232 ---
Important plist files
Raw disk images or the backup that you extracted in Chapter 3, Data Acquisition from iOSDevices, and Chapter 4, Data Acquisition from iOS Backups, should contain the following
plist files that are important for an investigation. The files displayed are extracted froman iOS 13.2 device backup. The file locations may vary for your iOS version.
The following are the plist files that contain data that may be relevant to yourinvestigation:
plist file Description
/HomeDomain/Library/Preferences/com.apple.commcenter.shared.plist
Contains thephonenumber inuse
/HomeDomain/Library/Preferences/com.apple.identityservices.idstatuscache.plist
Containsinformationabout theemail addressused for theApple ID andthe phonenumbers oftheindividualsthe userinteractedwith viaFaceTime oriMessageusing this ID
/HomeDomain/Library/Preferences/com.apple.mobile.ldbackup.plistContains thetimestampsof the lastiTunes andiCloudbackups, the

--- Page 233 ---
last iTunesbackup timezone, and if itwasencrypted ornot
/HomeDomain/Library/Preferences/com.apple.MobileBackup.DemotedApps.plist
Contains thelist of unusedapplicationsthat wereautomaticallyoffloaded bythe operatingsystem
/HomeDomain/Library/Preferences/com.apple.mobilephone.speeddial.plist
Contains thelist of theuser'sfavoritecontacts,includingtheir namesand phonenumbers
/HomeDomain/Library/Preferences/com.apple.preferences.datetime.plist
Containsinformationabout thetime zone setby the user
/RootDomain/Library/Caches/locationd/clients.plist
Contains thelist ofapplicationsthat uselocationServices
/RootDomain/Library/Preferences/com.apple.MobileBackup.plistContainsinformationabout the lastrestorationfrom thebackup,including the

--- Page 234 ---
restore startdate, filetransferduration,number offilestransferred,source deviceUniqueDeviceIdentifier(UDID), andso on
/SystemPreferencesDomain/SystemConfiguration/com.apple.mobilegestalt.plist
Contains thedevice nameassigned bythe user
/SystemPreferencesDomain/SystemConfiguration/com.apple.wifi.plist
Containsinformationaboutwirelessaccess pointsused by thedevice owner
/WirelessDomain/Library/Preferences/com.apple.commcenter.plist
Containsinformationabout thedevice phonenumber,networkcarrier,ICCIDs, andinternationalmobilesubscriberidentities(IMSIs)
 
Of course, plist files don't contain as much information as SQLite databases, but they canstill be useful during your forensic examinations. Next, we'll look at some other files that

--- Page 235 ---
may be also useful.

--- Page 236 ---
Other important files
Apart from SQLite and plist files, several other locations may contain
information that could be valuable to an investigation.
The other sources include the following:
Local dictionary
Photos
Thumbnails
Wallpaper
Downloaded third-party applications
Let's look at each of them.

--- Page 237 ---
Local dictionary
The list of words added by the device user to the dictionary are stored in a
LocalDictionary plaintext file, located at /KeyboardDomain/Library/Keyboard/. As the
file is plaintext, you can use your favorite text editor.

--- Page 238 ---
Photos
Photos are stored in a directory located at /CameraRollDomain/Media/DCIM, which
contains the photos taken with the device's built-in camera, screenshots,
selfies, photo stream, recently deleted photos, and accompanying
thumbnails. Some third-party applications will also store photos taken in
this directory. Every photo stored in the DCIM folder contains Exchangeable
Image File Format (EXIF) data. EXIF data stored in the photo can be
extracted using ExifTool, which can be downloaded from https://sno.phy.queens
u.ca/~phil/exiftool/. EXIF data may contain geographical information when a
photo is tagged with the user's geolocation if the user has enabled location
permissions on the iOS device.

--- Page 239 ---
Thumbnails
Another source of important artifacts related to photos is the ithmb files. You
can find these files at /CameraRollDomain/Media/PhotoData/Thumbnails. These files
contain thumbnails not only for actual photos on the device but also for
deleted ones. And, of course, there is a tool for parsing such files, iThmb
Converter, which can be downloaded from http://www.ithmbconverter.com/en/downlo
ad/ and is shown in the following screenshot:
Examining 3304.ithmb with iThmb Converter
As these files may contain thumbnails of deleted photos, they mustn't be
overlooked by forensic examiners. What's more, some of them contain quite
big thumbnails, so it will be clear what was pictured.

--- Page 240 ---
Wallpaper
The current background wallpapers set for the iOS device can be recovered
from the LockBackgroundThumbnail.jpg and LockBackgroundThumbnaildark.jpg files that
are found in /HomeDomain/Library/SpringBoard.
The wallpaper picture may contain identifying information about the user
that could help in a missing person's case or that could be found on an iOS
device recovered from a theft investigation.

--- Page 241 ---
Downloaded third-party
applications
Third-party applications that are downloaded and installed from the App
Store—including applications such as Facebook, WhatsApp, Viber,
Threema, Tango, Skype, and Gmail—contain a wealth of information that is
useful for an investigation. Some third-party applications use Base64
encoding, which needs to be converted for viewing purposes as well as
encryption. Applications that encrypt the database file may prevent you
from accessing the data residing in the tables. Encryption varies among
these applications, based on the application and iOS versions.
A subdirectory with a universally unique identifier (UUID) is created for
each application that is installed on the device in the
/private/var/mobile/Containers/Data/Application directory. Most of the files stored
in the application's directory are in the SQLite and plist format. Each file
must be examined for relevance. We recommend using Belkasoft Evidence
Center, Cellebrite UFED Physical Analyzer, Elcomsoft Phone Viewer, and
Magnet AXIOM when possible to extract these artifacts quickly, before
going back and manually running queries and parsing the data.
Also, information about installed applications can be gathered from
the applicationState.db database, located at /HomeDomain/Library/FrontBoard. This
is another SQLite database and can be analyzed with an appropriate viewer
of the examiner's choice.

--- Page 242 ---
Recovering deleted SQLite records
SQLite databases store the deleted records within the database itself, so it is
possible to recover deleted data, such as contacts, SMS messages,
calendars, notes, email, voicemail, and more by parsing the corresponding
SQLite database. If an SQLite database is vacuumed or defragmented, the
likelihood of recovering the deleted data is minimal. The amount of cleanup
that these databases require relies heavily on the iOS version, the device,
and the user's settings on the device.
A SQLite database file comprises one or more fixed-size pages, which are
used just once. SQLite uses a B-tree layout of pages to store indices and
table content. Detailed information on the B-tree layout can be found at http
s://github.com/NotionalLabs/SQLiteZer/blob/master/_resources/Sqlite_carving_extractA
ndroidData.pdf.
Commercial forensic tools provide support to recover deleted data from
SQLite database files, but they don't always recover all of the data, nor do
they support extracting data from all databases on an iOS device. It is
recommended that each database containing key artifacts be examined for
deleted data. The key artifacts or databases already discussed in this book
should be examined using free parsers, hex viewers, or even your forensic
tool to determine whether the user deleted artifacts that are relevant to the
investigation.
To carve an SQLite database, you can examine the data in raw hex or use
sqliteparse.py, a free Python script developed by Mari DeGrazia. The Python
script can be downloaded from https://github.com/mdegrazia/SQlite-Deleted-Recor
ds-Parser.
The following example recovers the deleted records from the notes.sqlitedb
file and dumps the output to the output.txt file. This script should work on
all database files recovered from iOS devices. To validate your findings

--- Page 243 ---
from running the script, simply examine the database in a hex viewer to
ensure nothing is overlooked. The code can be seen here:
$python sqliteparse.py -f notes.sqlitedb -r -o output.txt
In addition to this, performing a strings dump of the database file can also
reveal deleted records that may have been missed, as shown in the
following command:
$strings notes.sqlitedb
Should you prefer a GUI, Mari DeGrazia kindly created one and placed it on her
GitHub page.
Another open-source tool you can use to recover deleted SQLite records is
Undark. You can download it here: http://pldaniels.com/undark/. To use the
tool, run the following command:
./undark -i sms.db > sms_database.csv
It's important to note that Undark does not differentiate between current and
deleted data, so you will get the whole set of data, both actual and deleted.

--- Page 244 ---
Summary
This chapter covered various data analysis techniques and specified the
locations for common artifacts within the iOS device's filesystem. When
writing this chapter, we aimed to cover the most popular artifacts that tie
into most investigations. Clearly, it is impossible to cover them all. We hope
that once you learn how to extract data from SQLite and plist files, intuition
and persistence will assist you in parsing the artifacts that were not covered.
Keep in mind that most open-source and commercial tools are able to pull
active and deleted data from common database files, such as contacts, calls,
SMS messages, and more, but they often overlook the third-party
application database files. Our best advice is to know how to recover the
data manually, just in case you need to validate your findings or testify as to
how your tool functions.
We covered techniques to recover deleted SQLite records that prove useful
in most iOS device investigations. Again, the acquisition method, encoding,
and encryption schemas can affect the amount of data that you can recover
during your examination.
In the next chapter, iOS Forensic Tools, we will introduce you to the most
popular mobile forensic tools—Cellebrite UFED Physical Analyzer,
Magnet AXIOM, Elcomsoft Phone Viewer, and Belkasoft Evidence Center.

--- Page 245 ---
iOS Forensic Tools
An examiner like you must not only know how to use forensic tools but
must also understand the methods and acquisition techniques that are
deployed by the tools you use in your investigations. Apart from saving
time, forensic tools also make the process of forensic analysis a lot easier.
However, each tool has its flaws. You must catch any mistakes and know
how to correct them by leveraging another tool or technique. It's impossible
for a tool to support all devices. You are responsible for learning and using
the best tools to complete the job. As we discussed in the previous chapters,
you must understand how data is stored on iOS devices to ensure that the
tool is capturing all the accessible data.
Currently, there are a number of commercial tools, such as Cellebrite UFED
Physical Analyzer, BlackBag BlackLight, Oxygen Forensic Detective,
Belkasoft Evidence Center, MSAB XRY, Magnet AXIOM, and others,
which are available for the forensic acquisition and analysis of iOS devices.
For familiarity purposes, this chapter will walk you through the usage of a
few of them and provide details on the steps required to perform
acquisitions and the analysis of iOS devices.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
Working with Cellebrite UFED Physical Analyzer
Working with Magnet AXIOM
Working with Belkasoft Evidence Center
Working with Elcomsoft Phone Viewer

--- Page 246 ---
Working with Cellebrite UFED
Physical Analyzer
As per the vendor, Cellebrite Universal Forensic Extraction Device
(UFED) empowers law enforcement, antiterrorism, and security
organizations to capture critical forensic evidence from mobile phones,
smartphones, PDAs, and portable handset varieties, including updates for
newly released models. The tool enables forensically sound data extraction,
decoding, and analysis techniques to obtain existing and deleted data from
different mobile devices. As of February 2019, UFED supports data
extraction from almost 28,000 mobile devices.

--- Page 247 ---
Features of Cellebrite UFED
Physical Analyzer
The following are the features of Cellebrite UFED Physical Analyzer:
Supports different types of acquisition
Extracts the device keys that are required to decrypt physical images,
as well as keychain items
Decrypts physical images and keychain items
Reveals device passwords (not available for all locked devices)
Allows you to open an encrypted raw disk image file with a known
password
Supports passcode recovery attacks
Supports advanced analysis and decoding of extracted application data
Provides access to physical and logical data extracted in the same user
interface, making analysis easier
Generates reports in several popular formats, including Microsoft
Excel, PDF, and HTML
Dumps the raw filesystem partition so that it can be imported and
examined in another forensic tool
Creates a binary image file, in addition to the UFED shortcut file, for
ease of importing into other forensic tools for verification
Let's now look at advanced logical acquisition and analysis.

--- Page 248 ---
Advanced logical acquisition and
analysis with Cellebrite UFED
Physical Analyzer
As we mentioned previously, Physical Analyzer can be used not only for
parsing different types of forensic artifacts from acquired images but also for
performing both logical and filesystem (and even physical, for older devices)
types of extraction from iOS devices. Due to the fact that physical
acquisition is actually only for older devices, the best option is an advanced
logical acquisition. 
We are going to acquire and analyze data from an iPhone running iOS
13.2.3. Let's get started:
1. Connect the device through the appropriate cable to your workstation.
Make sure it's trusted and launch the Physical Analyzer. 
2. Go to Extract | iOS Device Extraction. The iOS Device Data Extraction
Wizard window will pop up:

--- Page 249 ---
Choosing an extraction type
3. Since we are dealing with a modern iOS device, let's choose Advanced
Logical extraction. If the device is recognized, you'll see the device's
name, its UDID, and also its iOS version:

--- Page 250 ---
Connecting the device
In our case, the iPhone's iTunes backup is protected with a known
password, so the best method is Method 1:

--- Page 251 ---
Choosing an extraction method
4. If you want the backup to be encrypted (recommended), you can choose
this option on the next page:

--- Page 252 ---
Choosing whether the backup should be encrypted or not
5. It's time to choose where the data will be saved; in our case, it's the root
of the D:\ drive:

--- Page 253 ---
Choosing where to save the extraction
5. Now, the acquisition process will start. Make sure the device is
connected until the end of the process:

--- Page 254 ---
Extracting the data
Once the extraction process has finished, the extracted data will be
parsed with powerful Physical Analyzer plugins. As a result, you will
get a set of artifacts divided into a number of categories:

--- Page 255 ---
Phone data extracted and parsed by Physical Analyzer
The same can be said about the data files:
Data files extracted by Physical Analyzer
As you may have already noticed, there are red numbers in brackets – these
are deleted records that have been recovered by Physical Analyzer's plugins.
As you already know, it's not a miracle that deleted data can be recovered
from SQLite databases, which are widely used in iOS. 

--- Page 256 ---
Talking about SQLite databases, there is another amazing feature of Physical
Analyzer that might be useful for adding custom artifacts to your mobile
forensics reports and parsing unknown apps data – the SQLite wizard. You
can find it under Tools | SQLite wizard:
1. Let's start by choosing a database. Of course, it's good to choose an app
that isn't parsed by Physical Analyzer automatically. In our example,
this is an app called Scan:
Selecting a database
2. Make sure you have selected the Include deleted rows option; this will
help you recover data automatically but, of course, it will increase the

--- Page 257 ---
number of false positive records:
Starting the SQLite wizard
So, our app is used for scanning QR codes and contains four columns
of interest – the scan date and time, latitude, longitude, and scan
result. All of the rows are part of ZSCSCANEVENT:

--- Page 258 ---
Choosing database tables and columns
3. The next step is selecting the timestamp. You've already learned quite a
bit about iOS timestamps and should recognize the format in
ZTIMELESSCREATIONDATE, but even if you don't, the SQLite wizard does this
for you:

--- Page 259 ---
Selecting the timestamp format
4. The generic model will suit any database, but there are some existing
Physical Analyzer models that can be used for typical content, such
as Chats or Contacts. In our case, we are using the generic model:

--- Page 260 ---
Choosing the model
Once you've chosen the model and field types for the column, you can run
the query and add the new parsed artifacts to your extraction and, afterward,
to your report.

--- Page 261 ---
Working with Magnet AXIOM
Magnet AXIOM is one of the most useful digital forensics tools on the
market. It can be used for both computer and mobile forensics; the recent
version of the suite introduced the newest feature – cloud forensics. As for
iOS forensics, it can be used both for logical and filesystem acquisitions
and supports all iOS versions – from the oldest to the latest. Of course, it
can also be used for parsing iTunes backups and physical images created by
third-party tools such as Elcomsoft iOS Forensic Toolkit.
One of the best features of Magnet AXIOM is its ability to start processing
extraction data on the fly so that you don't have to wait for the acquisition
process to be finished to start your forensic analysis.

--- Page 262 ---
Features of Magnet AXIOM
The following are the features of Magnet AXIOM:
Supports logical and filesystem (for jailbroken devices) acquisitions
Supports both encrypted and unencrypted iTunes backups
Recovers more than 500 artifact types
Works with other popular mobile forensics tools such as Cellebrite
UFED and XRY
Includes built-in SQLite and plist viewers
Creates so-called Portable Cases so that you can share the whole set
of data with your teammates and third parties
Can generate reports in several popular formats, such as Microsoft
Excel, PDF, and HTML

--- Page 263 ---
Logical acquisition and analysis
with Magnet AXIOM
As you may recall, the most common acquisition for modern iOS devices is
a logical type. Here is how you would acquire an iOS device with Magnet
AXIOM:
1. Start by creating a new case:

--- Page 264 ---
Creating a new case
2. Since we are dealing with an iOS device, we will choose the MOBILE
option:

--- Page 265 ---
Selecting the evidence source
3. There are a number of options to choose from, but in our case, the iOS
option is the right one:
Selecting the evidence source
4. There are three options for acquiring evidence – we can choose an
already acquired image (for example, a iTunes backup or a filesystem
image acquired by a third-party tool), extract data from the device, or
use GrayKey for acquisition. Let's choose the second option:
Choosing to acquire evidence

--- Page 266 ---
5. Our device is recognized and ready to be imaged. If you don't see your
device, use the UNKNOWN option:
Selecting the device
6. There are two types of extraction – Quick and Full. The Full option will
only be available if the device you want to acquire is jailbroken. In our
case, it's not:
Choosing the image type
7. You will be prompted to enter the password for the backup. As you may
recall, this way, you can get more data, so it's highly recommended:

--- Page 267 ---
Encrypting the backup
8. Before acquisition and processing are started, you can, for example,
choose keywords of interest, use Magnet.AI to categorize chats, or
configure Dynamic App Finder:

--- Page 269 ---
Processing details
Dynamic App Finder is a Magnet IEF and AXIOM feature that's capable of
finding potential mobile chat app databases located in images. You can read more about
this feature at: https://www.magnetforensics.com/mobile-forensics/using-dynamic-app-finder-to-recover-more-mo
bile-artifacts/.
9. You can customize MOBILE ARTIFACTS from here. For example, if
you are only interested in chats artifacts, it's better to choose only these
types of artifacts as they will shorten the processing time:
Selecting mobile artifacts
10. The ANALYZE EVIDENCE button will start the acquisition and
analysis process:

--- Page 270 ---
Imaging the evidence source
11. There are two windows for Magnet AXIOM – Process and Examine.
The first can be used to monitor the process of acquiring and processing
the evidence source, while the second can be used to analyze the
extracted and parsed data. As we mentioned previously, you can start
the analysis before the processing phase has ended. All you need to do
is click on LOAD NEW RESULTS in Magnet Examine:
Loading new results
12. Once the processing stage is over, you can find the parsed data in the
MOBILE section of Magnet Examine:

--- Page 271 ---
The MOBILE section
But, of course, it won't include everything; there are other valuable sections
that you can find evidence that has been extracted from the iOS device, such
as CHAT, MEDIA, and DOCUMENTS.

--- Page 272 ---
Working with Belkasoft Evidence
Center
Belkasoft Evidence Center is another popular digital forensics tool capable
of performing the acquisition and analysis of iOS devices. Like AXIOM, it
can be used for computer, mobile, and cloud forensics. 
One of the best features of Belkasoft Evidence Center is its ability to deal
with damaged iTunes backups. So, if you have a backup that none of your
tools is able to process, try Belkasoft Evidence Center; according to our
experience, it will process it successfully.

--- Page 273 ---
Features of Belkasoft Evidence
Center
The following are the features of Belkasoft Evidence Center:
Supports logical and filesystem (for jailbroken devices) acquisitions
Supports both encrypted and unencrypted iTunes backups
Supports damaged iTunes backups
Recovers more than 700 artifact types
Works with other popular mobile forensics tools, such as Cellebrite
UFED and XRY
Includes built-in SQLite and plist viewers
Includes a free scripting module, BelkaScript, that allows examiners to
write their own scripts to automate some common tasks
Can generate reports in several popular formats, such as Microsoft
Excel, PDF, and HTML

--- Page 274 ---
Logical acquisition and analysis
with Belkasoft Evidence Center
Since backup processing and analysis is one of the best features of Belkasoft
Evidence Center, we are going to walk you through this process here:
1. Let's start by creating a new case:
Creating a new case
2. There are multiple options here – you can process a previously acquired
image, such as an iTunes backup, or choose to extract data from a
device first. Let's start with logical acquisition. Choose the Mobile
option:

--- Page 275 ---
Choosing the data source
3. Since we're dealing with an iOS device, choose Apple. You'll see a list
of devices that are available:

--- Page 276 ---
Devices available for acquisition
4. Our device isn't jailbroken, so our choice is either logical acquisition or
iTunes backup:

--- Page 277 ---
Choosing the acquisition method
5. Once acquisition has been completed, you can choose artifacts of
interest. Make sure you choose only iOS-related artifacts; this will
decrease the processing time:

--- Page 278 ---
Choosing data types
6. Once processing is finished, extracted artifacts will be shown in the
Overview tab:

--- Page 279 ---
Overview tab
7. Finally, if you want to browse the filesystem of your forensic image,
use the File System tab:

--- Page 280 ---
The File System tab
Other available tabs may be useful too – the Dashboard tab shows you all the
available information about the case you are currently working on, the Task
Manager tab allows you to monitor processing progress, and the Search
Results tab shows you keyword search results. 

--- Page 281 ---
Working with Elcomsoft Phone
Viewer
Elcomsoft Phone Viewer is a tool capable of parsing and viewing data
extracted from not only iOS devices but also from BlackBerry 10 and
Windows Phone devices. It provides read-only, forensically sound access to
logical and filesystem images, as well as to data that's been extracted from
the cloud. 

--- Page 282 ---
Features of Elcomsoft Phone
Viewer
The following are the features of Elcomsoft Phone Viewer:
Analyzes online activities, including web browsing history,
bookmarks, and open tabs.
Provides access to synced data, passwords, and user data, including
messages, call logs, and contacts.
It categorizes multimedia files so that it's easier for you to understand
whether a photo was received in a message or was taken with the
phone's camera.
Aggregates location data from different sources.
Supports logical images, filesystem images, and iTunes and iCloud
backups.

--- Page 283 ---
Filesystem analysis with Elcomsoft
Phone Viewer
Elcomsoft Phone Viewer doesn't support device acquisition but can parse
and help you view data that has been extracted with Elcomsoft iOS Forensic
Toolkit, Elcomsoft Cloud eXtractor, or almost any other tool capable of iOS
device acquisition.
To explore a filesystem image that was previously created with Elcomsoft
iOS Forensic Toolkit, follow these steps:
1. Launch Elcomsoft Phone Viewer and choose the appropriate data
source. In our case, this is iOS device image:
Choosing data source
2. Choose the file you want to import and the artifact you want to parse:

--- Page 284 ---
Choosing data types
3. Wait for the extraction process to finish:
Extraction process
As a result, you'll get the device's information, as well as the parsed
artifacts split into multiple categories:

--- Page 285 ---
Parsed artifacts
Now, you can easily view, filter, and export any data that may be of interest
for your examination – all you need to do is click on the corresponding icon.

--- Page 286 ---
Summary
Forensic tools are helpful for an examiner as they not only save time but
also make the process a lot easier. However, not everyone has a budget
large enough to purchase commercial tools to obtain iOS acquisition. While
free tools exist for acquisition, support may be limited and multiple
extractions may be required to obtain the same amount of data as a
commercial tool.
For jailbroken devices, the iOS device can be connected to a forensic
workstation for live examination through SSH, which is how some of the
tools acquire the necessary data. However, this is not a method that is
recommended for those new to mobile forensics. For such purposes, this
chapter introduced you to several available iOS forensic tools and included
the steps you need to follow to perform acquisition and analysis.
You should take further steps to validate and understand each tool that
might be used as part of an investigation. We recommend that you acquire
test devices with known data to ensure that nothing is overlooked, the
evidence hasn't been altered, and that the methods provide you with access
to the data of interest, where possible.
The next chapter will introduce Android forensics and cover the
fundamental concepts of the Android platform.

--- Page 287 ---
Section 2: Android Forensics
This section will cover everything you need to know about forensics on
Android devices. We will start by understanding the Android platform and
its filesystem and then cover the topics of setup, acquisition/extraction, and
recovery. We will also look at Android malware and how to reverse
engineer Android apps using open source tools.
This chapter consists of the following chapters:
Chapter 7, Understanding Android
Chapter 8, Android Forensic Setup and Pre-Data Extraction Techniques
Chapter 9, Android Data Extraction Techniques
Chapter 10, Android Data Analysis and Recovery
Chapter 11, Android App Analysis, Malware, and Reverse Engineering

--- Page 288 ---
Understanding Android
In the previous chapters, we covered details about iOS devices, including
the filesystem structure, key artifacts, backup files, and acquisition and
analysis methods. Starting with this chapter, we will focus on the Android
platform and how to perform forensics on Android devices. Having a good
understanding of the Android ecosystem, security constraints, filesystems,
and other features would prove useful during a forensic investigation.
Gaining knowledge of these fundamentals would help a forensic expert to
make informed decisions while conducting an investigation.
We will cover the following topics in this chapter:
The evolution of Android
The Android architecture
Android security
The Android file hierarchy
The Android filesystem

--- Page 289 ---
The evolution of Android
Android is a Linux-based mobile operating system developed for
touchscreen mobile devices. It is developed by a consortium of companies
known as the Open Handset Alliance (OHA), with the primary contributor
and commercial marketer being Google. The Android operating system has
evolved significantly since its inaugural release date. Android was officially
launched to the public in 2008, with Android version 1.0. With the Android
1.5 Cupcake release in 2009, the tradition of naming Android versions after
confectionery was born. The version names were also released in
alphabetical order for the next 10 years. However, in 2019, Google
announced that they were ending the confectionery-based naming, and were
using numerical ordering for future versions. In the initial years, Android
versions were updated more than twice a year, but in more recent years,
version updates are done once per year. The most recent major Android
update is Android 11, the eleventh major version of the Android operating
system, announced by Google on February 19, 2020. 
The following is an overview of Android version history as of the time of
writing:
Version Version name Release year
Android 1.0 Apple Pie 2008
Android 1.1 Banana Bread 2009
Android 1.5 Cupcake 2009

--- Page 290 ---
Android 1.6 Donut 2009
Android 2.0 Eclair 2009
Android 2.2 Froyo 2010
Android 2.3 Gingerbread 2010
Android 3.0 Honeycomb 2011
Android 4.0 Ice Cream Sandwich 2011
Android 4.1 Jelly Bean 2012
Android 4.4 KitKat 2013
Android 5.0 Lollipop 2014
Android 6.0 Marshmallow 2015
Android 7.0 Nougat 2016

--- Page 291 ---
Android 8.0 Oreo 2017
Android 9.0 Pie 2018
Android 10.0 Q 2019
Android 11 R 2020
This evolution has also dramatically impacted the security considerations of
Android and how forensics techniques are applied. For example, the initial
versions of Android did not have a Full Disk Encryption (FDE)
mechanism to store data in an encrypted format within the device. As a
result, extracting data from the device was much easier for a forensic
investigator than it is currently. With each Android version update, more
and more security features, such as app permissions, trusted execution
environment (TEE), and secure kernel, have been added to improve the
security of the platform overall but at the same time complicate the process
of data extraction. We shall cover these security features in detail in the
other sections of this chapter. 
Now that we know about the history and versions of Android, we will take
a look at the Android architecture in the next section.

--- Page 292 ---
The Android architecture
To effectively understand forensic concepts when dealing with Android, you
should have a basic understanding of the Android architecture. Just like a
computer, any computing system that interacts with the user and performs
complicated tasks requires an operating system to handle the tasks
effectively. This operating system (whether it's a desktop operating system
or a mobile phone operating system) is responsible for managing the
resources of the system, to provide a way for the applications to talk to the
hardware or physical components to accomplish certain tasks. Android is
currently the most popular mobile operating system designed to power
mobile devices. You can find out more about this at https://developer.android.c
om/about/android.html.
Android, as an open source operating system, releases its code under the
Apache License, one of the many open source licenses. Practically, this
means anyone (especially device manufacturers) can access it, freely modify
it, and use the software according to the requirements of any device. This is
one of the primary reasons for its wide acceptance. Notable players that use
Android include Samsung, HTC, Sony, and LG.
As with any other platform, Android consists of a stack of layers running
one above the other. To understand the Android ecosystem, it's essential to
have a basic understanding of what these layers are and what they do.
The following diagram summarizes the various layers involved in the
Android software stack:

--- Page 294 ---
Android architecture 
This image is modified based on work created and shared by the Android Open Source
Project: https://developer.android.com/guide/platform
License: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
Each of these layers performs several operations that support specific
operating system functions. Each layer provides services to the layers lying
on top of it. Let's look at them in a little more detail.

--- Page 295 ---
The Linux kernel layer
The Android operating system is built on top of the Linux kernel, with
some architectural changes made by Google. There are several reasons for
choosing the Linux kernel. Most importantly, Linux is a portable platform
that can be compiled easily on different hardware. The kernel acts as an
abstraction layer between the software and hardware present on the device.
Consider the case of a camera. What happens when you take a photo using
the camera button on your device? At some point, the hardware instruction
(pressing a button) has to be converted to a software instruction (to take a
picture and store it in the gallery). The kernel contains drivers to facilitate
this process. When the user presses the button, the instruction goes to the
corresponding camera driver in the kernel, which sends the necessary
commands to the camera hardware, similar to what occurs when a key is
pressed on a keyboard. In simple words, the drivers in the kernel command
control the underlying hardware. As shown in the Android architecture
model, the kernel contains drivers related to Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, Universal
Service Bus (USB), audio, display, and so on.
The Linux kernel is responsible for managing the core functionality of
Android, such as process management, memory management, security, and
networking. Linux is a proven platform when it comes to security and
process management. Android has taken leverage of the existing Linux
open source operating system to build a solid foundation for its ecosystem.
Each version of Android has a different version of the underlying Linux
kernel. The Oreo Android version is known to use Linux kernel 3.18 or 4.9,
whereas the Pie version is known to use Linux kernel 4.4, 4.9, or
4.14. Android Q, targets Linux kernel 4.9, 4.14, or 4.19. The actual kernel
depends on the individual device.

--- Page 296 ---
The Hardware Abstraction Layer
The device hardware capabilities are exposed to the high-level Java
framework through the Hardware Abstraction Layer (HAL). The HAL
consists of several library modules that implement interfaces for a specific
type of hardware component. This allows hardware vendors to implement
functionality without changing the higher-level system.

--- Page 297 ---
Libraries
The next layer in the Android architecture consists of Android's native
libraries. The libraries are written in C or C++, and help the device to
handle different kinds of data. For example, the SQLite libraries are useful
for storing and retrieving the data from a database. Other libraries include
Media Framework, WebKit, Surface Manager, and Secure Sockets Library
(SSL).
The Media Framework library acts as the main interface to provide a
service to the other underlying libraries. The WebKit library provides web
pages in web browsers, and the Surface Manager library maintains the
graphics. In the same layer, we have Android Runtime (ART) and core
libraries. ART is responsible for running applications on Android devices.
The term runtime refers to the time from when an application is launched
until it is shut down.

--- Page 298 ---
Dalvik Virtual Machine (DVM)
All the applications that you install on the Android device are written in the
Java programming language. When a Java program is compiled, we get
bytecode. A virtual machine (VM) is an application that acts as an
operating system—that is, it is possible to run an instance of the Windows
operating system on a Mac, or vice versa, using a VM. Java Virtual
Machine (JVM) is one such VM that can execute the previously mentioned
bytecode. But Android versions before Android 5.0 used something called
DVM to run their applications.
DVM runs Dalvik bytecode, which is Java bytecode converted by the
Dalvik Executable (DEX) compiler. Thus, the .class files are converted to
dex files using the dx tool. Dalvik bytecode, when compared with Java
bytecode, is more suitable for low-memory and low-processing
environments. Also, note that JVM's bytecode consists of one or more .class
files, depending on the number of Java files that are present in an
application, but Dalvik bytecode is composed of only one dex file. Each
Android application runs its own instance of DVM. This is a crucial aspect
of Android security and will be addressed in detail in Chapter 8, Android
Forensic Setup and Pre-Data Extraction Techniques.
The following diagram provides an insight into how Android's DVM differs
from Java's JVM:

--- Page 299 ---
JVM versus DVM
Now that we have understood the basic differences between JVM and
DVM, let's quickly have a look at ART.

--- Page 300 ---
ART
From the Android 5.0 Lollipop version onward, Dalvik was replaced by
ART. Earlier versions of Android used just-in-time (JIT) compilation with
Dalvik (frequently executed operations are identified and dynamically
compiled to native machine code). This native execution of these frequently
used bytecodes, called traces, provides significant performance
improvements.
Unlike Dalvik, ART uses ahead-of-time (AOT) compilation, which
compiles entire applications into native machine code upon their
installation. This automatically increases the install time for an application,
but a major advantage is that this eliminates Dalvik's interpretation and
trace-based JIT compilation, and thereby increases efficiency and reduces
power consumption. ART uses a utility called dex2oat that accepts DEX files as
input and generates a compiled app executable for the target device. With
ART, the optimized DEX (.odex) files have been replaced with the
Executable and Linkable Format (ELF) executables.

--- Page 301 ---
The Java API framework layer
The application framework is the layer responsible for handling the basic
functioning of a phone, such as resource management, handling calls, and
so on. This is the block through which the applications installed on the
device directly talk to it. The following are some of the important blocks in
the application framework layer:
Telephony Manager: This block manages all the voice calls.
Content Provider: This block manages the sharing of data between
different applications.
Resource Manager: This block manages various resources used in
applications.
The final layer is the system apps layer, which will be discussed next.

--- Page 302 ---
The system apps layer
This is the topmost layer where the user can interact directly with the
device. There are two kinds of applications—preinstalled applications and
user-installed applications. Preinstalled applications—such as dialer, web
browser, and contacts—come along with the device. User-installed
applications can be downloaded from different places, such as Google Play
Store, Amazon Marketplace, and so on. Everything that you see on your
phone (contacts, mail, camera, and so on) is an application.
So far, we have learned about the Android architecture and the important
building blocks. We shall now dive into some of the inherent security
features in the Android operating system. 

--- Page 303 ---
Android security
Android was designed with a specific focus on security. Android as a
platform offers and enforces certain features that safeguard the user data
present on the mobile through multilayered security. There are certain safe
defaults that will protect the user, and there are certain offerings that can be
leveraged by the development community to build secure applications. As a
forensic investigator, understanding the internals of Android security is
crucial as it helps to identify the best techniques to apply in a given
situation, the technical limitations of certain techniques, and so on. 
The next few sections will help us understand more about Android's
security features and offerings.
A detailed explanation on Android security can be found at https://source.android.com/securit
y/.

--- Page 304 ---
Secure kernel
The kernel is at the heart of the security of any operating system. By
choosing Linux, which has evolved as a trusted platform over the years,
Android has established a very solid security foundation. Most of the
security features that are inherent to the Linux kernel are automatically
adopted by Android. For example, the user-based permission model of
Linux has, in fact, worked well for Android. As mentioned earlier, there is a
lot of specific code built into the Linux kernel. With each Android version
release, the kernel version has also changed. The following table shows
Android versions and their corresponding kernel versions:
Android version Linux kernel version
1 2.6.25
1.5 2.6.27
1.6 2.6.29
2.2 2.6.32
2.3 2.6.35
3.0 2.6.36

--- Page 305 ---
4.0 3.0.1
4.1 3.0.31
4.2 3.4.0
4.2 3.4.39
4.4 3.8
5.0 3.16.1
6.0 3.18.1
7.0 4.4.1
8.0 4.10
9.0 4.4, 4.9, and 4.14
10.0  4.9, 4.14, and 4.19

--- Page 306 ---
 
The Linux kernel automatically brings some of its inherent security
features, such as the following, to the Android platform:
A user-based permissions model
Isolation of running processes (application sandbox)
Secure inter-process communication (IPC)
We shall now learn about each of these features. 

--- Page 307 ---
The permission model
As shown in the following screenshot, any Android application must be
granted permissions to access sensitive functionality—such as the internet,
dialer, and so on—by the user. This provides an opportunity for the user to
know in advance which functionality on the device is being accessed by the
application. Simply put, it requires the user's permission to perform any
kind of malicious activity (stealing data, compromising the system, and so
on).
This model helps the user to prevent attacks, but if the user is unaware and
gives away a lot of permissions, it leaves them in trouble (remember—
when it comes to installing malware on any device, the weakest link is
always the user).

--- Page 308 ---
The permission model in Android
Until Android 6.0, users needed to grant the permissions during install time.
Users had to either accept all the permissions or not install the application.

--- Page 309 ---
But, starting from Android 6.0, users grant permissions to apps while the
app is running. This new permission system also gives the user more
control over the app's functionality by allowing the user to grant selective
permissions. For example, a user can deny a particular app access to their
location but provide access to the internet. The user can revoke the
permissions at any time by going to the app's Settings screen. From a
forensic perspective, what this means is that the kind of information that
can be extracted from a device depends not only on the device and the
installed apps but also on the permissions that are configured by the user. 

--- Page 310 ---
Application sandbox
In Linux systems, each user is assigned a unique user identifier (UID), and
users are segregated so that one user cannot access the data of another user.
However, all applications under a particular user are run with the same
privileges. Similarly, in Android, each application runs as a unique user. In
other words, a UID is assigned to each application and is run as a separate
process. This concept ensures an application sandbox at the kernel level.
The kernel manages the security restrictions between the applications by
making use of existing Linux concepts, such as UID and group identifier
(GID). If an application attempts to do something malicious—say, to read
the data of another application—this is not permitted as the application does
not have user privileges. Hence, the operating system protects an
application from accessing the data of another application.

--- Page 311 ---
Secure IPC
Android offers secure IPC, through which one activity in an application can
send messages to another activity in the same or a different application. To
achieve this, Android provides IPC mechanisms: Intents, Services, Content
Providers, and so on. This is more relevant to developers who code third-
party apps for the Android platform. Behind the scenes, forensic tools
exploit some of these concepts to gain access to the device information. 

--- Page 312 ---
Application signing
It is mandatory that all of the installed applications are digitally signed.
Developers can place their applications in Google's Play Store only after
signing the applications. The private key with which the application is
signed is held by the developer. Using the same key, a developer can
provide updates to their application, share data between the applications,
and so on. Unsigned applications, if attempted to be installed, will be
rejected by either Google Play or the package installer on the Android
device. In Android 8.0 and above, users must navigate to the Install
unknown apps setting in order to run unsigned apps, as shown in the
following screenshot:

--- Page 313 ---
Install unknown apps screen in Android
Now that we have some basic knowledge about digitally signed
applications, let's look at one of the security features in Android.

--- Page 314 ---
Security-Enhanced Linux
(SELinux)
SELinux is a security feature that was introduced in Android 4.3 and fully
enforced in Android 5.0. Until this addition, Android security was based on
Discretionary Access Control (DAC), which means applications can ask
for permissions, and users can grant or deny those permissions. Thus,
malware can create havoc on phones by gaining those permissions. But SE
Android uses Mandatory Access Control (MAC), which ensures that
applications work in isolated environments. Hence, even if a user installs a
malware app, the malware cannot access the operating system and corrupt
the device. SELinux is used to enforce MAC over all the processes,
including the ones running with root privileges. In SELinux, anything that
is not explicitly allowed is, by default, denied. SELinux can operate in one
of the two global modes: Permissive mode, which logs the permission
denials but does not enforce them; and Enforcing mode, which logs and
also enforces the permission denials. More details about SELinux can be
found at https://source.android.com/security/selinux/concepts.

--- Page 315 ---
FDE
With Android 6.0 Marshmallow, Google has mandated FDE for most
devices, provided that the hardware meets certain minimum standards.
Encryption is the process of converting data into ciphertext using a secret
key. On Android devices, FDE refers to the process of encrypting all user
data using a secret key. This key is in turn encrypted by the device's
personal identification number (PIN)/pattern/password that is set by the
user. Once a device is encrypted, all user-created data is automatically
encrypted before writing it to disk, and all reads automatically decrypt data
before returning it to the calling process. FDE in Android works only with
an Embedded Multimedia Card (eMMC) and similar flash devices that
present themselves to the kernel as block devices.
Staring from Android 7.x, Google decided to shift the encryption feature
from FDE to file-based encryption (FBE). In FBE, different files are
encrypted with different keys. By doing so, those files can be accessed
independently, without the need to decrypt the complete partition. As a
result of this, the system can now display open notifications or access boot-
related files without having to wait until the user unlocks the phone.

--- Page 316 ---
Android Keystore
Android Keystore is used to protect sensitive cryptographic keys from
unauthorized access. Keys stored within a Keystore can be used to perform
cryptographic operations, but they can never be extracted outside of the
Keystore. The hardware-backed Keystores provide security at hardware
level—that is, even if the operating system is compromised, the keys in the
hardware module would still be secure.

--- Page 317 ---
TEE
A TEE is an isolated area (typically, a separate microprocessor) intended to
guarantee the security of data stored inside it, and also to execute code with
integrity. The main processor on mobile devices is considered untrusted and
cannot be used to store secret data (such as cryptographic keys). Hence, a
TEE is used specifically to perform such operations, and the software
running on the main processor delegates any operations that require the use
of secret data to the TEE processor.

--- Page 318 ---
Verified Boot
Verified Boot tries to ensure that all code that is executed on an Android
device comes from a legitimate source rather than from an attacker or a
fraud. It establishes a full chain of trust and prevents side-loading of any
other operating system. During device boot-up, each stage validates the
integrity and authenticity of the next stage before handing over execution.
We shall now look into the various partitions and filesystems available on
an Android device. 

--- Page 319 ---
The Android file hierarchy
In order to perform forensic analysis on any system (desktop or mobile), it's
important to understand the underlying file hierarchy. A basic
understanding of how Android organizes its data in files and folders helps a
forensic analyst narrow down their research to specific issues. Just as with
any other operating system, Android uses several partitions. This chapter
provides an insight into some of the most significant partitions and the
content stored in them.
It's worth mentioning again that Android uses the Linux kernel. Hence, if
you are familiar with Unix-like systems, you will understand the file
hierarchy in Android very well. For those who are not very well acquainted
with the Linux model, here is some basic information: in Linux, the file
hierarchy is a single tree, with the top of the tree being denoted as / (called
the root). This is different from the concept of organizing files in drives (as
with Windows). Whether the filesystem is local or remote, it will be present
under the root.
The Android file hierarchy is a customized version of this existing Linux
hierarchy. Based on the device manufacturer and the underlying Linux
version, the structure of this hierarchy may have a few insignificant
changes. The following is a list of important folders that are common to
most Android devices. Some of the folders listed are only visible through
root access. Rooting is the process of gaining privileged access on an
Android device. More details about rooting and executing the adb
commands (which are shown in the following list) are covered in detail in Ch
apter 8, Android Forensic Setup and Pre-Data Extraction Techniques:
/boot: As the name suggests, this partition has the information and files
required for the phone to boot. It contains the kernel and Random
Access Memory (RAM) disk, so without this partition, the phone
cannot start its processes. Data residing in RAM is rich in value and
should be captured during a forensic acquisition.

--- Page 320 ---
/system: This partition contains system-related files other than the
kernel and RAM disk. This folder should never be deleted as that will
make the device unbootable. The contents of this partition can be
viewed using the following command:
/system partition
* /recovery: This is designed for backup purposes and allows the device
to boot into recovery mode. In recovery mode, you can find tools to
repair your phone installation.
/data: This is the partition that contains the data of each application.
Most of the data belonging to the user—such as the contacts, SMS,
and dialed numbers—is stored in this folder. This folder has significant
importance from a forensic point of view as it holds valuable data. The
contents of the data folder can be viewed using the following
command:

--- Page 321 ---
/data partition
* /cache: This is the folder used to store the frequently accessed data
and some of the logs for faster retrieval. The /cache partition is also
important to a forensic investigation as the data residing here may no
longer be present in the /data partition.
* /misc: As the name suggests, this folder contains information about
miscellaneous settings. These settings mostly define the state of the
device—that is, on/off. Information about hardware settings, USB
settings, and so on can be accessed from this folder.
/sdcard: This is the partition that holds all the information present on
the Secure Digital (SD) card. It is valuable as it can contain

--- Page 322 ---
information such as pictures, videos, files, documents, and so on.
Now that we have understood the Android file hierarchy and looked at the
important folders in it, let's have a look at the filesystem in the next section.

--- Page 323 ---
The Android filesystem
Understanding the filesystem is one essential part of forensic
methodologies. Knowledge about the properties and the structure of a
filesystem proves to be useful during forensic analysis. The filesystem
refers to the way data is stored, organized, and retrieved from a volume. A
basic installation may be based on one volume split into several partitions;
here, each partition can be managed by a different filesystem. As is true in
Linux, Android utilizes mount points, and not drives (that is, C: or E:).
In Linux, mounting is an act of attaching an additional filesystem to the currently
accessible filesystem of a computer. The filesystems in Linux are not accessed by drive
names but instead are organized into a multi-level hierarchy with a directory called root
at the top. Each new filesystem is added into this single filesystem tree when it is
mounted.
It does not make any difference whether the filesystem exists on the local
device or on a remote device. Everything is in a single hierarchy that begins
with root. Each filesystem defines its own rules for managing the files in the
volume. Depending on these rules, each filesystem offers a different speed
for file retrieval, security, size, and so on. Linux uses several filesystems,
and so does Android. From a forensic point of view, it's important to
understand which filesystems are used by Android and to identify the
filesystems that are of significance to the investigation. For example, the
filesystem that stores the user's data is of primary concern to us, as opposed
to a filesystem used to boot the device.

--- Page 324 ---
Viewing filesystems on an Android
device
The filesystems supported by the Android kernel can be determined by
checking the contents of the filesystems file in the proc folder. The content of
this file can be viewed using the # cat /proc/filesystems command:
Filesystems on an Android device

--- Page 325 ---
In the preceding output, the first column tells us whether the filesystem is
mounted on the device. The ones with the nodev property are not mounted on
the device.
The second column lists all the filesystems present on the device. A simple
mount command displays different partitions available on the device, as
follows:
Partitions on the Android device
Next, let's look at the common filesystems on Android.

--- Page 326 ---
Common filesystems found on
Android
The filesystems present in Android can be organized primarily into three
main categories, as follows:
Flash memory filesystems
Media-based filesystems
Pseudo filesystems
Let's look at each of them in detail.

--- Page 327 ---
Flash memory filesystems
Flash memory is a type of constantly powered nonvolatile memory
(NVM) that retains data in the absence of a power supply. Flash memory
can be erased and reprogrammed in units of memory called blocks. While
the supported filesystems vary based on the device and underlying Linux
kernel, the common flash memory filesystems are as follows:
Extended File Allocation Table (exFAT) is a Microsoft proprietary
filesystem that was created to be used on flash drives such as USB
memory sticks and SD cards. Because of the license requirements, it
isn't part of the standard Linux kernel. But still, a few manufacturers
provide support for this filesystem.
Flash Friendly File System (F2FS) was released in February 2013 to
support Samsung devices running the Linux 3.8 kernel. F2FS relies on
log-structured methods that optimize the NAND flash memory. The
offline support features are a highlight of this filesystem, though it is
still transient and being updated.
Yet Another Flash File System 2 (YAFFS2) is an open source,
single-threaded filesystem released in 2002. It is mainly designed to be
fast when dealing with the NAND flash. YAFFS2 utilizes Out-of-
band (OOB), and this is often not captured or decoded correctly
during forensic acquisition, which makes analysis difficult. We will
discuss this further in Chapter 9, Android Data Extraction Techniques.
YAFFS2 was the most popular release at one point and is still widely
used in Android devices. YAFFS2 is a log-structured filesystem. Data
integrity is guaranteed, even in the case of a sudden power outage. In
2010, there was an announcement stating that in releases after
Gingerbread, devices were going to move from YAFFS2 to fourth
extended file system (EXT4). Currently, YAFFS2 is not supported by
newer kernel versions, but certain mobile manufacturers might still
continue to support it.
Robust File System (RFS) supports NAND flash memory on
Samsung devices. RFS can be summarized as a File Allocation Table
16 (FAT16) or FAT32 filesystem, whereby journaling is enabled

--- Page 328 ---
through a transaction log. Many users complain that Samsung should
stick with EXT4. RFS has been known to have lag times that slow
down the features of Android.
Next in line is media-based filesystems.

--- Page 329 ---
Media-based filesystems
The following are some of the media-based filesystems supported by
Android devices.
The Extended File System (EXT), which was introduced in 1992
specifically for the Linux kernel, was one of the first filesystems, and it used
a virtual filesystem. EXT2, EXT3, and EXT4 are the subsequent versions.
Journaling is the main advantage of EXT3 over EXT2. With EXT3, if there
is an unexpected shutdown, there is no need to verify the filesystem. The
EXT4 filesystem has gained significance with mobile devices implementing
dual-core processors. The YAFFS2 filesystem is known to have a bottleneck
on dual-core systems. With the Gingerbread version of Android, the YAFFS
filesystem was swapped for EXT4.
The following are the mount points that use EXT4 on the Samsung Galaxy
mobile:
/dev/block/mmcblk0p9 /system ext4 ro,noatime,barrier=1,data=ordered 0    0
/dev/block/mmcblk0p3 /efs ext4 
rw,nosuid,nodev,noatime,barrier=1,journal_async_commit,data=ordered 0 0
/dev/block/mmcblk0p8 /cache ext4 
rw,nosuid,nodev,noatime,barrier=1,journal_async_commit,data=ordered 0 0
/dev/block/mmcblk0p12 /data ext4 
rw,nosuid,nodev,noatime,barrier=1,journal_async_commit,data=ordered,n 
oauto_da_alloc,discard 0 0  
Virtual File Allocation Table (VFAT) is an extension to the FAT16 and
FAT32 filesystems. Microsoft's FAT32 filesystem is supported by most
Android devices. It is supported by almost all the major operating systems,
including Windows, Linux, and macOS. This enables these systems to easily
read, modify, and delete the files present on the FAT32 portion of the
Android device. Most of the external SD cards are formatted using the
FAT32 filesystem.
Observe the following output, which shows that the /sdcard and
/secure/asec mount points use the VFAT filesystem:

--- Page 330 ---
mount command output in Android 
The final category is pseudo filesystems.

--- Page 331 ---
Pseudo filesystems
Pseudo filesystems, as the name suggests, are not actual files but a logical
grouping of files. The following are some of the important pseudo
filesystems in Android: 
The root filesystem (rootfs) is one of the main components of Android
and contains all the information required to boot the device. When the
device starts the boot process, it needs access to many core files, and
thus, it mounts the root filesystem. As shown in the preceding mount
command-line output, this filesystem is mounted at / (root folder).
Hence, this is the filesystem on which all the other filesystems are
slowly mounted. If this filesystem is corrupt, the device cannot be
booted.
The sysfs filesystem mounts the /sys folder, which contains information
about the configuration of the device. The following output shows
various folders under the sys directory in an Android device:
Folders under /sys directory in Android
Since the data present in these folders is mostly related to configuration, this
is not usually of much significance to a forensic investigator. But there can
be some circumstances where we might want to check whether a particular
setting was enabled on the phone, and analyzing this folder could be useful
under such conditions.

--- Page 332 ---
Note that each folder consists of a large number of files. Capturing this data through
forensic acquisition is the best method to ensure that this data is not changed during an
examination.
The devpts filesystem presents an interface to the Terminal session on an
Android device. It is mounted at /dev/pts. Whenever a Terminal
connection is established—for instance, when an adb shell is connected
to an Android device—a new node is created under /dev/pts. The
following is the output showing this when the adb shell is connected to
the device:
shell@Android:/ $ ls -l /dev/pts ls -l /dev/pts
crw------- shell shell 136, 0 2013-10-26 16:56 0
The cgroup filesystem stands for control groups. Android devices use
this filesystem to track their job. They are responsible for aggregating
the tasks and keeping track of them. This data is generally not very
useful during forensic analysis.
The proc filesystem contains information about kernel data structures,
processes, and other system-related information in the /proc directory.
For instance, the /sys directory contains files related to kernel
parameters. Similarly, /proc/filesystems displays the list of available
filesystems on the device. The following command shows all the
information about the central processing unit (CPU) of the device:

--- Page 333 ---
Output of the cpuinfo command on an Android device 
Similarly, there are many other useful files that provide valuable
information when you traverse them.
The tmpfs filesystem is a temporary storage facility on the device that
stores the files in RAM (volatile memory). The main advantage of
using RAM is faster access and retrieval. But once the device is
restarted or switched off, this data will not be accessible anymore.
Hence, it's important for a forensic investigator to examine the data in
RAM before a device reboot happens, or to extract the data via RAM
acquisition methods.
Today's forensic tools can easily mount these filesystems and display the
contents in a graphical user interface (GUI) screen, thereby enabling
forensic investigators to easily navigate and parse through the files. In the
initial days of Android forensics, an investigator had to typically run a set of
Linux or Windows commands to format and view these filesystems.

--- Page 334 ---
Summary
In this chapter, we covered the Android operating system's underlying
features, filesystems, and other details that are useful in a forensic
investigation. We learned about interesting security capabilities that are
built into Android. Unlike iOS, several variants of Android exist as many
devices run the Android operating system, and each may have different
filesystems and unique features. The fact that Android is open and
customizable also changes the playing field of digital forensics. This
knowledge will be helpful to understand forensic acquisition techniques. 
In the next chapter, we will discuss how to set up a forensic workstation
before performing the analysis. 

--- Page 335 ---
Android Forensic Setup and Pre-
Data Extraction Techniques
In the previous chapter, we covered the fundamentals of the Android
architecture, security features, filesystems, and other capabilities. Having an
established forensic environment before the start of an examination is
important, as it ensures that the data is protected while you, as the examiner,
maintain control of the workstation. This chapter will explain the process of
—and what to consider when—setting up a digital forensic examination
environment. It is paramount that you maintain control of the forensic
environment at all times; this prevents the introduction of contaminants that
could affect the forensic investigation.
We will cover the following topics in this chapter:
Setting up a forensic environment for Android
Connecting an Android device to a workstation
Screen lock bypassing techniques
Gaining root access

--- Page 336 ---
Setting up a forensic environment
for Android
As a forensic examiner, you may encounter a wide range of mobiles over
the course of your investigation. Therefore, it is necessary to have a basic
environment set up on top of which you can build based on requirements. It
is also very important that you maintain complete control over the
environment at all times to avoid any unexpected situations. Setting up a
proper lab environment is an essential part of the forensic process. The
Android forensic setup usually involves the following steps:
1. Start with a fresh or forensically sterile computer environment. This
means that other data is either not present on the system or is contained
in a manner that prevents it from contaminating the present
investigation.
2. Install the basic software necessary to connect to the device. Android
forensic tools and methodologies will work on the Windows, Linux,
and macOS platforms.
3. Obtain access to the device. You must be able to enable settings or
bypass them in order to allow the data to be extracted from the
Android device.
4. Issue commands to the device using the methods defined in this
chapter and in Chapter 9, Android Data Extraction Techniques.
The following sections provide guidance on setting up a basic Android
forensic workstation.

--- Page 337 ---
Installing the software
The Android Software Development Kit (SDK) helps the development
world to build, test, and debug applications to run on Android. The Android
SDK comes with Android Studio, the official integrated development
environment (IDE) for developing Android apps. Android Studio provides
valuable documentation and other tools that can be of great help during the
investigation of an Android device. Alternatively, you can download just
the platform tools, which are components of the Android SDK and include
tools that can interact with the Android platform, such as the ADB, fast
boot, and so on; these will be described in more detail in the following
sections.
A good understanding of the Android SDK will help you to get to grips
with the particulars of a device and its data on the device.
Android Studio consists of software libraries, APIs, tools, emulators, and other
reference material. It can be downloaded for free from https://developer.android.com/studio/inde
x.html. The platform tools can be downloaded from https://developer.android.com/studio/releases/
platform-tools.
During a forensic investigation, having these tools helps you connect to and
access data on Android devices. The Android SDK is updated very
frequently, so it's important to verify that your workstation also remains up
to date. The Android SDK can run on Windows, Linux, and macOS. 

--- Page 338 ---
Installing the Android platform
tools
A working installation of the Android SDK or Android platform tools is a
must during the investigation of a forensic device. The Windows version of
Android Studio is around 718 MB, and rather heavy compared to the
software for the platform tools, which is just 20 MB. 
The following is the step-by-step procedure to install the Android platform
tools on a Windows 10 machine:
1. Before you install Android Studio or the platform tools, make sure that
your system has Java Development Kit (JDK) installed, because the
Android SDK relies on Java SE Development Kit.
JDK can be downloaded from http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/index.html.
2. Download the latest version of the platform tools from https://developer.
android.com/studio/releases/platform-tools. 
3. Right-click and extract the ZIP files to a folder. The installation location
is your choice and must be remembered for future access. In this
example, we will extract it to the C:\ folder.
4. Open the directory (C:\platform-tools) and note that the following tools
are listed:

--- Page 339 ---
Android platform tools
This completes the basic Android tool installation. If you're installing the
full-blown Android Studio version, you should still see the platform tools
folder under the newly installed Android directory. 

--- Page 340 ---
Creating an Android virtual device
With Android Studio you can create an Android virtual device (AVD), also
called an emulator, which is often used by developers when creating new
applications; however, an emulator has significance from a forensic
perspective, too. Emulators are useful when trying to understand how
applications behave and execute on a device. This could be helpful in
confirming certain findings that are unearthed during a forensic
investigation.
Also, while working on a device that is running on an older platform, you
can design an emulator for the same platform. Furthermore, before installing
a forensic tool on a real device, the emulator can be used to find out how a
forensic tool works and changes the content on an Android device. To create
a new AVD (on the Windows workstation), go through the following steps:
1. Open Android Studio and navigate to Tools | AVD Manager. The
Android Virtual Device Manager window is shown in the following
screenshot:

--- Page 341 ---
Android Virtual Device Manager
2. Click on Create Virtual Device to create a new virtual device. In the
screens that follow, select the appropriate hardware, system image, API
level, AVD name, and so on, and proceed further. For example, the
following screenshot shows Android Pie being selected:

--- Page 342 ---
Virtual device configuration
3. A confirmation message is shown once the device is successfully
created. Now, select the AVD and click on the Play button. 
4. This should launch the emulator. Note that this could take a few
minutes, or even longer, depending on the workstation's CPU and
RAM. The emulator does consume a significant amount of resources on
the system. After a successful launch, the AVD will run, as shown in
the following screenshot:

--- Page 343 ---
The Android emulator 
From a forensic perspective, analysts and security researchers can leverage
the functionality of an emulator to understand the file system, data storage,
and so on. The data created when working on an emulator is stored in your
home directory in a folder named android. For instance, in our example, the
details about the Pixel_XL_API_28 emulator that we created earlier are
stored under C:\Users\Rohit\.android\avd\Pixel_XL_API_28.avd.
Among the various files present under this directory, the following are those
that are of interest to a forensic analyst:
cache.img: This is the disk image of the /cache partition (remember that
we discussed the /cache partition of an Android device in Chapter 7,

--- Page 344 ---
Understanding Android).
sdcard.img: This is the disk image of the SD card partition.
Userdata-qemu.img: This is the disk image of the /data partition. The /data
partition contains valuable information about the device user.
Now that we have understood the steps to set up the environment, let's
connect the Android device to a forensic workstation.

--- Page 345 ---
Connecting an Android device to a
workstation
Forensic acquisition of an Android device using open source tools requires
you to connect the device to a forensic workstation. Forensic acquisition of
any device should be conducted on a forensically sterile workstation. This
means that the workstation is strictly used for forensics and not for personal
use.
Note that any time a device is plugged into a computer, changes can be made to the
device; you must have full control of all interactions with the Android device at all
times.
The following steps should be performed by you in order
to successfully connect the device to a workstation. Note that write
protection may prevent the successful acquisition of the device, since
commands may need to be pushed to the device in order to pull
information. All the following steps should be validated on a test device
prior to attempting them on real evidence.
 

--- Page 346 ---
Identifying the device cable
The physical USB interface of an Android device allows it to connect to a
computer to share data, such as songs, videos, and photos. This USB
interface might change from manufacturer to manufacturer and also from
device to device. For example, some devices use mini-USB while some
others use micro-USB and USB Type C. Apart from this, some
manufacturers use their own proprietary formats, such as EXT-USB, EXT
micro-USB, and so on. The first step in acquiring an Android device is to
determine what kind of device cable is required.
There are different types, such as mini-USB, micro-USB, and other
proprietary formats. The following is a brief description of the most widely
used connector types:
Connector type Description
Mini - A USB
It is approximately 7 x 3 mm in size, with
two of the corners on one long side lifted
out.
Micro - B USB
It is approximately 6 x 1.5 mm in size,
with two corners cut off to form a
trapezoid.
Co-axial It has a circular hole with a pin sticking
up in the middle. There are different sizes
in this category, varying from 2 to 5 mm
in diameter. Widely used with Nokia
models.

--- Page 347 ---
D Sub-miniature
It has the shape of a rectangle with two
rounded corners. The length of the
rectangle varies, but the height is always
1.5 to 2 mm. Used mostly by Samsung
and LG devices.
 
Next, let's have a quick look at how to install device drivers.

--- Page 348 ---
Installing device drivers
In order to identify the device properly, the computer may need certain
drivers to be installed. Without the necessary drivers, the computer may not
identify and work with the connected device. The issue is that, since
Android is allowed to be modified and customized by manufacturers, there
is no single generic driver that works for all Android devices. Each
manufacturer writes its own proprietary drivers and distributes them over
the internet, so it's important to identify the specific device drivers that need
to be installed. Of course, some Android forensic toolkits (which we will
discuss in the following chapters) do come with some generic drivers or a
set of the most widely used drivers; they may not work with all models of
the Android phone.
Some Windows operating systems are able to autodetect and install drivers
once the device is plugged in, but more often than not they fail. The device
drivers for all manufacturers can be found on their respective websites.

--- Page 349 ---
Accessing the connected device
If you haven't done so already, connect the unlocked Android device to the
computer directly using the USB cable. The Android device will appear as a
new drive and you will be able to access the files on the external storage. If
the device is locked, then at this point, you will not be able to access any
files and may need to use the Turn on USB storage option, which can be
enabled on the phone, as shown in the following screenshot:
USB mass storage in Android 4.1 version

--- Page 350 ---
With some Android phones (especially with HTC), the device may expose
more than one functionality when connected with a USB cable. For
instance, as shown in the following screenshot, when an HTC device is
connected it presents a menu with four options. The default selection is
Charge only. When the Disk drive option is selected, it is mounted as a disk
drive:
HTC mobile USB options
When the device is mounted as a disk drive, you will be able to access the
SD card present on the device. From a forensic point of view, the SD card
has significant value as it may contain files that are important to an
investigation; however, the core application data stored under /data/data will
remain on the device and cannot be accessed with these methods.

--- Page 351 ---
The Android debug bridge
Considered to be one of the most crucial components in Android forensics,
the Android debug bridge (ADB) is a command-line tool that allows you
to communicate with the Android device and control it. We will learn about
the ADB in detail in upcoming chapters; for now, we will focus on a basic
introduction to the ADB. You can access the ADB tool under /platform-
tools/.
Before we discuss anything about the ADB, we need to have an
understanding of the USB debugging option.

--- Page 352 ---
USB debugging
The primary function of this option is to enable communication between the
Android device and the workstation on which the Android SDK is installed.
On a Samsung phone, you can access this under Settings | Developer
Options, as shown in the following screenshot:
The USB debugging option in a Samsung S8 device
Other Android phones may have different environments and configuration
features. You may have to force the Developer Options option by accessing

--- Page 353 ---
build mode.
However, starting from Android 4.2, the Developer Options menu is hidden
to make sure that users do not enable it by accident. To enable it, go to
Settings | About Phone and then tap the Build Number field seven times.
After this, Developer Options will be available in the Settings menu. Prior
to Android 4.2.2, enabling this option was the only requirement for
communicating with the device over ADB; however, starting from Android
4.2.2, Google has introduced the secure USB debugging option. This
feature only allows hosts that are explicitly authorized by the user to
connect to the device using ADB.
Thus, when you connect the device to a new workstation via USB in order
to access ADB, you need to first unlock the device and authorize access by
pressing OK in the confirmation window, as shown in the following
screenshot. If Always allow from this computer is checked, the device will
not prompt for authorization in the future:
Secure USB debugging
When the USB debugging option is selected, the device will run the adb
daemon (adbd) in the background and will continuously look for a USB
connection. The daemon will usually run under a nonprivileged shell user
account and thus will not provide access to the complete data; however, on
rooted phones, adbd will run under the root account and therefore provide

--- Page 354 ---
access to all the data. It is not recommended that you root a device to gain
full access unless all other forensic methods fail. Should you elect to root an
Android device, the methods must be well-documented and tested prior to
attempting it on real evidence. Rooting will be discussed at the end of this
chapter.
On the workstation where the Android SDK is installed, adbd will run as a
background process. Also, on the same workstation, a client program,
which can be invoked from a shell by issuing the adb command, will run.
When the adb client is started, it first checks whether an adb daemon is
already running. If the response is negative, it initiates a new process to
start the adb daemon. The adb client program communicates with local adbd
over port 5037.

--- Page 355 ---
Accessing the device using adb
Once the environment setup is complete and the Android device is in USB
debugging mode, connect the Android device to the forensic workstation
with a USB cable and start using adb.

--- Page 356 ---
Detecting connected devices
The following adb command provides a list of all the devices connected to
the forensic workstation. This will also list the emulator if it is running at
the time of issuing the command. Also remember that, if the necessary
drivers are not installed, then the following command will show a blank
message. If you encounter this situation, download the necessary drivers
from the manufacturer and install them:
We now have a list of devices connected to the workstation. Next, we will
see how to kill the local ADB server.

--- Page 357 ---
Killing the local ADB server
The following command kills the local adb service:
C:\android-sdk\platform-tools>adb.exe kill-server
After killing the local adb service, issue the adb devices command. You will
see that the server is started, as shown in the following screenshot:
We will now access the ADB shell on the Android device.

--- Page 358 ---
Accessing the adb shell
The ADB shell command allows you to access the shell on an Android
device and interact with the device.
The following is the command to access the adb shell and execute a basic ls
command to see the contents of the current directory:
C:\android-sdk\platform-tools>adb.exe shell shell@android:/ $ ls
ls acct cache
config d
data default.prop dev
efs etc
factory fstab.smdk4x12 init
init.bt.rc init.goldfish.rc init.rc init.smdk4x12.rc init.smdk4x12.usb.rc
....  
The Android emulator can be used by you to execute and understand adb
commands before using them on the device. In Chapter 9, Android Data
Extraction Techniques, we will explain more about leveraging adb to install
applications, copy files and folders from the device, view device logs, and
so on.

--- Page 359 ---
Basic Linux commands
We will now take a quick look at some commonly used Linux commands
and their usage with respect to an Android device:
ls: The ls command (with no option) lists the files and directories
present in the current directory. With the -l option, this command
shows files and directories and also their size, modified date and time,
the owner of the file and its permission, and so on, as shown in the
following command-line output:
shell@android:/ $ ls -l
ls -l
drwxr-xr-x root     root             2015-01-17 10:13 acct
drwxrwx--- system   cache             2014-05-31 14:55 cache
dr-x------ root     root              2015-01-17 10:13 config
lrwxrwxrwx root     root              2015-01-17 10:13 d -> 
/sys/kernel/debug
drwxrwx--x system   system            2015-01-17 10:13 data
-rw-r--r-- root     root          116 1970-01-01 05:30 default.prop
drwxr-xr-x root     root              2015-01-17 10:13 dev
drwxrwx--x radio    system            2013-08-13 09:34 efs
lrwxrwxrwx root     root              2015-01-17 10:13 etc -> /system/etc
...  
Similarly, the following are a few options that can be used along with the ls
command:
Option Description
a Lists hidden files
c Displays files by timestamp
d Displays only directories

--- Page 360 ---
n Displays the long-format listing, with GID
and UID numbers.
R Displays subdirectories as well
t Displays files based on timestamp
u Displays the file access time
 
Depending on the requirements, one or more of the following options can
be used by the investigator to view the details:
cat: The cat command reads one or more files and prints them to
standard output, as shown in the following command lines:
shell@android:/ $ cat default.prop
cat default.prop
#
# ADDITIONAL_DEFAULT_PROPERTIES
#
ro.secure=1
ro.allow.mock.location=0
ro.debuggable=0
persist.sys.usb.config=mtp  
To combine multiple files into one, we can use the > operator. To
append to an existing file, we can use the >> operator.
cd: The cd command is used to change from one directory to another.
This is more frequently used while navigating from one folder to
another. The following example shows the commands used to change
to the system folder:
shell@android:/ $ cd /system
cd /system

--- Page 361 ---
shell@android:/system $   
cp: The cp command can be used to copy a file from one location to
another. The syntax for this command is as follows:
$ cp [options] <source><destination>  
chmod: The chmod command is used to change the access permissions to
filesystem objects (files and directories). It may also alter special mode
flags. The syntax for this command is as follows:
$ chmod [option] mode files  
For example, chmod 777 on a file gives read, write, and execute
permissions to everyone.
dd: The dd command is used to copy a file, converting and formatting it
according to the operands. With Android, the dd command can be used
to create a bit-by-bit image of the Android device. More details of
imaging are covered in Chapter 4, Data Acquisition from iOS Backups.
The following is the syntax that needs to be used with this command:
dd if=/test/file of=/sdcard/sample.image    
rm: The rm command can be used to delete files or directories. The
following is the syntax for this command:
rm file_name    
grep: The grep command is used to search files or output for a particular
pattern. The syntax for this command is as follows:
grep [options] pattern [files]    
pwd: The pwd command displays the current working directory. For
example, the following command-line output shows that the current
working directory is /system:
shell@android:/system $ pwd
pwd
/system  

--- Page 362 ---
mkdir: The mkdir command is used to create a new directory. The
following is the syntax for this command:
mkdir [options] directories  
exit: The exit command can be used to exit the shell you are in. Just
type exit in the shell to exit from it.
Next, we will see how to handle an Android device efficiently before the
investigation.

--- Page 363 ---
Handling an Android device
Handling an Android device in a proper manner prior to the forensic
investigation is a very important task. Care should be taken to make sure
that our unintentional actions don't result in data modification or any other
unwanted happenings. The following sections throw light on certain issues
that need to be considered while handling the device in the initial stages of
a forensic investigation.
With improvements in technology, the concept of device locking has
effectively changed over the last few years. Most users now have a
passcode locking mechanism enabled on their device because of the
increase in general security awareness. Before we look at some of the
techniques used to bypass locked Android devices, it is important for us not
to miss an opportunity to disable the passcode when there is a chance.
When an Android device that is to be analyzed is first accessed, check
whether the device is still active (unlocked). If so, change the settings of the
device to enable greater access to the device. When the device is still active,
consider performing the following tasks:
Enabling USB debugging: Once the USB debugging option is
enabled, it gives greater access to the device through the adb
connection. This is of great significance when it comes to extracting
data from the device. The location of the option to enable USB
debugging might change from device to device, but it's usually under
Developer Options in Settings. Most methods for physically acquiring
Android devices require USB debugging to be enabled.
Enabling the Stay awake setting: If the Stay awake option is selected
and the device is connected for charging, then the device never locks.
Again, if the device locks, the acquisition can be halted.
Increasing screen timeout: This is the time for which the device will
be effectively active once it is unlocked. The location to access this
setting varies depending upon the model of the device. On a Samsung

--- Page 364 ---
Galaxy S3 phone, you can access this setting by navigating to Settings
| Display | ScreenTimeout.
Apart from these, as mentioned in Chapter 1, Introduction to Mobile
Forensics, the device needs to be isolated from the network to make sure
that remote wipe options do not work on the device. The Android Device
Manager allows the phone to be remotely wiped or locked. This can be
done by signing in to the Google account, which is configured on the
mobile. More details about this are supplied in the following section. If the
Android device is not set up to allow remote wiping, the device can only be
locked using the Android Device Manager. There are also several mobile
device management (MDM) software products available on the market,
which allow users to remotely lock or wipe the Android device. Some of
these may not require specific settings to be enabled on the device.
Using the available remote wipe software, it is possible to delete all the
data, including emails, applications, photos, contacts, and other files, as
well as those found on the SD card. To isolate the device from the network,
you can put the device in airplane mode and disable Wi-Fi as an extra
precaution. Enabling airplane mode and disabling Wi-Fi works well, as the
device will not be able to communicate over a cellular network and cannot
be accessed via Wi-Fi. Removing the SIM card from the phone is also an
option, but that does not effectively stop the device from communicating
over Wi-Fi or other cellular networks. To place the device in airplane mode,
press and hold the Power Off button and select Airplane mode.
All these steps can be done when the Android device is not locked;
however, during the investigation, we commonly encounter devices that are
locked. Therefore, it's important to understand how to bypass the lock code
if it is enabled on an Android device.

--- Page 365 ---
Screen lock bypassing techniques
Because of the increase in user awareness and the ease of functionality,
there has been an exponential increase in the usage of passcode options to
lock Android devices. This means that bypassing the device's screen lock
during a forensic investigation becomes increasingly important. The
applicability of the screen lock bypass techniques discussed so far is based
on the situation. Note that some of these methods may result in us making
changes to the device. Make sure that you test and validate all the steps
listed on non-evidentiary Android devices. You must have authorization to
make the required changes to the device, document all steps taken, and be
able to describe the steps taken if courtroom testimony is required.
Currently, there are three types of screen lock mechanisms offered by
Android. Although there are some devices that have voice-lock, face-lock,
and fingerprint-lock options, we will limit our discussion to the following
three options, since these are the most widely used on all Android devices:
Pattern lock: The user sets a pattern or design on the phone and the
same pattern must be drawn to unlock the device. Android was the first
smartphone to introduce a pattern lock.
PIN code: This is the most common lock option and is found on many
mobile phones. The PIN code is a four-digit number that needs to be
entered to unlock the device.
Passcode: This is an alphanumeric passcode. Unlike the PIN, which
takes four digits, the alphanumeric passcode includes letters as well as
digits.
The following section details some techniques you can use to bypass these
Android lock mechanisms. Depending on the situation, these techniques
might help an investigator to bypass the screen lock.

--- Page 366 ---
Using ADB to bypass the screen
lock
If USB debugging appears to be enabled on the Android device, it is wise to
take advantage of it by connecting with adb using a USB connection, as
discussed in the earlier sections of this chapter. You should connect the
device to the forensic workstation and issue the adb devices command. If the
device shows up, it implies that USB debugging is enabled. If the Android
device is locked, you must attempt to bypass the screen lock. The following
two methods may allow you to bypass the screen lock when USB
debugging is enabled.

--- Page 367 ---
Deleting the gesture.key file
Deleting the gesture.key file will remove the pattern lock on the device;
however, it's important to note that this will permanently change the device,
as the pattern lock is gone. This should be considered if you are conducting
covert operations. The following shows how the process is done:
1. Connect the device to the forensic workstation (a Windows machine,
in our example) using a USB cable.
2. Open the command prompt and execute the following instructions:
adb.exe shell
cd /data/system rm gesture.key  
3. Reboot the device. If the pattern lock still appears, just draw any
random design and the device should unlock without any trouble.
This method works when the device is rooted. This method may not be successful on
unrooted devices. Rooting an Android device should not be performed without proper
authorization, as the device is altered.

--- Page 368 ---
Updating the settings.db file
To update the settings.db file, go through the following steps:
1. Connect the device to the forensic workstation using a USB cable.
2. Open the command prompt and execute the
following: /data/data/com.android.providers.settings/databases sqlite3
settings.db:
3. Exit and reboot the device.
4. The Android device should be unlocked. If it is not, attempt to remove
the gesture.key as explained earlier.
We will have a look at the recovery mode and ADB connection in the
following section.

--- Page 369 ---
Checking for the modified recovery
mode and ADB connection
In Android, recovery refers to the dedicated partition where the recovery
console is present. The two main functions of recovery are deleting all user
data and installing updates. For instance, when you factory-reset your
phone, recovery boots up and deletes all the data. Similarly, when updates
are to be installed on the phone, it is done in recovery mode.
There are many enthusiastic Android users who install custom ROM
through a modified recovery module. This modified recovery module is
mainly used to make the process of installing custom ROM easy. Recovery
mode can be accessed in different ways, depending on the manufacturer of
the device; information on which method is right for which manufacturer's
devices is easily available on the internet. Usually, this is done by holding
different keys together, such as the Volume button and Power button. Once
in recovery mode, connect the device to the workstation and try to access
the adb connection. If the device has a recovery mode that is not modified,
you may not be able to access the adb connection. Modified recovery
versions of the device present the user with different options as shown in
the following screenshot:


--- Page 370 ---
Next, we will see how to flash the recovery partition.

--- Page 371 ---
Flashing a new recovery partition
There are mechanisms available to flash the recovery partition of an
Android device with a modified image. The fastboot utility facilitates this
process. Fastboot is a diagnostic protocol that comes with the SDK package
and is used primarily to modify the flash filesystem through a USB
connection from a host computer. For this, you need to start the device in
boot loader mode, in which only the most basic hardware initialization is
performed.
Once the protocol is enabled on the device, it will accept a specific set of
commands that are sent to it via the USB cable using a command line.
Flashing or rewriting a partition with a binary image stored on the computer
is one such command that is allowed. Once the recovery is flashed, boot the
device in recovery mode, mount the /data and /system partitions, and use adb
to remove the gesture.key file. Reboot the phone and you should be able to
bypass the screen lock; however, this works only if the device bootloader is
unlocked. Also, flashing permanently alters the device. Instead of flashing,
you could use the fastboot boot command to boot to a recovery image
temporarily to delete the key file without permanently changing the
recovery partition.

--- Page 372 ---
Using automated tools
There are several automated solutions available on the market for unlocking
Android devices. Commercial tools, such as Cellebrite and XRY, are capable
of bypassing the screen locks, but most of them require USB debugging to
be enabled. We will now examine how to unlock an Android device using
the UFED user lock code recovery tool. This tool only works on those
devices that support USB OTG. This process also requires a UFED camera,
Cable No. 500-Bypass lock, and Cable No. 501-Bypass lock. Once the tool
is installed on the workstation, go through the following steps to unlock the
Android device:
1. Run the tool on the workstation and press 1, as shown in the following
screenshot:
UFED user lock code recovery tool
2. Now, connect side A of Cable No. 500-Bypasslock to a USB port of the
workstation. Also, connect side B of Cable No. 500-Bypasslock to

--- Page 373 ---
Cable No. 501- OTG and then connect the other end to the device.
3. Once connected, the tool prompts you to select the recovery profile.
Select [1] Manually select the recovery profile..
4. Now, select the lock type used on the device and the recovery profile,
and proceed by following the instructions on the screen.
5. After this, make sure that the keypad appears on the device screen and
that it's ready to accept the PIN code.
6. Close any message windows that may appear. Press 1 and hit Enter.
Now, make five incorrect login attempts by entering random input, and
click on Forgot pattern at the bottom of the device.
7. Follow the instructions on the screen, wait for the camera window to
open, and then click on the camera window.
8. Use the cursor to select any nonempty area on the device's screen by
placing the green square over it—for example, select any number on the
screen. This is used by the tool to detect whether the device is
unlocked. Press Enter to start the process.
9. The tool will try a number of combinations to unlock the device. Once
unlocked, it will prompt you to end the process.
We will now learn about the Android Device Manager and how to unlock a
device using it.

--- Page 374 ---
Using Android Device Manager
Most of the latest Android phones come with a service called Android
Device Manager, which helps the owner of a device to locate their lost
phone. This service can also be used to unlock a device; however, this is
possible only when you know the Google account credentials that are
configured on the device. If you have access to the account credentials, then
follow these steps to unlock the device:
1. Visit http://google.com/android/devicemanager on your workstation.
2. Sign in using the Google account that is configured on the device.
3. Select the device you need to unlock and click on Lock, as shown in the
following screenshot:

--- Page 375 ---
Android Device Manager
4. Enter a temporary password and click on Lock again.
5. Once it's successful, enter the temporary password on the device to
unlock it.
This can be done without knowing the credentials of the computer that the
login is saved on (that is, the suspect's PC). 

--- Page 376 ---
Bypass using Find My Mobile (for
Samsung phones only)
Using Find My Mobile is a technique that's worth attempting if you're
handling a Samsung device; however, it only works if the device owner is
already logged into the Samsung account on the device and you know the
Samsung credentials that are configured on the device.
To start the process, access the Find My Mobile service from the web
browser and then log in using the Samsung account credentials registered on
the device, as follows:
1. Tap on the Lock My Screen option located on the left side.:

--- Page 377 ---
2. Now, enter any temporary PIN and then tap on the Lock button. (You
may also see the unlock my screen option for some devices, which also
serves the same purpose). The phone can now be unlocked with the
temporary PIN that was set earlier.
Next, let's take a look at a smudge attack.

--- Page 378 ---
Smudge attack
In rare cases, a smudge attack may be used to deduce the password of a
touchscreen mobile device. This attack relies on identifying the smudges
left behind by the user's fingers. While this may present a bypass method, it
must be said that a smudge attack is unlikely to work since most Android
devices are touchscreen and smudges will also be present from using the
device; however, it has been demonstrated that, under proper lighting, the
smudges that are left behind can be easily detected, as shown in the
following screenshot.
By analyzing the smudge marks, we can discern the pattern that is used to
unlock the screen. This attack is more likely to work while discerning the
pattern lock on the Android device. In some cases, PIN codes can also be
recovered depending upon the cleanliness of the screen. So, during a
forensic investigation, care should be taken when the device is first handled
to make sure that the screen is not touched:

--- Page 379 ---
Smudges visible on a device under proper lighting 
We will now be looking at the next method, which is the forgot password
option.

--- Page 380 ---
Using the forgot password/forgot
pattern option
If you know the username and password of the primary Gmail address that
is configured on the device, you can change the PIN, password, or swipe on
the device. After making a certain number of failed attempts to unlock the
screen, Android provides an option called Forgot pattern? or Forgot
password?, as shown in the following screenshot:

--- Page 381 ---
Forgot pattern option on an Android device
Tap on that link and sign in using the Gmail username and password. This
will allow you to create a new pattern lock or passcode for the device.
Note that this works only on devices running Android 4.4 or earlier.

--- Page 382 ---
Bypassing third-party lock screens
by booting into safe mode
If the screen lock is a third-party app, rather than the in-built lock, it can be
bypassed by booting into safe mode and disabling it. To boot into safe mode
on an Android device 4.1 or later, press and hold the Power button until the
Power options menu appears. Then, press and hold the Power button and
you'll be prompted to reboot your Android device into safe mode. Tap the
OK button, as shown in the following screenshot:
Safe mode in Android
Once you're in safe mode, you can disable the third-party lock screen app or
uninstall it completely. After this, reboot the device and you should be able
to access it without any lock screen.

--- Page 383 ---
Secure USB debugging bypass
using ADB keys
As mentioned earlier, while using USB debugging, if the Always allow
from this computer option is checked, the device will not prompt for
authorization in the future. This is done by storing certain keys, namely
adbkey and adbkey.pub, on the computer. Any attempt to connect to adb from an
untrusted computer is denied. In this case, the adbkey and the adbkey.pub files
can be pulled from the suspect's computer and copied to the investigator's
workstation. The device will then assume that it is communicating with a
known, authorized computer. The adbkey and adbkey.pub files can be found at
C:Users<username>.android on Windows machines.

--- Page 384 ---
Secure USB debugging bypass in
Android 4.4.2
As explained in earlier sections, the secure USB debugging feature
introduced in Android 4.4.2 allows only authorized workstations to connect
to the device; however, there's a bug in this feature, as reported at https://lab
s.mwrinfosecurity.com/, which allows a user to bypass the Secure USB
debugging feature and connect the device to any workstation. Here are the
steps to follow to bypass Secure USB debugging on an Android device:
1. On an unlocked device, attempt to use adb. An error message will be
shown by the device.
2. Now, navigate to either the emergency dialer or the lock-screen camera
and execute the following commands:
$ adb kill-server
$ adb shell  
3. The confirmation dialog will be triggered and the workstation can now
be authorized without unlocking the device. The confirmation dialog
box will be displayed on the emergency dialer, as shown in the
following screenshot:

--- Page 385 ---
Secure USB debugging in Android 4.2.2
4. Once connected to the device through adb, try to bypass the lock screen
using the following command:
$ adb shell pm clear com.android.keyguard
Next, let's see how to bypass the screen lock by crashing the lock screen.

--- Page 386 ---
Crashing the lock screen UI in
Android 5.x
On devices running Android 5.0 to 5.1.1, the password lock screen (not the
PIN or pattern locks) can be bypassed by crashing the screen UI. This can
be accomplished by performing the following steps, as explained at https://a
ndroid.gadgethacks.com/:
1. Click on the Emergency Call option on the lock screen and then enter
any random input (for example, 10 asterisks) on the dialer screen.
2. Double-tap the field to highlight the entered text, as shown in the
following screenshot, and select Copy. Now, paste it into the same
field:

--- Page 387 ---
Crashing lock screen UI
3. Repeat this process to add more characters. Do this until the field no
longer highlights the characters on double-tapping.
4. Go back to the lock screen and open the camera shortcut. Now, pull
down the notifications screen and tap the Settings icon. You will then
be prompted to enter a password.
5. Press and hold the input field and select Paste, repeat this process
multiple times. Once enough characters are pasted into the field, the
lock screen will crash, allowing you to access the device.

--- Page 388 ---
Now, let's look at some more techniques.

--- Page 389 ---
Other techniques
All of the aforementioned techniques and available commercial tools are
useful to any forensic examiner, like you, trying to get access to the data on
an Android device; however, there could be situations where none of these
techniques work. To obtain a complete physical image of the device,
techniques such as chip-off and JTAG may be required when commercial
and open source solutions fail. A short description of these techniques is
included here.
While the chip-off technique removes the memory chip from a circuit and
tries to read it, the JTAG technique involves probing the JTAG test access
ports (TAPs) and soldering connectors to the JTAG ports in order to read
data from the device memory. The chip-off technique is more destructive
because, once the chip is removed from a device, it is difficult to restore the
device to its original functional state. Also, expertise is needed to carefully
remove the chip from the device by desoldering the chip from the circuit
board. The heat required to remove the chip can also damage or destroy the
data stored on that chip, which means that this technique should be used
only when the data is not retrievable by open source or commercial tools or
the device is damaged beyond repair. When using the JTAG technique,
JTAG ports help you to access the memory chip to retrieve a physical image
of the data without needing to remove the chip. To turn off screen lock on a
device, you can identify where the lock code is stored in the physical
memory dump, turn off the locking, and copy that data back to the device.
Commercial tools, such as Cellebrite Physical Analyzer, can accept .bin
files from chip-off and JTAG acquisitions and crack the lock code for you.
Once the code is either manually removed or cracked, you can analyze the
device using normal techniques.
Both the chip-off and JTAG techniques require extensive research and experience to be
attempted on a real device. A great resource for JTAG and chip-off on devices can be
found at https://forensicswiki.xyz/page/Main_Page.

--- Page 390 ---
In this section, we looked into various ways to bypass a screen lock on
Android device. We will now learn what Android rooting is all about.

--- Page 391 ---
Gaining root access
As a mobile device forensic examiner, it is essential for you to know
everything that relates to twisting and tweaking the device. This will help
you to understand the internal workings of the device in detail and
understand many issues that you may face during your investigation.
Rooting Android phones has become a common phenomenon, and you can
expect to encounter rooted phones during forensic examinations. Where
applicable, you may also need to root the device in order to acquire data for
forensic examination. This means that it's important to know the ins and
outs of rooted devices and how they are different from other phones. The
following sections cover information about Android rooting and other
related concepts.

--- Page 392 ---
What is rooting?
The default administrative account in Unix-like operating systems is called
root. In Linux, the root user has the power to start/stop any system service,
edit/delete any file, change the privileges of other users, and so on. We have
already learned that Android uses the Linux kernel, and so most
Linux concepts are applicable to Android as well; however, most Android
phones do not let you log in as a root user by default.
Rooting an Android phone is all about gaining access to the device to perform actions
that are not normally allowed on the device. Manufacturers want devices to function in
a certain manner for normal users. Rooting a device may void a warranty, since using
root opens the system to vulnerabilities and provides the user with superuser
capabilities.
Imagine a malicious application gaining access to an entire Android system
with root access. Remember that, in Android, each application is treated as
a separate user and is issued a UID. This means that applications have
access to limited resources and the concept of application isolation is
enforced. Essentially, rooting an Android device allows superuser
capabilities and provides open access to the Android device.
Superuser capabilities are similar to the admin capability on a Windows
machine, and give privileged access to perform actions that may not be
done by a normal user. In mobiles, this superuser access is disabled by
design, but rooting a phone allows you to gain this privilege. 

--- Page 393 ---
Understanding the rooting process
Even though hardware manufacturers try to impose enough restrictions to
restrict access to the root, hackers have always found different ways to get
access to the root. The process of rooting varies depending on the
underlying device manufacturer; however, rooting any device usually
involves exploiting a security bug in the device's firmware, then copying
the su (superuser) binary to a location in the current process's path
(/system/xbin/su), and granting it executable permissions with the chmod
command.
For the sake of simplicity, imagine that an Android device has three to four
partitions, which run programs not entirely related to Android (Android
being one among them).
The boot loader is present in the first partition and is the first program that
runs when the phone is powered on. The primary job of this boot loader is
to boot other partitions and load the Android partition, commonly referred
to as ROM by default. To see the boot loader menu, a specific key
combination is required, such as holding the power button and pressing the
volume up button. This menu provides options for you to boot into other
partitions, such as the recovery partition.
The recovery partition deals with installing upgrades to the phone, which
are written directly to the Android ROM partition. This is the mode that you
see when you install any official update on the device. Device
manufacturers make sure that only official updates are installed through the
recovery partition. This means that bypassing this restriction would allow
you to install/flash any unlocked Android ROM. Modified recovery
programs are those that not only allow an easier rooting process, but also
provide various options that are not seen in the normal recovery mode. The
following screenshot shows the normal recovery mode:

--- Page 394 ---
Normal Android system recovery mode
The following screenshot shows the modified recovery mode:
The modified recovery mode
The most commonly used recovery program in the Android world is
Clockwork recovery, also called ClockworkMod. Most rooting methods
begin by flashing a modified recovery to the recovery partition. After that,
you can issue an update, which can root the device; however, you don't
need to perform all the actions manually, as software is available for most
models that can root your phone with a single click.

--- Page 395 ---
Starting from Android 7.x, Google started strictly enforcing verified boot
on devices. Verified boot guarantees that the software on the device is not
modified before booting into the normal mode. This is implemented in such
a way that each stage verifies the integrity and authenticity of the next stage
before executing it. If a particular partition or segment is modified, the
integrity check fails and the mobile may not boot into normal mode. More
information about verified boot can be found at https://source.android.com/secu
rity/verifiedboot/verified-boot.
This also means that rooting such Android devices is going to be extremely
difficult because rooting involves tweaking the Android OS. Marshmallow
was the first Android version to provide alerts on system integrity, but since
Android 7.x, this has been made mandatory.

--- Page 396 ---
Rooting an Android device
We will now look at the different methods available to root an Android
device. The primary factor that influences your choice of method is whether
the underlying boot loader is locked or unlocked. Gaining root access on a
device with an unlocked boot loader is very easy, while gaining root access
to a device with a locked boot loader is not so straightforward, which means
that unlocking your Android phone’s bootloader is often the first step to
rooting and flashing custom ROMs. This can be done either through
fastboot mode (discussed in earlier sections) or by following a vendor-
specific boot loader unlock procedure. Once the device bootloader is
unlocked, the next step is to copy the su binary and grant it executable
permissions. This can be done in many ways. 
The following is how to root a Samsung Galaxy S7 (International SM-
G930F/FD/X, Korean SM-G930K/L/S, and Canadian SM-G930W8 Exynos
models):
1. Make sure OEM unlock is enabled in the Developer options.
2. Download ODIN (available at https://build.nethunter.com/samsung-tools/Odi
n_3.12.3.zip) and extract the contents of the archive to the directory of
your choice.
3. Download the TWRP image (available at https://twrp.me/samsung/samsungg
alaxys7.html).
4. Reboot your device into download mode. To do this, hold the Volume
down + Home buttons while your device reboots. Once you see the
download mode warning screen, press Volume up to continue.
Start Odin and put the TWRP image in the AP slot; don't forget
to disable Auto-Reboot. Start flashing the recovery.
5. To exit download mode, hold Volume down + Home + Power; when
the screen blanks, immediately change Volume down to Volume up.
6. Allow system modifications by swiping right.
7. Download SuperSU (available at https://download.chainfire.eu/supersu).

--- Page 397 ---
8. Transfer the archive with SuperSU to the device via MTP and install it
via the corresponding TWRP option.
Rooting is a highly device-specific process and hence the forensic
investigator needs to be cautious before applying these techniques on any
Android device. Rooting a device has both advantages and disadvantages
associated with it. The following are the advantages of rooting: 
Rooting allows modification of the software on the device to the
deepest level—for example, you can overclock or underclock the
device's CPU.
It allows restrictions imposed on the device by carriers, manufacturers,
and so on, to be bypassed.
For extreme customization, new customized ROMs can be
downloaded and installed.
The following are the disadvantages of rooting:
Rooting a device must be done with extreme care as errors may result
in irreparable damage to the software on the phone, turning the device
into a useless brick.
Rooting might void the warranty of a device.
Rooting results in increased exposure to malware and other attacks.
Malware with access to the entire Android system can create havoc.
Once the device is rooted, applications such as the Superuser app are
available to provide and deny root privileges. This app helps you to grant
and manage superuser rights on the device, as shown in the following
screenshot:

--- Page 398 ---
Application requesting root access
We will now look at root access.

--- Page 399 ---
Root access - ADB shell
A normal Android phone does not allow you to access certain directories
and files on the device. For example, try to access the /data/data folder on an
Android device that is not rooted. You will see the following message:
Permission denial without root access
On a rooted phone, you can run the adb shell as root by issuing the following
command:
C:\android-sdk\platform-tools>adb.exe root
The following screenshot shows the output of the preceding command:
Successful execution of shell command on a rooted device
Thus, rooting a phone enables you to access folders and data that are
otherwise not accessible. Also note that # symbolizes root or superuser
access, while $ reflects a normal user, as shown in the preceding command
lines.

--- Page 400 ---
Android 7.0 (Nougat) and later versions support file-based encryption (FBE), which
allows the encryption of different files with different keys. For a forensic investigator
like you, it is important to note that it is not possible to apply a permanent root to an
FBE-enabled device for acquisition purposes. Instead, it is recommended that you use a
custom recovery methodology, because the recovery partition runs with root privileges. 

--- Page 401 ---
Summary
In this chapter, we learned how to set up a proper forensic workstation
before conducting investigations on an Android device. Start with a sterile
forensic workstation that has the necessary basic software and device
drivers installed on it. If the method of forensic acquisition requires the
Android device to be unlocked, you need to determine the best method by
which to gain access to the device. If the device has the USB debugging
feature enabled, then bypassing the screen-lock is just a cakewalk. We
learned about the various screen lock bypass techniques and helped you to
determine which one to use under different circumstances. Depending on
the forensic acquisition method and the scope of the investigation, rooting
the device should provide complete access to the files present on the device.
We also learned about rooting and how it can be used to gain complete
access to the device's filesystem and perform actions that are not normally
allowed. 
Now that the basic concepts of gaining access to an Android device have
been covered, we will cover acquisition techniques and describe how data is
pulled using each method in Chapter 9, Android Data Extraction Techniques.

--- Page 402 ---
Android Data Extraction
Techniques
Using any of the screen lock bypass techniques explained in Chapter 8,
Android Forensic Setup and Pre-Data Extraction Techniques, an examiner
can try to access a locked device. Once the device is accessible, the next
task is to extract the information present on the device. This can be
achieved by applying various data extraction techniques to the Android
device.
This chapter will help you to identify the sensitive locations present on an
Android device and explain various logical and physical techniques that can
be applied to the device to extract the necessary information.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
Understanding data extraction techniques
Manual data extraction
Logical data extraction
Physical data extraction, which covers imaging an Android device and
SD card, JTAG, and chip-off techniques

--- Page 403 ---
Understanding data extraction
techniques
Data residing on an Android device may be an integral part of civil,
criminal, or internal investigations done as part of a corporate company's
internal probe. While dealing with investigations involving Android
devices, you, as the forensic examiner, need to be mindful of the issues that
need to be taken care of during the forensic process; this includes
determining whether root access is permitted (via consent or legal
authority) and what data can be extracted and analyzed during the
investigation. For example, in a criminal case involving stalking, the court
may only allow SMS, call logs, and photos to be extracted and analyzed on
the Android device belonging to the suspect. In this case, it may make the
most sense to logically capture only those specific items. However, it is best
to obtain a full physical data extraction from the device and only examine
the areas admissible by the court. You never know where your investigation
may lead and it is best to obtain as much data from the device as possible
immediately, rather than wishing you had a full image should the scope of
consent change. Data extraction techniques on an Android device can be
classified into three types:
Manual data extraction
Logical data extraction
Physical data extraction
As described in Chapter 1, Introduction to Mobile Forensics, manual
extraction involves browsing through the device normally and capturing
any valuable information, while logical extraction deals with accessing the
filesystem, and physical extraction is about extracting a bit-by-bit image of
the device. The extraction methods for each of these types will be described
in detail in the following sections.

--- Page 404 ---
Some methods may require the device to be rooted to fully access the data. Each
method has different implications and their success rates will depend on the tool and
method used as well as the device's make and model.

--- Page 405 ---
Manual data extraction
This method of extraction involves you utilizing the normal user interface
of the mobile device to access content present in the memory. You will
browse through the device normally by accessing different menus to view
details such as call logs, text messages, and IM chats. The content of each
screen is captured by taking pictures and can be presented as evidence.
The main drawback of this type of examination is that only the files that are
accessible via the operating system (in UI mode) can be investigated. Care
must be taken when manually examining the device, as it's easy to press the
wrong button and erase or add data. Manual extraction should be used as
the last resort to verify findings extracted using one of the other methods.
Certain circumstances may warrant you to conduct a manual examination as
the first step. This may include cases of life or death situations or missing
persons where a quick scan of the device may lead the police to the
individual.

--- Page 406 ---
Logical data extraction
Logical data extraction techniques extract the data present on the device by
interacting with the operating system and accessing the filesystem. These
techniques are significant because they provide valuable data, work on most
devices, and are easy to use. Once again, the concept of rooting comes into
the picture while extracting the data. Logical techniques do not actually
require root access for data extraction. However, having root access on a
device allows you to access all of the files present on a device. This means
that some data may be extracted on a non-rooted device while root access
will open the device and provide access to all of the files present on the
device. Hence, having root access to a device would greatly influence the
amount and kind of data that could be extracted through logical techniques.
The following sections explain various techniques that can be used to
extract data logically from an Android device.

--- Page 407 ---
ADB pull data extraction
As seen earlier, adb is a command-line tool that helps you to communicate
with a device to retrieve information. Using adb, you can extract data from
all of the files on the device or just the relevant files in which you are
interested. This is the most widely used technique as part of logical
extraction. 
To access an Android device through adb, the USB debugging option must be
enabled. From Android 4.2.2, due to secure USB debugging, the host
connecting to the device should also be authorized. If the device is locked
and USB debugging is not enabled, try to bypass the screen lock using the
techniques explained in Chapter 8, Android Forensic Setup and Pre-Data
Extraction Techniques.
As a forensic examiner, it's important for you to know how the data is stored
on the Android device and to understand where important and sensitive
information is stored so that the data can be extracted accordingly.
Application data often contains a wealth of user data that may be relevant to
the investigation. All files pertaining to applications of interest should be
examined for relevance, as will be explained in Chapter 10, Android Data
Analysis and Recovery. The application data can be stored in one of the
following locations:
Shared preferences: This stores data in key-value pairs in a
lightweight XML format. Shared preference files are stored in the
shared_pref folder of the application /data directory.
Internal storage: This stores data that is private and is present in the
device's internal memory. Files saved to the internal storage are private
and cannot be accessed by other applications.
External storage: This stores data that is public in the device's external
memory, which does not usually enforce security mechanisms. This
data is available in the /sdcard directory.
SQLite database: This data is available in the /data/data/PackageName/
database. It is usually stored with the .db file extension. The data

--- Page 408 ---
present in a SQLite file can be viewed using the SQLite browser (http
s://sourceforge.net/projects/sqlitebrowser/) or by executing the necessary
SQLite commands on the respective files.
Every Android application stores data on the device using one or more of the
preceding data storage options. So, the Contacts application would store all
of the information about the contact details in the /data/data folder under its
package name. Note that /data/data is a part of your device's internal storage,
where all of the apps are installed under normal circumstances. Some
application data will reside on the SD card and in the /data/data partition.
Using adb, we can pull the data present in this partition for further analysis
using the adb pull command. Once again, it's important to note that this
directory is only accessible on a rooted phone.
In Android 7.0 (Nougat), a new storage type called device encrypted storage has been
introduced to allow apps to store certain kinds of data in this storage. As a result of this,
you will notice new file paths such as misc_de, misc_ce, system_de, and system_ce under the
/data folder. From a forensic perspective, this is a very important change because what
this also means is that, on devices running Android Nougat, /data/data is not the only
location where artifacts are stored, for example,
SMS data location on old devices:
/data/com.android.providers.telephony/databases/smsmms.db and SMS data location on Nougat
devices: /user_de/0/com.android.providers.telephony/databases/smsmms.db.
 
On a rooted phone, the adb pull command on the databases folder of the
Dropbox app can be executed as follows:
The adb pull command
Similarly, on a rooted phone, the entire /data folder can be pulled in this
manner. As shown in the following screenshot, the complete /data directory

--- Page 409 ---
on the Android device can be copied to the local directory on the machine.
The entire data directory was extracted in 97 seconds. The extraction time
will vary depending on the amount of data residing in /data:
The /data directory extracted to a forensic workstation
On a non-rooted device, a pull command on the /data directory does not
extract the files, as shown in the following output, since the shell user does
not have permission to access those files:
ADB pull command on non-rooted device
The data copied from a rooted phone through the preceding process
maintains its directory structure, hence allowing an investigator to browse
through the necessary files to gain access to the information. By analyzing
the data of the respective applications, a forensic expert can gather critical
information that can influence the outcome of the investigation. Note that
examining the folders natively on your forensic workstation will alter the

--- Page 410 ---
dates and times of the content. You should make a copy of the original
output to use for a date/time comparison.

--- Page 411 ---
Using SQLite Browser to view the
data
SQLite Browser is a tool that can help during the course of analyzing
extracted data. SQLite Browser allows you to explore database files with the
following extensions: .sqlite, .sqlite3, .sqlitedb, .db, and .db3. The main
advantage of using SQLite Browser is that it shows data in a table form.
Navigate to File | Open Database to open a .db file using SQLite Browser. As
shown in the following screenshot, there are three main tabs: Database
Structure, Browse Data, and Execute SQL. The Browse Data tab allows you
to see the information present in different tables within the .db files.
We will be mostly using this tab during our analysis. Alternatively, tools
such as Oxygen Forensic SQLite Viewer can also be used for the same
purpose. Recovering deleted data from database files is possible and will be
explained in Chapter 10, Android Data Analysis and Recovery:

--- Page 412 ---
SQLite Browser
The following sections throw light on identifying important data and
manually extracting various details from an Android phone. Gaining access
to the Terminal on Android has been covered in earlier chapters. In the
following section, we will directly jump into gaining device information
from there. 

--- Page 413 ---
Extracting device information
Knowing the details of your Android device, such as the model, version,
and more, will aid your investigation. For example, when the device is
physically damaged and this prohibits the examination of the device
information, you can grab details about the device by executing the
following command under the /system folder:
# cat build.prop
This can be seen in the following screenshot:

--- Page 414 ---
The build.prop file
After extracting device information, we will now extract call logs.

--- Page 415 ---
Extracting call logs
Accessing the call logs of a phone is often required during an investigation
to confirm certain events. The information about call logs is stored in the
contacts2.db file located at /data/data/com.android.providers.contacts/databases/. As
mentioned earlier, you can use SQLite Browser to see the data present in this
file after extracting it to a local folder on the forensic workstation. Let's see
how to extract call logs by following these steps:
1. As shown in the following screenshot, using the adb pull command, the
necessary .db files can be extracted to a folder on the forensic
workstation:
The contacts2.db file copied to a local folder
2. Note that applications used to make calls can store call log details in the
respective application folder. All communication applications must be
examined for call log details, as follows:
C:\android-sdk-windows\platform-tools>adb.exe pull
/data/data/com.android.providers.contacts C:temp 
This will give the following output:

--- Page 416 ---
3. Now, open the contacts2.db file using SQLite Browser (by navigating to
File | Open Database) and browse through the data present in different
tables. The calls table present in the contacts2.db file provides
information about the call history. The following screenshot highlights
the call history along with the name, number, duration, and date:
On devices running Android 7.0 (Nougat), call log data has been moved out
of the contacts2.db file. On these devices, call log data can be accessed at
/data/com.android.providers.contacts/databases/calllog.db

--- Page 417 ---
Extracting SMS/MMS
During the course of an investigation, you may be asked to retrieve the text
messages that were sent by and delivered to a particular mobile device.
Hence, it is important to understand where the details are stored and how to
access the data. The mmssms.db file, which is present under
/data/data/com.android.providers.telephony/databases, contains the necessary
details. As with call logs, you must ensure that applications capable of
messaging are examined for relevant message logs by using the following
command:
adb.exe pull /data/data/com.android.providers.telephony C:\temp
This will give the following output:
Extracting SMS data
The phone number can be seen under the address column and the
corresponding text message can be seen under the body column, as shown in
the following screenshot:
The calls table in the contacts2.db file
We will now extract browser history information.

--- Page 418 ---
Extracting browser history
information
Extracting browser history information is one task that is often required of a
forensic examiner. Apart from the default Android browser, different
browser applications can be used on an Android phone, such as Firefox
Mobile and Google Chrome. All of these browsers store their browser
history in the SQLite .db format. For our example, we are extracting data
from the default Android browser to our forensic workstation. This data is
located at /data/data/com.android.browser. The file named browser2.db contains the
browser history details. The following screenshot shows the browser data, as
represented by Oxygen Forensic SQLite Viewer. Note that the trial version
will hide certain information:

--- Page 419 ---
The browser2.db file in Oxygen Forensic SQLite Viewer
Please note that the aforementioned behavior might change if the browser's incognito
mode is used.
Several details covered in the preceding section are not stored on the device
if the browser's incognito mode is used. Next, we will be analyzing social
networking and IM chats.

--- Page 420 ---
Analysis of social networking/IM
chats
Social networking and IM chat applications such as Facebook, Twitter, and
WhatsApp reveal sensitive data that could be helpful during the investigation
of any case. The analysis is pretty much the same as with any other Android
application. Download the data to a forensic workstation and analyze the .db
files to find out whether you can unearth any sensitive information. For
example, let's look at the Facebook application and try to see what data can
be extracted.
First, we extract the /data/data/com.facebook.katana folder and navigate to the
databases folder. The fb.db file present under this folder contains the
information that is associated with the user's account. The friends_data table
contains information about the user's friends' names, along with their phone
numbers, email IDs, and dates of birth, as shown in the following screenshot.
Similarly, other files can be analyzed to find out whether any sensitive
information can be gathered:

--- Page 421 ---
The fb.db file in SQLite Browser
Similarly, by analyzing the data present in the /data/data folder, information
about the geolocation, calendar events, user notes, and more can be grabbed.

--- Page 422 ---
ADB backup extraction
Starting from Android 4.0, Google implemented the adb backup functionality,
which allows users to back up application data to a computer using the adb
tool. This process does not require root access and, hence, can be very
useful during forensic examination. The main drawback is that it does not
back up every application installed on the device. The backup feature is
application dependent, as the owner of the application can choose to allow
backups. Backups are allowed by default, but the developer can disable it if
they want to. Hence, most third-party apps have this enabled and the adb
backup command will work for them. Here is the syntax for the adb backup
command:
adb backup [-f <file>] [-apk|-noapk] [-shared|-noshared] [-all] [-system|nosystem] 
[<packages...>]
Let's discuss this in detail:
-f: This is used to choose where the backup file will be stored. If not
specified, it defaults to backup.ab in the present working directory.
[-apk|noapk]: This is used to choose whether or not to back up the .apk
file. The default is -noapk.
[-obb|-noobb]: This is used to choose whether or not to back up the .obb
(APK expansion) files. It defaults to -noobb.
[-shared|-noshared]: This is used to choose whether or not to back up
data from shared storage and the SD card. The default is -noshared.
[-all]: This includes all applications for which backups are enabled.
[-system|-nosystem]: This is used to choose whether or not to include
system applications. It defaults to -system.
[<packages>]: This is used to list a specific package name to be backed
up.
Once the device is connected to the workstation and adb can access it, run
the adb backup -shared -all command, as shown in the following screenshot:

--- Page 423 ---
The adb backup command
Once the command is run, the user then needs to approve the permission on
the device, as shown in the following screenshot. For this reason, if the
device is screen locked, it's not possible to make a backup:
Backup permission on the device
An Android backup file is stored as a .ab file and, by default, it is stored in
the platform- tools folder of the Android SDK. There are free tools, such as
Android Backup Extractor, that can convert the .ab file into a .tar file,
which can then be viewed. Android Backup Extractor can be downloaded
from https://sourceforge.net/projects/adbextractor/. This tool is a Java-based

--- Page 424 ---
application, so ensure that Java is installed on the workstation before using
the tool. To convert the backup file into .tar format, issue the following
command:
java -jar abe.jar unpack backup.ab backup.tar
This will automatically create a file with the .tar extension, which can then
be viewed easily using Archive tools such as WinRAR or 7Zip. However,
note that if the password was entered on the device when the backup was
created, the file will be encrypted and, therefore, you'll need to provide the
password as an argument in the preceding command. The backup file
contains two main folders—apps and shared. The apps folder contains all of
the information that is present under /data/data for the applications included
in the backup. The shared folder contains all of the data present on the SD
card.

--- Page 425 ---
ADB dumpsys extraction
The adb dumpsys command allows you to gather information about services
and applications running on the system. The adb shell dumpsys command gives
diagnostic output for all system services. The dumpsys command does not
require root privileges to be executed and requires only USB debugging to
be enabled as with any other adb command. As shown in the following
screenshot, to see the list of all the services that you can use with dumpsys, run
the adb.exe shell service list command:
The dumpsys service list command
Analyzing certain dumpsys services, such as Wi-Fi, user, and notification, can
be helpful in certain scenarios. Here are some of the interesting cases where
running the dumpsys command could be helpful during forensic analysis:
The dumpsys iphonesubinfo service can be used to get information about a device
ID or the IMEI number, as shown in the following screenshot:

--- Page 426 ---
The dumpsys command showing the IMEI number
The dumpsys wifi service gives information about Wi-Fi points accessed by the
user. It shows the SSIDs of the connections that have been saved. This
information can be used to pin down the user to a particular location. Here is
the adb dumpsys command, which gives this information:
The dumpsys command showing the last connected Wi-Fi details
The dumpsys usagestats service gives information about recently used
applications, along with their date of usage. For example, the following
screenshot shows that no apps were used on February 1, 2016, but on
January 31, 2016, the Google Chrome browser was used and there was an
attempt to back up the phone data:

--- Page 427 ---
The dumpsys command showing recently used apps
Observe that against Date 20160201, android: 0 times denotes that no apps were
used. But for Date: 20160131, android: 1 times confirms that one app was used
and the later sections provide more details on what app was used and so on.
Depending on the case being investigated, the forensic analyst needs to
figure out whether any of the dumpsys commands can be of use. Running a
dumpsys command immediately after a device seizure can be extremely helpful
later on. By running the adb shell dumpsys command, you can record all of the
dumpsys service information.

--- Page 428 ---
Using content providers
In Android, the data of one application cannot be accessed by another
application under normal circumstances. However, Android provides a
mechanism through which data can be shared with other applications. This is
precisely achieved through the use of content providers. Content providers
present data to external applications in the form of one or more tables. These
tables are no different from the tables found in a relational database. They
can be used by applications to share data, usually through the URI
addressing scheme. They are used by other applications that access the
provider using a provider-client object. During the installation of an app, the
user determines whether or not the app can gain access to the requested data
(content providers). For instance, contacts, SMS/MMS, and a calendar are
examples of content providers.
Hence, by taking advantage of this, we can create an app that can grab all
of the information from all of the available content providers. This is
precisely how most commercial forensic tools work. The advantage of this
method is that it can be used on both rooted and non-rooted devices. For our
example, we use AFLogical, which takes advantage of the content provider
mechanism to gain access to the information. This tool extracts the data and
saves it to an SD card in CSV format. The following steps extract the
information from an Android device using AFLogical Open Source Edition
1.5.2:
1. Download AFLogical OSE 1.5.2 from https://github.com/nowsecure/android
-forensics/downloads.
The AFLogical LE edition is capable of extracting a large amount of information and
requires registration via forensics using an active law enforcement or government
agency email address. AFLogical OSE can pull all available MMSes, SMSes, contacts,
and call logs.
2. Ensure that USB debugging mode is enabled and connect the device to
the workstation.

--- Page 429 ---
3. Verify that the device is identified by issuing the adb.exe devices
command:
Identify connected device
4. Save the AFLogical OSE app in the home directory and issue the adb.exe
install AFLogical-OSE_1.5.2.apk command to install it on the device:
Installing AFLogical app
5. Once the application is installed, you can run it directly from the device
and click on the Capture button present at the bottom of the app, as
shown in the following screenshot:
The AFLogical OSE app
6. The app starts extracting data from the respective content providers
and, once the process is complete, a message will be displayed, as
shown in the following screenshot:

--- Page 430 ---
Message displayed after the extraction is complete
7. The extracted data is saved to the SD card of the device in a directory
named forensics. The extracted information is stored in CSV files, as
shown in the following screenshot. The CSV files can be viewed using
any editor:
Files extracted using AFLogical OSE
8. The info.xml file present in the same directory provides information
about the device, including the IMEI number, IMSI number, Android
version, information about installed applications, and so on.
However, note that third-party app installation should be allowed (by selecting the
Unknown Sources option) on the device for this to work. Other tools that can help
during an investigation to logically extract data will be covered in Chapter 11, Android App
Analysis, Malware, and Reverse Engineering.
This section covered various logical acquisition techniques. We will now
look into physical data extraction techniques. 

--- Page 431 ---
Physical data extraction
Physical extraction refers to the process of obtaining an exact bit-by-bit
image of a device. It is important to understand that a bit-by-bit image is not
the same as copying and pasting the contents of a device. If we copy and
paste the contents of a device, it will only copy the available files, such as
visible files, hidden files, and system-related files. This method is
considered a logical image. With this method, deleted files and files that are
not accessible are not copied by the copy command. Deleted files can be
recovered (based on the circumstances) using certain techniques, which we
will see in the following chapters. Unlike logical extraction, physical
extraction is an exact copy of the device's memory and includes more
information, such as the slack space and unallocated space.
Android data extraction through physical techniques is commonly
performed using the dd command, while other advanced techniques such as
JTAG and chip-off are also available, but are usually hard to implement and
require great precision and experience to try them on real devices during the
course of an investigation. As with any other technique, if an individual
performs these procedures incorrectly, data on the device can be corrupted
or become irretrievable, thereby making it non-admissible in a court of law.
JTAG and chip-off techniques are covered in detail in the following
sections. However, extracting data through the dd command requires root
access. The following sections provide an overview of various techniques
that can be used to perform physical extraction.

--- Page 432 ---
Imaging an Android phone
Imaging a device is one of the most important steps in mobile device
forensics. When possible, it's imperative to obtain a physical image of an
Android device before performing any techniques to extract the data directly
from the device. In forensics, this process of obtaining a physical acquisition
is commonly called imaging the device. The terms physical image, forensic
image, and raw image are often used to refer to the image captured through
this process. Let's first revisit how imaging is done on a desktop computer as
it helps us to correlate and realize the problems associated with imaging
Android devices. Let's assume that a desktop computer, which is not
powered on, is seized from a suspect and sent for forensic examination. In
this case, a typical forensic examiner would remove the hard disk, connect it
to a write blocker, and obtain a bit-by-bit forensic image using any of the
available tools. The original hard disk is then safely protected during the
forensic imaging of the data.
With an Android device, all of the areas that contain data cannot be easily
removed. Also, if the device is active at the time of receiving it for
examination, it is not possible to analyze the device without making any
changes to it, because any interaction would change the state of the device.
An Android device may have two file storage areas: internal and external
storage. Internal storage refers to the built-in non-volatile memory. External
storage refers to the removable storage medium, such as a micro SD card.
However, it's important to note that some devices do not have a removable
storage medium such as an SD card, but they divide the available permanent
storage space into internal and external storage. Hence, it's not always true
that external storage is removable. When a removable SD card is present, a
forensic image of the memory card has to be obtained. As discussed in Chapte
r 7, Understanding Android, these removable cards are generally formatted
with the FAT32 filesystem. Some mobile device acquisition methods will
acquire the SD card through the Android device. This process, while useful,
will be slow due to the speed limitations of USB phone cables.

--- Page 433 ---
Android, by default, does not provide access to internal directories and
system-related files. This restricted access is to ensure the security of the
device. For instance, the /data/data folder is not accessible on a non-rooted
device. This folder is especially of interest to us because it stores most of the
user-created data and many applications write valuable data into this folder.
Hence, to obtain an image of the device, we need to root the Android device.
Rooting a device gives us superuser privileges and access to all of the data.
It is important to realize that this book has been stressing that all of the steps
taken should be forensically sound and should not make changes to the
device whenever possible. Rooting an Android device will make changes to
it and should be tested on any device that you have not previously
investigated. Rooting is common for Android devices, but getting root
access could alter the device in a manner that renders the data changed or—
worse yet—wiped. Some Android devices, such as the Nexus 4 and 5, may
force the data partition to be wiped before allowing root access. This negates
the need to root the device to gain access because all of the user data is lost
during the process. Just remember that, while rooting provides access to
more data when successfully done, it can also wipe data or destroy the
phone. Hence, you must ensure that you have consent or legal rights to
manipulate an Android device before proceeding with the root. As rooting
techniques have been discussed in Chapter 8, Android Forensic Setup and Pre-
Data Extraction Techniques, we will proceed with the example assuming
that the device is rooted.
The following is a step-by-step process to obtain a forensic image of a
rooted Android device:
1. Connect the Android device to the workstation and verify that the
device is identified by issuing the adb devices command, as shown here:
Identify connected devices
2. Once the adb access is ready, the partitions can be acquired from the
Android device using the following steps:

--- Page 434 ---
Using the dd command: The dd command can be used to create a
raw image of the device. This command helps us to create a bit-
by-bit image of the Android device by copying low-level data.
Inserting a new SD card: Insert a new SD card into the device to
copy the image file to this card. Make sure that this SD card is
wiped and does not contain any other data. You might also need to
testify that no additional data is present on the drive. 
Executing the command: The filesystem of an Android device is
stored in different locations within the /dev partition. A simple mount
command on a Samsung Galaxy S3 phone returns the following
output:
mount command output on an Android device
3. From the preceding output, we can identify the blocks where the /system,
/data, and /cache partitions are mounted. Although it's important to
image all of the files, most of the data is present in the /data and /system
partitions. When time allows, all partitions should be acquired for
completeness. Once this is done, execute the following command to
image the device:
dd if=/dev/block/mmcblk0p12 of=/sdcard/tmp.image
In the preceding example, the data partition of a Samsung Galaxy S3 was
used (where if is the input file and of is the output file).

--- Page 435 ---
The preceding command will make a bit-by-bit image of the mmcblk0p12 file
(data partition) and copy the image file to an SD card. Once this is done, the
dd image file can be analyzed using the available forensic software.
You must ensure that the SD card has enough storage space to contain the data partition
image. Other methods are available to acquire data from rooted devices.
If the image cannot be written to the SD card directly, you can use the netcat
command to write the output directly to the machine. The netcat tool is a
Linux-based tool used for transferring data over a network connection.
Android devices do not usually come with netcat installed. Let's see how to
use this command in the following steps:
1. To check whether netcat is installed, simply open the ADB shell and
type nc. If it returns saying nc is not found, netcat will have to be
installed manually on the device. You can download netcat compiled for
Android at https://sourceforge.net/projects/androidforensics-netcat/files/.
2. Push netcat on to the device using the following command on your
computer:
adb push nc /dev/Case_Folder/nc
The command should have created Case_Folder in /dev and nc should be
in it.
3. Now, we need to give it permission to execute from the ADB shell.
This can be done as follows:
chomd +x /dev/Case_Folder/nc
4. Open two Terminal windows with the ADB shell open in one of them.
The other will be used to listen to the data being sent from the device.
Now, we need to enable port forwarding over ADB from your
computer:
adb forward tcp:9999 tcp:9999
9999 is the port we chose to use for netcat; it can be any arbitrary port number
between 1023 and 65535 on a Linux or Mac system (1023 and below are

--- Page 436 ---
reserved for system processes and require root permission to use them). In
the other Terminal window, run the following:
nc 127.0.0.1 9999 > data_partition.img
The data_partition.img file should now be created in the current directory of
your computer. When the data is finished transferring, netcat will terminate
in both terminals and return to Command Prompt. The process can take a
significant amount of time depending on the size of the image.

--- Page 437 ---
Imaging a memory (SD) card
There are many tools available that can image a memory card. The
following example uses WinHex to create a raw disk image of the SD card.
The following is the step-by-step process with which to image a memory
card using WinHex:
1. Connecting the memory card: Remove the SD card from the
memory slot and use a card reader to connect the memory card to the
forensic workstation.
2. Write-protect the card: Open the disk using WinHex. Navigate to
Options | Edit Mode and select Read-only Mode (=write-protected
mode), as shown in the following screenshot. This is to make sure that
the device is write-protected and no data can be written on it:
WinHex view of Edit Mode (left) and WinHex Read-only Mode enabled (right)
3. Calculating the hash value: Calculate the hash value of the memory
card to make sure that no changes are made at any point during the
investigation. Navigate to Tools | Compute hash and choose any
hashing algorithm.
4. Creating the image of the disk: Navigate to File | Create Disk Image,
as shown in the following screenshot. Select the raw image option (.dd)
to create an image. This completes the imaging of the memory card:

--- Page 438 ---
The WinHex disk image option
Once a forensic image is obtained using any of the methods described
previously, it needs to be analyzed to extract the relevant information. There
are several commercial tools, such as Cellebrite and XRY, that can analyze
image files. Analyzing Android images is covered in detail in Chapter 10,
Android Data Analysis and Recovery.

--- Page 439 ---
Joint Test Action Group
Joint Test Action Group (JTAG) involves using advanced data acquisition
methods, which involve connecting to specific ports on the device and
instructing the processor to transfer the data stored on the device. Using this
method, a full physical image of a device can be acquired. It is always
recommended to first try out the other techniques mentioned earlier, as they
are easy to implement and require less effort. An analyst must be
experienced and properly trained before attempting JTAG as the device may
be damaged if not handled properly.
The JTAG process usually involves the following forensic steps:
1. In JTAG, the device Test Access Ports (TAPs) are used to access the
CPU of the device. Identifying the TAPs is the primary and most
important step. TAPs are identified and the connection is traced to the
CPU to find out which pad is responsible for each function. Although
device manufacturers document resources about the JTAG schematics
of a particular device, they are not released for general viewing. A
good site for JTAG on an Android device is https://forensicswiki.xyz/wik
i/index.php?title=JTAG_Forensics.
2. Wire leads are then soldered to appropriate connector pins and the
other end is connected to the device that can control the CPU, as
shown in the following photograph (published by Jim Swauger at htt
p://www.binaryintel.com/services/jtag-chip-off-forensics/jtag-forensics/ ).
JTAG jigs can be used to forgo soldering for certain devices. The use
of a jig or JTAG adapter negates the need to solder, as it connects the
TAPs to the CPU:

--- Page 440 ---
The JTAG setup
Once the preceding steps are complete, power must be applied to boot
the CPU. The voltage that must be applied depends on the
specifications released by the hardware manufacturer. Do not apply a
voltage beyond the number given in the specification.
After applying the power, a full binary memory dump of the NAND
flash can be extracted.
Analyze the extracted data using the forensic techniques and tools
learned in this book. A raw .bin file will be obtained during the
acquisition; most forensic tools support the ingestion and analysis of
this image format.
JTAG may sound complicated (perhaps it is), but it serves many useful
purposes and three advantages are listed here:
The main advantage of this technique is that it works even if the device
is not powered on.
It does not require root, ADB, or USB debugging.
It can be used to recover device PINs/passwords and so can image the
entire flash memory and recover/crack password files.

--- Page 441 ---
It is also important to understand that the JTAG technique should not result
in the loss of functionality of the device. If reassembled properly, the device
should function without any problems. Although the JTAG technique is
effective in extracting data, only experienced and qualified personnel
should attempt it. Any error in soldering the JTAG pads or applying the
wrong voltage could severely damage the device.

--- Page 442 ---
The chip-off technique
Chip-off, as the name suggests, is a technique where the NAND flash chips
are removed from the device and examined to extract information. Hence,
this technique will work even when the device is passcode-protected and
USB debugging is not enabled. Unlike the JTAG technique, where the
device functions normally after examination, the chip-off technique usually
results in the destruction of the device, that is, it is more difficult to reattach
the NAND flash to the device after examination. The process of reattaching
the NAND flash to the device is called re-balling and requires training and
practice.
Chip-off techniques usually involve the following forensic steps:
1. All of the chips on the device must be researched to determine which
chip contains user data.
2. Once determined, the NAND flash is physically removed from the
device. This can be done by applying heat to desolder the chip:

--- Page 443 ---
Chip-off technique
Source: http://www.binaryintel.com/services/jtag-chip-off-forensics/chip-off_forensics/
3. This is a very delicate process and must be done with great care, as it
may result in damaging the NAND flash.
4. The chip is then cleaned and repaired to make sure that the connectors
are present and functioning.
5. Using specialized hardware device adapters, the chip can now be read.
This is done by inserting the chip into the hardware device, that

--- Page 444 ---
supports the specific NAND flash chip. In this process, raw data is
acquired from the chip, resulting in a .bin file.
6. The data acquired can now be analyzed using forensic techniques and
the tools described earlier.
The chip-off technique is most helpful when a device is damaged severely,
locked, or otherwise inaccessible. However, the application of this
technique requires not only expertise but also costly equipment and tools.
There is always a risk of damaging the NAND flash while removing it and,
hence, it is recommended to try out the logical techniques first to extract
any data.
While root access is a must to perform any of the techniques discussed
earlier, it must be noted here that, at the time of writing this book, none of
these techniques would work on devices that have Full Disk Encryption
(FDE) enabled. As discussed in Chapter 7, Understanding Android, Google
has mandated the use of FDE for most devices starting from Android 6.0.
Although some techniques were demonstrated and published for decrypting
full disk encryption, they are device-specific and are not widely applicable.

--- Page 445 ---
Summary
This chapter covered various manual, logical, and physical data extraction
techniques. We learned when and how to apply these techniques during the
course of an investigation. Logical techniques extract data by interacting
with the device using tools such as ADB. Physical techniques, on the other
hand, access a larger set of data; they are complex and require a great deal
of expertise to perform. Imaging a device produces a bit-by-bit image of the
device, which is later analyzed using tools. Imaging a device is one of the
primary steps to ensure that the data on the device is not modified. Android
7.0 and above poses a new challenge to forensic investigators by bringing in
new security features and file paths that may limit acquisition. With this
knowledge, you can perform device acquisition to extract relevant data
from an Android device. 
In the next chapter, we will see how to extract relevant data such as call
logs, text messages, and browsing history from an image file. We will also
cover data recovery techniques, using which we can recover data deleted
from a device.

--- Page 446 ---
Android Data Analysis and
Recovery
In the previous chapter, we covered various logical and physical extraction
techniques. In physical extraction, a bit-by-bit image of the Android device
is obtained, which contains valuable information. In this chapter, we will
learn how to analyze and extract relevant data, such as call logs and text
messages, from an image file. While the data extraction and analysis
techniques provide information about various details, not all techniques can
provide information about the deleted data. Data recovery is a crucial aspect
of mobile forensics, as it helps to unearth the deleted items.
This chapter aims at covering various techniques, that can be used by a
forensic analyst to recover the data from an Android device.
In this chapter, we will cover the following two major topics:
Analyzing and extracting data from Android image files using the
Autopsy tool
Understanding techniques to recover deleted files from an SD card and
the internal memory

--- Page 447 ---
Analyzing and extracting data from
Android image files using the
Autopsy tool
The term Android image refers to the physical image (also called a
forensic image or raw image) that is obtained by performing any of the
physical data extraction techniques. Using the techniques explained in Chapte
r 9, Android Data Extraction Techniques, you can image the entire /data/data
block or any particular block that is of relevance to the investigation. Once
the image is obtained, an investigator like you can manually go through the
contents of the file or take advantage of the available tools to parse through
the contents. Commercial tools, such as Cellebrite and XRY, can drill into
the data and present a comprehensive picture of the contents. Autopsy is
one of the very widely used open source tools in the forensics world that
performs an excellent job of analyzing an Android image.

--- Page 448 ---
The Autopsy platform
Autopsy is a forensic platform and acts as a GUI for the Sleuth Kit. It is
available for free; you can download it at http://www.sleuthkit.org/. The
Sleuth Kit is a collection of Unix and Windows-based tools and utilities,
which are used to perform forensic analysis. Autopsy displays the results by
forensically analyzing a given volume, and thereby helps investigators to
focus on relevant sections of the data. Autopsy is free and extensible and
has several modules that can be plugged in. Autopsy can be used to load
and analyze an Android image that is obtained after physical extraction.

--- Page 449 ---
Adding an image to Autopsy
Once you have downloaded and installed Autopsy, follow these steps to add
an image to Autopsy:
1. Open the Autopsy tool and select the Create New Case option, as
shown in the following screenshot:
Creating a new case in Autopsy
2. Enter all of the necessary case details, including the name of the case,
the location where data needs to be stored, and so on, as shown in the
following screenshot:

--- Page 450 ---
Entering case information in Autopsy
3. Enter the case number and examiner details, and click on Finish.
4. Now, click on the Add Data Source button, add the image file to be
analyzed, and click on Next:

--- Page 451 ---
Entering data source information in Autopsy
5. On the next screen, you can configure what modules have to be run on
the images, as shown in the following screenshot. It is recommended to
select the Recent Activity, Exif Parser, Keyword Search, and Android
Analyzer modules. In the next step, click on Finish:

--- Page 452 ---
Configuring modules in Autopsy
Once this is done, the tool usually takes a few minutes to parse through the
image depending on its size. During this time, you might see some errors or
warning messages if any are encountered by the tool. However, Autopsy
provides the fastest access to the artifacts and the filesystem when compared
to other tools.

--- Page 453 ---
Analyzing an image using Autopsy
Once the image is loaded, expand the file present under Data Sources to see
data present in the image. For example, the following screenshot shows the
contents of the /data/ folder:

--- Page 454 ---
Analyzing an image in Autopsy
In the preceding example, only the /data portion of the device has been
imaged. If the entire device had been imaged, then the tool would show

--- Page 455 ---
more volumes. Depending on the underlying details of the investigation,
relevant portions need to be analyzed. In the following example, by
examining the folders present under com.android.browser, we can extract the list
of various sites visited by the user along with their access dates:
Analyzing browsing details in Autopsy
Valuable data, such as text messages, browsing history, chats, call history,
pictures, videos, and location details, could be unearthed by analyzing the
data present under various sections. In the next section, we shall look into
data recovery from an SD card and the internal memory.

--- Page 456 ---
Understanding techniques to
recover deleted files from the SD
card and the internal memory
Data recovery is one of the most significant and powerful aspects of
forensic analysis. The ability to recover deleted data can be crucial to crack
many civil and criminal cases. From a normal user's point of view,
recovering data that has been deleted would usually refer to the operating
system's built-in solutions, such as the Recycle Bin in Windows. While it's
true that data can be recovered from these locations, due to an increase in
user awareness, these options don't often work. For instance, on a desktop
computer, people now use Shift + Delete as a way to delete a file
completely from their desktop.
Data recovery is the process of retrieving deleted data from a device when it
cannot be accessed normally. Consider the scenario where a mobile phone
has been seized from a terrorist. Wouldn't it be of the greatest importance to
know which items were deleted by the terrorist? Access to any deleted SMS
messages, pictures, dialed numbers, application data, and more can be of
critical importance, as they often reveal sensitive information. With
Android, it is possible to recover most of the deleted data if the device files
are properly acquired. However, if proper care is not taken while handling
the device, the deleted data could be lost forever. To ensure that the deleted
data is not overwritten, it is recommended to keep the following points in
mind:
Do not use the phone for any activity after seizing it. The deleted data
exists on the device until space is needed by some other incoming data.
Hence, the phone must not be used for any sort of activity to prevent
the data from being overwritten.
Even when the phone is not used, without any intervention from our
end, data can be overwritten. For instance, an incoming SMS would

--- Page 457 ---
automatically occupy space, which could overwrite the data marked
for deletion. To prevent the occurrence of such events, you should
follow the forensic handling methods described in the previous
chapters. The easiest solution is to place the device in airplane mode or
disable all connectivity options on the device. This prevents the
delivery of any new messages.
All Android filesystems have metadata that contains information about the
hierarchy of files, filenames, and so on. Deletion will not really erase this
data but remove the filesystem metadata. When text messages or any other
files are deleted from the device, they are just made invisible to the user, but
the files are still present on the device. Essentially, the files are simply
marked for deletion, but they reside on the filesystem until being
overwritten. Recovering deleted data from an Android device involves two
scenarios: recovering data that is deleted from the SD card, such as pictures,
videos, application data, and more, and recovering data that is deleted from
the internal memory of the device. The following sections cover the
techniques that can be used to recover deleted data from both the SD card
and the internal memory of the Android device.

--- Page 458 ---
Recovering deleted data from an
external SD card
Data present on SD cards can reveal a lot of information to forensic
investigators. SD cards are capable of storing pictures and videos taken by
the phone's camera, voice recordings, application data, cached files, and
more. Essentially, anything that can be stored on a computer hard drive can
be stored on an SD card as much as the available space allows.
Recovering the deleted data from an external SD card is a straightforward
process. SD cards can be mounted as an external mass storage device and
forensically acquired using standard digital forensic methods, as discussed in
Chapter 9, Android Data Extraction Techniques. As mentioned in the previous
chapters, SD cards in Android devices often use the FAT32 filesystem. The
main reason for this is that the FAT32 filesystem is widely supported in most
operating systems, including Windows, Linux, and macOS X. The maximum
file size on a FAT32 formatted drive is around 4 GB. With increasingly high-
resolution formats now available, this limit is commonly reached. Apart
from this, FAT32 can only be used on partitions that are less than 32 GB in
size. Hence, the exFAT filesystem, which overcomes these problems, is now
being used in some of the devices.
Recovering the deleted data from an external SD card can be easily
accomplished if it can be mounted as a drive. Hence, if the SD card is
removable, connect it to a workstation using a write blocker for acquisition.
However, the latest Android devices do not usually mount as a mass storage.
This is because these devices use the Media Transfer Protocol (MTP) or
Picture Transfer Protocol (PTP) protocols instead of USB mass storage.
The problem with USB mass storage is that the computer would need
exclusive access to the storage. In other words, the external storage needs to
be completely disconnected from the Android OS when it is connected to a
workstation. This has led to several other complications for mobile apps.

--- Page 459 ---
When an Android device uses MTP, it appears to the computer as a media
device and not as Removable Storage, as shown in the following screenshot:
Android device connection using MTP
But the normal data recovery tools would need a mount drive to perform a
scan. Hence, most of the latest devices that use MTP/PTP are not treated as a
mount drive, and so the traditional data recovery tools that work for
computers do not work on them.
For this reason, when the device uses MTP/PTP and is not mounted as a
drive, the recovery can be done by certain Android-specific data recovery
tools that need the USB debugging option to be turned on. Almost all
Android data recovery tools in the market need you to enable USB
debugging so that your device and the SD card can be recognized before
starting Android data recovery.

--- Page 460 ---
You must understand that Android devices might use space on the SD card
to cache application data; therefore, it is important to make sure that as much
data as possible is obtained from the device prior to removing the SD card.
Some older devices automatically mount the device as a drive when
connected through USB. It is a sound forensic practice to not work directly
on the device for data extraction, data recovery, and so on. Hence, a physical
image of the SD card needs to be taken and all required analysis is
performed on the image itself. It is recommended to acquire the SD card
through the device as well as separately to ensure that all data is obtained. To
achieve the SD card image, dd through adb can be used while the device is
running to obtain an image of the SD card of the device if the device cannot
be powered off due to possible evidence running in the memory. If the SD
card is removed and connected to the workstation through a card reader, it
appears as external mass storage, which can then be imaged using the
standard forensic techniques described in earlier chapters.
Once the image is obtained, it can be analyzed using any standard forensic
tools, such as FTK Imager. FTK Imager is a simple tool that can be used to
create and analyze disk images. It is available for download at https://accessda
ta.com/product-download/ftk-imager-version-3.2.0.
The following is a step-by-step process to recover the deleted files from an
SD card image using FTK Imager:
1. Start FTK Imager and click on File, then click on Add Evidence Item...
in the menu:
Adding evidence in FTK Imager

--- Page 461 ---
2. Select Image File as the evidence type in the Select Source dialog, and
click on Next:
Selecting file type in FTK Imager
3. In the Select File dialog, go to the location where the SDCARD.dd SD card
image file is present, select it, and click on Finish:


--- Page 462 ---
Selecting the image file for analysis in FTK Imager
4. The contents of the SD card image are then shown in the View pane.
You can browse through the folders by clicking on the + sign. When a
folder is highlighted, the contents are shown on the right pane. When a
file is selected, its contents can be seen in the bottom pane. As shown in
the following screenshot, the deleted files are also shown with a red
cross mark over the icon:
Deleted files shown with a red cross over the icons in FTK Imager

--- Page 463 ---
5. To copy the deleted files to the workstation, right-click on the marked
file and select Export Files..., as shown in the following screenshot:
Recovering deleted images in FTK Imager
It is also recommended to check whether the device has any backup
applications or files installed. The initial release of Android did not include a
mechanism for users to back up their personal data. Hence, several backup
applications were used extensively by users. Using these apps, users can
back up their data either to the SD card or to the cloud. For example, the
Super Backup app contains the options to back up call logs, contacts, SMS,
and more, as shown in the following screenshot:

--- Page 464 ---
The Super Backup Android app
Upon detection of a backup application, you must attempt to determine
where the data is stored. Usually, the backup folder path is the internal SD
card. The folder path is also present in the backup app's settings. The data
saved in a backup may contain important information, and hence, looking
for any third-party backup app on the device would be very helpful.

--- Page 465 ---
Recovering data deleted from the
internal memory
Recovering files that are deleted from an Android device's internal memory
(such as SMS, contacts, and app data) is not supported by all analytical
tools and may require manual carving. Unlike some media containing
common filesystems, such as SD cards, the filesystem may not be
recognized and mounted by forensic tools. Also, you cannot get access to
the raw partitions of the internal memory of an Android phone unless the
phone is rooted. It is recommended to image the device before and after the
rooting process happens. The following are some of the other issues that
you may face when attempting to recover data from the internal memory on
Android devices:
To get access to the internal memory, you can try to root the phone.
However, the rooting process might involve writing some data to the
/data partition, and this process could overwrite the data of value on the
device.
Unlike SD cards, the internal filesystem here is not FAT32 (which is
widely supported by forensic tools). The internal filesystem could be
YAFFS2 (on older devices), EXT3, EXT4, RFS, or something
proprietary built to run on Android. Therefore, many of the recovery
tools designed for use with Windows filesystems won't work.
Application data on Android devices is commonly stored in the SQLite
format. While most forensic tools provide access to the database files,
they may have to be exported and viewed in a native browser. You
must examine the raw data to ensure that the deleted data is not
overlooked by the forensic tool.
The discussed reasons make it difficult, but not impossible, to recover the
deleted data from the internal memory. The internal memory of Android
devices holds the bulk of the user data and the possible keys to your
investigation. As previously mentioned, the device must be rooted to access

--- Page 466 ---
the raw partitions. Most of the Android recovery tools on the market do not
highlight the fact that they only work on rooted phones. Let's now take a
look at how we can recover deleted data from an Android phone.

--- Page 467 ---
Recovering deleted files by parsing
SQLite files
Android uses SQLite files to store most data. Data related to text messages,
emails, and certain app data is stored in SQLite files. SQLite databases can
store deleted data within the database itself. Files marked for deletion by the
user no longer appear in the active SQLite database files. Therefore, it is
possible to recover the deleted data, such as text messages and contacts.
There are two areas within a SQLite page that can contain deleted data—
unallocated blocks and free blocks.
Most of the commercial tools that recover deleted data scan the unallocated
blocks and free blocks of the SQLite pages. Parsing the deleted data can be
done using the available forensic tools, such as Oxygen Forensics SQLite
Viewer. The trial version of the SQLite Viewer can be used for this purpose;
however, there are certain limitations on the amount of data that you can
recover. You can write your own script to parse the files for deleted content,
and for this, you need to have a good understanding of the SQLite file
format. The http://www.sqlite.org/fileformat.html page is a good place to start. If
you do not want to reinvent the wheel and want to reuse the existing scripts,
you can try the available open source Python scripts (http://az4n6.blogspot.in/2
013/11/python-parser-to-recover-deleted-sqlite.html) to parse the SQLite files for
deleted records.
For our example, we will recover deleted SMSes from an Android device.
Recovering deleted SMSs from an Android phone is quite often requested as
part of the forensic analysis of a device, mainly because text messages
contain data, which can reveal a lot of information. There are different ways
to recover deleted text messages on an Android device. First, we need to
understand where the messages are being stored on the device. In Chapter 9,
Android Data Extraction Techniques, we explained the important locations
on the Android device where user data is stored. Here is a quick recap of
this:

--- Page 468 ---
Every application stores its data under the /data/data folder (again, this
requires root access to acquire data).
The files under the location,
/data/data/com.android.providers.telephony/databases, contain details about
the SMS/MMS.
Under the mentioned locations, text messages are stored in an SQLite
database file, which is named mmssms.db. Deleted text messages can be
recovered by examining this file. Here are the steps to recover deleted
SMSes using the mmssms.db file:
1. On the Android device, enable the USB debugging mode and connect
the device to the forensic workstation. Using the adb command-line tool,
extract the databases folder present at /data/data/ by issuing the
following command:
adb.exe pull /data/data/com.android.providers.telephony/databases C:\temp
The output can be seen as follows:
ADB pull command
Once the files are extracted to the local machine, use the Oxygen Forensics SQLite
Viewer tool to open the mmssms.db file.
2. Click on the table named sms and observe the current message under the
Tables data tab in the tool.
3. One way to view the deleted data is by clicking on the Blocks
containing deleted data tab, as shown in the following screenshot:

--- Page 469 ---
Recovering deleted SMS messages
Similarly, other data residing on Android devices that is stored in SQLite
files can be recovered by parsing for deleted content. When the preceding
method doesn't provide access to the deleted data, you should look at the file
in raw hex file for data marked as deleted, which can be manually carved
and reported.

--- Page 470 ---
Recovering files using file-carving
techniques
File carving is an extremely useful method in forensics because it allows
data that has been deleted or hidden to be recovered for analysis. In simple
terms, file carving is the process of reassembling computer files from
fragments in the absence of filesystem metadata. In file carving, specified
file types are searched for and extracted across the binary data to create a
forensic image of a partition or an entire disk. File carving recovers files
from the unallocated space in a drive based merely on file structure and
content without any matching filesystem metadata. Unallocated space refers
to the part of the drive that no longer holds any file information indicated by
the filesystem structures, such as the file table.
Files can be recovered or reconstructed by scanning the raw bytes of the disk
and reassembling them. This can be done by examining the header (the first
few bytes) and footer (the last few bytes) of a file.
File-carving methods are categorized based on the underlying technique in
use. The header-footer carving method relies on recovering the files based
on their header and footer information. For instance, for JPEG files, these
start with 0xffd8 and end with 0xffd9.
The locations of the header and footer are identified and everything between
those two endpoints is carved. Similarly, the carving method based on the
file structure uses the internal layout of a file to reconstruct the file.
However, the traditional file-carving techniques, such as the ones that we've
already explained, may not work if the data is fragmented. To overcome this,
new techniques, such as smart carving, use the fragmentation characteristics
of several popular filesystems to recover the data.
Once the phone is imaged, it can be analyzed using tools such as Scalpel.
Scalpel is a powerful open source utility to carve files. This tool analyzes the

--- Page 471 ---
block database storage, identifies the deleted files, and recovers them.
Scalpel is filesystem-independent and is known to work on various
filesystems, including FAT, NTFS, EXT2, EXT3, HFS, and more. More
details about Scalpel can be found at https://github.com/sleuthkit/scalpel. The
following steps explain how to use Scalpel on an Ubuntu workstation:
1. Install Scalpel on the Ubuntu workstation using the sudo apt-get install
scalpel command.
2. The scalpel.conf file present under the /etc/scalpel directory contains
information about the supported file types, as shown in the following
screenshot:
The scalpel configuration file
This file needs to be modified to mention the files that are related to Android. A sample
scalpel.conf file can be downloaded from https://www.nowsecure.com/tools-and-trainings/#viaforensics.
You can also uncomment the files and save the conf file to select file types of your choice.
Once this is done, replace the original conf file with the one that is downloaded.
3. Scalpel needs to be run along with the preceding configuration file on
the dd image being examined. You can run the tool using the following
command by inputting the configuration file and the dd file:

--- Page 472 ---
$ scalpel -c /home/unigeek/Desktop/scalpel-android.conf 
/home/unigeek/Desktop/userdata.dd -o /home/unigeek/Desktop/rohit
Once this command is run, the tool starts to carve the files and build
them accordingly as shown in the following screenshot:
Running the Scalpel tool on a dd file
4. The output folder that was specified in the preceding command now
contains lists of folders that are based on the file types, as shown in the
following screenshot. Each of these folders contains data that is based
on the folder name. For instance, jpg 2-0 contains files related to the .jpg
extension that have been recovered:

--- Page 473 ---
Output folder after running the Scalpel tool
5. As shown in the preceding screenshot, each folder contains recovered
data from the Android device, such as images, PDF files, ZIP files, and
more. While some pictures are recovered completely, some are not
recovered fully, as shown in the following screenshot:
Recovered data using the Scalpel tool
Applications such as DiskDigger can be installed on Android devices to
recover different types of files from both the internal memory and SD cards.
DiskDigger includes support for JPG files, MP3 and WAV audio, MP4 and
3GP video, raw camera formats, Microsoft Office files (DOC, XLS, and
PPT), and more. However, as mentioned earlier, the application requires root
privileges on the Android device to recover the content from the internal
memory. These changes should be clearly documented by you.
The DiskDigger Android app operates in two different modes, basic scan
mode and full scan mode.

--- Page 474 ---
The full scan mode works only on rooted devices, whereas the basic scan
mode works on any device. As shown in the following screenshot, on a
rooted phone, the app automatically locates and displays the available
partitions:
The DiskDigger app 
After you select the memory partition, the tool now prompts you to select the
types of files that you would like to recover. Proceed by selecting the file

--- Page 475 ---
types of interest:
The DiskDigger app file selection screen
Once the scanning begins, the DiskDigger app will automatically show you
the files that are available for recovery. The recovered files can be either
saved to the app or to the device directly. Hence, file-carving techniques play

--- Page 476 ---
a very important role in recovering important deleted files from the device's
internal memory.

--- Page 477 ---
Recovering contacts using your
Google account
You can also restore the contacts on the device using the Contacts app
through the Google account that is configured on the device. This would
work if the user of the device has previously synced their contacts using the
Sync Settings option available in Android. This option synchronizes the
contacts and other details and stores them in the cloud. A forensic examiner
like you with legal authority or proper consent can restore the deleted
contacts if you can get access to the Google account configured on the
device. Once the account is accessed, perform the following steps to restore
the data:
1. Log in to your Google Contacts app on the Android device using the
configured Google account. The following example is attempt on a
OnePlus 5 device running the Android Pie version.
2. Click on Settings and then look for Restore, as shown in the following
screenshot:

--- Page 478 ---
The Restore menu in the Contacts app
3. Click on Restore, and the following screen will appear: 

--- Page 479 ---
The Restore contacts dialog box
As you can see, you can restore the contact list to a previous state when the
backup was taken at various points in time. You can also use the Undo
changes option under the Settings menu to restore the contacts to any state
in the past 30 days:

--- Page 480 ---
Restore deleted contacts in Google account
Hence, using any one of the preceding techniques, a forensic examiner like
you can attempt to easily recover deleted data. 

--- Page 481 ---
Summary
In this chapter, we learned various techniques to recover deleted data from
an Android device. This process depends on various factors, which heavily
rely on access to the data residing in the internal memory and SD card. We
saw various techniques to recover deleted data from both SD card as well as
internal memory. While the recovery of deleted items from external storage,
such as an SD card, is easy, the recovery of deleted items from the internal
memory takes considerable effort. We have also learned SQLite file-parsing
and file-carving techniques, using which deleted data can be extracted from
an Android device. With this knowledge, you can now perform data
recovery during a forensic investigation. 
The next chapter discusses the forensic analysis of Android apps and
malware and the reverse engineering of Android apps.

--- Page 482 ---
Android App Analysis, Malware,
and Reverse Engineering
Third-party applications are commonly used by smartphone users. Android
users download and install several apps from app stores such as Google
Play. During forensic investigations, it is often helpful to perform an
analysis of these apps to retrieve valuable data and to detect any malware.
For instance, a photo vault app might lock sensitive images present on a
device. Hence, it would be of great significance to have the knowledge to
identify the passcode for the photo vault app.
Also, apps such as Facebook, WhatsApp, Skype, and so on are widely used
these days, and they are often the source of valuable data that aids in
cracking a case. Hence, it is important to know what kind of data these apps
store and the location of this data. While the data extraction and data
recovery techniques we discussed in earlier chapters provide access to
valuable data, app analysis helps us gain information about the specifics of
an application, such as preferences and permissions.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
Analyzing widely used Android apps to retrieve valuable data
Techniques to reverse engineer an Android application
Android malware

--- Page 483 ---
Analyzing widely used Android
apps to retrieve valuable data
On Android, everything the user interacts with is an application. While some
apps are preinstalled by the device manufacturer, others are downloaded and
installed by the user. For example, even routine functions, such as contacts,
calls, SMS, and so on, are performed through their respective apps. Thus,
Android app analysis is crucial during the course of an investigation. Several
third-party apps, such as WhatsApp, Facebook, Skype, Chrome browser, and
so on, are used widely, and they handle a lot of valuable information.
Depending on the type of application, most of these apps store sensitive
information on the device's internal memory or SD card. Analyzing them
may provide information about the location details of the user, their
communication with others, and more. Using the forensic techniques we
described earlier, it is possible to get access to the data stored by these
applications. However, you, as a forensic examiner, need to develop the
necessary skills to convert the available data into useful data. This is
achieved when you have a comprehensive understanding of how the
application handles data.
As we discussed in previous chapters, all applications store their data in the
/data/data folder by default. Apps also store certain other data on the SD card,
if they want to, by asking permission at the time of installation. Information
about applications present on the device can be gathered by inspecting the
contents of the /data/data folder, but this is not straightforward as it requires
analyzing each individual app folder under this path. As an alternative, you
can inspect the packages.list file present under /data/system. This file contains
information about all the apps, along with their package names and data
paths. 
This can be performed using the following command:
# cat packages.list

--- Page 484 ---
The following is the output of the preceding command:
Content of the packages.list file
Now, let's look specifically at some third-party apps that are widely used and
handle valuable data.
The following apps are only being covered to make you familiar with the kind of data
that can be extracted and the possible locations where the data can be obtained. You will
need to take appropriate permissions and should abide by the legal rules before
performing these tasks on a device. As we explained in Chapter 8, Android Forensic Setup
and Pre-Data Extraction Techniques, the following techniques only work after the device
has been rooted. 

--- Page 485 ---
Facebook Android app analysis
The Facebook Android app is one of the most widely used social networking
applications. It stores its information in the /data/data folder, within
the com.facebook.katana package. The following details provide an overview of
the kind of information that can be gathered across various files:
Facebook contacts: Information about the user's Facebook contacts
can be retrieved by analyzing the contacts_db2 database, which is present
under the following path:
Path: /data/data/com.facebook.katana/databases/contacts_db2.
The contacts_db2 database (SQLite file) contains a table named
contacts, which contains most of the user's information, such as
their first name, last name, display name, and URL for display
picture.
Facebook notifications: Information about a user's notifications can be
gathered by analyzing the notification_db database, which is present
under the following path:
Path: /data/data/com.facebook.katana/databases/notifications_db.
The gql_notifications table present under the preceding path holds
the user's information. The seen_state column confirms whether a
notification has been seen or not. The updated column points to the
time when the notification was updated. The gql_payload column
contains the notification and the sender information.
Facebook messages: A Facebook message conversation may be of
crucial importance in several cases and can be viewed by analyzing the
threads_db2 database:
Path: /data/data/com.facebook.katana/databases/threads_db2
Videos from newsfeed: The /video-cache folder contains videos that
have been downloaded from the user's newsfeed. Note that these are not
the videos posted by the user, but rather they are the videos that
appeared on their newsfeed:
Path: /data/data/com.facebook.katana/files/video-cache

--- Page 486 ---
Images from newsfeed: The /images folder contains various images that
appear on the user's profile, such as the ones from their newsfeed and
contact profile pictures. Several directories are present within this
folder and images may be stored in formats other than .jpg, such as .cnt:
Path: /data/data/com.facebook.katana/cache/images
Newsfeed data: The newfeed_db database contains data shown to the user
on their newsfeed. As shown in the following screenshot, analyzing this
database would provide valuable information, such as when a particular
story was loaded by the device (the fetched_at column), if a particular
story was seen by the user (the seen_state column), and where the
corresponding files of a story are stored on the device (the
cache_file_path column):
Path: /data/data/com.facebook.katana/databases/newsfeed_db:
The Facebook newsfeed.db file analyzed in SQLite browser 
In the preceding screenshot, fetched_at specifies the date and time when this
information is fetched. Notice that the app uses Linux epoch time, also
known as Unix time or Posix time, to store this information. This format is
often used by multiple apps and, hence, is worth taking a look at. Linux

--- Page 487 ---
epoch time is stored as the number of seconds (or milliseconds) since
midnight on January 1, 1970. There are several online sites, such as https://w
ww.epochconverter.com/, that can readily convert the Linux epoch time into a
normal format. For example, the following screenshot shows Linux epoch
time 1,577,881,839 converted into a normal format:
Example of time format
Now that we have performed an analysis of the Facebook app, let's perform
a similar analysis with our next application, which is WhatsApp.

--- Page 488 ---
WhatsApp Android app analysis
WhatsApp is the most popular chat (audio and video) messaging service
and is used by more than a billion people across the globe. It stores
its information under the /data/data folder, with the package
name, com.whatsapp. The following is an overview of the important files that
are of interest from a forensic perspective:
User's profile pic: The user's profile picture is saved with
theme.jpg filename and is present under the following path:
Path: /data/data/com.whatsapp/me.jpg
User's phone number (associated with WhatsApp): The me file that's
present under the main folder contains the phone number that is
associated with the user's WhatsApp account. Note that this may or
may not be the phone number that is associated with the SIM:
Path: /data/data/com.whatsapp/me
Contacts profile pic: The /avatars directory contains thumbnails of the
profile pictures of the user's contacts (who use WhatsApp):
Path: /data/data/com.whatsapp/files/Avatars
Chat messages: All message-related information, including chats and
sender details, is present in the msgstore.db file, which is present at the
following location:
Path: /data/data/com.whatsapp/databases/msgstore.db
WhatsApp files: Most of the files shared with WhatsApp, such as
images, videos, and audio messages, are stored on the SD card in the
following location:
Path: /sdcard/WhatsApp/Media
Both sent and received files are stored separately here in their respective
folder names.
Next, we will look at another application that is used for telecommunication
and specializes in providing video chat and voice calls: Skype.

--- Page 489 ---
Skype Android app analysis
Skype is an app that offers video chat and voice call services. The
application's data is stored under the /data/data folder, with the package
name com.skype.raider. The following are some important artifacts that can be
extracted by analyzing the Skype app:
Username and IP address: The shared.xml file present under the
following path contains information about the username and the last IP
address that connected to Skype:
Path: /data/data/com.skype.raider/files/shared.xml
Profile picture: The user's profile picture is present in the /thumbnails
directory, whose path is as follows:
Path: /data/data/com.skype.raider/files/<username>/thumbnails/
Call logs: Information about call logs made from Skype is available in
the main.db file. Analyzing this file gives us a lot of information:
Path: /data/data/com.skype.raider/files/<username>/main.db/.
For example, the duration table provides information about call
duration, the start_timestamp field gives the start time of a call, and
the creation_timestamp field indicates when the call is initiated (this
includes unanswered calls). The type column indicates whether the
call was incoming (value= 1) or outgoing (value= 2).
Chat messages: The messages table present in the main.db file contains all
the chat messages. The author and from_dispname columns provide
information about who wrote the message. The timestamp column shows
the date/time of the message. The body_xml column contains the content
of the message:
Path: /data/data/com.skype.raider/files/<username>/main.db/
Files transferred: The Transfers table contains information about
transferred files, such as the filename, the size of the file, and their
location on the device:
Path: /data/data/com.skype.raider/files/<username>/main.db/.
The actual images or files that are received will be stored on an
SD card. If a file is downloaded, it will be in the Downloads folder in

--- Page 490 ---
the root of the SD.
Group chats: The ChatMembers table shows a list of users who are
present in a particular chat. The adder column shows the user who
initiated the conversation:
Path: /data/data/com.skype.raider/files/<username>/main.db/
Now, we will perform an analysis on the Gmail application.

--- Page 491 ---
Gmail Android app analysis
Gmail is a widely used email service offered by Google. The application
data is saved under the /data/data folder, with the package name
com.google.android.gm. The following are the important artifacts that can be
extracted by analyzing the Gmail app:
Account details: The XML files present under /shared_prefs confirm the
email account details. Details of other accounts, which are linked to the
current email, can be identified from the Gmail.xml file:
Path: /data/data/com.google.android.gm/cache/<username>@gmail.com
Attachments: Attachments that are recently used in both sending and
receiving emails are saved to the /cache directory. This is valuable
because it gives us access to items that have been deleted from the
email service too. Each row also contains a messages_conversation value.
This value can be compared with the conversations table of the email
attachment. The filename column identifies the path on the device where
the file is located. The following is the exact path for this folder:
Path: /data/data/com.google.android.gm/cache/<username>@gmail.com:
List of attachments present under Gmail's cache directory

--- Page 492 ---
Email subject: The subject of this email can be recovered by analyzing
the conversations table present in the mailstore.<username>@gmail.com.db file:
Path: /data/data/com.google.android.gm/databases/mailstore.
<username>@gmail.com.db
Search history: Any text searches that were made within the app are
stored in the suggestions.db file, which is present at the following
location:
Path: /data/data/com.google.android.gm/databases/suggestions.db
Let's wrap up this section by performing a final analysis on the Google
Chrome application.

--- Page 493 ---
Google Chrome Android app
analysis
Google Chrome is the default web browser on Google Pixel and many other
devices, and it is used widely to browse the internet. The application data is
present under the /data/data folder, with the package name, com.android.chrome.
The following are the important artifacts that can be extracted by analyzing
the Gmail app:
Profile picture: The profile picture of the user is stored with the Google
Profile Picture.png filename in the following location:
Path: /data/data/com.android.chrome/app_chrome/Default/ Google Profile
Picture.png
Bookmarks: The Bookmarks file contains information about all the
bookmarks synced with the account. Details such as the site name,
URL, and the time when it was bookmarked can be gathered by
analyzing this file:
Path: /data/data/com.android.chrome/app_chrome/Default/Bookmarks
Browsing history: The History.db file contains the user's web history
stored in various tables. For example, as shown in the following
screenshot, the keyword_search_terms table contains information about the
searches that were made using the Chrome browser:

--- Page 494 ---
Google Chrome browsing history
The segments table contains a list of sites visited by the user (but
not all of the sites). It's interesting to note that Chrome stores the
data belonging to not just the device, but the account in general.
In other words, information about sites that have been visited
from other devices using the same account is also stored on the
device; for example, the URLs table contains the browsing history
for a Google account across several devices.
Path: /data/data/com.android.chrome/app_chrome/Default/History.
Login Data: The Login Data database contains the login information of
different sites saved in the browser. The site URL, along with the
username and password, is stored in the respective tables:
Path: /data/data/com.android.chrome/app_chrome/Default/Login Data
Frequently visited sites: The Top Sites database contains a list of
frequently visited sites:
Path: /data/data/com.android.chrome/app_chrome/Default/Top Sites

--- Page 495 ---
Other data: Other information, such as the phone numbers or email
addresses entered by the user during form fills across different sites, is
stored in the Web Data database. Any tables that are present within this
database contain autofill data:
Path: /data/data/com.android.chrome/app_chrome/Default/Web Data
Now that we have analyzed the different third-party apps, we will look at
the techniques we can use to reverse engineer Android apps.

--- Page 496 ---
Techniques to reverse engineer an
Android application
You may need to deal with applications that stand as a barrier to accessing
the required information. For instance, take the case of the gallery on a
phone that is locked by an AppLock application. In this case, in order to
access the pictures and videos stored in the gallery, you first need to enter
the passcode to the AppLock. Hence, it would be interesting to know how
the AppLock app stores the password on the device. You might look into the
SQLite database files. However, if they are encrypted, then it's hard to even
tell that it's a password. Reverse engineering applications would be helpful
in such cases where you want to better understand the application and how
the application stores the data.
To state it in simple terms, reverse engineering is the process of retrieving
source code from an executable. Reverse engineering an Android app is
done in order to understand the functionality of the app, the data storage,
the security mechanisms in place, and more. Before we proceed to learn
how to reverse engineer an Android app, here is a quick recap of the
Android apps:
All the applications that are installed on the Android device are written
in the Java programming language.
When a Java program is compiled, we get bytecode. This is sent to a
dex compiler, which converts it into Dalvik bytecode.
Thus, the class files are converted into dex files using a dx tool.
Android uses something called Dalvik virtual machine (DVM) to run
its applications.
JVM's bytecode consists of one or more class files, depending on the
number of Java files that are present in an application. Regardless, a
Dalvik bytecode is composed of only one dex file.

--- Page 497 ---
Thus, the dex files, XML files, and other resources that are required to run
an application are packaged into an Android package file (an APK file).
These APK files are simply collections of items within ZIP files. Therefore,
if you rename an APK extension file to a .zip file, then you will be able to
see the contents of the file. However, before you can do this, you need to
get access to the APK file of the application that is installed on the phone.
Here is how the APK file corresponding to an application can be accessed.

--- Page 498 ---
Extracting an APK file from an
Android device
Apps that come preinstalled with the phone are stored in the /system/app
directory. Third-party applications that are downloaded by the user are
stored in the /data/app folder. The following method helps you gain access to
the APK files on the device; it works on both rooted and non-rooted devices:
1. Identify the package name of the app by issuing the # adb.exe shell pm
list packages command.
The following is the output of the preceding command:
List of package names present on the device
As shown in the preceding command-line output, the list of package
names is displayed. Try to find a match between the app in question

--- Page 499 ---
and the package name. Usually, the package names are very much
related to the app names. Alternatively, you can use the Android
Market or Google Play to identify the package name easily. The URL
for an app in Google Play contains the package name, as shown in
the following screenshot:
Facebook App in the Google Play Store
2. Identify the full pathname of the APK file for the desired package by
issuing the adb shell pm path command, as follows:
Identifying full pathname of APK
3. Pull the APK file from the Android device to the forensic workstation
using the adb pull command:

--- Page 500 ---
adp pull command
Now, let's analyze the contents of an APK file. An Android package is a
container for an Android app's resources and executables. It's a zipped file
that contains the following files:
AndroidManifest.xml: This contains information about the permissions and
more.
classes.dex: This is the class file that's been converted into a dex file by
the dex compiler.
Res: The application's resources, such as the image files, sound files, and
more, are present in this directory.
Lib: This contains native libraries that the application may use.
META-INF: This contains information about the application's signature and
signed checksums for all the other files in the package.
Once the APK file has been obtained, you can proceed to reverse engineer
the Android application.

--- Page 501 ---
Steps to reverse engineer Android
apps
APK files can be reverse-engineered in different ways to get the original
code. The following is one method that uses the dex2jar and JD-GUI tools to
gain access to the application code. For our example, we will examine the
com.twitter.android-1.apk file. The following are the steps to successfully
reverse engineer the APK file:
1. Rename the APK extension to ZIP to see the contents of the file.
Rename the com.twitter.android-1.apk file to twitter.android-1.zip and
extract the contents of this file using any file archiver application. The
following screenshot shows the files that were extracted from the
original file, twitter.android-1.zip:
Extracted files of an APK file
2. The classes.dex file that we discussed previously can be accessed after
extracting the contents of the APK file. This dex file needs to be

--- Page 502 ---
converted into a class file in Java. This can be done using the dex2jar
tool.
3. Download the dex2jar tool from https://github.com/pxb1988/dex2jar, drop the
classes.dex file into the dex2jar tools directory, and issue the following
command:
C:\Users\Rohit\Desktop\Training\Android\dex2jar-0.0.9.15>d2j- dex2jar.bat 
classes.dex dex2jar classes.dex -> classes-dex2jar.jar
4. When the preceding command is successfully run, it creates a new
classes -dex2jar.jar file in the same directory, as shown in the following
screenshot:
The classes-dex2jar.jar file created by the dex2jar tool
5. To view the contents of this JAR file, you can use a tool such as JD-
GUI. As shown in the following screenshot, the files present in an
Android application and the corresponding code can be seen:

--- Page 503 ---
The JD-GUI tool
Once we get access to the code, it is easy to analyze how the application
stores the values, permissions, and more information that may be helpful to
bypass certain restrictions. When malware is found on a device, this method
to decompile and analyze the application may prove useful, as it will show
what is being accessed by the malware and provide clues to where the data is
being sent. The following sections focus on Android malware in detail.

--- Page 504 ---
Android malware
As Android's market share continues to increase, so do attacks or malware
targeted at Android users. Mobile malware is a broad term that refers to a
piece of software that performs unintended actions and includes Trojans,
spyware, adware, ransomware, and others. According to pandasecurity,
Android devices are 50 times more infected with malware compared to iOS
devices (https://www.pandasecurity.com/mediacenter/mobile-security/android-more-infe
cted-than-ios/). In 2019, the famous Agent Smith malware alone infected
almost 25 million Android devices, as per a Cybersecurity Hub news report
(https://www.cshub.com/malware/articles/incident-of-the-week-malware-infects-25m-andr
oid-phones). 
One of the primary reasons for this situation is that, unlike Apple's App
Store, which is tightly controlled by the company, Google's Play Store is an
open ecosystem without any detailed upfront security reviews. Malware
developers can easily move their apps to the Play Store and thereby
distribute their apps. Google now has a malware-detecting software named
Google Bouncer, which will automatically scan an uploaded app for
malware, but attackers have figured out several ways to remain undetected.
Moreover, Android officially allows us to load apps that have been
downloaded over the internet (side-loading), unlike iOS, which does not
allow unsigned apps.
For example, as shown in the following screenshot, when the Unknown
sources option is selected on an Android device, it allows the user to install
apps that have been downloaded from any site over the internet:

--- Page 505 ---
Side-loading option in Android
The third-party app stores that host Android apps are known to be hubs of
malware. This prompted Google to roll out the Verify Apps feature starting
from Android 4.2, which scans apps locally on Android devices to look for
malicious activities, such as SMS abuse. As shown in the following
screenshot, the Verify apps feature may warn the user, or in some cases may

--- Page 506 ---
even block the installation. However, this is an opt-in service, so users can
disable this feature if they wish to:
Verify apps feature in Android
Starting with Android Oreo, Google has rolled out a new feature called Play
Protect, which is a better version of the verifying apps feature. The primary
job of Play Protect is to block or warn the users of malicious or harmful apps
that have been installed on the Android device. For example, as shown in the
following screenshot, the Play Protect feature may show a warning message
during the app's installation:

--- Page 507 ---
Play Protect feature
Next, let's have a look at the types of malware.

--- Page 508 ---
Types of Android malware
There are different kinds of malware types that can infect an Android
device. The following are some of the most common ones:
 Banking malware: It can be distributed as fake banking applications
to steal banking credentials typed by the users, or steal any other
sensitive personal information from the user's account. Banking
Trojans can intercept or modify banking transactions and perform
dangerous actions such as sending, deleting, and intercepting SMS
messages, as well as keylogging.
Spyware: Spyware monitors, logs, and sends important information
from the target device to the attacker's server. This information might
comprise SMS messages, recorded phone calls, screenshots, keylogs,
emails, or any other application data that may be of interest to the
attacker. BusyGasper, a spyware identified by Kaspersky Lab experts
in early 2018, not only possesses common spyware capabilities, such
as collecting information from popular messаging applications, such as
WhatsApp, Viber, and Facebook, but it also has device sensor
listeners, including motion detectors.
Adware: Adware is another popular malicious or unwanted
application type that is very common on Android devices. It is
relatively easy to detect, as the victim will receive continuous popups
and ads on their device's screen. Such unwanted programs are not
always harmless, since popups may result in downloading another
piece of malware, including the types already mentioned – spyware
and banking Trojans.
Ransomware: The main targets of ransomware are Windows-based
desktop computers and servers, but it also exists on mobile platforms,
and on Android in particular. Usually, it only locks the device screen
with a ransom note, but sometimes it encrypts users' data as well. 
Crypto-mining malware: Cryptocurrencies are extremely popular
nowadays, so this type of malicious program is available even for
mobile platforms, such as Android. The goal of such applications is to

--- Page 509 ---
mine cryptocurrency, using a victim's device computation
capacity. Occasionally, this type of malware can even put smartphone
hardware at risk.
Advanced malware is also capable of rooting the device and installing new
apps. For example, the Android Mazar malware, which was discovered in
Feb 2016, spreads via text messages and is capable of gaining administrator
rights on phones, allowing it to wipe handsets, make calls, or read texts.
A full list of Android malware families and their capabilities is available at https://forensi
cs.spreitzenbarth.de/android-malware/.
Once malware gets into a device, it can perform dangerous actions, some of
which are as follows:
Send and read your text messages
Steal sensitive data, such as pictures, videos, and credit card numbers
Manipulate files or data present on the device
Send SMS to a premium-rated number
Infect your browser and steal any data typed into its Change
device settings
Wipe all data present on the device
Lock the device until a ransom is paid
Display advertisements continuously
Now that we have understood the different types of malware, we will see
how the malware spreads in your device.

--- Page 510 ---
How does Android malware
spread?
An Android device can be infected with malware in several different ways.
The following are some of the possible ways:
Repackaging legitimate application: This is the most common
method used by attackers. First, the attacker downloads a legitimate
application and disassembles it. Then, they add their malicious code
and reassemble the application. The new malicious application now
functions exactly as the legitimate application does, but it also
performs malicious activity in the background. This kind of
application is commonly found in third-party Android app stores and is
downloaded by many people.
Exploiting Android vulnerabilities: In this scenario, an attacker
exploits the bugs or the vulnerabilities that are discovered in the
Android platform to install their malicious application or to perform
any unwanted actions. For example, installer hijacking, which was
identified in 2015, has been exploited by attackers to replace an
Android application with malware during installation.
Bluetooth and MMS propagation: Malware is also spread via
Bluetooth and MMS. The victim receives the malware when the device
is in discoverable mode, for example, when it can be seen by other
Bluetooth-enabled devices. In the case of MMS, the malware is
attached to the message, just like how computer viruses are sent
through email attachments. However, in both these methods, the user
has to agree, at least once, to run the file.
App downloading a malicious update: In this case, the app that was
originally installed does not contain any malicious code, but a function
present within the code will download malicious commands at
runtime. This can be done via a stealthy update or user update. For
example, the Plankton malware uses stealthy updates that directly
download a JAR file from a remote server and do not need any user

--- Page 511 ---
permission. In the case of user updates, the user has to allow the app to
download the new version of the app.
Remote install: The attacker may compromise the credentials of the
user's account on the device and thereby remotely install apps on the
device. This generally happens in targeted scenarios and is less
frequent compared to the previous two methods we just described.
Now that we've looked at the possible ways in which the Android malware
can spread, let's try to identify the presence of malware in your device.

--- Page 512 ---
Identifying Android malware
From a forensic perspective, it's important to identify the presence of any
malware on the device prior to performing any analysis. This is because
malware can alter the state of the device or contents on the device, thereby
making the analysis or the results inconsistent. There are tools available on
the market that can analyze the physical extraction to identify malware. For
example, Cellebrite UFED Physical Analyzer has BitDefender's anti-
malware technology, which scans for malware. As shown in the following
screenshot, once the physical image has been loaded into the tool, the file
can be scanned for malware:
Scanning for malware in UFED Physical Analyzer

--- Page 513 ---
Once the scan starts, the BitDefender software tries to unpack the .apk files
and looks for infected or malicious files. This process is automatic and the
tool points to the malicious apps, as shown in the following screenshot:
Malware scanner results in UFED Physical Analyzer
The tool simply points out that something malicious is present on the device.
The forensic investigator has to then manually confirm whether this is a
valid issue by analyzing the respective application. This is where the reverse
engineering skills that we discussed in the previous sections need to be
leveraged. Once the application has been reverse-engineered and the code
has been obtained, it is recommended that you take a look at the
AndroidManifest.xml file to find out the app permissions. This will be helpful for
understanding where the app stores the data, what resources it is trying to
access, and more. For example, a Flashlight application does not need
read/write access to your SD card data, or to make a phone call:

--- Page 514 ---
Permissions in the AndroidManifest.xml file
Alternatively, you can also upload the .apk file to VirusTotal, a free service
that can be used to analyze suspicious files for malware. VirusTotal will scan
your file against 55 antivirus engines. It's also important to note that the tool
may not identify a valid case if the details are obfuscated in the .apk file.
Hence, as a forensic investigator, it's important to develop the necessary

--- Page 515 ---
skills to reverse engineer any suspicious apps and analyze the code to
identify malicious behavior.
In some investigations, the nature of the malware that is present on a device
may also result in arriving at certain crucial conclusions, which may affect
the outcome of the case. For example, consider an internal investigation in a
corporation that involves sending abusive messages to other employees.
Identifying malware on the device that sends the messages would help solve
the case.

--- Page 516 ---
Summary
Android app analysis helps a forensic investigator look for valuable data in
relevant locations on a device. Reverse engineering Android apps is the
process of retrieving source code from an APK file. Using certain tools,
such as dex2jar, Android apps can be reverse-engineered in order to
understand their functionality and data storage, identify malware, and more.
In this chapter, we performed analysis on different android applications and
we are now able to retrieve data from them. We also learned about different
types of Android malware and how to identify them. Tools such as UFED
Physical Analyzer come with BitDefender software, which can
automatically scan for malware.
The next chapter covers performing forensics on Windows Phone devices.

--- Page 517 ---
Section 3: Windows Forensics and
Third-Party Apps
This section will cover forensics on Windows phones – right from
understanding the Windows Phone OS to data extraction from the device.
The last chapter will cover how to perform forensics on some of the most
widely used third-party apps, such as Facebook, WhatsApp, and so on. We
will look at how data is organized within these apps and some of the
techniques that can be readily applied to extract the data within them.
This section consists of the following chapters:
Chapter 12, Windows Phone Forensics
Chapter 13, Parsing Third-Party Application Files

--- Page 518 ---
Windows Phone Forensics
Despite the fact that Windows Phones are not so widely used nowadays,
they may still be encountered during forensic investigations. These devices
are the most affordable on the market, so understanding how to acquire,
analyze, and decode data from Windows Phones is important. Locating and
interpreting digital evidence present on these devices requires specialized
knowledge of the Windows Phone operating system, and may not always be
possible. Commercial forensic and open source tools provide limited
support for acquiring user data from Windows devices. As Windows
Phones do not occupy much of the mobile market space, most forensic
practitioners are unfamiliar with the data formats, embedded databases that
are used, and other artifacts that exist on the device. This chapter provides
an overview of Windows Phone forensics, describing various methods of
acquiring and examining data on Windows mobile devices.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
Windows Phone OS
Windows 10 Mobile security model
Windows Phone filesystem
Data acquisition
Commercial forensic tool acquisition methods
Extracting data without the use of commercial tools
Key artifacts for examination

--- Page 519 ---
Windows Phone OS
Windows Phone is a proprietary mobile operating system developed by
Microsoft. It was launched as a successor to Windows Mobile, but it does
not provide backward compatibility with the previous platform. Windows
Phone was launched in October 2010 with Windows Phone 7. The version
history of the Windows Phone operating system then continued with the
release of Windows Phone 7.5, Windows Phone 7.8, Windows Phone 8.1,
and Windows Phone 10. 
Despite the fact that Microsoft claims they have stopped developing this
mobile operating system, excluding security patches, you are likely to face
it as a mobile forensic examiner.
The following sections will provide more details about Windows Phone, its
features, and its underlying security model.
Unlike Android and iOS devices, Windows Phone comes with a new
interface, which uses so-called tiles for apps instead of icons, as shown in
the following image. These tiles can be designed and updated by the user:

--- Page 520 ---
The Windows Phone home screen
Similar to other mobile platforms, Windows Phone allows for the
installation of third-party apps. These apps can be downloaded from the
Windows Phone Marketplace, which is managed by Microsoft. When
comparing the number of apps available for iOS and Android devices,
Windows Phone pales in comparison. However, applications are available
and you should expect to see them on Windows Phone devices.

--- Page 521 ---
Windows Phone introduced new features, making it more similar to other
smartphones compared to Windows Mobile:
Cortana: This is the personal assistant for the device. It was
introduced in Windows 8.1 and is still present on Windows 10 devices.
Cortana aids the user by fielding questions using Bing, setting
reminders, sending texts, and essentially using all the functionality to
provide the user with a better and easier experience. Everything that
Cortana does leaves a trace on the device.
Wallet: This stores credit card accounts, boarding passes, tickets,
coupons, and more.
Geofence and advanced location settings: These provide the user
with additional protection as the phone can detect when it is out of a
trusted zone and may lock itself.
Additional features: These are features such as live tiles, enhanced
colors, and quiet hours.
Other common applications associated with Windows Phone include
OneDrive (formerly SkyDrive), OneNote, and Office 365 synchronization.
OneDrive provides the user with access to all of their documents and files
from any device. OneNote is essentially the same, but it acts as a notebook
or diary. Office 365 provides the user with constant access to their email,
calendar, contacts, and more across multiple devices.
The introduction of data synchronization across multiple devices makes our
job as forensic examiners difficult. It is our job to determine how the
evidence was placed on the device. Is it possible to definitively state how an
artifact was placed on a device? To be honest, this depends. Nobody wants
to hear this response, but a lot of factors must be considered. What is the
app? What OS is running on the device? What is the artifact? For example,
let's consider OneDrive. If the device contains documents from OneDrive,
the original author should be contained within the metadata. This, together
with examining whether or not the content was shared with the device, may
provide a glimpse into how the artifact was created. However, when
examining a calendar entry when Office 365 is in place, it may be
impossible to state whether the user created the entry on their phone, PC, or
laptop. The synchronization is instantaneous, and status flags stating where

--- Page 522 ---
the artifact was created do not always exist. If this artifact is indeed the
smoking gun of the investigation, you need to apply your skills to uncover
other artifacts that support your findings. Digging deeper into the data is
required. Now that we are aware of the details of Windows Phone and its
features, let's have a look at its security model and see how it keeps the data
secure.

--- Page 523 ---
Windows 10 Mobile security model
The security model of Windows Phone is designed to make sure that the
user data present on the device is safe and secure. The following sections
provide a brief explanation of the concepts that Windows Phone security is
built on.

--- Page 524 ---
Chambers
Windows Phone is heavily built on the principles of least privilege and
isolation. This has been consistent since the inception of Windows Phone 7.
To achieve this, Windows Phone introduced the concept of chambers. Each
chamber has an isolation boundary where processes can run. Depending on
the security policy of a specific chamber, a process running in this chamber
has the privilege of accessing the OS's resources and capabilities (https://ww
w.msec.be/mobcom/ws2013/presentations/david_hernie.pdf). There are four types of
security chambers. The following is a brief description of each of them:
Trusted Computing Base (TCB): The processes here have
unrestricted access to most Windows Phone resources. This chamber
has privileges to modify policies and enforce the security model. The
kernel runs in this chamber.
Elevated Rights Chamber (ERC): This chamber is less privileged
than the TCB chamber. It has privileges to access all resources except
the security policy. This chamber is mainly used for services and user-
mode drivers, which provide functionality intended for use by other
applications on the phone.
Standard Rights Chamber (SRC): This is the default chamber for
preinstalled applications, such as Microsoft Outlook Mobile 2010.
Least Privileged Chamber (LPC): This is the default chamber for all
the applications that are downloaded and installed through the
Marketplace Hub (which is also known as the Windows Phone
Marketplace).
Next, we will be looking at encryption.

--- Page 525 ---
Encryption
Windows Phone 8 introduced BitLocker technology to encrypt all user data
that is stored on the device via AES 128-bit encryption. The user can
simply flip the switch to enable this feature, and all of their data residing on
the internal storage of the device will be encrypted. In addition, the user can
encrypt their SD card – assuming the device has one – and set a password
or PIN on their device. Should all of these locks and the encryption be
enabled, accessing the data on this device may be impossible, unless the
password is recovered.

--- Page 526 ---
Capability-based model
Capabilities are defined as the resources on the phone (camera, location
information, microphone, and more) associated with security, privacy, and
cost. The LPC has a minimal set of access rights by default. However, this
can be expanded by requesting more capabilities during the installation.
Capabilities are granted during the app's installation and cannot be modified
or elevated during runtime. For this reason, it is difficult to side-load
applications or force custom boot code to the device to gain forensic access,
as it is normally rejected prior to bootup.
To install an app on a Windows Phone, you need to sign in to the
Marketplace with a Windows Live ID. During installation, apps are
required to ask the user for permission before using certain capabilities, an
example of which is shown in the following screenshot:

--- Page 527 ---
Windows app requesting user permissions (https://i-msdn.sec.s-msft.com/dynimg/IC752370.png)
This is similar to the permission model in Android. This gives the user the
freedom to learn about all the capabilities that an application has before
installing the application. The list of all capabilities is included in the
WMAppManifest.xml application manifest file, which can be accessed through
Visual Studio or other methods that are defined at https://docs.microsoft.com/e
n-us/previous-versions/windows/apps/ff769509(v=vs.105).

--- Page 528 ---
App sandboxing
Apps in Windows Phone run in a sandboxed environment. This means
every application on Windows Phone runs in its own chamber. Applications
are isolated from each other and cannot access the data of other
applications. If any app needs to save information to the device, it can do so
using the isolated storage, which is restricted from access by other
applications. Also, the third-party applications installed on Windows Phone
cannot run in the background; that is, when the user switches to a different
application, the previously used application is shut down (although the
application state is preserved). This ensures that the application cannot
perform activities such as communicating over the internet when the user is
not using the application. These restrictions also make Windows Phone less
susceptible to malware, but you should never assume that any device is
safe. It is just more challenging for malware to function on these devices.
So far, we have had a look at the four types of security chambers and we
now know that Windows Phone 8 uses BitLocker technology for
encryption. We have learned about the different capabilities granted during
the installation of an application and saw how every application is isolated
from each other. Next, we'll look at an important aspect of Windows
Phones, which is its filesystem.

--- Page 529 ---
Windows Phone filesystem
The Windows Phone filesystem is more or less similar to the filesystems
used in Windows 7, Windows 8, and Windows 10. From the root directory,
you can reach different files and folders that are available on this device.
From a forensic perspective, the following are some of the folders that can
yield valuable data. All the listed directories are located in the root
directory:
Application data: This directory contains data of applications on the
phone, such as Outlook, Maps, and Internet Explorer.
Applications: This directory contains the apps installed by the user.
The isolated storage, which is allocated or used by each app, is also
located in this folder.
My Documents: This directory holds different Office documents, such
as Word, Excel, or PowerPoint files. The directory also includes
configuration files and multimedia files, such as music or videos.
Windows: This directory contains files that are related to the Windows
Phone operating system.
The acquisition method used here will determine the amount of filesystem
access that you have to the device. For example, a physical image may
provide access to several partitions that can be recovered from the data
dump. A Windows Phone 10 device that contains 27 partitions can be seen
in the following screenshot. Partitions 26 (MainOS) and 27 (Data) contain
the relevant data:

--- Page 530 ---
Windows Phone 10 partitions
While most artifacts will exist in the Data partition, it is always best practice to capture
and analyze both when possible.
The MainOS partition in the preceding screenshot, partition 26, contains the
system data from the Windows Phone. As in all Windows investigations,
the system data contains artifacts relevant to investigations.
In this example, partition 27 contains the User or Data partition. Depending
on the device, the partition numbers may vary. In our example, the Data
partition is shown in the following screenshot as partition 27. Here, the
SMS, email, application data, contacts, call logs, and internet history were

--- Page 531 ---
recovered using mobile forensic tools. These methods will be discussed
later in this chapter:
Windows Phone 10 Data partition
Windows Phone also maintains the Windows registry, a database that
stores environment variables on the operating system. The Windows
registry is basically a directory that stores settings and options for the
Microsoft operating system. Windows Phone is no different. When
examining a Windows Phone, you will expect to see the NTUSER.dat, SAM,
SYSTEM, SOFTWARE, SECURITY, and DEFAULT hives. While these hives may be unique
to the phone, they can be examined just like traditional Windows registry
hives.
A detailed case investigation is included in a paper by Cynthia Murphy.
This involves a criminal case of a home invasion and sexual assault and
details the efforts of great minds in the forensic community to uncover
artifacts that assisted in closing the investigation. Sometimes, the mobile

--- Page 532 ---
device is the most important artifact pertaining to the case. For more
information, please refer to https://www.sans.org/reading-room/whitepapers/forensi
cs/windows-phone-8-forensic-artifacts-35787. Now that we have looked at the file
and folder structure, let's learn how to acquire data using this knowledge.

--- Page 533 ---
Data acquisition
Acquiring data from a Windows Phone is challenging for forensic
examiners, as the physical, filesystem, and logical methods that were
defined in previous chapters are not greatly supported. In addition to this,
the phone may need to be at a specific battery charge state (%) in order for
the commercial tool to recognize and acquire the device. This is often one
of the most difficult steps in acquiring Windows Phones. 
One of the most common techniques that's implemented by commercial
tools attempting data acquisition is to install an application or agent on the
device, which enables two-way communication for commands to be sent to
the device in order to extract data. This could result in certain changes on
the device; nevertheless, this is still forensically sound if the examiner
follows standard protocols and has tested the validity of the tool being used.
These protocols include proper testing to ensure no user data is changed
(and if changed, documenting what occurred), validation of the method on a
test device, and documenting all steps taken during the acquisition process.
For this acquisition method to work, the app needs to be installed with the
privileges of the SRC. This may require you to copy the manufacturer's
DLLs, which have higher privileges, into the user app. This allows the app
to access methods and resources that are usually limited to native apps. In
addition to this, the device must be unlocked, or these methods may not
work.
Most examiners rely on forensic tools and methods to acquire mobile
devices. Again, these practices are not as supported for Windows Phones.
Keep in mind that to deploy and run an app on Windows Phone, both the
device and the developer must be registered and unlocked by Microsoft.
This restriction can be bypassed by unlocking the device using a public
jailbreak for Windows Phone 8 to 10 devices. 
For quite a long time, JTAG and chip-off acquisitions were the only options
to acquire most Windows Phones. Everything changed in January 2015:

--- Page 534 ---
Cellebrite implemented an acquisition module that allowed mobile forensic
examiners to extract data at the physical level from most Lumia devices.
Later, the Windows Phone Internals project presented a way to unlock
the bootloader of some Lumia devices, including 520, 521, 525, 620, 625,
720, 820, 920, 925, 928, 1020, and 1320. This made the physical
acquisition of these devices possible. You can learn more about this project
at https://www.wpinternals.net/. Now, we will look at some of the commercial
tools that are used for acquisition methods.

--- Page 535 ---
Commercial forensic tool
acquisition methods
There are a few commercial tools available that offer support for the
acquisition of Windows Phone devices. Cellebrite UFED offers support to
acquire Windows Phone devices using the physical, filesystem,
and logical methods. To determine whether the device you are examining is
supported by the tool, you can download and use the UFED Phone Detective
mobile app, which is available for free both in App Store and Google Play:
Searching for supported Lumia devices

--- Page 536 ---
Some of these acquisition methods are more robust, obtain a full physical
dump of the data, and can bypass some lock codes on specific devices.
However, some device support includes simply extracting contacts and
pictures from the device. It is important for the examiner to realize that
specific steps must be taken, as directed by the tool. Acquiring these devices
is not easy, and often, you will find that the tool will not be successful.
When the tool seems to fail, attempt to acquire the device using the
Smartphone/PDA option offered in UFED. To do this, follow these steps:
1. Launch UFED4PC and select Mobile Device.
2. Select Browse Manually.
3. Select Smartphones.
4. Select the Windows device that you are attempting to acquire.
5. Try all the methods that are offered, starting with physical, filesystem,
and logical (in that order, where possible):
Extraction methods
6. Follow all the remaining steps and try all offered acquisition methods
until you're successful.
Cellebrite may alert you that the acquisition is not successful for several
reasons. When this occurs, try every option to ensure you have exhausted the
commercial options available. An example of an acquisition attempt in
UFED4PC is as follows:

--- Page 537 ---
1. Launch UFED4PC.
2. Select your Make and Model for the device.
3. Select the Physical, File System, or Logical acquisition method
(offerings will vary, depending on the device model).
In this example, only Logical acquisition was supported. Two methods are
available. The first option uses a cable, while the second uses Bluetooth. In
this example, a special UFED cable is required. I selected the UFED cable
first, as Bluetooth requires that additional changes are made to the phone
during pairing:
UFED4PC Logical extraction options
When attempting to acquire the device with USB cable 100, only multimedia
files were accessible.
Then, attempt the same acquisition, but select Bluetooth. Follow the
instructions given to pair the device with the forensic workstation:

--- Page 538 ---
UFED4PC extraction options (Bluetooth)
With this acquisition method, we were able to obtain contacts. Note
that there are no methods offered to obtain SMS, MMS, Email, IM,
Calendar, Call Logs, Apps Data, and others. It is suggested you repeat the
generic methods listed in the previous screenshot using the Smartphone
option in UFED4PC. So far, we have looked at some acquisition methods
using commercial tools. Now, let's learn how to extract data without these
tools.

--- Page 539 ---
Extracting data without the use of
commercial tools
In some cases, the physical acquisition of Windows Phone devices is
possible only with advance methods, such as JTAG and chip-off. But thanks
to the security researcher known as Heathcliff, it became possible to perform
physical acquisition on limited phone models and operating system versions
with his tool called WPinternals (https://www.wpinternals.net).
The tool supports the following models of Lumia phones: 520, 521, 525,
620, 625, 720, 820, 920, 925, 928, 1020, and 1320.
As for operating system versions, the following are supported:
8.10.12393.890
8.10.12397.895
8.10.14219.341
8.10.14226.359
8.10.14234.375
8.10.15116.125
8.10.15148.160
10.0.10512.1000
10.0.10536.1004
10.0.10549.4
10.0.10581.0
10.0.10586.11
10.0.10586.36
This method is experimental and can result in bricking the device! Despite the fact that
the percentage of bricked devices is relatively low, we recommend that you use it as the
last option.
The first step of the acquisition process will be downloading a Windows
Full Flash Update (FFU) file and the emergency files for the phone model
you are working with:

--- Page 541 ---
Downloading FFU files
If the downloaded FFU contains an unsupported OS version, then
WPinternals will download another FFU to get additional files:
Getting additional files
During the unlocking process, the phone may reboot a couple of times, but
this is a normal behavior:
Scanning for flashing profile
Once the profile has been found, the tool flashes the unlocked bootloader:
Flashing unlocked bootloader
If the device has been flashed successfully, it's put into Mass Storage Mode:

--- Page 542 ---
Mass Storage Mode
Now, the device can be easily imaged, for example, using FTK Imager:
Windows Phone in FTK Imager
Now, we will learn how to extract data from SD cards.

--- Page 543 ---
SD card data extraction methods
Windows Phones may contain removable SD cards. These cards may be
secured with a key that prevents the SD card from being removed and used,
or accessed via other devices (phones, cameras, computers, and more). This
is different from the key that is created if the user encrypts the SD card.
Brute-force and dictionary attacks can be run on user-encrypted SD cards in
an attempt to access the data. When examining a Windows Phone, it is best
to research the device to see whether SD card security will be a factor when
acquiring data from the device. If so, simply follow the preceding steps and
acquire the SD card data through the phone during forensic extraction.
Please refer to the following chart.
For devices where the SD card can be removed, you have two scenarios to
consider. If the device is on, should you acquire the phone and the SD card
as is? If the device is off, should you remove the SD card and acquire the
device using FTK Imager? The answer is, it depends. In forensics, we use
this statement frequently, but it remains true. If you leave the device on, it
must be isolated from the network to ensure that it is not remotely accessed
and immediately acquired, or the battery will drain and, ultimately, the
device may power down. If the device is off and you remove the SD card,
you must ensure that the card remains tied to the device itself and is acquired
both externally and internally to ensure all data is captured. In a normal
situation, the following chart suggests the recommended steps to handle SD
cards that are found in Windows Phones:

--- Page 544 ---
Most commercial forensic tools will offer to extract data from SD cards.
Often, the phone extraction process will only extract data residing on the SD
card. This is often the case when there is no support for a specific Windows
Phone. If the SD card is not recognized by the tool and the data is not
extracted, it is likely that the SD card has been encrypted by the user, and the
password for the device is different from the password for the SD card.
When this occurs, try to crack the passcode and reacquire the device. Note
that cracking a passcode on an SD card may not always be possible, but it's
worth a shot trying brute-force and dictionary attacks as you would on a
standard hard drive or external device.
When acquiring an SD that has been removed from a Windows Phone, FTK
Imager is a free and reliable option to create a forensically sound image that

--- Page 545 ---
can be examined in a variety of tools. To create an SD card image, follow
these steps:
1. Remove the SD card from the device and make sure to document all
identifiers on the card and the phone to ensure that they are not
permanently separated.
2. Insert the SD card into a write blocker and insert this into your forensic
workstation.
3. Launch FTK Imager.
4. Select File and then Create Disk Image.
5. Select Physical Drive:
FTK Imager – creating a disk image

--- Page 546 ---
6. Use the drop-down list to select the correct device.
Look at the make and size to ensure that you are acquiring the correct device.
7. Select Finish.
8. Click on Add and select the image type. For this example, Raw (dd) is
going to be used as it is supported by most commercial and open source
methods for analysis:
FTK Imager – selecting the image type
9. Enter the relevant case information and select Next. This can be
skipped. 
10. Select the image destination:

--- Page 547 ---
FTK Imager – saving your image file
11. Select Finish and then select Start. It is recommended that you verify
images after they are created.
Once complete, your results will be displayed. We will cover analyzing the
SD card data in the following sections.

--- Page 548 ---
Key artifacts for examination
In this section, we are going to introduce you to the location of some of the
most common Windows Phone forensic artifacts, including contacts, SMS,
and call and internet history.

--- Page 549 ---
Extracting contacts and SMS
All the contacts and incoming and outgoing short messages (SMS) in
Windows Phone 7–10 are stored in the file named store.vol, which is present
under the \Application Data\Microsoft\Outlook\Stores\DeviceStore (Windows 7) and
Users\WPCOMMSERVICES\APPDATA\Local\Unistore (Windows 8-10) directories. An
example of a Windows 10 store.vol file can be seen in the following
screenshot:
The store.vol file in a Windows Phone
Now, let's learn how to extract the call history.

--- Page 550 ---
Extracting call history
Call history data can currently be extracted from the Phone file. It's important
to note that the file doesn't have an extension and is located at
\Users\WPCOMMSERVICES\APPDATA\ Local\UserData\. Here is an example of a Windows
10 Phone file:
The Phone file in a Windows Phone
In a similar manner, we will be extracting internet history in the following
section.

--- Page 551 ---
Extracting internet history
Internet history can be extracted from the WebCacheV01.dat file located
at \Users\DefApps\APPDATA\Local\Microsoft\Windows\WebCache\. Here is an example of
a Windows 10 WebCacheV01.dat file:
The WebCacheV01.dat file in a Windows Phone
These files can be examined manually, for example, with a hex viewer, or
can be parsed automatically with mobile forensic tools. Here is
the WebCacheV01.dat file being parsed with Magnet AXIOM:

--- Page 552 ---
WebCacheV01.dat file parsed with Magnet AXIOM
With this, we've covered how to extract SMS, contacts, call, and internet
history from a Windows Phone.

--- Page 553 ---
Summary
Acquiring data from Windows Phone devices is challenging since they are
secure, and commercial forensic tools and open source methods do not
provide easy solutions for forensic examiners like you. Multiple tools, chip-
off, JTAG, and the methods we defined in this book are some of the
methods that provide access to user data on Windows Phone devices. Often,
you will find that Windows Phone devices require multiple extraction
methods to acquire accessible data. The biggest challenge is getting access
to the device to acquire the data. Once the data is available, all the extracted
information can be analyzed by you.
In this chapter, we covered the interface, important features, and the
security model of the Windows Phone device. Then, we had a look at the
different partitions and folder structure within the Windows filesystem. The
Windows Phone registry is similar to the registry in the Microsoft operating
system. We saw how to extract data with and without using commercial
tools and looked at some common Windows Phone forensic artifacts. With
this knowledge, you can now extract user data from a Windows Phone
using multiple extraction methods.
The next chapter will walk you through parsing third-party application files.

--- Page 554 ---
Parsing Third-Party Application
Files
Third-party applications have taken the smartphone community by storm.
Most smartphone owners have more than one app on their device that they
rely on to chat, game, get directions, or share pictures. According to https://
www.statista.com/statistics/276623/number-of-apps-available-in-leading-app-stores/,
there are almost 5 million apps worldwide for various smartphones. Apple's
App Store offers approximately 1.8 million apps, Google Play offers 2.47
million, Amazon offers 600,000, and Windows offers 670,000. This number
is expected to grow exponentially through 2020.
The goal of this chapter is to introduce you to the various applications seen
on Android, iOS devices, and Windows Phones. Each application will vary
due to versions and devices, but their underlying structures are similar. We
will look at how the data is stored and why preference files are important to
your investigation.
We will cover the following topics in detail in this chapter:
Different third-party applications
How applications are stored on iOS devices
How applications are stored on Android devices
Windows Phone application storage
How to use both commercial and open source solutions to parse
application data

--- Page 555 ---
Introduction to third-party
applications
Third-party applications are an integral part of mobile device investigations;
often, the key artifacts seem to exist within an application. This requires you
to understand where application data is stored on the device, how application
data is saved for that platform, and which tool best helps to uncover the
evidence. Manual parsing is often a key factor when examining third-party
applications on any smartphone. While some commercial tools, such as
Belkasoft Evidence Center or Magnet AXIOM, are known for application
parsing support, no tool is perfect and it's virtually impossible for tools to
keep up with the frequent updates that are released for each application.
Most often, you'll find that the commercial tools available parse the most
popular applications on the market. For example, when Facebook purchased
WhatsApp, Belkasoft, Cellebrite, Magnet Forensics, and Oxygen Forensics
started supporting this application. Facebook is extremely popular, but data
isn't always extracted or parsed, due to security features that are built into
the app—this is where all apps differ. Our best advice is to test, test, and test!
You can download an app, populate data, and examine the results to see how
your view of the evidence compares to your actual evidence. This practice
will enable you to understand how updates change the artifacts, how
evidence locations change, and how to manually extract artifacts that your
tools are missing. Additionally, reverse-engineering an app and analyzing its
code will help you to identify where the data is stored and how it is stored.
Most applications do not require a data plan for use; they can fully function
via a Wi-Fi network, which means that apps can still function if a person
travels to a region in which their device would not usually work. For
example, when I travel, I rely on Skype, Viber, and WhatsApp to call and
text family and friends. To use these apps, all that is required is that my
smartphone is connected to Wi-Fi.

--- Page 556 ---
We have already addressed some third-party application extraction and
analysis tips in this book. In addition to this, we discussed the files that need
to be examined to understand and analyze application data in Chapter 5, iOS
Data Analysis and Recovery; Chapter 10, Android Data Analysis and
Recovery; Chapter 11, Android App Analysis, Malware, and Reverse
Engineering; and Chapter 12, Windows Phone Forensics. This chapter will
dive deeper into the applications and relevant files and will prepare you for
the analysis of these artifacts. Each application has a purpose. Most tools
provide support for the most popular application in each category. The rest is
up to you. A quick look at the applications presented by the Oxygen
Forensic Detective tool is shown in the following screenshot. As expected,
these are not all of the applications that are present on the device; rather,
these are just the ones that the tool knows how to parse:

--- Page 557 ---
Example of applications parsed by Oxygen Forensic Detective on an Apple device
In the next section, we will analyze some of the widely used chat
applications. 

--- Page 558 ---
Chat applications
Chat applications are among the most common applications on the market.
These applications provide users with the ability to chat or call outside the
standard services offered by the network service provider. These apps may
often be more secure compared to other apps. By secure, we mean that the
apps may offer encryption, private profiles, private group chats, and more.
Additionally, these apps enable the user to message or call others without the
need for a data plan, as Wi-Fi provides all of the access that they need.
Facebook Messenger, WhatsApp, Skype, Tango, and Snapchat are some of
the more popular applications.
Parsing artifacts from chat applications is not always simple. Often, multiple
tools and methods will be required to extract all of the data within them.
Commercial tools may only parse a portion of the data, forcing you to learn
how to examine and recover all data or miss evidence. In the following
screenshot, Oxygen Forensic Detective is being used to parse chat messages
from Tango on an Android device. Note that the message does not show the
image in the table. However, this image can be pieced back into the message
(notice the screenshot that is shown with an arrow pointing to the message to
which it belongs), to provide an overall picture of what was being shared in
a conversation. This was a manual process and was not performed by the
tool:

--- Page 559 ---
An example of piecing application chat logs back together
Next, we will take a look at GPS apps. 

--- Page 560 ---
GPS applications
Most users branch out from their standard phone apps for GPS support.
This includes getting directions to locations and obtaining maps for areas of
interest. Common GPS applications include Waze and Google Maps. Waze
goes beyond just providing directions, as it also alerts the user to road
hazards, traffic, and police officers that are to be found along the route they
are driving:

--- Page 561 ---
The Waze application
Other applications that store location information include Twitter,
Instagram, Facebook, and Foursquare. These applications enable a user to
alert friends and followers to their location when they create a post or share
an image or video. All of these transactions are tracked within the app.
Understanding this is key to uncovering additional artifacts that are not
reported by your forensic tool.

--- Page 562 ---
When examining location information from GPS applications, it is best to
assume that you need to manually examine the databases and preference
files that are associated with that application. We recommend using your
forensic tool to triage the data on the device and then dive deeply into the
artifacts, which will be discussed later in this chapter. An example of Waze
being parsed by UFED Physical Analyzer can be found in the following
screenshot. Here, we can see that the user had 5 favorite locations, 74
mapped locations, and 70 recent directions. All of this information must be
manually verified if it pertains to the investigation. This is because the tool
cannot determine whether the user typed the address, whether it was
suggested, or whether the user even traveled to that location. Proper skills
are required by you to tie a user to a specific location, and this takes more
than a forensic tool:
The Waze application in UFED Physical Analyzer
We will now analyze some of the popular secure messaging apps. 

--- Page 563 ---
Secure applications
If data is secure and self-destructing, did it ever even exist? Ignore the
claims of data retention and hunt for that data, as these apps often make
claims that are simply untrue. Although applications are designed with
security in mind, updates are released quickly and quality assurance checks
may not be strong enough to catch everything. On occasion, you will find
an app with an encrypted or non-existent database, but the file includes a
journal, write-ahead logs, or shared memory files that contain portions of
chats that were supposed to be encrypted. In addition to this, the user can
save media files that are shared, take screenshots of conversations, and do
much more. Often, you may uncover the images, audio, and video files that
were shared and supposed to be encrypted.
Some popular secure messaging applications include Telegram, Wickr, and
Signal. Some of these are encrypted, where nothing is recoverable.
However, this all depends on the device, the OS running on the smartphone,
and the version of the app. The security level of these apps is publicly
advertised, but again, take this with a grain of salt. You should always
assume that there could be a vulnerability in the app that may provide you
with access forensically. Dig for this evidence!

--- Page 564 ---
Financial applications
Applications that utilize financial information, such as credit card
information and personal banking, are required to be encrypted and secure.
iOS devices will not acquire these apps without an Apple ID and password.
Even if you have the user's Apple ID and password, the data extracted
should still be encrypted. Some examples of financial applications include
Google Pay, Microsoft Wallet, PayPal, Apple Pay, and in-app purchases.
When you examine a device, you may see that the app was installed with
the associated application metadata, but account information and
transactions will not be accessible.

--- Page 565 ---
Social networking applications
Commercial support for social networking applications is strong as they are
the most popular apps downloaded from app stores. These applications allow
users to make posts, share locations, chat publicly and privately, and
essentially catalog their lives. Common social networking applications
include Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram. Often, users will enable one app,
such as Instagram, to have access to Facebook and Twitter so that posting is
seamless. Hence, when examining devices, the user may find multiple copies
of the same file or conversation due to the sharing that takes place between
apps.
When examining these apps with commercial tools, it is common for chats
and contacts to be parsed, meaning that other data may be overlooked.
Again, this means you must look at the data dump to ensure that nothing is
missed. As an example, we are going to take a look at Twitter. This
application stores a lot of information that may require more than one tool to
parse. Additionally, the user may have to manually examine the database
files to ensure that all artifacts have been recovered.
Let's take a look at what the tool was able to extract. As stated several times
in this book, start with what the tool is telling you is installed, and then
formulate keywords and methods to dig deep into the filesystem. We can see
the user account information for Twitter, as well as the file path where this
data is being extracted, in the following screenshot:

--- Page 567 ---
Twitter as parsed by Magnet AXIOM
The next logical step is to view what the tool can tell you about the
application and how it was used. Magnet AXIOM provided the following
information for Twitter account usage. Note that both public tweets and
private messages (DMs) are recovered:
Twitter usage by Magnet AXIOM
After examining what was parsed by the tool, the database files should be
examined to ensure that nothing was missed. This is not always simple, as
each account and function may have a unique database. By function, we
mean that contacts may be stored in one database while chats and account
information are stored in another. Once you become more familiar with
common applications, you will know where to look first.
In the following screenshot, we can see all of the databases that are
associated with Twitter. Again, start with what you know and dig deeper:

--- Page 568 ---
Twitter databases containing user activity
Each database may contain unique data that can be parsed for additional
artifacts. These applications also contain unique user_id values, which can be
used as keywords to search for other devices with traces of communication
within an investigation.
Custom queries can be written to parse Twitter databases of interest. A good
example of how to do this is shown as follows. This query is specific to
parsing Twitter contacts:
SELECT _id AS "Index", 
user_id AS "User ID", 
username AS "Username", 
name AS "Name", 
datetime (profile_created/1000,'UNIXEPOCH','localtime') AS "Profile Created", 
description AS "Twitter Description", 
web_url AS "Website URL",
location AS "Location",

--- Page 569 ---
followers AS "Followers", 
friends AS "Following", 
users.statuses AS "Number of Tweets",
image_url AS "Profile Image URL", 
datetime (updated/1000,'UNIXEPOCH','localtime') AS "Profile Updated" 
FROM users
So far, we have looked at various kinds of third-party apps and how tools
can aid an investigator in extracting the data. We will now look at some of
the fundamental concepts that will help an investigator while analyzing the
data. 

--- Page 570 ---
Encoding versus encryption
The terms encoding and encryption are used so frequently when discussing
applications and smartphone data that they are often confused. Encoding is
essentially the process of obfuscating a message or piece of information to
appear as raw code. In some cases, the goal of encoding is to make the data
unrecognizable to the computer or the user. In reality, the primary goal of
encoding is to transform the input into a different format using a publicly
available scheme. In other words, anyone can easily decode an encoded
value. Encryption, however, transforms the data using a key to keep its
content confidential. So, encrypted text can only be reversed if you have the
key.
Most applications claim that they encrypt data or that the data is never saved
to disk. While this is true for some, most are simply encoded. Encoding
options can vary, but the most common option for smartphone data is Base64.
Messaging apps often rely on Base64 encoding to make the data appear to be
hidden or safe. A common artifact of Base64 is the padding of the data with =
when the encoded bytes are not divisible by three.
A few years ago, Oxygen Forensics and Autopsy were two of the few tools
that supported the decoding of Base64 payloads from applications derived
from smartphones. For these tools to parse the data, they must support the
application containing the encoding. Currently, MSAB, UFED Physical
Analyzer, and Magnet IEF provide Base64 decoding support.
An example of Base64-encoded messages is shown in the following
screenshot. This data is from the Tango chat application:

--- Page 571 ---
Base64-encoded Tango messages
Encryption is a bit more difficult as the app itself may not even provide
access to the encrypted data. For example, you may find that the database
directory or the cells containing the encrypted data are simply empty.
Occasionally, you will have access to the encrypted blobs within the
databases, but this data cannot always be decrypted. Again, when you face
encrypted data, look elsewhere. Have you examined the journal and write-
ahead logs? Have you examined the cache and media directories? Have you
examined the SD card? These are common questions you will often have to
ask yourself to ensure that you are not relying on your forensic tools too
much and that you are covering your bases to ensure nothing is overlooked.
As we've explained, start with what you know. We know that the cache and
database directories store user data, so this is a great place to start your
manual examination, as you can see in the following screenshot:

--- Page 572 ---
Data storage locations for applications
In the following sections, we will cover how applications store their data
within the device and the significance of various types of storage options. 

--- Page 573 ---
iOS, Android, and Windows Phone
application data storage
Almost all applications rely on SQLite for data storage. These databases
can be stored internally on the device or the SD card for relevant phones.
When SQLite is used, temporary memory files are commonly associated
with each database to make SQLite more efficient. These files are rollback
journals (JOURNAL), Write-Ahead Logs (WAL) and Shared Memory
(SHM) files. These files may contain data that is not present in the SQLite
database. We can see several WAL and SHM files associated with various
WhatsApp database files in the following screenshot:
An SHM file and WAL example
In addition to SQLite databases, other devices rely on Plist, XML, JSON,
and DAT files for application data storage, account data storage, purchase
information, and user preferences. These files will be discussed in the
Android, iOS, and Windows Phone sections of this chapter.

--- Page 574 ---
iOS applications
Apple relies on SQLite and Plist as common locations for application data
storage. On occasion, JSON files will be used for application data.
Examining applications recovered from an iOS device can be
overwhelming. We suggest you start with what you know and what your
tool is telling you. Examine the Installed Applications listed by your tool of
choice. From here, go directly to the applications directory and ensure that
nothing is being overlooked. When a user deletes an app, the databases
often remain and the link to the installed application is simply broken.
Examining all areas of the iOS device will prevent you from missing data:

--- Page 575 ---
Installed applications on an iPhone
After examining the installed applications, search the Library and Documents
directories for any relevant Plist files that may contain application artifacts.

--- Page 576 ---
Finally, examine the Media directory on the iPhone as well as the one
associated with the app to recover additional artifacts, such as shared
photos, videos, audio files, and profile pictures. In the following screenshot,
we are examining the Media directory associated with the WhatsApp
application:
Application data on an iPhone
We will now take a look at data storage in Android applications. 

--- Page 577 ---
Android applications
Android devices rely heavily on SQLite for application storage. The
preference files for each application are often in the DAT or XML file
formats. More so than an iOS device, examining applications on an Android
device may be one of the most tedious tasks. This is due to the various
locations where data may be stored. The best place to start is with a tool
that will provide a listing of what is installed on the device. Next, go to the
subdirectories off of the /Root directory. Remember, these applications may
possess unique names and may be difficult to locate.
You may have to research the application to gain a better understanding of
the filenames that are associated with each of them. The following
screenshot is an example of application directories on an Android device:

--- Page 578 ---
Application data on an Android device
Each of these application directories will contain a lot of data to examine.
We recommend starting with the Databases and Cache directories and then
expanding your analysis to other locations on the device. The next locations
to examine include the Media and Cache partitions. If the data appears to be
missing or is claimed to have been deleted, do not forget to examine the
Downloads directory on the device and SD card.
Application data can exist in several locations in the Media directories. Using
a tool, such as UFED Physical Analyzer, which provides keyword-
searching capabilities spanning beyond parsed items, will really help to
locate artifacts pertaining to specific applications. We are looking at the
large amount of data stored in the Media directory on an Android device in

--- Page 579 ---
the following screenshot. This data is unique from what is stored in the
application directories that were discussed previously. Each location needs
to be thoroughly examined to ensure that nothing is missed. It is important
that you take what you learned in previous chapters to analyze Android
application data:
Unique application data in the Media directory
We will now look at apps installed on Windows Phone and their
acquisition. 

--- Page 580 ---
Windows Phone applications
Applications found on Windows Phones are no different from those found
on iOS and Android devices. SQLite is the most common format used for
data storage. However, not all devices allow for SQLite files to be stored
internally on the phone. For these devices, all application data will be found
on the SD card. Some may view this as lucky because it saves us from
having to examine several locations on the device, but the SD card and the
applications themselves may be encrypted.
Where possible, it is best to remove the SD card and acquire it using a
forensic tool. When this is not possible, the next best method would be to
try to acquire the SD card through the phone using a forensic tool. Again,
this will often result in missed data. By the way of a final effort, live
analysis can be completed by mounting the device and using Windows
Explorer to view the applications stored on the device and SD card, as
discussed in Chapter 12, Windows Phone Forensics.

--- Page 581 ---
Forensic methods used to extract
third-party application data
Almost all commercial tools will attempt to support the extraction of third-
party applications. We recommend that you test your tools thoroughly and
often, if you rely on tool output for your investigative results. This is
because the apps are updated so frequently that it is nearly impossible for
the tools not to miss something. You must learn about the applications, how
they work, and how the devices store data for each app. We strongly
recommend that you use your tool to triage the case and then dive into the
data to manually extract anything that the tools miss. Make sure that you
only include factual data in your forensic report and not everything that the
tools parse, as the tools cannot decipher the difference between a device and
human creation. Only a trained examiner can do this with confidence.

--- Page 582 ---
Commercial tools
As you have seen in this book, there are many tools that can handle the job
of smartphone forensics. However, there are a few that really shine when it
comes to parsing application data. Magnet AXIOM, Oxygen Forensic
Detective, and UFED Physical Analyzer are a few that do a good job of
recovering data from the application categories discussed in this chapter.
We will take a quick look at how to leverage each of these tools to parse
application data. Keep in mind that these tools will not find every
application and will not parse all data for applications.

--- Page 583 ---
Oxygen Forensic Detective
Oxygen Forensic Detective can be used to examine application data. For this
example, we are assuming that acquisition is complete and we are simply
attempting to analyze the data. Note that Oxygen is capable of acquiring and
analyzing smartphones. In this example, we acquired the device with
Cellebrite UFED and analyzed it with Oxygen. To load a data dump of a
device and examine its application artifacts, perform the following steps:
1. Launch Oxygen Forensic Detective.
2. Select the Import File option and choose your image. Multiple image
formats are supported for ingestion into Oxygen.
3. After parsing is complete, start examining the parsed applications:

--- Page 584 ---
The Oxygen Forensic Detective application view

--- Page 585 ---
4. Next, start examining applications of interest by clicking on the
application and examining all of the associated files.
5. Once you select the application, you will be presented with the data that
was parsed and the full file path from where the data was extracted. Use
this path to manually verify the findings. We are looking at the Pinterest
application in the following screenshot. Note how the container, file,
and table of interest are provided and hyperlinked for the user. The tool
is even encouraging you to dig deeper and verify the findings:
Oxygen Detective Pinterest example
Oxygen Detective has built-in features for keyword searching,
bookmarking, and reporting. In addition, the SQLite Database and
Plist Viewer will provide you with a method for examining relevant
application data

--- Page 586 ---
6. Report all account information, chats, messages, locations, and any
other data of interest, as this provides relevance to your investigation.
The next tool that we will be looking at is Magnet AXIOM.

--- Page 587 ---
Magnet AXIOM
Magnet AXIOM has been known as one of the leaders in internet and
application parsing for digital media. It is just as strong with mobile devices.
Again, one tool cannot do the job, but AXIOM has proven to be the
strongest and parses the most applications from Android, iOS, and Windows
Phones. To use AXIOM to examine application artifacts, perform the
following steps:
1. Launch AXIOM, create a new case, and then select MOBILE (note that
if MOBILE is grayed out, you need to obtain a license that provides
mobile support from Magnet Forensics):
Selecting the evidence source
2. Select LOAD EVIDENCE and navigate to your image file. More than
one image can be loaded and parsed at the same time.
3. Select GO TO ARTIFACT DETAILS and determine what you want to
parse. We recommend selecting all of the apps:

--- Page 588 ---
Magnet AXIOM supported artifacts
4. Select ANALYZE EVIDENCE.
5. Once complete, you can use Artifacts:

--- Page 589 ---
Application Artifacts in Magnet AXIOM
The first step in the examination is to review what has been parsed by
AXIOM. In the preceding screenshot, we can see that Telegram was parsed.
Start your examination in the most relevant location. For example, if you are
looking for Telegram Chats, go right to that location and start examining the
artifacts. Note that Messages and Chats are pulled into two different
categories. This is common when private messaging is used. All relevant
application containers should be examined. Additionally, AXIOM provides

--- Page 590 ---
the full file path from which the data was recovered. Use another tool to
navigate to this file for verification and manual examination.
AXIOM also provides logical keyword search (it will search what it can
parse and nothing else), bookmarking, and reporting. Make sure that you
only report factual application artifacts and incorporate these into your final
forensic report.

--- Page 591 ---
UFED Physical Analyzer
Physical Analyzer is one of the most well-known mobile forensic tools on
the market. This tool is one of the best platforms to manually conduct an
examination in addition to leveraging the data parsed by the tool. For
application analysis, Physical Analyzer is good at parsing chats and
contacts for each supported application. For data that is not parsed, Physical
Analyzer provides an analytical platform that enables the user to browse the
filesystem to uncover additional artifacts. Keyword searching is robust in
this tool and is capable of searching raw hex as well as parsed data. In
addition, a SQLite viewer is included.
To conduct a forensic examination of application data in Physical Analyzer,
perform the following steps to get started:
1. Launch Physical Analyzer by double-clicking on the UFED shortcut
image file or by double-clicking the tool icon.
2. Load the image file and wait until parsing completes.
3. Examine the parsed artifacts, as shown in the following screenshot:

--- Page 592 ---
Data parsed by Physical Analyzer
We recommend examining what is parsed and referring to the hyperlink of
where the data is being extracted. Navigate to this path and then examine
the entire application directory.
To find the application directory, leverage built-in keyword searching
capabilities to aid in the investigation. Remember, you may have to conduct
research to determine the filenames associated with the app if this is not
apparent. 

--- Page 593 ---
Open source/free tools
For those on a budget, it is possible to examine application data from
smartphones using open source solutions and cheap tools. These solutions
are more difficult to use, and they are often not the answer for those new to
forensics who need the assistance of a tool in data extraction and analysis.
Examining application data is tedious, and if you do not know where to
look, you will likely need to spend some money to get a head start. Tools
such as Andriller can be purchased for around $500. While this is not free,
it's also not $10,000, which is what some of the other commercial tools
cost. In the following section, we will cover a few of our favorite tools that
are useful in parsing application data from smartphones.

--- Page 594 ---
Working with Autopsy
Autopsy is one of the best tools for filesystem examinations. Unfortunately,
iOS parsing is not provided in Autopsy, but it still may be useful for
filesystem images. Autopsy can be downloaded from http://sleuthkit.org/autop
sy/. When using Autopsy, the Android Analyzer module will parse some
application data from the device. Let's look at how to use Autopsy for
Android image analysis.
To use Autopsy, download the software and install it on a Windows machine
and follow these instructions. Make sure that you are always using the latest
version:
1. Launch Autopsy.
2. Create a new case:
Autopsy case creation
3. Select Next and then click on Finish.
4. Navigate to your image file and select Next.
5. Select the modules that you wish to run. Keyword Search and Android
Analyzer will be the most fruitful for an Android device:

--- Page 595 ---
Autopsy module selection
Ingest Modules are tools built into Autopsy that can be run when the case
has started or at any point afterward. The default modules in this version of
Autopsy are as follows:
Recent Activity: This extracts recent user activity such as web
browsing, recently used documents, and installed programs.
Hash Lookup: This identifies known and notable files using supplied
hash databases, such as a standard NSRL database. It also allows
importing custom hash databases.
File Type Identification: This matches file types based on binary
signatures.
Archive Extractor: This extracts archive files (.zip, .rar, .arj, .7z, .gzip,
.bzip2, and .tar). It automatically extracts these file types and puts their
contents into the directory tree.
EXIF Parser: This ingests JPEG files and retrieves their EXIF metadata.
Keyword Search: This performs file indexing and periodic search using
keywords and regular expressions in lists. It allows the loading of

--- Page 596 ---
custom keywords/lists.
Email Parser: This module detects and parses mbox and pst/ost files and
populates email artifacts in the blackboard.
Extension Mismatch Detector: These are flag files that have a non-
standard extension based on their file types.
E01 Verifier: This validates the integrity of E01 files.
Android Analyzer: This extracts Android system and third-party app
data.
Interesting Files Identifier: This identifies interesting items, as defined.
Also, you can install third-party modules for Autopsy. Some of them are
really useful for Android forensics. A good example is Parse SQLite DB by
Mark McKinnon. This module parses any SQLite database it finds
and imports it into the extracted content. This and other modules can be
downloaded from this GitHub: https://github.com/markmckinnon/Autopsy-Plugins
Autopsy provides access to filesystem data faster than any commercial or
open source tool available. Knowing where to go from there is the hard part.
So, again, start with anything that is in the extracted content and then dive
into the filesystem to examine the files discussed in this book and any
relevant application data, as shown in the following screenshot:

--- Page 597 ---
Browsing the filesystem with Autopsy
Once you have identified applications of interest, start with what is parsed
and then examine the relevant database, cache, and preference files. Autopsy
includes basic SQLite Viewer that can be used for triage purposes. If you
need to run queries, we recommend using DB Browser for SQLite or

--- Page 598 ---
browsers included in commercial products, for example, Belkasoft Evidence
Center, especially if you want to analyze data from free lists and unallocated
space.
Android Analyzer can decode some artifacts automatically, for example,
contacts, calls, and SMS. The following screenshot shows the results of the
decoded SMS messages:
SMS messages decoded by Autopsy
Now, we will be looking at some more methods of extracting data.

--- Page 599 ---
Other methods of extracting
application data
One of the easiest ways to parse application data is to create custom SQLite
queries and Python scripts to parse data of interest. We have discussed
several suggestions and examples of queries and scripts throughout this
book. Python is one of the best solutions because it is free and we have full
access to its libraries. One thing to keep in mind is that our scripts have to
be updated frequently to keep up with application updates. Also, make sure
that your encoding schemas are correct to prevent application artifacts from
being missed or not interpreted correctly.
In addition to Python scripts, free parsers that support application extraction
already exist. WhatsApp Extract is a free tool for both Android and iOS that
will extract WhatsApp application data from devices. Often, this free tool
will extract more data than the commercial solutions, depending on the
permissions the user allocated during installation. Others, such as Mari
DeGrazia (http://az4n6.blogspot.in/p/downloads.html), Adrian Leong (https://gith
ub.com/cheeky4n6monkey/4n6-scripts), Sarah Edwards (https://github.com/mac4n6),
and Alexis Brignoni (https://github.com/abrignoni) have developed scripts to
parse applications, recover deleted data from SQLite free pages, decode
Base64, and more. We recommend using what is already available before
developing your own.

--- Page 600 ---
Summary
In this chapter, we learned about how to successfully parse and extract data
from popular third-party apps. Many apps are not what they claim to be.
Never trust what you read about apps, as quality assurance testing across
apps is not consistent, and we have determined several vulnerabilities and
security flaws over the years that provide us with methods of piecing
application data back together. Also, application updates will change the
way we need to look at the data found. Understanding each smartphone and
how it stores application data is the first step toward successfully examining
applications on smartphones. Knowing that updates may change data
locations, encoding, and encryption, as well as how your tool functions, is
one of the hardest concepts for examiners to grasp. It is your job to learn the
capabilities of the application to uncover the most data from the mobile
device.
Understanding how an application works is hard enough without having to
consider how to extract artifacts. As you have read in this book, there are
many ways to parse data from smartphones. One tool is never enough, and
the reality is that mobile forensics can be expensive. We hope that we have
provided you with a practical guide that teaches you how to acquire and
analyze artifacts that are recovered from smartphones. Take what you've
learned and apply it immediately to your methods to conduct mobile
forensics or use it to make you more prepared in your next job. Remember
that practice, testing, and training will make you better at your job and will
help you to perfect the art of mobile forensics.

--- Page 601 ---
Other Books You May Enjoy
If you enjoyed this book, you may be interested in these other books by
Packt:
Digital Forensics and Incident Response
Gerard Johansen
ISBN: 978-1-78728-868-3
Create and deploy incident response capabilities within your
organization
Build a solid foundation for acquiring and handling suitable evidence
for later analysis
Analyze collected evidence and determine the root cause of a security
incident
Learn to integrate digital forensic techniques and procedures into the
overall incident response process
Integrate threat intelligence in digital evidence analysis
Prepare written documentation for use internally or with external
parties such as regulators or law enforcement agencies

--- Page 602 ---
Learning Python for Forensics
Preston Miller, Chapin Bryce
ISBN: 978-1-78328-523-5
Discover how to perform Python script development
Update yourself by learning the best practices in forensic programming
Build scripts through an iterative design
Explore the rapid development of specialized scripts
Understand how to leverage forensic libraries developed by the
community
Design flexibly to accommodate present and future hurdles
Conduct effective and efficient investigations through programmatic
pre-analysis
Discover how to transform raw data into customized reports and
visualizations

--- Page 603 ---
Leave a review - let other readers
know what you think
Please share your thoughts on this book with others by leaving a review on
the site that you bought it from. If you purchased the book from Amazon,
please leave us an honest review on this book's Amazon page. This is vital
so that other potential readers can see and use your unbiased opinion to
make purchasing decisions, we can understand what our customers think
about our products, and our authors can see your feedback on the title that
they have worked with Packt to create. It will only take a few minutes of
your time, but is valuable to other potential customers, our authors, and
Packt. Thank you!