--- Page 2 ---
Brock J. LaMeres
Introduction to Logic Circuits & Logic
Design with VHDL


--- Page 3 ---
Brock J. LaMeres
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Montana State
University, Bozeman, Montana, USA
ISBN 978-3-319-34194-1e-ISBN 978-3-319-34195-8
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-34195-8
Library of Congress Control Number: 2016940960
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2017
This Springer imprint is published by Springer Nature
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher,
whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the
rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation,
computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or
hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service
marks, etc. in this publication does not imply, even in the absence of a
specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective
laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice
and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date
of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the editors give a
warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein
or for any errors or omissions that may have been made.
Printed on acid-free paper

--- Page 4 ---
The registered company is Springer International Publishing AG
Switzerland

--- Page 5 ---
Preface
The purpose of this new book is to fill a void that has appeared in the
instruction of digital circuits over the past decade due to the rapid
abstraction of system design. Up until the mid-1980s, digital circuits were
designed using classical techniques. Classical techniques relied heavily on
manual design practices for the synthesis, minimization, and interfacing of
digital systems. Corresponding to this design style, academic textbooks
were developed that taught classical digital design techniques. Around
1990, large-scale digital systems began being designed using hardware
description languages (HDL) and automated synthesis tools. Broad-scale
adoption of this modern design approach spread through the industry during
this decade. Around 2000, hardware description languages and the modern
digital design approach began to be taught in universities, mainly at the
senior and graduate level. There were a variety of reasons that the modern
digital design approach did not penetrate the lower levels of academia
during this time. First, the design and simulation tools were difficult to use
and overwhelmed freshman and sophomore students. Second, the ability to
implement the designs in a laboratory setting was infeasible. The modern
design tools at the time were targeted at custom integrated circuits, which
are cost and time prohibitive to implement in a university setting. Between
2000 and 2005, rapid advances in programmable logic and design tools
allowed the modern digital design approach to be implemented in a
university setting, even in lower level courses. This allowed students to
learn the modern design approach based on HDLs and prototype their
designs in real hardware, mainly Field Programmable Gate Arrays
(FPGAs). This spurred an abundance of textbooks to be authored teaching
hardware description languages and higher levels of design abstraction.
This trend has continued until today. While abstraction is a critical tool for
engineering design, the rapid movement toward teaching only the modern
digital design techniques has left a void for freshman and sophomore level
courses in digital circuitry. Legacy textbooks that teach the classical design
approach are outdated and do not contain sufficient coverage of HDLs to
prepare the students for follow-on classes. Newer textbooks that teach the
modern digital design approach move immediately into high-level
behavioral modeling with minimal or no coverage of the underlying

--- Page 6 ---
hardware used to implement the systems. As a result, students are not being
provided the resources to understand the fundamental hardware theory that
lies beneath the modern abstraction such as interfacing, gate-level
implementation, and technology optimization. Students moving too rapidly
into high levels of abstraction have little understanding of what is going on
when they click the “compile & synthesize” button of their design tool. This
leads to graduates who can model a breadth of different systems in an HDL,
but have no depth into how the system is implemented in hardware. This
becomes problematic when an issue arises in a real design and there is no
foundational knowledge for the students to fall back on in order to debug
the problem.
This new book addresses the lower level foundational void by providing
a comprehensive, bottoms-up, coverage of digital systems. The book begins
with a description of lower level hardware including binary representations,
gate-level implementation, interfacing, and simple combinational logic
design. Only after a foundation has been laid in the underlying hardware
theory is the VHDL language introduced. The VHDL introduction gives
only the basic concepts of the language in order to model, simulate, and
synthesize combinational logic. This allows the students to gain familiarity
with the language and the modern design approach without getting
overwhelmed by the full capability of the language. The book then covers
sequential logic and finite state machines at the component level. Once this
secondary foundation has been laid, the remaining capabilities of VHDL are
presented that allow sophisticated, synchronous systems to be modeled. An
entire chapter is then dedicated to examples of sequential system modeling,
which allows the students to learn by example. The second part of the
textbook introduces the details of programmable logic, semiconductor
memory, and arithmetic circuits. The book culminates with a discussion of
computer system design, which incorporates all of the knowledge gained in
the previous chapters. Each component of a computer system is described
with an accompanying VHDL implementation, all while continually
reinforcing the underlying hardware beneath the HDL abstraction.
Written the Way It Is Taught
The organization of this book is designed to follow the way in which the
material is actually learned. Topics are presented only once sufficient

--- Page 7 ---
background has been provided by earlier chapters to fully understand the
material. An example of this learning-oriented organization is how the
VHDL language is broken into two chapters. Chapter 5 presents an
introduction to VHDL and the basic constructs to model combinational
logic. This is an ideal location to introduce the language because the reader
has just learned about combinational logic theory in Chap. 4 . This allows
the student to begin gaining experience using the VHDL simulation tools on
basic combinational logic circuits. The more advanced constructs of VHDL
such as sequential modeling and test benches are presented in Chap. 8 only
after a thorough background in sequential logic is presented in Chap. 7 .
Another example of this learning-oriented approach is how arithmetic
circuits are not introduced until Chap. 12 . While technically the arithmetic
circuits in Chap. 12 are combinational logic circuits and could be presented
in Chap. 4 , the student does not have the necessary background in Chap. 4
to fully understand the operation of the arithmetic circuitry so its
introduction is postponed.
This incremental, just-in-time presentation of material allows the book
to follow the way the material is actually taught in the classroom. This
design also avoids the need for the instructor to assign sections that move
back-and-forth through the text. This not only reduces course design effort
for the instructor but also allows the student to know where they are in the
sequence of learning. At any point, the student should know the material in
prior chapters and be moving toward understanding the material in
subsequent ones.
An additional advantage of this book’s organization is that it supports
giving the student hands-on experience with digital circuitry for courses
with an accompanying laboratory component. The flow is designed to
support lab exercises that begin using discrete logic gates on a breadboard
and then move into HDL-based designs implemented on off-the-shelf
FPGA boards. Using this approach to a laboratory experience gives the
student experience with the basic electrical operation of digital circuits,
interfacing, and HDL-based designs.
Learning Outcomes
Each chapter begins with an explanation of its learning objective followed
by a brief preview of the chapter topics. The specific learning outcomes are

--- Page 8 ---
then presented for the chapter in the form of concise statements about the
measurable knowledge and/or skills the student will possess by the end of
the chapter. Each section addresses a single, specific learning outcome. This
eases the process of assessment and gives specific details on student
performance. There are 600+ exercise problems and concept check
questions for each section tied directly to specific learning outcomes for
both formative and summative assessment.
Teaching by Example
With over 200 worked examples, concept checks for each section, 200+
supporting figures, and 600+ exercise problems, students are provided with
multiple ways to learn. Each topic is described in a clear, concise written
form with accompanying figures as necessary. This is then followed by
annotated worked examples that match the form of the exercise problems at
the end of each chapter. Additionally, concept check questions are placed at
the end of each section in the book to measure the student’s general
understanding of the material using a concept inventory assessment style.
These features provide the student multiple ways to learn the material and
build an understanding of digital circuitry.
Course Design
The book can be used in multiple ways. The first is to use the book to cover
two, semester-based college courses in digital logic. The first course in this
sequence is an introduction to logic circuits and covers Chaps. 1 – 7 . This
introductory course, which is found in nearly all accredited electrical and
computer engineering programs, gives students a basic foundation in digital
hardware and interfacing. Chapters 1 – 7 only cover relevant topics in
digital circuits to make room for a thorough introduction to VHDL. At the
end of this course students have a solid foundation in digital circuits and are
able to design and simulate VHDL models of concurrent and hierarchical
systems. The second course in this sequence covers logic design using
chapters 8 – 13 . In this second course, students learn the advanced features
of VHDL such as packages, sequential behavioral modeling, and test
benches. This provides the basis for building larger digital systems such as
registers, finite state machines, and arithmetic circuits. Chapter 13 brings all

--- Page 9 ---
of the concepts together through the design of a simple 8-bit computer
system that can be simulated and implemented using many off-the-shelf
FPGA boards.
This book can also be used in a more accelerated digital logic course
that reaches a higher level of abstraction in a single semester. This is
accomplished by skipping some chapters and moving quickly through
others. In this use model, it is likely that Chap. 2 on numbers systems and
Chap. 3 on digital circuits would be quickly referenced but not covered in
detail. Chapters 4 and 7 could also be covered quickly in order to move
rapidly into VHDL modeling without spending significant time looking at
the underlying hardware implementation. This approach allows a higher
level of abstraction to be taught but provides the student with the reference
material so that they can delve in the details of the hardware
implementation if interested.
All exercise and concept problems that do not involve a VHDL model
are designed so that they can be implemented as a multiple choice or
numeric entry question in a standard course management system. This
allows the questions to be automatically graded. For the VHDL design
questions, it is expected that the students will upload their VHDL source
files and screenshots of their simulation waveforms to the course
management system for manual grading by the instructor or teaching
assistant.
Instructor Resources
Instructors adopting this book can request a solution manual that contains a
graphic-rich description of the solutions for each of the 600+ exercise
problems. Instructors can also receive the VHDL solutions and test benches
for each VHDL design exercise. A complementary lab manual has also
been developed to provide additional learning activities based on both the
74HC discrete logic family and an off-the-shelf FPGA board. This manual
is provided separately from the book in order to support the ever-changing
technology options available for laboratory exercises.
Brock J. LaMeres
Bozeman, MT, USA

--- Page 10 ---
Acknowledgements
Dr. LaMeres would like to thank his family for their endless support of this
endeavor. To JoAnn, my beautiful wife and soul mate, nothing that I do is
possible without you by my side. To Alexis and Kylie, my two wonderful
daughters, you are my inspiration and the reason I have hope.
Dr. LaMeres would also like to thank the 400+ engineering students at
Montana State University that helped proofread this book in preparation for
the first edition.

--- Page 11 ---
Contents
1:  Introduction:  Analog vs.  Digital
1. 1 Differences between Analog and Digital Systems
1. 2 Advantages of Digital Systems over Analog Systems
2:  Number Systems
2. 1 Positional Number Systems
2. 1. 1 Generic Structure
2. 1. 2 Decimal Number System (Base 10)
2. 1. 3 Binary Number System (Base 2)
2. 1. 4 Octal Number System (Base 8)
2. 1. 5 Hexadecimal Number System (Base 16)
2. 2 Base Conversion
2. 2. 1 Converting to Decimal
2. 2. 2 Converting from Decimal
2. 2. 3 Converting Between 2 n Bases
2. 3 Binary Arithmetic
2. 3. 1 Addition (Carries)
2. 3. 2 Subtraction (Borrows)
2. 4 Unsigned and Signed Numbers

--- Page 12 ---
2. 4. 1 Unsigned Numbers
2. 4. 2 Signed Numbers
3:  Digital Circuitry and Interfacing
3. 1 BASIC GATES
3. 1. 1 Describing the Operation of a Logic Circuit
3. 1. 2 The Buffer
3. 1. 3 The Inverter
3. 1. 4 The AND Gate
3. 1. 5 The NAND Gate
3. 1. 6 The OR Gate
3. 1. 7 The NOR Gate
3. 1. 8 The XOR Gate
3. 1. 9 The XNOR Gate
3. 2 Digital Circuit Operation
3. 2. 1 Logic Levels
3. 2. 2 Output DC Specifications
3. 2. 3 Input DC Specifications
3. 2. 4 Noise Margins
3. 2. 5 Power Supplies
3. 2. 6 Switching Characteristics

--- Page 13 ---
3. 2. 7 Data Sheets
3. 3 Logic Families
3. 3. 1 Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductors
3. 3. 2 Transistor-Transistor Logic
3. 3. 3 The 7400 Series Logic Families
3. 4 Driving Loads
3. 4. 1 Driving Other Gates
3. 4. 2 Driving Resistive Loads
3. 4. 3 Driving LEDs
4:  Combinational Logic Design
4. 1 Boolean Algebra
4. 1. 1 Operations
4. 1. 2 Axioms
4. 1. 3 Theorems
4. 1. 4 Functionally Complete Operation Sets
4. 2 Combinational Logic Analysis
4. 2. 1 Finding the Logic Expression from a Logic Diagram
4. 2. 2 Finding the Truth Table from a Logic Diagram
4. 2. 3 Timing Analysis of a Combinational Logic Circuit
4. 3 Combinational Logic Synthesis

--- Page 14 ---
4. 3. 1 Canonical Sum of Products
4. 3. 2 The Minterm List (Σ)
4. 3. 3 Canonical Product of Sums (POS)
4. 3. 4 The Maxterm List (Π)
4. 3. 5 Minterm and Maxterm List Equivalence
4. 4 Logic Minimization
4. 4. 1 Algebraic Minimization
4. 4. 2 Minimization Using Karnaugh Maps
4. 4. 3 Don’t Cares
4. 4. 4 Using XOR Gates
4. 5 Timing Hazards and Glitches
5:  VHDL (Part 1)
5. 1 History of Hardware Description Languages
5. 2 HDL Abstraction
5. 3 The Modern Digital Design Flow
5. 4 VHDL Constructs
5. 4. 1 Data Types
5. 4. 2 Libraries and Packages
5. 4. 3 The Entity
5. 4. 4 The Architecture

--- Page 15 ---
5. 5 Modeling Concurrent Functionality in VHDL
5. 5. 1 VHDL Operators
5. 5. 2 Concurrent Signal Assignments
5. 5. 3 Concurrent Signal Assignments with Logical Operators
5. 5. 4 Conditional Signal Assignments
5. 5. 5 Selected Signal Assignments
5. 5. 6 Delayed Signal Assignments
5. 6 Structural Design Using Components
5. 6. 1 Component Instantiation
5. 7 Overview of Simulation Test Benches
6:  MSI Logic
6. 1 Decoders
6. 1. 1 Example:  One-Hot Decoder
6. 1. 2 Example:  Seven-Segment Display Decoder
6. 2 Encoders
6. 2. 1 Example:  One-Hot Binary Encoder
6. 3 Multiplexers
6. 4 Demultiplexers
7:  Sequential Logic Design
7. 1 Sequential Logic Storage Devices

--- Page 16 ---
7. 1. 1 The Cross-Coupled Inverter Pair
7. 1. 2 Metastability
7. 1. 3 The SR Latch
7. 1. 4 The S′R′ Latch
7. 1. 5 SR Latch with Enable
7. 1. 6 The D-Latch
7. 1. 7 The D-Flip-Flop
7. 2 Sequential Logic Timing Considerations
7. 3 Common Circuits Based On Sequential Storage Devices
7. 3. 1 Toggle Flop Clock Divider
7. 3. 2 Ripple Counter
7. 3. 3 Switch Debouncing
7. 3. 4 Shift Registers
7. 4 Finite-State Machines
7. 4. 1 Describing the Functionality of an FSM
7. 4. 2 Logic Synthesis for an FSM
7. 4. 3 FSM Design Process Overview
7. 4. 4 FSM Design Examples
7. 5 Counters
7. 5. 1 2-Bit Binary Up Counter

--- Page 17 ---
7. 5. 2 2-Bit Binary Up/ Down Counter
7. 5. 3 2-Bit Gray Code Up Counter
7. 5. 4 2-Bit Gray Code Up/ Down Counter
7. 5. 5 3-Bit One-Hot Up Counter
7. 5. 6 3-Bit One-Hot Up/ Down Counter
7. 6 Finite-State Machine’s Reset Condition
7. 7 Sequential Logic Analysis
7. 7. 1 Finding the State Equations and Output Logic Expressions
of an FSM
7. 7. 2 Finding the State Transition Table of an FSM
7. 7. 3 Finding the State Diagram of an FSM
7. 7. 4 Determining the Maximum Clock Frequency of an FSM
8:  VHDL (Part 2)
8. 1 The Process
8. 1. 1 Sensitivity List
8. 1. 2 The Wait Statement
8. 1. 3 Sequential Signal Assignments
8. 1. 4 Variables
8. 2 Conditional Programming Constructs
8. 2. 1 If/ Then Statements
8. 2. 2 Case Statements

--- Page 18 ---
8. 2. 3 Infinite Loops
8. 2. 4 While Loops
8. 2. 5 For Loops
8. 3 Signal Attributes
8. 4 Test Benches
8. 4. 1 Report Statement
8. 4. 2 Assert Statement
8. 5 Packages
8. 5. 1 STD_ LOGIC_ 1164
8. 5. 2 NUMERIC_ STD
8. 5. 3 NUMERIC_ STD_ UNSIGNED
8. 5. 4 NUMERIC_ BIT
8. 5. 5 NUMERIC_ BIT_ UNSIGNED
8. 5. 6 MATH_ REAL
8. 5. 7 MATH_ COMPLEX
8. 5. 8 TEXTIO and STD_ LOGIC_ TEXTIO
8. 5. 9 Legacy Packages (STD_ LOGIC_ ARITH/ UNSIGNED/ 
SIGNED)
9:  Behavioral Modeling of Sequential Logic
9. 1 Modeling Sequential Storage Devices in VHDL
9. 1. 1 D-Latch

--- Page 19 ---
9. 1. 2 D-Flip-Flop
9. 1. 3 D-Flip-Flop with Asynchronous Reset
9. 1. 4 D-Flip-Flop with Asynchronous Reset and Preset
9. 1. 5 D-Flip-Flop with Synchronous Enable
9. 2 Modeling Finite-State Machines in VHDL
9. 2. 1 Modeling the States with User-Defined, Enumerated Data
Types
9. 2. 2 The State Memory Process
9. 2. 3 The Next State Logic Process
9. 2. 4 The Output Logic Process
9. 2. 5 Explicitly Defining State Codes with Subtypes
9. 3 FSM Design Examples in VHDL
9. 3. 1 Serial Bit Sequence Detector in VHDL
9. 3. 2 Vending Machine Controller in VHDL
9. 3. 3 2-Bit, Binary Up/ Down Counter in VHDL
9. 4 Modeling Counters in VHDL
9. 4. 1 Counters in VHDL Using the Type UNSIGNED
9. 4. 2 Counters in VHDL Using the Type INTEGER
9. 4. 3 Counters in VHDL Using the Type STD_ LOGIC_ 
VECTOR
9. 4. 4 Counters with Enables in VHDL

--- Page 20 ---
9. 4. 5 Counters with Loads
9. 5 RTL Modeling
9. 5. 1 Modeling Registers in VHDL
9. 5. 2 Shift Registers in VHDL
9. 5. 3 Registers as Agents on a Data Bus
10:  Memory
10. 1 Memory Architecture and Terminology
10. 1. 1 Memory Map Model
10. 1. 2 Volatile vs.  Nonvolatile Memory
10. 1. 3 Read-Only vs.  Read/ Write Memory
10. 1. 4 Random Access vs.  Sequential Access
10. 2 Nonvolatile Memory Technology
10. 2. 1 ROM Architecture
10. 2. 2 Mask Read-Only Memory
10. 2. 3 Programmable Read-Only Memory
10. 2. 4 Erasable Programmable Read-Only Memory
10. 2. 5 Electrically Erasable Programmable Read-Only Memory
10. 2. 6 FLASH Memory
10. 3 Volatile Memory Technology
10. 3. 1 Static Random Access Memory

--- Page 21 ---
10. 3. 2 Dynamic Random Access Memory
10. 4 Modeling Memory with VHDL
10. 4. 1 Read-Only Memory in VHDL
10. 4. 2 Read/ Write Memory in VHDL
11:  Programmable Logic
11. 1 Programmable Arrays
11. 1. 1 Programmable Logic Array
11. 1. 2 Programmable Array Logic
11. 1. 3 Generic Array Logic
11. 1. 4 Hard Array Logic
11. 1. 5 Complex Programmable Logic Devices
11. 2 Field Programmable Gate Arrays
11. 2. 1 Configurable Logic Block (or Logic Element)
11. 2. 2 Look-Up Tables
11. 2. 3 Programmable Interconnect Points (PIPs)
11. 2. 4 Input/ Output Block
11. 2. 5 Configuration Memory
12:  Arithmetic Circuits
12. 1 Addition
12. 1. 1 Half Adders

--- Page 22 ---
12. 1. 2 Full Adders
12. 1. 3 Ripple Carry Adder (RCA)
12. 1. 4 Carry Look Ahead Adder (CLA)
12. 1. 5 Adders in VHDL
12. 2 Subtraction
12. 3 Multiplication
12. 3. 1 Unsigned Multiplication
12. 3. 2 A Simple Circuit to Multiply by Powers of Two
12. 3. 3 Signed Multiplication
12. 4 Division
12. 4. 1 Unsigned Division
12. 4. 2 A Simple Circuit to Divide by Powers of Two
12. 4. 3 Signed Division
13:  Computer System Design
13. 1 Computer Hardware
13. 1. 1 Program Memory
13. 1. 2 Data Memory
13. 1. 3 Input/ Output Ports
13. 1. 4 Central Processing Unit
13. 1. 5 A Memory Mapped System

--- Page 23 ---
13. 2 Computer Software
13. 2. 1 Opcodes and Operands
13. 2. 2 Addressing Modes
13. 2. 3 Classes of Instructions
13. 3 Computer Implementation:  An 8-Bit Computer Example
13. 3. 1 Top-Level Block Diagram
13. 3. 2 Instruction Set Design
13. 3. 3 Memory System Implementation
13. 3. 4 CPU Implementation
13. 4 Architecture Considerations
13. 4. 1 Von Neumann Architecture
13. 4. 2 Harvard Architecture
Appendix A: List of Worked Examples
Suggested Readings
Index

--- Page 24 ---
(1)
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2017
Brock J. LaMeres, Introduction to Logic Circuits & Logic Design with VHDL , DOI 10.1007/978-3-
319-34195-8_1
1. Introduction: Analog vs. Digital
Brock J. LaMeres1 
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Montana State
University, Bozeman, MT, USA
 
We often hear that we live in a digital age. This refers to the massive
adoption of computer systems within every aspect of our lives from smart
phones to automobiles to household appliances. This statement also refers
to the transformation that has occurred to our telecommunications
infrastructure that now transmits voice, video, and data using 1’s and 0’s.
There are a variety of reasons that digital systems have become so prevalent
in our lives. In order to understand these reasons, it is good to start with an
understanding of what a digital system is and how it compares to its
counterpart, the analog system. The goal of this chapter is to provide an
understanding of the basic principles of analog and digital systems.
Learning Outcomes—After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
1.1Describe the fundamental differences between analog and digital
systems.
 
1.2Describe the advantages of digital systems compared to analog
systems.
 

--- Page 25 ---
1.1 Differences Between Analog and Digital
Systems
Let’s begin by looking at signaling. In electrical systems, signals represent
information that is transmitted between devices using an electrical quantity
(voltage or current). An analog signal is defined as a continuous, time-
varying quantity that corresponds directly to the information it represents.
An example of this would be a barometric pressure sensor that outputs an
electrical voltage corresponding to the pressure being measured. As the
pressure goes up, so does the voltage. While the range of the input
(pressure) and output (voltage) will have different spans, there is a direct
mapping between the pressure and voltage. Another example would be
sound striking a traditional analog microphone. Sound is a pressure wave
that travels through a medium such as air. As the pressure wave strikes the
diaphragm in the microphone, the diaphragm moves back and forth.
Through the process of inductive coupling, this movement is converted to
an electric current. The characteristics of the current signal produced (e.g.,
frequency and magnitude) correspond directly to the characteristics of the
incoming sound wave. The current can travel down a wire and go through
another system that works in the opposite manner by inductively coupling
the current onto another diaphragm, which in turn moves back and forth
forming a pressure wave and thus sound (i.e., a speaker). In both of these
examples, the electrical signal represents the actual information that is
being transmitted and is considered analog. Analog signals can be
represented mathematically as a function with respect to time.
In digital signaling the electrical signal itself is not directly the
information it represents; instead, the information is encoded. The most
common type of encoding is binary (1’s and 0’s). The 1’s and 0’s are
represented by the electrical signal. The simplest form of digital signaling is
to define a threshold voltage directly in the middle of the range of the
electrical signal. If the signal is above this threshold, the signal is
representing a 1. If the signal is below this threshold, the signal is
representing a 0. This type of signaling is not considered continuous as in
analog signaling; instead, it is considered to be discrete because the
information is transmitted as a series of distinct values. The signal
transitions between a 1 to 0 or 0 to 1 are assumed to occur instantaneously.

--- Page 26 ---
While this is obviously impossible, for the purposes of information
transmission, the values can be interpreted as a series of discrete values.
This is a digital signal and is not the actual information, but rather the
binary encoded representation of the original information. Digital signals
are not represented using traditional mathematical functions; instead, the
digital values are typically held in tables of 1’s and 0’s.
Figure 1.1 shows an example analog signal (left) and an example digital
signal (right). While the digital signal is in reality continuous, it represents a
series of discrete 1 and 0 values.
Fig. 1.1Analog (left) vs. digital (right) signals


--- Page 27 ---
1.2 Advantages of Digital Systems Over Analog
Systems
There are a variety of reasons that digital systems are preferred over analog
systems. First is their ability to operate within the presence of noise . Since
an analog signal is a direct representation of the physical quantity it is
transmitting, any noise that is coupled onto the electrical signal is
interpreted as noise on the original physical quantity. An example of this is
when you are listening to an AM/FM radio and you hear distortion of the
sound coming out of the speaker. The distortion you hear is not due to
actual distortion of the music as it was played at the radio station, but rather
electrical noise that was coupled onto the analog signal transmitted to your
radio prior to being converted back into sound by the speakers. Since the
signal in this case is analog, the speaker simply converts it in its entirety
(noise + music) into sound. In the case of digital signaling, a significant
amount of noise can be added to the signal while still preserving the
original 1’s and 0’s that are being transmitted. For example, if the signal is
representing a 0, the receiver will still interpret the signal as a 0 as long as
the noise doesn’t cause the level to exceed the threshold. Once the receiver
interprets the signal as a 0, it stores the encoded value as a 0, thus ignoring
any noise present during the original transmission. Figure 1.2 shows the
exact same noise added to the analog and digital signals from Fig. 1.1. The
analog signal is distorted; however, the digital signal is still able to transmit
the 0’s and 1’s that represent the information.

--- Page 28 ---
Fig. 1.2Noise on analog (left) and digital (right) signals
Another reason that digital systems are preferred over analog ones is the
simplicity of the circuitry. In order to produce a 1 and 0, you simply need an
electrical switch. If the switch connects the output to a voltage below the
threshold, then it produces a 0. If the switch connects the output to a voltage
above the threshold, then it produces a 1. It is relatively simple to create
such a switching circuit using modern transistors. Analog circuitry,
however, needs to perform the conversion of the physical quantity it is
representing (e.g., pressure, sound) into an electrical signal all the while
maintaining a direct correspondence between the input and output. Since
analog circuits produce a direct, continuous representation of information,
they require more complicated designs to achieve linearity in the presence
of environmental variations (e.g., power supply, temperature, fabrication
differences). Since digital circuits only produce a discrete representation of
the information, they can be implemented with simple switches that are
only altered when information is produced or retrieved. Figure 1.3 shows an
example comparison between an analog inverting amplifier and a digital
inverter. The analog amplifier uses dozens of transistors (inside the triangle)
and two resistors to perform the inversion of the input. The digital inverter
uses two transistors that act as switches to perform the inversion.

--- Page 29 ---
Fig. 1.3Analog (left) vs. digital (right) circuits
A final reason that digital systems are being widely adopted is their
reduced power consumption. With the advent of complementary metal
oxide transistors (CMOS), electrical switches can be created that consume
very little power to turn on or off and consume relatively negligible
amounts of power to keep on or off. This has allowed large-scale digital
systems to be fabricated without excessive levels of power consumption.
For stationary digital systems such as servers and workstations, extremely
large and complicated systems can be constructed that consume reasonable
amounts of power. For portable digital systems such as smart phones and
tablets, this means useful tools can be designed that are able to run on
portable power sources. Analog circuits, on the other hand, require
continuous power to accurately convert and transmit the electrical signal
representing the physical quantity. Also, the circuit techniques that are
required to compensate for variances in power supply and fabrication
processes in analog systems require additional power consumption. For
these reasons, analog systems are being replaced with digital systems
wherever possible to exploit their noise immunity, simplicity, and low
power consumption. While analog systems will always be needed at the
transition between the physical (e.g., microphones, camera lenses, sensors,
video displays) and the electrical world, it is anticipated that the push
toward digitization of everything in between (e.g., processing, transmission,
storage) will continue.

--- Page 30 ---
Summary
An analog system uses a direct mapping between an electrical quantity
and the information being processed. A digital system, on the other
hand, uses a discrete representation of the information.
Using a discrete representation allows the digital signals to be more
immune to noise in addition to requiring simple circuits that require
less power to perform the computations.
Exercise Problems
Section 1.1: Differences Between Analog and Digital Systems
1.1.1 If an electrical signal is a direct function of a physical quantity, is it
considered analog or digital?
 
1.1.2 If an electrical signal is a discrete representation of information, is
it considered analog or digital?
 
1.1.3 What part of any system will always require an analog component? 
1.1.4 Is the sound coming out of earbuds analog or digital? 
1.1.5 Is the MP3 file stored on an iPod analog or digital? 
1.1.6 Is the circuitry that reads the MP3 file from memory in an iPod
analog or digital?  

--- Page 31 ---
1.1.7 Is the electrical signal that travels down earphone wires analog or
digital?
 
1.1.8 Is the voltage coming out of the battery in an iPod analog or
digital?
 
1.1.9 Is the physical interface on the touch display of an iPod analog or
digital?
 
1.1.10Take a look around right now and identify two digital technologies
in use.
 
1.1.11 Take a look around right now and identify two analog technologies
in use.
 
Section 1.2: Advantages of Digital Systems Over Analog Systems
1.2.1Give three advantages of using digital systems over analog. 
1.2.2Name a technology or device that has evolved from analog to digital
in your lifetime.
 
1.2.3Name an analog technology or device that has become obsolete in
your lifetime.
 
1.2.4Name an analog technology or device that has been replaced by
digital technology but is still in use due to nostalgia.
 
1.2.5Name a technology or device invented in your lifetime that could
not have been possible without digital technology.
 

--- Page 32 ---
(1)
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2017
Brock J. LaMeres, Introduction to Logic Circuits & Logic Design with VHDL , DOI 10.1007/978-3-
319-34195-8_2
2. Number Systems
Brock J. LaMeres1 
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Montana State
University, Bozeman, MT, USA
 
Logic circuits are used to generate and transmit 1s and 0s to compute and
convey information. This two-valued number system is called binary. As
presented earlier, there are many advantages of using a binary system;
however, the human brain has been taught to count, label, and measure
using the decimal number system. The decimal number system contains 10
unique symbols (0 → 9) commonly referred to as the Arabic numerals.
Each of these symbols is assigned a relative magnitude to the other
symbols. For example, 0 is less than 1, 1 is less than 2, etc. It is often
conjectured that the 10-symbol number system that we humans use is due to
the availability of our ten fingers (or digits) to visualize counting up to 10.
Regardless, our brains are trained to think of the real world in terms of a
decimal system. In order to bridge the gap between the way our brains think
(decimal) and how we build our computers (binary), we need to understand
the basics of number systems. This includes the formal definition of a
positional number system and how it can be extended to accommodate any
arbitrarily large (or small) value. This also includes how to convert between
different number systems that contain different numbers of symbols. In this
chapter, we cover four different number systems: decimal (10 symbols),
binary (2 symbols), octal (8 symbols), and hexadecimal (16 symbols). The
study of decimal and binary is obvious as they represent how our brains
interpret the physical world (decimal) and how our computers work
(binary). Hexadecimal is studied because it is a useful means to represent

--- Page 33 ---
large sets of binary values using a manageable number of symbols. Octal is
rarely used but is studied as an example of how the formalization of the
number systems can be applied to all systems regardless of the number of
symbols they contain. This chapter also discusses how to perform basic
arithmetic in the binary number system and represent negative numbers.
The goal of this chapter is to provide an understanding of the basic
principles of binary number systems.
Learning Outcomes—After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
2.1Describe the formation and use of positional number systems. 
2.2Convert numbers between different bases.  
2.3Perform binary addition and subtraction by hand. 
2.4Use two’s complement numbers to represent negative numbers. 
2.1 Positional Number Systems
A positional number system allows the expansion of the original set of
symbols so that they can be used to represent any arbitrarily large (or small)
value. For example, if we use the 10 symbols in our decimal system, we can
count from 0 to 9. Using just the individual symbols we do not have enough
symbols to count beyond 9. To overcome this, we use the same set of
symbols but assign a different value to the symbol based on its position
within the number. The position of the symbol with respect to other
symbols in the number allows an individual symbol to represent greater (or
lesser) values. We can use this approach to represent numbers larger than
the original set of symbols. For example, let’s say we want to count from 0
upward by 1. We begin counting 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 to 9. When we are
out of symbols and wish to go higher, we bring on a symbol in a different
position with that position being valued higher and then start counting over
with our original symbols (e.g., …, 9, 10, 11,… 19, 20, 21, …). This is
repeated each time a position runs out of symbols (e.g., …, 99, 100, 101, …
999, 1000, 1001, …).

--- Page 34 ---
First, let’s look at the formation of a number system. The first thing that
is needed is a set of symbols. The formal term for one of the symbols in a
number system is a numeral. One or more numerals are used to form a
number. We define the number of numerals in the system using the terms
radix or base. For example, our decimal number system is said to be base
10, or have a radix of 10 because it consists of 10 unique numerals or
symbols:
The next thing that is needed is the relative value of each numeral with
respect to the other numerals in the set. We can say 0 < 1 < 2 < 3, etc. to
define the relative magnitudes of the numerals in this set. The numerals are
defined to be greater or less than their neighbors by a magnitude of 1. For
example, in the decimal number system each of the subsequent numerals is
greater than its predecessor by exactly 1. When we define this relative
magnitude we are defining that the numeral 1 is greater than the numeral 0
by a magnitude of 1; the numeral 2 is greater than the numeral 1 by a
magnitude of 1, etc. At this point we have the ability to count from 0 to 9 by
1’s. We also have the basic structure for mathematical operations that have
results that fall within the numeral set from 0 to 9 (e.g., 1 + 2 = 3). In order
to expand the values that these numerals can represent, we need to define
the rules of a positional number system.
2.1.1 Generic Structure
In order to represent larger or smaller numbers than the lone numerals in a
number system can represent, we adopt a positional system. In a positional
number system, the relative position of the numeral within the overall
number dictates its value. When we begin talking about the position of a
numeral, we need to define a location to which all of the numerals are
positioned with respect to. We define the radix point as the point within a
number to which numerals to the left represent whole numbers and
numerals to the right represent fractional numbers. The radix point is
denoted with a period (i.e., “.”). A particular number system often renames
this radix point to reflect its base. For example, in the base 10-number
system (i.e., decimal), the radix point is commonly called the decimal point;
however, the term radix point can be used across all number systems as a
generic term. If the radix point is not present in a number, it is assumed to

--- Page 35 ---
be to the right of number. Figure 2.1 shows an example number
highlighting the radix point and the relative positions of the whole and
fractional numerals.
Fig. 2.1Definition of radix point
Next, we need to define the position of each numeral with respect to the
radix point. The position of the numeral is assigned a whole number with
the number to the left of the radix point having a position value of 0. The
position number increases by 1 as numerals are added to the left (2, 3, 4 …)
and decreased by 1 as numerals are added to the right (−1, −2, −3). We will
use the variable p to represent position. The position number will be used to
calculate the value of each numeral in the number based on its relative
position to the radix point. Figure 2.2 shows the example number with the
position value of each numeral highlighted.
Fig. 2.2Definition of position number (p) within the number
In order to create a generalized format of a number, we assign the term
digit (d) to each of the numerals in the number. The term digit signifies that
the numeral has a position. The position of the digit within the number is
denoted as a subscript. The term digit can be used as a generic term to
describe a numeral across all systems, although some number systems will
use a unique term instead of digit which indicates its base. For example, the
binary system uses the term bit instead of digit; however, using the term
digit to describe a generic numeral in any system is still acceptable.
Figure 2.3 shows the generic subscript notation used to describe the
position of each digit in the number.

--- Page 36 ---
Fig. 2.3Digit notation
We write a number from left to right starting with the highest position
digit that is greater than 0 and end with the lowest position digit that is
greater than 0. This reduces the amount of numerals that are written;
however, a number can be represented with an arbitrary number of 0s to the
left of the highest position digit greater than 0 and an arbitrary number of 0s
to the right of the lowest position digit greater than 0 without affecting the
value of the number. For example, the number 132.654 could be written as
0132.6540 without affecting the value of the number. The 0s to the left of
the number are called leading 0s and the 0s to the right of the number are
called trailing 0s. The reason this is being stated is because when a number
is implemented in circuitry, the number of numerals is fixed and each
numeral must have a value. The variable n is used to represent the number
of numerals in a number. If a number is defined with n = 4, that means 4
numerals are always used. The number 0 would be represented as 0000 with
both representations having an equal value.
2.1.2 Decimal Number System (Base 10)
As mentioned earlier, the decimal number system contains 10 unique
numerals (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9). This system is thus a base 10 or a
radix 10 system. The relative magnitudes of the symbols are 0 < 1 < 2 < 3 < 
4 < 5 < 6 < 7 < 8 < 9.
2.1.3 Binary Number System (Base 2)
The binary number system contains two unique numerals (0 and 1). This
system is thus a base 2 or a radix 2 system. The relative magnitudes of the
symbols are 0 < 1. At first glance, this system looks very limited in its
ability to represent large numbers due to the small number of numerals.
When counting up, as soon as you count from 0 to 1, you are out of
symbols and must increment the p + 1 position in order to represent the next
number (e.g., 0, 1, 10, 11, 100, 101, …); however, magnitudes of each

--- Page 37 ---
position scale quickly so that circuits with a reasonable amount of digits can
represent very large numbers. The term bit is used instead of digit in this
system to describe the individual numerals and at the same time indicate the
base of the number.
Due to the need for multiple bits to represent meaningful information,
there are terms dedicated to describe the number of bits in a group. When 4
bits are grouped together, they are called a nibble. When 8 bits are grouped
together, they are called a byte. Larger groupings of bits are called words.
The size of the word can be stated as either an n-bit word or omitted if the
size of the word is inherently implied. For example, if you were using a 32-
bit microprocessor, using the term word would be interpreted as a 32-bit
word. For example, if there was a 32-bit grouping, it would be referred to as
a 32-bit word. The leftmost bit in a binary number is called the most
significant bit (MSB). The rightmost bit in a binary number is called the
least significant bit (LSB).
2.1.4 Octal Number System (Base 8)
The octal number system contains 8 unique numerals (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7).
This system is thus a base 8 or a radix 8 system. The relative magnitudes of
the symbols are 0 < 1 < 2 < 3 < 4 < 5 < 6 < 7. We use the generic term digit to
describe the numerals within an octal number.
2.1.5 Hexadecimal Number System (Base 16)
The hexadecimal number system contains 16 unique numerals. This system
is most often referred to in spoken word as “hex” for short. Since we only
have 10 Arabic numerals in our familiar decimal system, we need to use
other symbols to represent the remaining 6 numerals. We use the alphabetic
characters A–F in order to expand the system to 16 numerals. The 16
numerals in the hexadecimal system are 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, A, B, C,
D, E, and F. The relative magnitudes of the symbols are 0 < 1 < 2 < 3 < 4 < 
5 < 6 < 7 < 8 < 9 < A < B < C < D < E < F. We use the generic term digit to
describe the numerals within a hexadecimal number.
At this point, it becomes necessary to indicate the base of a written
number. The number 10 has an entirely different value if it is a decimal
number or binary number. In order to handle this, a subscript is typically
included at the end of the number to denote its base. For example, 1010

--- Page 38 ---
indicates that this number is decimal “ten.” If the number was written as
102, this number would represent binary “one zero.” Table 2.1 lists the
equivalent values in each of the 4 number systems just described for counts
from 010 to 1510. The left side of the table does not include leading 0s. The
right side of the table contains the same information but includes the
leading zeros. The equivalencies of decimal, binary, and hexadecimal in this
table are typically committed to memory.
Table 2.1Number system equivalency
2.2 Base Conversion

--- Page 39 ---
Now we look at converting between bases. There are distinct techniques for
converting to and from decimal. There are also techniques for converting
between bases that are powers of 2 (e.g., base 2, 4, 8, 16).
2.2.1 Converting to Decimal
The value of each digit within a number is based on the individual digit
value and the digit’s position. Each position in the number contains a
different weight based on its relative location to the radix point. The weight
of each position is based on the radix of the number system that is being
used. The weight of each position in decimal is defined as
This expression gives the number system the ability to represent
fractional numbers since an expression with a negative exponent (e.g., x−y)
is evaluated as one over the expression with the exponent change to positive
(e.g., 1/xy). Figure 2.4 shows the generic structure of a number with its
positional weight highlighted.
Fig. 2.4Weight definition
In order to find the decimal value of each of the numerals in the number,
its individual numeral value is multiplied by its positional weight. In order
to find the value of the entire number, each value of the individual numeral-
weight products is summed. The generalized format of this conversion is
written as
In this expression, pmax represents the highest position number that
contains a numeral greater than 0. The variable pmin represents the lowest
position number that contains a numeral greater than 0. These limits are
used to simplify the hand calculations; however, these terms theoretically

--- Page 40 ---
could be +∞ to −∞ with no effect on the result since the summation of every
leading 0 and every trailing 0 contributes nothing to the result.
As an example, let’s evaluate this expression for a decimal number. The
result will yield the original number but will illustrate how positional
weight is used. Let’s take the number 132.65410. To find the decimal value
of this number, each numeral is multiplied by its positional weight and then
all of the products are summed. The positional weight for the digit 1 is
(radix)p or (10)2. In decimal this is called the hundred’s position. The
positional weight for the digit 3 is (10)1, referred to as the ten’s position.
The positional weight for digit 2 is (10)0, referred to as the one’s position.
The positional weight for digit 6 is (10)−1, referred to as the tenth’s position.
The positional weight for digit 5 is (10)−2, referred to as the hundredth’s
position. The positional weight for digit 4 is (10)−3, referred to as the
thousandth’s position.
When these weights are multiplied by their respective digits and
summed, the result is the original decimal number 132.65410. Example 2.1
shows this process step by step.
Example 2.1 Converting Decimal to Decimal
This process is used to convert between any other base to decimal.

--- Page 41 ---
2.2.1.1 Binary to Decimal
Let’s convert 101.112 to decimal. The same process is followed with the
exception that the base in the summation is changed to 2. Converting from
binary to decimal can be accomplished quickly in your head due to the fact
that the bit values in the products are either 1 or 0. That means any bit that
is a 0 has no impact on the outcome and any bit that is a 1 simply yields the
weight of its position. Example 2.2 shows the step-by-step process
converting a binary number to decimal.
Example 2.2 Converting Binary to Decimal
2.2.1.2 Octal to Decimal
When converting from octal to decimal, the same process is followed with
the exception that the base in the weight is changed to 8. Example 2.3
shows an example of converting an octal number to decimal.
Example 2.3 Converting Octal to Decimal

--- Page 42 ---
2.2.1.3 Hexadecimal to Decimal
Let’s convert 1AB.EF16 to decimal. The same process is followed with the
exception that the base is changed to 16. When performing the conversion,
the decimal equivalents of the numerals A–F need to be used. Example 2.4
shows the step-by-step process converting a hexadecimal number to
decimal.
Example 2.4 Converting Hexadecimal to Decimal

--- Page 43 ---
2.2.2 Converting from Decimal
The process of converting from decimal to another base consists of two
separate algorithms. There is one algorithm for converting the whole
number portion of the number and another algorithm for converting the
fractional portion of the number. The process for converting the whole
number portion is to divide the decimal number by the base of the system
you wish to convert to. The division will result in a quotient and a whole
number remainder. The remainder is recorded as the least significant
numeral in the converted number. The resulting quotient is then divided
again by the base, which results in a new quotient and new remainder. The
remainder is recorded as the next higher order numeral in the new number.
This process is repeated until a quotient of 0 is achieved. At that point the
conversion is complete. The remainders will always be within the numeral
set of the base being converted to.
The process for converting the fractional portion is to multiply just the
fractional component of the number by the base. This will result in a
product that contains a whole number and a fraction. The whole number is
recorded as the most significant digit of the new converted number. The
new fractional portion is then multiplied again by the base with the whole
number portion being recorded as the next lower order numeral. This
process is repeated until the product yields a fractional component equal to

--- Page 44 ---
zero or the desired level of accuracy has been achieved. The level of
accuracy is specified by the number of numerals in the new converted
number. For example, the conversion would be stated as “convert this
decimal number to binary with a fractional accuracy of 4 bits.” This means
the algorithm would stop once 4-bits of fraction had been achieved in the
conversion.
2.2.2.1 Decimal to Binary
Let’s convert 11.37510 to binary. Example 2.5 shows the step-by-step
process converting a decimal number to binary.
Example 2.5 Converting Decimal to Binary


--- Page 45 ---
2.2.2.2 Decimal to Octal
Let’s convert 10.410 to octal with an accuracy of four fractional digits.
When converting the fractional component of the number, the algorithm is
continued until four digits worth of fractional numerals have been achieved.
Once the accuracy has been achieved, the conversion is finished even
though a product with a zero fractional value has not been obtained.
Example 2.6 shows the step-by-step process converting a decimal number
to octal with a fractional accuracy of four digits.
Example 2.6 Converting Decimal to Octal
2.2.2.3 Decimal to Hexadecimal

--- Page 46 ---
Let’s convert 254.65510 to hexadecimal with an accuracy of three fractional
digits. When doing this conversion, all of the divisions and multiplications
are done using decimal. If the results end up between 1010 and 1510, then
the decimal numbers are substituted with their hex symbol equivalent (i.e.,
A to F). Example 2.7 shows the step-by-step process of converting a
decimal number to hex with a fractional accuracy of three digits.
Example 2.7 Converting Decimal to Hexadecimal
2.2.3 Converting Between 2n Bases
Converting between 2n bases (e.g., 2, 4, 8, 16) takes advantage of the direct
mapping that each of these bases has back to binary. Base 8 numbers take
exactly 3 binary bits to represent all 8 symbols (i.e., 08 = 0002, 78 = 1112).
Base 16 numbers take exactly 4 binary bits to represent all 16 symbols (i.e.,
016 = 00002, F16 = 11112).

--- Page 47 ---
When converting from binary to any other 2n base, the whole number
bits are grouped into the appropriate-sized sets starting from the radix point
and working left. If the final leftmost grouping does not have enough
symbols, it is simply padded on left with leading 0s. Each of these groups is
then directly substituted with their 2n base symbol. The fractional number
bits are also grouped into the appropriate-sized sets starting from the radix
point, but this time working right. Again, if the final rightmost grouping
does not have enough symbols, it is simply padded on the right with trailing
0s. Each of these groups is then directly substituted with their 2n base
symbol.
2.2.3.1 Binary to Octal
Example 2.8 shows the step-by-step process of converting a binary number
to octal.
Example 2.8 Converting Binary to Octal
2.2.3.2 Binary to Hexadecimal
Example 2.9 shows the step-by-step process of converting a binary number
to hexadecimal.
Example 2.9 Converting Binary to Hexadecimal

--- Page 48 ---
2.2.3.3 Octal to Binary
When converting to binary from any 2n base, each of the symbols in the
originating number are replaced with the appropriate-sized number of bits.
An octal symbol will be replaced with 3 binary bits while a hexadecimal
symbol will be replaced with 4 binary bits. Any leading or trailing 0s can be
removed from the converted number once complete. Example 2.10 shows
the step-by-step process of converting an octal number to binary.
Example 2.10 Converting Octal to Binary


--- Page 49 ---
2.2.3.4 Hexadecimal to Binary
Example 2.11 shows the step-by-step process of converting a hexadecimal
number to binary.
Example 2.11 Converting Hexadecimal to Binary
2.2.3.5 Octal to Hexadecimal
When converting between 2n bases (excluding binary) the number is first
converted into binary and then converted from binary into the final 2n base
using the algorithms described before. Example 2.12 shows the step-by-step
process of converting an octal number to hexadecimal.
Example 2.12 Converting Octal to Hexadecimal


--- Page 50 ---
2.2.3.6 Hexadecimal to Octal
Example 2.13 shows the step-by-step process of converting a hexadecimal
number to octal.
Example 2.13 Converting Hexadecimal to Octal
2.3 Binary Arithmetic
2.3.1 Addition (Carries)
Binary addition is a straightforward process that mirrors the approach we
have learned for longhand decimal addition. The two numbers (or terms) to
be added are aligned at the radix point and addition begins at the least
significant bit. If the sum of the least significant position yields a value with
two bits (e.g., 102), then the least significant bit is recorded and the most
significant bit is carried to the next higher position. The sum of the next
higher position is then performed including the potential carry bit from the

--- Page 51 ---
prior addition. This process continues from the least significant position to
the most significant position. Example 2.14 shows how addition is
performed on two individual bits.
Example 2.14 Single-Bit Binary Addition
When performing binary addition, the width of the inputs and output is
fixed (i.e., n-bits). Carries that exist within the n-bits are treated in the
normal fashion of including them in the next higher position sum; however,
if the highest position summation produces a carry, this is a uniquely named
event. This event is called a carry out or the sum is said to generate a carry.
The reason this type of event is given special terminology is because in real
circuitry, the number of bits of the inputs and output is fixed in hardware
and the carry out is typically handled by a separate circuit. Example 2.15
shows this process when adding two 4-bit numbers.
Example 2.15 Multiple-Bit Binary Addition
The largest decimal sum that can result from the addition of two binary
numbers is given by 2·(2n − 1). For example, two 8-bit numbers to be added
could both represent their highest decimal value of (2n − 1) or 25510 (i.e.,
1111 11112). The sum of this number would result in 51010 or (1 1111

--- Page 52 ---
11102). Notice that the largest sum achievable would only require one
additional bit. This means that a single carry bit is sufficient to handle all
possible magnitudes for binary addition.
2.3.2 Subtraction (Borrows)
Binary subtraction also mirrors longhand decimal subtraction. In
subtraction, the formal terms for the two numbers being operated on are
minuend and subtrahend. The subtrahend is subtracted from the minuend to
find the difference. In longhand subtraction, the minuend is the top number
and the subtrahend is the bottom number. For a given position if the
minuend is less than the subtrahend, it needs to borrow from the next higher
order position to produce a difference that is positive. If the next higher
position does not have a value that can be borrowed from (i.e., 0), then it in
turn needs to borrow from the next higher position, and so forth. Example
2.16 shows how subtraction is performed on two individual bits.
Example 2.16 Single-Bit Binary Subtraction
As with binary addition, binary subtraction is accomplished on fixed widths
of inputs and output (i.e., n-bits). The minuend and subtrahend are aligned
at the radix point and subtraction begins at the least significant bit position.
Borrows are used as necessary as the subtractions move from the least
significant position to the most significant position. If the most significant
position requires a borrow, this is a uniquely named event. This event is
called a borrow in or the subtraction is said to require a borrow. Again, the
reason this event is uniquely named is because in real circuitry, the number
of bits of the input and output is fixed in hardware and the borrow in is
typically handled by a separate circuit. Example 2.17 shows this process
when subtracting two 4-bit numbers.

--- Page 53 ---
Example 2.17 Multiple-Bit Binary Subtraction
Notice that if the minuend is less than the subtrahend, then the difference
will be negative. At this point, we need a way to handle negative numbers.
2.4 Unsigned and Signed Numbers
All of the number systems presented in the prior sections were positive. We
need to also have a mechanism to indicate negative numbers. When looking
at negative numbers, we only focus on the mapping between decimal and
binary since octal and hexadecimal are used as just another representation
of a binary number. In decimal, we are able to use the negative sign in front
of a number to indicate that it is negative (e.g., −3410). In binary, this
notation works fine for writing numbers on paper (e.g., −10102), but we
need a mechanism that can be implemented using real circuitry. In a real
digital circuit, the circuits can only deal with 0s and 1s. There is no “−” in a
digital circuit. Since we only have 0s and 1s in the hardware, we use a bit to
represent whether a number is positive or negative. This is referred to as the

--- Page 54 ---
sign bit. If a binary number is not going to have any negative values, then it
is called an unsigned number and it can only represent positive numbers. If
a binary number is going to allow negative numbers, it is called a signed
number. It is important to always keep track of the type of number we are
using as the same bit values can represent very different numbers depending
on the coding mechanism that is being used.
2.4.1 Unsigned Numbers
An unsigned number is one that does not allow negative numbers. When
talking about this type of code, the number of bits is fixed and stated up
front. We use the variable n to represent the number of bits in the number.
For example, if we had an 8-bit number, we would say, “This is an 8-bit,
unsigned number.”
The number of unique codes in an unsigned number is given by 2n. For
example, if we had an 8-bit number, we would have 28 or 256 unique codes
(e.g., 0000 00002 to 1111 11112).
The range of an unsigned number refers to the decimal values that the
binary code can represent. If we use the notation N unsigned to represent any
possible value that an n-bit, unsigned number can take on, the range would
be defined as 0 < Nunsigned < (2n − 1):
For example, if we had an unsigned number with n = 4, it could take on
a range of values from +010 (00002) to +1510 (11112). Notice that while this
number has 16 unique possible codes, the highest decimal value it can
represent is 1510. This is because one of the unique codes represents 010.
This is the reason that the highest decimal value that can be represented is
given by (2n − 1). Example 2.18 shows this process for a 16-bit number.
Example 2.18 Finding the Range of an Unsigned Number

--- Page 55 ---
2.4.2 Signed Numbers
Signed numbers are able to represent both positive and negative numbers.
The most significant bit of these numbers is always the sign bit, which
represents whether the number is positive or negative. The sign bit is
defined to be a 0 if the number is positive and 1 if the number is
negative. When using signed numbers, the number of bits is fixed so that
the sign bit is always in the same position. There are a variety of ways to
encode negative numbers using a sign bit. The encoding method used
exclusively in modern computers is called two’s complement. There are two
other encoding techniques called signed magnitude and one’s complement
that are rarely used but are studied to motivate the power of two’s
complement. When talking about a signed number, the number of bits and
the type of encoding are always stated. For example, we would say, “This is
an 8-bit, two’s complement number.”
2.4.2.1 Signed Magnitude
Signed magnitude is the simplest way to encode a negative number. In this
approach, the most significant bit (i.e., leftmost bit) of the binary number is
considered the sign bit (0 = positive, 1 = negative). The rest of the bits to the
right of the sign bit represent the magnitude or absolute value of the
number. As an example of this approach, let’s look at the decimal values
that a 4-bit, signed magnitude number can take on. These are shown in
Example 2.19.

--- Page 56 ---
Example 2.19 Decimal Values That a 4-bit, Signed Magnitude Code Can
Represent
There are drawbacks of signed magnitude encoding that are apparent from
this example. First, the value of 010 has two signed magnitude codes (00002
and 10002). This is an inefficient use of the available codes and leads to
complexity when building arithmetic circuitry since it must account for two
codes representing the same number.
The second drawback is that addition using the negative numbers does
not directly map to how decimal addition works. For example, in decimal if
we added (−5) + (1), the result would be −4. In signed magnitude, adding
these numbers using a traditional adder would produce (−5) + (1) = (−6).
This is because the traditional addition would take place on the magnitude
portion of the number. A 510 is represented with 1012. Adding 1 to this
number would result in the next higher binary code 1102 or 610. Since the
sign portion is separate, the addition is performed on |5|, thus yielding 6.
Once the sign bit is included, the resulting number is −6. It is certainly
possible to build an addition circuit that works on signed magnitude
numbers, but it is more complex than a traditional adder because it must
perform a different addition operation for the negative numbers versus the

--- Page 57 ---
positive numbers. It is advantageous to have a single adder that works
across the entire set of numbers.
Due to the duplicate codes for 0, the range of decimal numbers that
signed magnitude can represent is reduced by 1 compared to unsigned
encoding. For an n-bit number, there are 2n unique binary codes available
but only 2n − 1 can be used to represent unique decimal numbers. If we use
the notation N SM to represent any possible value that an n-bit, signed
magnitude number can take on, the range would be defined as
Example 2.20 shows how to use this expression to find the range of
decimal values that an 8-bit, signed magnitude code can represent.
Example 2.20 Finding the Range of a Signed Magnitude Number
The process to determine the decimal value from a signed magnitude binary
code involves treating the sign bit separately from the rest of the code. The
sign bit provides the polarity of the decimal number (0 = positive, 1 = 
negative). The remaining bits in the code are treated as unsigned numbers
and converted to decimal using the standard conversion procedure
described in the prior sections. This conversion yields the magnitude of the
decimal number. The final decimal value is found by applying the sign.
Example 2.21 shows an example of this process.
Example 2.21 Finding the Decimal Value of a Signed Magnitude Number

--- Page 58 ---
2.4.2.2 One’s Complement
One’s complement is another simple way to encode negative numbers. In
this approach, the negative number is obtained by taking its positive
equivalent and flipping all of the 1s to 0s and 0s to 1s. This procedure of
flipping the bits is called a complement (notice the two es). In this way, the
most significant bit of the number is still the sign bit (0 = positive, 1 = 
negative). The rest of the bits represent the value of the number, but in this
encoding scheme the negative number values are less intuitive. As an
example of this approach, let’s look at the decimal values that a 4-bit, one’s
complement number can take on. These are shown in Example 2.22.
Example 2.22 Decimal Values that a 4-bit, One's Complement Code Can
Represent

--- Page 59 ---
Again, we notice that there are two different codes for 010 (00002 and
11112). This is a drawback of one’s complement because it reduces the
possible range of numbers that can be represented from 2n to (2n − 1) and
requires arithmetic operations that take into account the gap in the number
system. There are advantages of one’s complement, however. First, the
numbers are ordered such that traditional addition works on both positive
and negative numbers (excluding the double 0 gap). Taking the example of
(−5) + (1) again, in one’s complement the result yields −4, just as in a
traditional decimal system. Notice that in one’s complement, −510 is
represented with 10102. Adding 1 to this entire binary code would result in
the next higher binary code 10112 or −410 from the above table. This makes
addition circuitry less complicated, but still not as simple as if the double 0
gap was eliminated. Another advantage of one’s complement is that as the
numbers are incremented beyond the largest value in the set, they roll over
and start counting at the lowest number. For example, if you increment the
number 01112 (710), it goes to the next higher binary code 10002, which is
−710. The ability to have the numbers roll over is a useful feature for
computer systems.
If we use the notation N 1comp to represent any possible value that an n-
bit, one’s complement number can take on, the range is defined as

--- Page 60 ---
Example 2.23 shows how to use this expression to find the range of
decimal values that a 24-bit, one’s complement code can represent.
Example 2.23 Finding the Range of a 1’s Complement Number
The process of finding the decimal value of a one’s complement number
involves first identifying whether the number is positive or negative by
looking at the sign bit. If the number is positive (i.e., the sign bit is 0), then
the number is treated as an unsigned code and is converted to decimal using
the standard conversion procedure described in prior sections. If the number
is negative (i.e., the sign bit is 1), then the number sign is recorded
separately and the code is complemented in order to convert it to its positive
magnitude equivalent. This new positive number is then converted to
decimal using the standard conversion procedure. As the final step, the sign
is applied. Example 2.24 shows an example of this process.
Example 2.24 Finding the Decimal Value of a 1’s Complement Number

--- Page 61 ---
2.4.2.3 Two’s Complement
Two’s complement is an encoding scheme that addresses the double 0 issue
in signed magnitude and 1’s complement representations. In this approach,
the negative number is obtained by subtracting its positive equivalent from
2n. This is identical to performing a complement on the positive equivalent
and then adding one. If a carry is generated, it is discarded. This procedure
is called “taking the two’s complement of a number.” The procedure of
complementing each bit and adding one is the most common technique to
perform a two’s complement. In this way, the most significant bit of the
number is still the sign bit (0 = positive, 1 = negative) but all of the negative
numbers are in essence shifted up so that the double 0 gap is eliminated.
Taking the two’s complement of a positive number will give its negative
counterpart and vice versa. Let’s look at the decimal values that a 4-bit,
two’s complement number can take on. These are shown in Example 2.25.
Example 2.25 Decimal Values That a 4-bit, Two’s Complement Code Can
Represent

--- Page 62 ---
There are many advantages of two’s complement encoding. First, there is
no double 0 gap, which means that all possible 2n unique codes that can
exist in an n-bit number are used. This gives the largest possible range of
numbers that can be represented. Another advantage of two’s complement
is that addition with negative numbers works exactly the same as decimal.
In our example of (−5) + (1), the result is (−4). Arithmetic circuitry can be
built to mimic the way our decimal arithmetic works without the need to
consider the double 0 gap. Finally, the rollover characteristic is preserved
from one’s complement. Incrementing +7 by +1 will result in −8.
If we use the notation N 2comp to represent any possible value that an n-
bit, two’s complement number can take on, the range is defined as
Example 2.26 shows how to use this expression to find the range of
decimal values that a 32-bit, two’s complement code can represent.
Example 2.26 Finding the Range of a Two’s Complement Number

--- Page 63 ---
The process of finding the decimal value of a two’s complement number
involves first identifying whether the number is positive or negative by
looking at the sign bit. If the number is positive (i.e., the sign bit is 0), then
the number is treated as an unsigned code and is converted to decimal using
the standard conversion procedure described in prior sections. If the number
is negative (i.e., the sign bit is 1), then the number sign is recorded
separately and a two’s complement is performed on the code in order to
convert it to its positive magnitude equivalent. This new positive number is
then converted to decimal using the standard conversion procedure. The
final step is to apply the sign. Example 2.27 shows an example of this
process.
Example 2.27 Finding the Decimal Value of a Two’s Complement
Number


--- Page 64 ---
To convert a decimal number into its two’s complement code, the range is
first checked to determine whether the number can be represented with the
allocated number of bits. The next step is to convert the decimal number
into unsigned binary. The final step is to apply the sign bit. If the original
decimal number was positive, then the conversion is complete. If the
original decimal number was negative, then the two’s complement is taken
on the unsigned binary code to find its negative equivalent. Example 2.28
shows this procedure when converting −9910 to its 8-bit, two’s complement
code.
Example 2.28 Finding the Two’s Complement Code of a Decimal Number


--- Page 65 ---
2.4.2.4 Arithmetic with Two’s Complement
Two’s complement has a variety of arithmetic advantages. First, the
operations of addition, subtraction, and multiplication are handled exactly
the same as when using unsigned numbers. This means that duplicate
circuitry is not needed in a system that uses both number types. Second, the
ability to convert a number from positive to its negative representation by
performing a two’s complement means that an adder circuit can be used for
subtraction. For example, if we wanted to perform the subtraction 1310 − 
410 = 910, this is the same as performing 1310 + (−410) = 910. This allows us
to use a single adder circuit to perform both addition and subtraction as long
as we have the ability to take the two’s complement of a number. Creating a
circuit to perform two’s complement can be simpler and faster than building
a separate subtraction circuit, so this approach can sometimes be
advantageous.
There are specific rules for performing two’s complement arithmetic
that must be followed to ensure proper results. First, any carry or borrow
that is generated is ignored. The second rule that must be followed is to
always check if two’s complement overflow occurred. Two’s complement
overflow refers to when the result of the operation falls outside of the range
of values that can be represented by the number of bits being used. For
example, if you are performing 8-bit, two’s complement addition, the range
of decimal values that can be represented is −12810 to +12710. Having two
input terms of 12710 (0111 11112) is perfectly legal because they can be
represented by the 8 bits of the two’s complement number; however, the
summation of 12710 + 12710 = 25410 (1111 11102). This number does not fit
within the range of values that can be represented and is actually the two’s
complement code for −210, which is obviously incorrect. Two’s
complement overflow occurs if any of the following occurs:
The sum of like signs results in an answer with opposite sign (i.e.,
positive + positive = negative or negative + negative = positive)
The subtraction of a positive number from a negative number results in
a positive number (i.e., negative − positive = positive)
The subtraction of a negative number from a positive number results in
a negative number (i.e., positive − negative = negative)

--- Page 66 ---
Computer systems that use two’s complement have a dedicated logic
circuit that monitors for any of these situations and lets the operator know
that overflow has occurred. These circuits are straightforward since they
simply monitor the sign bits of the input and output codes. Example 2.29
shows how to use two’s complement in order to perform subtraction using
an addition operation.
Example 2.29 Two’s Complement Addition


--- Page 67 ---
Summary
The base, or radix, of a number system refers to the number of unique
symbols within its set. The definition of a number system includes
both the symbols used and the relative values of each symbol within
the set.
The most common number systems are base 10 (decimal), base 2
(binary), and base 16 (hexadecimal). Base 10 is used because it is how
the human brain has been trained to treat numbers. Base 2 is used
because the two values are easily represented using electrical switches.
Base 16 is a convenient way to describe large groups of bits.
A positional number system allows larger (or smaller) numbers to be
represented beyond the values within the original symbol set. This is
accomplished by having each position within a number have a
different weight.
There are specific algorithms that are used to convert any base to or
from decimal. There are also algorithms to convert between number
systems that contain a power-of-two symbols (e.g., binary to
hexadecimal and hexadecimal to binary).
Binary arithmetic is performed on a fixed width of bits (n). When an n-
bit addition results in a sum that cannot fit within n-bits, it generates a
carry out bit. In an n-bit subtraction, if the minuend is smaller than the
subtrahend, a borrow in can be used to complete the operation.

--- Page 68 ---
Binary codes can represent both unsigned and signed numbers. For an
arbitrary n-bit binary code, it is important to know the encoding
technique and the range of values that can be represented.
Signed numbers use the most significant position to represent whether
the number is negative (0 = positive, 1 = negative). The width of a
signed number is always fixed.
Two’s complement is the most common encoding technique for signed
numbers. It has an advantage that there are no duplicate codes for zero
and that the encoding approach provides a monotonic progression of
codes from the most negative number that can be represented to the
most positive. This allows addition and subtraction to work the same
on two’s complement numbers as it does on unsigned numbers.
When performing arithmetic using two’s complement codes, the carry
bit is ignored.
When performing arithmetic using two’s complement codes, if the
result lies outside of the range that can be represented it is called two’s
complement overflow. Two’s complement overflow can be determined
by looking at the sign bits of the input arguments and the sign bit of
the result.
Exercise Problems
Section 2.1: Positional Number Systems
2.1.1 What is the radix of the binary number system?  
2.1.2 What is the radix of the decimal number system?  
2.1.3 What is the radix of the hexadecimal number system? 
2.1.4 What is the radix of the octal number system?  
2.1.5 For the number 261.367, what position (p) is the number 2 in? 
2.1.6 For the number 261.367, what position (p) is the number 1 in? 

--- Page 69 ---
2.1.7 For the number 261.367, what position (p) is the number 3 in? 
2.1.8 For the number 261.367, what position (p) is the number 7 in? 
2.1.9 What is the name of the number system containing 102?  
2.1.10What is the name of the number system containing 1010?  
2.1.11 What is the name of the number system containing 1016?  
2.1.12What is the name of the number system containing 108?  
2.1.13Which of the four number systems covered in this chapter (i.e.,
binary, decimal, hexadecimal, and octal) could the number 22 be
part of? Give all that are possible.
 
2.1.14Which of the four number systems covered in this chapter (i.e.,
binary, decimal, hexadecimal, and octal) could the number 99 be
part of? Give all that are possible.
 
2.1.15Which of the four number systems covered in this chapter (i.e.,
binary, decimal, hexadecimal, and octal) could the number 1F be
part of? Give all that are possible.
 
2.1.16Which of the four number systems covered in this chapter (i.e.,
binary, decimal, hexadecimal, and octal) could the number 88 be
part of? Give all that are possible.
 
Section 2.2: Base Conversions
2.2.1 If the number 101.111 has a radix of 2, what is the weight of the
position containing the bit 0?
 
222 Ifthenumber261367hasaradixof10whatistheweightofthe

--- Page 70 ---
2.2.2 If the number 261.367 has a radix of 10, what is the weight of the
position containing the numeral 2?  
2.2.3 If the number 261.367 has a radix of 16, what is the weight of the
position containing the numeral 1?
 
2.2.4 If the number 261.367 has a radix of 8, what is the weight of the
position containing the numeral 3?
 
2.2.5 Convert 1100 11002 to decimal. Treat all numbers as unsigned.  
2.2.6 Convert 1001.10012 to decimal. Treat all numbers as unsigned.  
2.2.7 Convert 728 to decimal. Treat all numbers as unsigned.  
2.2.8 Convert 12.578 to decimal. Treat all numbers as unsigned.  
2.2.9 Convert F316 to decimal. Treat all numbers as unsigned.  
2.2.10Convert 15B.CEF16 to decimal. Treat all numbers as unsigned. Use
an accuracy of seven fractional digits.
 
2.2.11 Convert 6710 to binary. Treat all numbers as unsigned.  
2.2.12Convert 252.98710 to binary. Treat all numbers as unsigned. Use an
accuracy of 4 fractional bits and don’t round up.
 
2.2.13Convert 6710 to octal. Treat all numbers as unsigned.  
2.2.14Convert 252.98710 to octal. Treat all numbers as unsigned. Use an
accuracy of four fractional digits and don’t round up.
 
2.2.15Convert6710 tohexadecimal.Treatallnumbersasunsigned.

--- Page 71 ---
. . 5 Covet 6 10 to e adec a. eat a u bes as u sg ed.  
2.2.16Convert 252.98710 to hexadecimal. Treat all numbers as unsigned.
Use an accuracy of four fractional digits and don’t round up.
 
2.2.17Convert 1 0000 11112 to octal. Treat all numbers as unsigned.  
2.2.18Convert 1 0000 1111.0112 to hexadecimal. Treat all numbers as
unsigned.
 
2.2.19Convert 778 to binary. Treat all numbers as unsigned.  
2.2.20Convert F.A16 to binary. Treat all numbers as unsigned.  
2.2.21Convert 668 to hexadecimal. Treat all numbers as unsigned.  
2.2.22Convert AB.D16 to octal. Treat all numbers as unsigned.  
Section 2.3: Binary Arithmetic
2.3.1Compute 10102 + 10112 by hand. Treat all numbers as unsigned.
Provide the 4-bit sum and indicate whether a carry out occurred.
 
2.3.2Compute 1111 11112 + 0000 00012 by hand. Treat all numbers as
unsigned. Provide the 8-bit sum and indicate whether a carry out
occurred.
 
2.3.3Compute 1010.10102 + 1011.10112 by hand. Treat all numbers as
unsigned. Provide the 8-bit sum and indicate whether a carry out
occurred.
 
2.3.4Compute 1111 1111.10112 + 0000 0001.11002 by hand. Treat all
numbers as unsigned. Provide the 12-bit sum and indicate whether a 

--- Page 72 ---
g
carry out occurred.
2.3.5Compute 10102 − 10112 by hand. Treat all numbers as unsigned.
Provide the 4-bit difference and indicate whether a borrow in
occurred.
 
2.3.6Compute 1111 11112 − 0000 00012 by hand. Treat all numbers as
unsigned. Provide the 8-bit difference and indicate whether a
borrow in occurred.
 
2.3.7Compute 1010.10102 − 1011.10112 by hand. Treat all numbers as
unsigned. Provide the 8-bit difference and indicate whether a
borrow in occurred.
 
2.3.8Compute 1111 1111.10112 − 0000 0001.11002 by hand. Treat all
numbers as unsigned. Provide the 12-bit difference and indicate
whether a borrow in occurred.
 
Section 2.4: Unsigned and Signed Numbers
2.4.1 What range of decimal numbers can be represented by 8-bit, two’s
complement numbers?
 
2.4.2 What range of decimal numbers can be represented by 16-bit,
two’s complement numbers?
 
2.4.3 What range of decimal numbers can be represented by 32-bit,
two’s complement numbers?
 
2.4.4 What range of decimal numbers can be represented by 64-bit,
two’s complement numbers?
 
2.4.5 What is the 8-bit, two’s complement code for +8810?  
246 Whatisthe8bittwo’scomplementcodefor 88 ?

--- Page 73 ---
2.4.6 What is the 8-bit, twos complement code for −8810?  
2.4.7 What is the 8-bit, two’s complement code for −12810?  
2.4.8 What is the 8-bit, two’s complement code for −110?  
2.4.9 What is the decimal value of the 4-bit, two’s complement code
00102?
 
2.4.10What is the decimal value of the 4-bit, two’s complement code
10102?
 
2.4.11 What is the decimal value of the 8-bit, two’s complement code
0111 11102?
 
2.4.12What is the decimal value of the 8-bit, two’s complement code
1111 11102?
 
2.4.13Compute 11102 + 10112 by hand. Treat all numbers as 4-bit, two’s
complement codes. Provide the 4-bit sum and indicate whether
two’s complement overflow occurred.
 
2.4.14Compute 1101 11112 + 0000 00012 by hand. Treat all numbers as
8-bit, two’s complement codes. Provide the 8-bit sum and indicate
whether two’s complement overflow occurred.
 
2.4.15Compute 1010.10102 + 1000.10112 by hand. Treat all numbers as
8-bit, two’s complement codes. Provide the 8-bit sum and indicate
whether two’s complement overflow occurred.
 
2.4.16Compute 1110 1011.10012 + 0010 0001.11012 by hand. Treat all
numbers as 12-bit, two’s complement codes. Provide the 12-bit 

--- Page 74 ---
, p
sum and indicate whether two’s complement overflow occurred.
2.4.17Compute 410 − 510 using 4-bit two’s complement addition. You
will need to first convert each number into its 4-bit two’s
complement code and then perform binary addition (i.e., 410 + 
(−510)). Provide the 4-bit result and indicate whether two’s
complement overflow occurred. Check your work by converting
the 4-bit result back to decimal.
 
2.4.18Compute 710 − 710 using 4-bit two’s complement addition. You
will need to first convert each decimal number into its 4-bit two’s
complement code and then perform binary addition (i.e., 710 + 
(−710)). Provide the 4-bit result and indicate whether two’s
complement overflow occurred. Check your work by converting
the 4-bit result back to decimal.
 
2.4.19Compute 710 + 110 using 4-bit two’s complement addition. You
will need to first convert each decimal number into its 4-bit two’s
complement code and then perform binary addition. Provide the 4-
bit result and indicate whether two’s complement overflow
occurred. Check your work by converting the 4-bit result back to
decimal.
 
2.4.20Compute 6410 − 10010 using 8-bit two’s complement addition. You
will need to first convert each number into its 8-bit two’s
complement code and then perform binary addition (i.e., 6410 + 
(−10010)). Provide the 8-bit result and indicate whether two’s
complement overflow occurred. Check your work by converting
the 8-bit result back to decimal.
 
2.4.21Compute (−99)10 − 1110 using 8-bit two’s complement addition.
You will need to first convert each decimal number into its 8-bit
two’s complement code and then perform binary addition (i.e.,
( 99 )+( 11 )) Providethe8bitresultandindicatewhether
 

--- Page 75 ---
(−9910) + (−1110)). Provide the 8-bit result and indicate whether
two’s complement overflow occurred. Check your work by
converting the 8-bit result back to decimal.
2.4.22Compute 5010 + 10010 using 8-bit two’s complement addition. You
will need to first convert each decimal number into its 8-bit two’s
complement code and then perform binary addition. Provide the 8-
bit result and indicate whether two’s complement overflow
occurred. Check your work by converting the 8-bit result back to
decimal.
 

--- Page 76 ---
(1)
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2017
Brock J. LaMeres, Introduction to Logic Circuits & Logic Design with VHDL , DOI 10.1007/978-3-
319-34195-8_3
3. Digital Circuitry and Interfacing
Brock J. LaMeres1 
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Montana State
University, Bozeman, MT, USA
 
Now we turn our attention to the physical circuitry and electrical quantities
that are used to represent and operate on the binary codes 1 and 0. In this
chapter we begin by looking at how logic circuits are described and
introduce the basic set of gates used for all digital logic operations. We then
look at the underlying circuitry that implements the basic gates including
digital signaling and how voltages are used to represent 1s and 0s. We then
look at interfacing between two digital circuits and how to ensure that when
one circuit sends a binary code, the receiving circuit is able to determine
which code was sent. Logic families are then introduced and the details of
how basic gates are implemented at the switch level are presented. Finally,
interfacing considerations are covered for the most common types of digital
loads (i.e., other gates, resistors, and LEDs). The goal of this chapter is to
provide an understanding of the basic electrical operation of digital circuits.
Learning Outcomes—After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
3.1Describe the functional operation of a basic logic gate using truth
tables, logic expressions, and logic waveforms.
 
3.2Analyze the DC and AC behavior of a digital circuit to verify that it is
operating within specification.
 

--- Page 77 ---
3.3Describe the meaning of a logic family and the operation of the most
common technologies used today.
 
3.4Determine the operating conditions of a logic circuit when driving
various types of loads.
 
3.1 Basic Gates
The term gate is used to describe a digital circuit that implements the most
basic functions possible within the binary system. When discussing the
operation of a logic gate, we ignore the details of how the 1s and 0s are
represented with voltages and manipulated using transistors. We instead
treat the inputs and output as simply ideal 1s and 0s. This allows us to
design more complex logic circuits without going into the details of the
underlying physical hardware.
3.1.1 Describing the Operation of a Logic Circuit
3.1.1.1 The Logic Symbol
A logic symbol is a graphical representation of the circuit that can be used
in a schematic to show how circuits in a system interface to one another.
For the set of basic logic gates, there are uniquely shaped symbols that
graphically indicate their functionality. For more complex logic circuits that
are implemented with multiple basic gates, a simple rectangular symbol is
used. Inputs of the logic circuit are typically shown on the left of the
symbol and outputs are on the right. Figure 3.1 shows two example logic
symbols.


--- Page 78 ---
Fig. 3.1Example logic symbols
3.1.1.2 The Truth Table
We formally define the functionality of a logic circuit using a truth table. In
a truth table, each and every possible input combination is listed and the
corresponding output of the logic circuit is given. If a logic circuit has n
inputs, then it will have 2n possible input codes. The binary codes are listed
in ascending order within the truth table mimicking a binary count starting
at 0. By always listing the input codes in this way, we can assign a row
number to each input that is the decimal equivalent of the binary input code.
Row numbers can be used to simplify the notation for describing the
functionality of larger circuits. Figure 3.2 shows the formation of an
example 3-input truth table.
Fig. 3.2Truth table formation
3.1.1.3 The Logic Function
A logic expression (also called a logic function) is an equation that provides
the functionality of each output in the circuit as a function of the inputs. The
logic operations for the basic gates are given a symbolic set of operators
(e.g., +, . , ⊕ ), the details of which will be given in the next sections. The
logic function describes the operations that are necessary to produce the
outputs listed in the truth table. A logic function is used to describe a single
output that can take on only the values 1 and 0. If a circuit contains multiple
outputs, then a logic function is needed for each output. The input variables
can be included in the expression description just as in an analog function.

--- Page 79 ---
For example, “F(A,B,C) = …” would state that “F is a function of the inputs
A, B, and C.” This can also be written as “FA,B,C = ….” The input variables
can also be excluded for brevity as in “F = … .” Figure 3.3 shows the
formation of an example 3-input logic expression.
Fig. 3.3Logic function formation
3.1.1.4 The Logic Waveform
A logic waveform is a graphical depiction of the relationship of the output
to the inputs with respect to time. This is often a useful description of
behavior since it mimics the format that is typically observed when
measuring a real digital circuit using test equipment such as an
oscilloscope. In the waveform, each signal can only take on a value of 1 or
0. It is useful to write the logic values of the signal at each transition in the
waveform for readability. Figure 3.4 shows an example logic waveform.
Fig. 3.4Example logic waveform

--- Page 80 ---
3.1.2 The Buffer
The first basic gate is the buffer. The output of a buffer is simply the input.
The logic symbol, truth table, logic function and logic waveform for the
buffer are given in Fig. 3.5.
Fig. 3.5Buffer symbol, truth table, logic function, and logic waveform
3.1.3 The Inverter
The next basic gate is the inverter. The output of an inverter is the
complement of the input. Inversion is also often called the not operation. In
spoken word, we might say “A is equal to not B”; thus this gate is also often
called a not gate. The symbol for the inverter is the same as the buffer with
the exception that an inversion bubble (i.e., a circle) is placed on the output.
The inversion bubble is a common way to show inversions in schematics
and will be used by many of the basic gates. In the logic function, there are
two common ways to show this operation. The first way is by placing a
prime (′) after the input variable (e.g., Out = In′). This notation has the
advantage that it is supported in all text editors but has the drawback that it
can sometimes be difficult to see. The second way to indicate inversion in a
logic function is by placing an inversion bar over the input variable (e.g.,
Out = 
). The advantage of this notation is that it is easy to see but has the
drawback that it is not supported by many text editors. In this text, both
conventions will be used to provide exposure to each. The logic symbol,
truth table, logic function, and logic waveform for the inverter are given in
Fig. 3.6.

--- Page 81 ---
Fig. 3.6Inverter symbol, truth table, logic function, and logic waveform
3.1.4 The AND Gate
The next basic gate is the AND gate. The output of an AND gate will only
be true (i.e., a logic 1) if all of the inputs are true. This operation is also
called a logical product because if the inputs were multiplied together, the
only time the output would be a 1 is if each and every input was a 1. As a
result, the logic operator is the dot (·). Another notation that is often seen is
the ampersand (&). The logic symbol, truth table, logic function, and logic
waveform for a 2-input AND gate are given in Fig. 3.7.
Fig. 3.72-Input AND gate symbol, truth table, logic function, and logic waveform
Ideal AND gates can have any number of inputs. The operation of an n-
bit, AND gates still follows the rule that the output will only be true when
all of the inputs are true. Later sections will discuss the limitations on
expanding the number of inputs of these basic gates indefinitely.
3.1.5 The NAND Gate
The NAND gate is identical to the AND gate with the exception that the
output is inverted. The “N” in NAND stands for “NOT,” which represents
the inversion. The symbol for a NAND gate is an AND gate with an

--- Page 82 ---
inversion bubble on the output. The logic expression for a NAND gate is
the same as an AND gate but with an inversion bar over the entire
operation. The logic symbol, truth table, logic function, and logic waveform
for a 2-input NAND gate are given in Fig. 3.8. Ideal NAND gates can have
any number of inputs with the operation of an n-bit, NAND gate following
the rule that the output is always the inversion of an n-bit, AND operation.
Fig. 3.82-Input NAND gate symbol, truth table, logic function, and logic waveform
3.1.6 The OR Gate
The next basic gate is the OR gate. The output of an OR gate will be true
when any of the inputs are true. This operation is also called a logical sum
because of its similarity to logical disjunction in which the output is true if
at least one of the inputs is true. As a result, the logic operator is the plus
sign (+). The logic symbol, truth table, logic function, and logic waveform
for a 2-input OR gate are given in Fig. 3.9. Ideal OR gates can have any
number of inputs. The operation of an n-bit, OR gates still follows the rule
that the output will be true if any of the inputs are true.
Fig. 3.92-Input OR gate symbol, truth table, logic function, and logic waveform

--- Page 83 ---
3.1.7 The NOR Gate
The NOR gate is identical to the OR gate with the exception that the output
is inverted. The symbol for a NOR gate is an OR gate with an inversion
bubble on the output. The logic expression for a NOR gate is the same as an
OR gate but with an inversion bar over the entire operation. The logic
symbol, truth table, logic function, and logic waveform for a 2-input NOR
gate are given in Fig. 3.10. Ideal NOR gates can have any number of inputs
with the operation of an n-bit, NOR gate following the rule that the output
is always the inversion of an n-bit, OR operation.
Fig. 3.102-Input NOR gate symbol, truth table, logic function, and logic waveform
3.1.8 The XOR Gate
The next basic gate is the exclusive-OR gate, or XOR gate for short. This
gate is also called a difference gate because for the 2-input configuration, its
output will be true when the input codes are different from one another.
The logic operator is a circle around a plus sign ( ⊕ ). The logic symbol,
truth table, logic function, and logic waveform for a 2-input XOR gate are
given in Fig. 3.11.


--- Page 84 ---
Fig. 3.11 2-Input XOR gate symbol, truth table, logic function, and logic waveform
Using the formal definition of an XOR gate (i.e., the output is true if
any of the input codes are different from one another), an XOR gate with
more than two inputs can be built. The truth table for a 3-bit, XOR gate
using this definition is shown in Fig. 3.12. In modern electronics, this type
of gate has found little use since it is much simpler to build this
functionality using a combination of AND and OR gates. As such, XOR
gates with greater than two inputs do not implement the difference function.
Instead, a more useful functionality has been adopted in which the output of
the n-bit, XOR gate is the result of a cascade of 2-input XOR gates. This
results in an ultimate output that is true when there is an ODD number of
1s on the inputs. This functionality is much more useful in modern
electronics for error correction codes and arithmetic. As such, this is the
functionality that is seen in modern n-bit, XOR gates. This functionality is
also shown in Fig. 3.12.
Fig. 3.123-Input XOR gate implementation
3.1.9 The XNOR Gate

--- Page 85 ---
The exclusive-NOR gate is identical to the XOR gate with the exception
that the output is inverted. This gate is also called an equivalence gate
because for the 2-input configuration, its output will be true when the input
codes are equivalent to one another. The symbol for an XNOR gate is an
XOR gate with an inversion bubble on the output. The logic expression for
an XNOR gate is the same as an XOR gate but with an inversion bar over
the entire operation. The logic symbol, truth table, logic function, and logic
waveform for a 2-input XNOR gate are given in Fig. 3.13. XNOR gates can
have any number of inputs with the operation of an n-bit, XNOR gate
following the rule that the output is always the inversion of an n-bit, XOR
operation (i.e., the output is true if there is an ODD number of 1s on the
inputs).
Fig. 3.132-Input XNOR gate symbol, truth table, logic function, and logic waveform


--- Page 86 ---
3.2 Digital Circuit Operation
Now we turn our attention to the physical hardware that is used to build the
basic gates just described and how electrical quantities are used to represent
and communicate the binary values 1 and 0. We begin by looking at digital
signaling. Digital signaling refers to how binary codes are generated and
transmitted successfully between two digital circuits using electrical
quantities (e.g., voltage and current). Consider the digital system shown in
Fig. 3.14. In this system, the sending circuit generates a binary code. The
sending circuit is called either the transmitter (Tx) or driver. The
transmitter represents the binary code using an electrical quantity such as
voltage. The receiving circuit (Rx) observes this voltage and is able to
determine the value of the binary code. In this way, 1s and 0s can be
communicated between the two digital circuits. The transmitter and receiver
are both designed to use the same digital signaling scheme so that they are
able to communicate with each other. It should be noted that all digital
circuits contain both inputs (Rx) and outputs (Tx) but are not shown in this
figure for simplicity.
Fig. 3.14Generic digital transmitter/receiver circuit
3.2.1 Logic Levels
A logic level is the term to describe all possible states that a signal can
have. We will focus explicitly on circuits that represent binary values, so
these will only have two finite states (1 and 0). To begin, we define a
simplistic model of how to represent the binary codes using an electrical
quantity. This model uses a voltage threshold (Vth) to represent the
switching point between the binary codes. If the voltage of the signal (Vsig)
is above this threshold, it is considered a logic HIGH. If the voltage is
below this threshold, it is considered a logic LOW. A graphical depiction of

--- Page 87 ---
this is shown in Fig. 3.15. The terms HIGH and LOW are used to describe
which logic level corresponds to the higher or lower voltage.
Fig. 3.15Definition of logic HIGH and LOW
It is straightforward to have the HIGH level correspond to the binary
code 1 and the LOW level correspond to the binary code 0; however, it is
equally valid to have the HIGH level correspond to the binary code 0 and
the LOW level correspond to the binary code 1. As such, we need to define
how the logic levels HIGH and LOW map to the binary codes 1 and 0. We
define two types of digital assignments: positive logic and negative logic. In
positive logic, the logic HIGH level represents a binary 1 and the logic
LOW level represents a binary 0. In negative logic, the logic HIGH level
represents a binary 0 and the logic LOW level represents a binary 1.
Table 3.1 shows the definition of positive and negative logic. There are
certain types of digital circuits that benefit from using negative logic;
however, we will focus specifically on systems that use positive logic since
it is more intuitive when learning digital design for the first time. The
transformation between positive and negative logic is straightforward and
will be covered in Chap. 4.
Table 3.1Definition of positive and negative logic

--- Page 88 ---
3.2.2 Output DC Specifications
Transmitting circuits provide specifications on the range of output voltages
(VO) that they are guaranteed to provide when outputting a logic 1 or 0.
These are called the DC output specifications. There are four DC voltage
specifications that specify this range: VOH-max, VOH-min, VOL-max, and VOL-
min. The VOH-max and VOH-min specifications provide the range of voltages
the transmitter is guaranteed to provide when outputting a logic HIGH (or
logic 1 when using positive logic). The VOL-max and VOL-min specifications
provide the range of voltages the transmitter is guaranteed to provide when
outputting a logic LOW (or logic 0 when using positive logic). In the
subscripts for these specifications, the “O” signifies “output” and the “L” or
“H” signifies “LOW” or “HIGH,” respectively.
The maximum amount of current that can flow through the transmitter’s
output (IO) is also specified. The specification IOH-max is the maximum
amount of current that can flow through the transmitter’s output when
sending a logic HIGH. The specification IOL-max is the maximum amount of
current that can flow through the transmitter’s output when sending a logic
LOW. When the maximum output currents are violated, it usually damages
the part. Manufacturers will also provide a recommended amount of current
for IO that will guarantee the specified operating parameters throughout the
life of the part. Figure 3.16 shows a graphical depiction of these DC
specifications. When the transmitter output is providing current to the
receiving circuit (a.k.a., the load), it is said to be sourcing current. When
the transmitter output is drawing current from the receiving circuit, it is said
to be sinking current. In most cases, the transmitter sources current when
driving a logic HIGH and sinks current when driving a logic LOW.
Figure 3.16 shows a graphical depiction of these specifications.

--- Page 89 ---
Fig. 3.16DC specifications of a digital circuit
3.2.3 Input DC Specifications
Receiving circuits provide specifications on the range of input voltages (VI)
that they will interpret as either a logic HIGH or LOW. These are called the
DC input specifications. There are four DC voltage specifications that
specify this range: VIH-max, VIH-min, VIL-max, and VIL-min. The VIH-max and
VIH-min specifications provide the range of voltages that the receiver will
interpret as a logic HIGH (or logic 1 when using positive logic). The VIL-
max and VIL-min specifications provide the range of voltages that the receiver
will interpret as a logic LOW (or logic 0 when using positive logic). In the
subscripts for these specifications, the “I” signifies “input.”

--- Page 90 ---
The maximum amount of current that the receiver will draw, or take in,
when connected is also specified II). The specification IIH-max is the
maximum amount of current that the receiver will draw when it is being
driven with a logic HIGH. The specification IIL-max is the maximum amount
of current that the receiver will draw when it is being driven with a logic
LOW. Again, Fig. 3.16 shows a graphical depiction of these DC
specifications.
3.2.4 Noise Margins
For digital circuits that are designed to operate with each other, the VOH-max
and VIH-max specifications have equal voltages. Similarly, the VOL-min and
VIL-min specifications have equal voltages. The VOH-max and VOL-min output
specifications represent the best-case scenario for digital signaling as the
transmitter is sending the largest (or smallest) signal possible. If there is no
loss in the interconnect between the transmitter and receiver, the full
voltage levels will arrive at the receiver and be interpreted as the correct
logic states (HIGH or LOW).
The worst-case scenario for digital signaling is when the transmitter
outputs its levels at VOH-min and VOL-max. These levels represent the furthest
away from an ideal voltage level that the transmitter can send to the
receiver and are susceptible to loss and noise that may occur in the
interconnect system. In order to compensate for potential loss or noise,
digital circuits have a predefined amount of margin built into their worst-
case specifications. Let’s take the worst-case example of a transmitter
sending a logic HIGH at the level VOH-min. If the receiver was designed to
have VIH-min (i.e., the lowest voltage that would still be interpreted as a
logic 1) equal to VOH-min, then if even the smallest amount of the output
signal was attenuated as it traveled through the interconnect, it would arrive
at the receiver below VIH-min and would not be interpreted as a logic 1.
Since there will always be some amount of loss in any interconnect system,
the specifications for VIH-min are always less than VOH-min. The difference
between these two quantities is called the noise margin. More specifically,
it is called the noise margin HIGH (or NMH) to signify how much margin is
built into the Tx/Rx circuit when communicating a logic 1. Similarly, the

--- Page 91 ---
VIL-max specification is always higher than the VOL-max specification to
account for any voltage added to the signal in the interconnect. The
difference between these two quantities is called the noise margin LOW (or
NML) to signify how much margin is built into the Tx/Rx circuit when
communicating a logic 0. Noise margins are always specified as positive
quantities, and thus the order of the subtrahend and minuend in these
differences:
Figure 3.16 includes the graphical depiction of the noise margins.
Notice in this figure that there is a region of voltages that the receiver will
not interpret as either a HIGH or a LOW. This region lies between the VIH-
min and VIL-max specifications. This is the uncertainty region and should be
avoided. Signals in this region will cause the receiver’s output to go to an
unknown voltage. Digital transmitters are designed to transition between
the LOW and HIGH states quickly enough so that the receiver does not
have time to react to the input being in the uncertainty region.
3.2.5 Power Supplies
All digital circuits require a power supply voltage and a ground. There are
some types of digital circuits that may require multiple power supplies. For
simplicity, we will focus on digital circuits that only require a single power
supply voltage and ground. The power supply voltage is commonly given
the abbreviations of either VCC or VDD. The “CC” or “DD” have to do with
how the terminals of the transistors inside of the digital circuit are
connected (i.e., “collector to collector” or “drain to drain”). Digital circuits
will specify the required power supply voltage. Ground is considered an
ideal 0v. Digital circuits will also specify the maximum amount of DC
current that can flow through the VCC (ICC) and GND (IGND) pins before
damaging the part.
There are two components of power supply current. The first is the
current that is required for the functional operation of the device. This is
called the quiescent current (Iq). The second component of the power
supply current is the output currents (IO). Any current that flows out of a
digital circuit must also flow into it. When a transmitting circuit sources

--- Page 92 ---
current to a load on its output pin, it must bring in that same amount of
current on another pin. This is accomplished using the power supply pin
(VCC). Conversely, when a transmitting circuit sinks current from a load on
its output pin, an equal amount of current must exit the circuit on a different
pin. This is accomplished using the GND pin. This means that the amount
of current flowing through the VCC and GND pins will vary depending on
the logic states that are being driven on the outputs. Since a digital circuit
may contain numerous output pins, the maximum amount of current
flowing through the VCC and GND pins can scale quickly and care must be
taken not to damage the device.
The quiescent current is often specified using the term I CC . This should
not be confused with the specification for the maximum amount of current
that can flow through the VCC pin, which is often called ICC-max. It is easy
to tell the difference because ICC (or Iq) is much smaller than ICC-max for
CMOS parts. ICC (or Iq) is specified in the μA to nA range while the
maximum current that can flow through the VCC pin is specified in the mA
range. Example 3.1 shows the process of calculating the ICC and IGND
currents when sourcing multiple loads.
Example 3.1 Calculating ICC and IGND When Sourcing Multiple Loads

--- Page 94 ---
Example 3.2 shows the process of calculating the ICC and IGND currents
when both sourcing and sinking loads.
Example 3.2 Calculating ICC and IGND When Both Sourcing and Sinking
Loads

--- Page 95 ---
3.2.6 Switching Characteristics

--- Page 96 ---
Switching characteristics refer to the transient behavior of the logic circuits.
The first group of switching specifications characterize the propagation
delay of the gate. The propagation delay is the time it takes for the output to
respond to a change on the input. The propagation delay is formally defined
as the time it takes from the point at which the input has transitioned to 50 
% of its final value to the point at which the output has transitioned to 50 %
of its final value. The initial and final voltages for the input are defined to
be GND and VCC, while the output initial and final voltages are defined to
be VOL and VOH. Specifications are given for the propagation delay when
transitioning from a LOW to HIGH (tPLH) and from a HIGH to LOW
(tPHL). When these specifications are equal, the values are often given as a
single specification of tpd. These specifications are shown graphically in
Fig. 3.17.
Fig. 3.17Switching characteristics of a digital circuit
The second group of switching specifications characterize how quickly
the output switches between states. The transition time is defined as the
time it takes for the output to transition from 10 to 90 % of the output
voltage range. The rise time (tr) is the time it takes for this transition when
going from a LOW to HIGH, and the fall time (tf) is the time it takes for this
transition when going from a HIGH to LOW. When these specifications are

--- Page 97 ---
equal, the values are often given as a single specification of tt. These
specifications are shown graphically in Fig. 3.17.
3.2.7 Data Sheets
The specifications for a particular part are given in its data sheet. The data
sheet contains all of the operating characteristics for a part, in addition to
functional information such as package geometries and pin assignments.
The data sheet is usually the first place a designer will look when selecting
a part. Figures 3.18, 3.19, and 3.20 show excerpts from an example data
sheet highlighting some of the specifications just covered.

--- Page 98 ---
Fig. 3.18Example data sheet excerpt (1)

--- Page 99 ---
Fig. 3.19Example data sheet excerpt (2)

--- Page 100 ---
Fig. 3.20Example data sheet excerpt (3)

--- Page 102 ---
3.3 Logic Families
It is apparent from the prior discussion of operating conditions that digital
circuits need to have comparable input and output specifications in order to
successfully communicate with each other. If a transmitter outputs a logic
HIGH as +3.4v and the receiver needs a logic HIGH to be above +4v to be
successfully interpreted as a logic HIGH, then these two circuits will not be
able to communicate. In order to address this interoperability issue, digital
circuits are grouped into logic families. A logic family is a group of parts
that all adhere to a common set of specifications so that they work together.
The logic family is given a specific name and once the specifications are
agreed upon, different manufacturers produce parts that work within the
particular family. Within a logic family, parts will all have the same power
supply requirements and DC input/output specifications such that if
connected directly, they will be able to successfully communicate with each
other. The phrase “connected directly” is emphasized because it is very
possible to insert an interconnect circuit between two circuits within the
same logic family and alter the output voltage enough so that the receiver
will not be able to interpret the correct logic level. Analyzing the effect of
the interconnect circuit is part of the digital design process. There are many
logic families that exist (up to 100 different types!) and more emerge each
year as improvements are made to circuit fabrication processes that create
smaller, faster, and lower power circuits.
3.3.1 Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductors
The first group of logic families we will discuss is called complementary
metal oxide semiconductors, or CMOS. This is currently the most popular
group of logic families for digital circuits implemented on the same
integrated circuit (IC). An integrated circuit is where the entire circuit is
implemented on a single piece of semiconductor material (or chip). The IC
can contain transistors, resistors, capacitors, inductors, wires, and
insulators. Modern integrated circuits can contain billions of devices and
meters of interconnect. The opposite of implementing the circuit on an
integrated circuit is to use discrete components. Using discrete
components refers to where every device (transistor, resistor, etc.) is its own
part and is wired together externally using either a printed circuit board

--- Page 103 ---
(PCB) or jumper wires as on a breadboard. The line between ICs and
discrete parts has blurred in the past decades because modern discrete parts
are actually fabricated as an IC and regularly contain multiple devices (e.g.,
four logic gates per chip). Regardless, the term discrete is still used to
describe components that only contain a few components where the term IC
typically refers to a much larger system that is custom designed.
The term CMOS comes from the use of particular types of transistors to
implement the digital circuits. The transistors are created using a metal
oxide semiconductor (MOS) structure. These transistors are turned on or off
based on an electric field, so they are given the name metal oxide
semiconductor field effect transistors, or MOSFETs. There are two
transistors that can be built using this approach that operate complementary
to each other, thus the term complementary metal oxide semiconductors. To
understand the basic operation of CMOS logic, we begin by treating the
MOSFETs as ideal switches. This allows us to understand the basic
functionality without diving into the detailed electronic analysis of the
transistors.
3.3.1.1 CMOS Operation
In CMOS, there is a single power supply (VCC or VDD) and a single ground
(GND). The ground signal is sometimes called VSS. The maximum input
and output DC specifications are equal to the power supply (VCC = VOH-max 
= VIH-max). The minimum input and output DC specification are equal to
ground (GND = 0v = VOL-min = VIL-min). In this way, using CMOS
simplifies many of the specifications. If you state that you are using
“CMOS with a +3.4v power supply,” you are inherently stating that VCC = 
VOH-max = VIH-max = +3.4v and that VOL-min = VIL-min = 0v. Many times the
name of the logic family will be associated with the power supply voltage.
For example, a logic family may go by the name “+3.3v CMOS” or “+2.5v
CMOS.” These names give a first-level description of the logic family
operation, but more details about the operation must be looked up in the
data sheet.
There are two types of transistors used in CMOS. The transistors will be
closed or open based on an input logic level. The first transistor is called an
N-type MOSFET, or NMOS. This transistor will turn on, or close, when the

--- Page 104 ---
voltage between the gate and source (VGS) is greater than its threshold
voltage. The threshold voltage (VT) is the amount of voltage needed to
create a conduction path between the drain and the source terminals. The
threshold voltage of an NMOS transistor is typically between 0.2v and 1v
and much less than the VCC voltage in the system. The second transistor is
called a P-type MOSFET, or PMOS. This transistor turns on, or closes,
when the voltage between the gate and the source (VGS) is less than VT,
where the VT for a PMOS is a negative value. This means that to turn on a
PMOS transistor, the gate terminal needs to be at a lower voltage than the
source. The type of transistor (i.e., P-type or N-type) has to do with the type
of semiconductor material used to conduct current through the transistor.
An NMOS transistor uses negative charge to conduct current (i.e.,
Negative-Type) while a PMOS uses positive charge (i.e., Positive-Type).
Figure 3.21 shows the symbols for the PMOS and NMOS, the fabrication
cross sections, and their switch-level equivalents.

--- Page 105 ---
Fig. 3.21CMOS transistors
The basic operation of CMOS is that when driving a logic HIGH the
switches are used to connect the output to the power supply (VCC), and
when driving a logic LOW the switches are used to connect the output to
GND. In CMOS, VCC is considered an ideal logic HIGH and GND is
considered an ideal logic LOW. VCC is typically much larger than VT, so
using these levels can easily turn on and off the transistors. The design of
the circuit must never connect the output to VCC and GND at the same time
or else the device itself will be damaged due to the current flowing directly
from VCC to GND through the transistors. Due to the device physics of the
MOSFETS, PMOS transistors are used to form the network that will
connect the output to VCC (a.k.a., the pull-up network), and NMOS
transistors are used to form the network that will connect the output to GND

--- Page 106 ---
(a.k.a., the pull-down network). Since PMOS transistors are closed when
the input is a 0 (thus providing a logic HIGH on the output) and NMOS
transistors are closed when the input is a 1 (thus providing a logic LOW on
the output), CMOS implements negative logic gates. This means that
CMOS can implement inverters, NAND, and NOR gates but not buffers,
AND, and OR gates directly. In order to create a CMOS AND gate, the
circuit would implement a NAND gate followed by an inverter and
similarly for an OR gate and buffer.
3.3.1.2 CMOS Inverter
Let’s now look at how we can use these transistors to create a CMOS
inverter. Consider the transistor arrangement shown in Fig. 3.22.
Fig. 3.22CMOS inverter schematic
The inputs of both the PMOS and NMOS are connected together. The
PMOS is used to connect the output to VCC and the NMOS is used to
connect the output to GND. Since the inputs are connected together and the
switches operate in a complementary manner, this circuit ensures that both
transistors will never be on at the same time. When In = 0, the PMOS
switch is closed and the NMOS switch is open. This connects the output
directly to VCC, thus providing a logic HIGH on the output. When In = 1,
the PMOS switch is open and the NMOS switch is closed. This connects

--- Page 107 ---
the output directly to GND, thus providing a logic LOW. This configuration
yields an inverter. This operation is shown graphically in Fig. 3.23.
Fig. 3.23CMOS inverter operation
3.3.1.3 CMOS NAND Gate
Let’s now look at how we use a similar arrangement of transistors to
implement a 2-input NAND gate. Consider the transistor configuration
shown in Fig. 3.24.

--- Page 108 ---
Fig. 3.24CMOS 2-input NAND gate schematic
The pull-down network consists of two NMOS transistors in series (M1
and M2) and the pull-up network consists of two PMOS transistors in
parallel (M3 and M4). Let’s go through each of the input conditions and
examine which transistors are on and which are off and how they impact the
output. The first input condition is when A = 0 and B = 0. This condition
turns on both M3 and M4 creating two parallel paths between the output
and VCC. At the same time, it turns off both M1 and M2 preventing a path
between the output and GND. This input condition results in an output that
is connected to VCC resulting in a logic HIGH. The second input condition
is when A = 0 and B = 1. This condition turns on M3 in the pull-up network
and M2 in the pull-down network. This condition also turns off M4 in the
pull-up network and M1 in the pull-down network. Since the pull-up
network is a parallel combination of PMOS transistors, there is still a path
between the output and VCC through M3. Since the pull-down network is a
series combination of NMOS transistors, both M1 and M2 must be on in
order to connect the output to GND. This input condition results in an
output that is connected to VCC resulting in a logic HIGH. The third input
condition is when A = 1 and B = 0. This condition again provides a path
between the output and VCC through M4 and prevents a path between the

--- Page 109 ---
output and ground by having M2 open. This input condition results in an
output that is connected to VCC resulting in a logic HIGH. The final input
condition is when A = 1 and B = 1. In this input condition, both of the
PMOS transistors in the pull-up network (M3 and M4) are off preventing
the output from being connected to VCC. At the same time, this input turns
on both M1 and M2 in the pull-down network connecting the output to
GND. This input condition results in an output that is connected to GND
resulting in a logic LOW. Based on the resulting output values
corresponding to the four input codes, this circuit yields the logic operation
of a 2-input NAND gate. This operation is shown graphically in Fig. 3.25.

--- Page 110 ---
Fig. 3.25CMOS 2-input NAND gate operation

--- Page 111 ---
Creating a CMOS NAND gate with more than two inputs is
accomplished by adding additional PMOS transistors to the pull-up network
in parallel and additional NMOS transistors to the pull-down network in
series. Figure 3.26 shows the schematic for a 3-input NAND gate. This
procedure is followed for creating NAND gates with larger numbers of
inputs.
Fig. 3.26CMOS 3-input NAND gate schematic
If the CMOS transistors were ideal switches, the approach of increasing
the number of inputs could be continued indefinitely. In reality, the
transistors are not ideal switches and there is a limit on how many
transistors can be added in series and continue to operate. The limitation has
to do with ensuring that each transistor has enough voltage to properly turn
on or off. This is a factor in the series network because the drain terminals
of the NMOS transistors are not all connected to GND. If a voltage
develops across one of the lower transistors (e.g., M3), then it takes more
voltage on the input to turn on the next transistor up (e.g., M2). If too many
transistors are added in series, then the uppermost transistor in the series
may not be able to be turned on or off by the input signals. The number of

--- Page 112 ---
inputs that a logic gate can have within a particular logic family is called its
fan-in specification. When a logic circuit requires a number of inputs that
exceeds the fan-in specification for a particular logic family, then additional
logic gates must be used. For example, if a circuit requires a 5-input NAND
gate but the logic family has a fan-in specification of 4, this means that the
largest NAND gate available only has 4-inputs. The 5-input NAND
operation must be accomplished using additional circuit design techniques
that use gates with 4 or less inputs. These design techniques will be covered
in Chap. 4.
3.3.1.4 CMOS NOR Gate
A CMOS NOR gate is created using a similar topology as a NAND gate
with the exception that the pull-up network consists of PMOS transistors in
series and the pull-down network that consists of NMOS transistors in
parallel. Consider the transistor configuration shown in Fig. 3.27.
Fig. 3.27CMOS 2-input NOR gate schematic

--- Page 113 ---
The series configuration of the pull-up network will only connect the
output to VCC when both inputs are 0. Conversely, the pull-down network
prevents connecting the output to GND when both inputs are 0. When either
or both of the inputs are true, the pull-up network is off and the pull-down
network is on. This yields the logic function for a NOR gate. This operation
is shown graphically in Fig. 3.28. As with the NAND gate, the number of
inputs can be increased by adding more PMOS transistors in series in the
pull-up network and more NMOS transistors in parallel in the pull-down
network.

--- Page 114 ---
Fig. 3.28CMOS 2-input NOR gate operation

--- Page 115 ---
The schematic for a 3-input NOR gate is given in Fig. 3.29. This
approach can be used to increase the number of inputs up until the fan-in
specification of the logic family is reached.
Fig. 3.29CMOS 3-input NOR gate schematic
3.3.2 Transistor-Transistor Logic
One of the first logic families that emerged after the invention of the
integrated circuit was transistor-transistor logic (TTL). This logic family
uses bipolar junction transistor (BJT) as its fundamental switching item.
This logic family defined a set of discrete parts that contained all of the
basic gates in addition to more complex building blocks. TTL was used to
build the first computer systems in the 1960s. TTL is not widely used today
other than for specific applications because it consumes more power than
CMOS and cannot achieve the density required for today’s computer
systems. TTL is discussed because it was the original logic family based on
integrated circuits, so it provides a historical perspective of digital logic.
Furthermore, the discrete logic pin-outs and part-numbering schemes are
still used today for discrete CMOS parts.

--- Page 116 ---
3.3.2.1 TTL Operation
TTL logic uses BJT transistors and resistors to accomplish the logic
operations. The operation of a BJT transistor is more complicated than an
MOSFET; however, it performs essentially the same switch operation when
used in a digital logic circuit. An input is used to turn the transistor on,
which in turn allows current to flow between two other terminals.
Figure 3.30 shows the symbol for the two types of BJT transistors. The PNP
transistor is analogous to a PMOS and the NPN is analogous to an NMOS.
Current will flow between the Emitter and Collector terminals when there is
a sufficient voltage on the Base terminal. The amount of current that flows
between the Emitter and Collector is related to the current flowing into the
Base. The primary difference in operation between BJTs and MOSFETs is
that BJTs require proper voltage biasing in order to turn on and also draws
current through the BASE in order to stay on. The detailed operation of
BJTs is beyond the scope of this text, so an overly simplified model of TTL
logic gates is given.
Fig. 3.30PNP and NPN transistors
Figure 3.31 shows a simplified model of how TTL logic operates using
BJTs and resistors. This simplified model does not show all of the

--- Page 117 ---
transistors that are used in modern TTL circuits but instead is intended to
provide a high-level overview of the operation. This gate is an inverter that
is created with an NPN transistor and a resistor. When the input is a logic
HIGH, the NPN transistor turns on and conducts current between its
collector and emitter terminals. This in effect closes the switch and connects
the output to GND providing a logic LOW. During this state, current will
also flow through the resistor to GND through Q1, thus consuming more
power than the equivalent gate in CMOS. When the input is a logic LOW,
the NPN transistor turns off and no current flows between its collector and
emitter. This, in effect, is an open circuit leaving only the resistor connected
to the output. The resistor pulls the output up to VCC providing a logic
HIGH on the output. One drawback of this state is that there will be a
voltage drop across the resistor, so the output is not pulled fully to VCC.

--- Page 118 ---
Fig. 3.31TTL inverter
3.3.3 The 7400 Series Logic Families
The 7400 series of TTL circuits became popular in the 1960s and 1970s.
This family was based on TTL and contained hundreds of different digital
circuits. The original circuits came in either plastic or ceramic Dual-In-Line
packages (DIP). The 7400 TTL logic family was powered off of a +5v
supply. As mentioned before, this logic family set the pin-outs and part-
numbering schemes for modern logic families. There were many
derivatives of the original TTL logic family that made modifications to
improve speed and reliability, decrease power, and reduce power supplies.
Today’s CMOS logic families within the 7400 series still use the same pin-

--- Page 119 ---
outs and numbering schemes as the original TTL family. It is useful to
understand the history of this series because these parts are often used in
introductory laboratory exercises to learn how to interface digital logic
circuits.
3.3.3.1 Part-Numbering Scheme
The part numbering scheme for the 7400 series and its derivatives contains
five different fields: (1) manufacturer, (2) temperature range, (3) logic
family, (4) logic function, and (5) package type. The breakdown of these
fields is shown in Fig. 3.32.

--- Page 120 ---
Fig. 3.327400 series part-numbering scheme
3.3.3.2 DC Operating Conditions
Table 3.2 gives the DC operating conditions for a few of the logic families
within the 7400 series. Notice that the CMOS families consume much less
power than the TTL families. Also notice that the TTL output currents are
asymmetrical. The differences between the IOH and IOL within the TTL
families have to do with the nature of the bipolar transistors and the
resistors used to create the pull-up networks within the devices. CMOS has

--- Page 121 ---
symmetrical drive currents due to using complementary transistors for the
pull-up (PMOS) and pull-down networks (NMOS).
Table 3.2DC operating conditions for a sample of 7400 series logic families
3.3.3.3 Pin-Out Information for the DIP Packages
Figure 3.33 shows the pin-out assignments for a subset of the basic gates
from the 74HC logic family in the Dual-In-Line package form factor. Most
of the basic gates within the 7400 series follow these assignments. Notice
that each of these basic gates comes in a 14-pin DIP package, each with a
single VCC and single GND pin. It is up to the designer to ensure that the
maximum current flowing through the VCC and GND pins does not exceed
the maximum specification. This is particularly important for parts that
contain numerous gates. For example, the 74HC00 part contains four, 2-
input NAND gates. If each of the NAND gates was driving a logic HIGH at
its maximum allowable output current (i.e., 25 mA from Fig. 3.19), then a
total of 4∙25 mA + Iq = ~100 mA would be flowing through its VCC pin.
Since the VCC pin can only tolerate a maximum of 50 mA of current (from
Fig. 3.19), the part would be damaged since the output current of ~100 mA
would also flow through the VCC pin. The pin-outs in Fig. 3.33 are useful
when first learning to design logic circuits because the DIP packages plug
directly into a standard breadboard.

--- Page 122 ---
Fig. 3.33Pin-outs for a subset of basic gates from the 74HC logic family in DIP packages

--- Page 123 ---
3.4 Driving Loads
At this point we’ve discussed in depth how proper care must be taken to
ensure that not only do the output voltages of the driving gate meet the
input specifications of the receiver in order to successfully transmit 1s and
0s, but that the output current of the driver does not exceed the maximum
specifications so that the part is not damaged. The output voltage and
current for a digital circuit depend greatly on the load that is being driven.
The following sections discuss the impact of driving some of the most
common digital loads.
3.4.1 Driving Other Gates

--- Page 124 ---
Within a logic family, all digital circuits are designed to operate with one
another. If there is minimal loss or noise in the interconnect system, then 1s
and 0s will be successfully transmitted and no current specifications will be
exceeded. Consider the example in Example 3.3 for an inverter driving
another inverter from the same logic family.
Example 3.3 Determining if Specifications Are Violated When Driving
Another Gate as a Load
From this example, it is clear that there are no issues when a gate is driving
another gate from the same family. This is as expected because that is the
point of a logic family. In fact, gates are designed to drive multiple gates
from within their own family. Based solely on the DC specifications for
input and output current, it could be assumed that the number of other gates
that can be driven is simply IO-max/II-max. For the example in Example 3.3,
this would result in a 74HC gate being able to drive 25,000 other gates (i.e.,
25 mA/1 μA = 25,000). In reality, the maximum number of gates that can be
driven is dictated by the switching characteristics. This limit is called the
fan-out specification. The fan-out specification states the maximum
number of other gates from within the same family that can be driven. As
discussed earlier, the output signal needs to transition quickly through the

--- Page 125 ---
uncertainty region so that the receiver does not have time to react and go to
an unknown state. As more and more gates are driven, this transition time is
slowed down. The fan-out specification provides a limit to the maximum
number of gates from the same family that can be driven while still
ensuring that the output signal transitions between states fast enough to
avoid the receivers from going to an unknown state. Example 3.4 shows the
process of determining the maximum output current that a driver will need
to provide when driving the maximum number of gates allowed by the fan-
out specification.
Example 3.4 Determining the Output Current When Driving Multiple
Gates as the Load
3.4.2 Driving Resistive Loads
There are many situations where a resistor is the load in a digital circuit. A
resistive load can be an actual resistor that is present for some other purpose
such as a pull-up, pull-down, or for impedance matching. More complex
loads such as buzzers, relays, or other electronics can also be modeled as a
resistor. When a resistor is the load in a digital circuit, care must be taken to
avoid violating the output current specifications of the driver. The electrical
circuit analysis technique that is used to evaluate how a resistive load
impacts a digital circuit is Ohm’s law. Ohm’s law is a very simple
relationship between the current and voltage in a resistor. Figure 3.34 gives
a primer on Ohm’s law. For use in digital circuits, there are only a select

--- Page 126 ---
few cases that this technique will be applied to, so no prior experience with
Ohm’s law is required at this point.
Fig. 3.34A primer on Ohm’s law
Let’s see how we can use Ohm’s law to analyze the impact of a resistive
load in a digital circuit. Consider the circuit configuration in Example 3.5
and how we can use Ohm’s law to determine the output current of the
driver. The load in this case is a resistor connected between the output of
the driver and the power supply (+5v). When driving a logic HIGH, the
output level will be approximately equal to the power supply (i.e., +5v).
Since in this situation both terminals of the resistor are at +5v, there is no
voltage difference present. That means when plugging into Ohm’s law, the
voltage component is 0v, which gives 0 amps of current. In the case where
the driver is outputting a logic LOW, the output will be approximately
GND. In this case, there is a voltage drop of +5v across the resistor (5v–0v).
Plugging this into Ohm’s law yields a current of 50 mA flowing through the
resistor. This can become problematic because the current flows through the
resistor and then into the output of the driver. For the 74HC logic family,
this would exceed the IO max specification of 25 mA and damage the part.

--- Page 127 ---
Additionally, as more current is drawn through the output, the output
voltage becomes less and less ideal. In this example, the first order analysis
uses VO = GND. In reality, as the output current increases, the output
voltage will move further away from its ideal value and may eventually
reach a value within the uncertainty region.
Example 3.5 Determining the Output Current When Driving a Pull-Up
Resistor as the Load
A similar process can be used to determine the output current when driving
a resistive load between the output and GND. This process is shown in

--- Page 128 ---
Example 3.6.
Example 3.6 Determining the Output Current When Driving a Pull-Down
Resistor as the Load
3.4.3 Driving LEDs
A light-emitting diode (LED) is a very common type of load that is driven
using a digital circuit. The behavior of diodes is typically covered in an
analog electronics class. Since it is assumed that the reader has not been
exposed to the operation of diodes, the behavior of the LED will be
described using a highly simplified model. A diode has two terminals, the
anode and cathode. Current that flows from the anode to the cathode is

--- Page 129 ---
called the forward current. A voltage that is developed across a diode from
its anode to cathode is called the forward voltage. A diode has a unique
characteristic that when a forward voltage is supplied across its terminal, it
will only increase up to a certain point. The amount is specified as the
LED’s forward voltage (vf) and is typically between 1.5v and 2v in modern
LEDs. When a power supply circuit is connected to the LED, no current
will flow until this forward voltage has been reached. Once it has been
reached, current will begin to flow and the LED will prevent any further
voltage from developing across it. Once current flows, the LED will begin
emitting light. The more current that flows, the more light that will be
emitted up until the point that the maximum allowable current through the
LED is reached and then the device will be damaged. When using an LED,
there are two specifications of interest: the forward voltage and the
recommended forward current. The symbols for a diode and an LED are
given in Fig. 3.35.
Fig. 3.35Symbols for a diode and a light-emitting diode
When designing an LED driver circuit, a voltage must be supplied in
order to develop the forward voltage across the LED so that current will
flow. A resistor is included in series with the LED for two reasons. The first
reason is to provide a place for any additional voltage provided by the
driver to develop in the situation that Vo > Vf, which is most often the case.
The second reason for the resistor is to set the output current. Since the
voltage across the resistor will be a fixed amount (i.e., Vo − Vf), then the
value of the resistor can be chosen to set the current. This current is
typically set to an optimum value that turns on the LED to a desired
luminosity while also ensuring that the maximum output current of the
driver is not violated. Consider the LED driver configuration shown in

--- Page 130 ---
Example 3.7 where the LED will be turned on when the driver outputs a
HIGH.
Example 3.7 Determining the Output Current When Driving an LED
where HIGH = ON
Example 3.8 shows another example of driving an LED, but this time using
a different configuration where the LED will be on when the driver outputs
a logic LOW.
Example 3.8 Determining the Output Current When Driving an LED
where HIGH = OFF

--- Page 132 ---
Summary
The operation of a logic circuit can be described using either a logic
symbol, a truth table, a logic expression, or a logic waveform.
Logic gates represent the most basic operations that can be performed
on binary numbers. They are BUF, INV, AND, NAND, OR, NOR,
XOR, and XNOR.
XOR gates that have a number of inputs greater than two are created
using a cascade of 2-input XOR gates. This implementation has more
practical applications such as arithmetic and error detection codes.
The logic level describes whether the electrical signal representing one
of the two states is above or below a switching threshold region. The
two possible values that a logic level can be are HIGH or LOW.
The logic value describes how the logic levels are mapped into the two
binary codes 0 and 1. In positive logic a HIGH = 1 and a LOW = 0. In
negative logic a HIGH = 0 and a LOW = 1.
Logic circuits have DC specifications that describe how input voltage
levels are interpreted as either HIGHs or LOWs (VIH-max, VIH-min, VIL-
max, and VIL-min). Specifications are also given on what output voltages
will be produced when driving a HIGH or LOW (VOH-max, VOH-min,
VOL-max, and VOL-min).
In order to successfully transmit digital information, the output
voltages of the driver that represent a HIGH and LOW must arrive at
the receiver within the voltage ranges that are interpreted as a HIGH
and LOW. If the voltage arrives at the receiver outside of these
specified input ranges, the receiver will not know whether a HIGH or
LOW is being transmitted.
Logic circuits also specify maximum current levels on the power
supplies (IVCC, Ignd), inputs (II-max), and outputs (IO-max) that may not
be exceeded. If these levels are exceeded, the circuit may not operate
properly or be damaged.
The current exiting a logic circuit is equal to the current entering.

--- Page 133 ---
When a logic circuit sources current to a load, an equivalent current is
drawn into the circuit through its power supply pin.
When a logic circuit sinks current from a load, an equivalent current
flows out of the circuit through its ground pin.
The type of load that is connected to the output of a logic circuit
dictates how much current will be drawn from the driver.
The quiescent current (Iq or Icc) is the current that the circuit always
draws independent of the input/output currents.
Logic circuits have AC specifications that describe the delay from the
input to the output (tPLH, tPHL) and also how fast the outputs transition
between the HIGH and LOW levels (tr, tf).
A logic family is a set of logic circuits that are designed to operate with
each other.
The fan-in of a logic family describes the maximum number of inputs
that a gate may have.
The fan-out of a logic family describes the maximum number of other
gates from within the same family that can be driven simultaneously
by one gate.
CMOS logic is the most popular family series in use today. CMOS
logic uses two transistors (NMOS and PMOS) that act as
complementary switches. CMOS transistors draw very low quiescent
current and can be fabricated with extremely small feature sizes.
In CMOS, only inverters, NAND gates, and NOR gates can be created
directly. If it is desired to create a buffer, AND gate, or OR gate, an
inverter is placed on the output of the original inverter, NAND, or
NOR gate.
Exercise Problems
Section 3.1: Basic Gates
3.1.1Give the truth table for a 3-input AND gate with the input variables
A, B, and C and output F.
 

--- Page 134 ---
3.1.2Give the truth table for a 3-input OR gate with the input variables A,
B, and C and output F.  
3.1.3Give the truth table for a 3-input XNOR gate with the input
variables A, B, and C and output F.
 
3.1.4Give the logic expression for a 3-input AND gate with the input
variables A, B, and C and output F.
 
3.1.5Give the logic expression for a 3-input OR gate with the input
variables A, B, and C and output F.
 
3.1.6Give the logic expression for a 3-input XNOR gate with the input
variables A, B, and C and output F.
 
3.1.7Give the logic waveform for a 3-input AND gate with the input
variables A, B, and C and output F.
 
3.1.8Give the logic waveform for a 3-input OR gate with the input
variables A, B, and C and output F.
 
3.1.9Give the logic waveform for a 3-input XNOR gate with the input
variables A, B, and C and output F.
 
Section 3.2: Digital Circuit Operation
3.2.1 Using the DC operating conditions from Table 3.2, give the noise
margin HIGH (NMH) for the 74LS logic family.
 
3.2.2 Using the DC operating conditions from Table 3.2, give the noise
margin LOW (NML) for the 74LS logic family.
 
3.2.3 Using the DC operating conditions from Table 3.2, give the noise
margin HIGH (NMH) for the 74HC logic family with VCC = +5v.
 

--- Page 135 ---
3.2.4 Using the DC operating conditions from Table 3.2, give the noise
margin LOW (NML) for the 74HC logic family with VCC = +5v.  
3.2.5 Using the DC operating conditions from Table 3.2, give the noise
margin HIGH (NMH) for the 74HC logic family with VCC = +3.4v.
 
3.2.6 Using the DC operating conditions from Table 3.2, give the noise
margin LOW (NML) for the 74HC logic family with VCC = +3.4v.
 
3.2.7 For the driver configuration in Fig. 3.36, give the current flowing
through the V CC pin.
Fig. 3.36Driver Configuration 1
 
3.2.8 For the driver configuration in Fig. 3.36, give the current flowing
through the GND pin.
 
3.2.9 For the driver configuration in Fig. 3.37, give the current flowing
through the V CC pin.  

--- Page 136 ---
Fig. 3.37Driver Configuration 2
3.2.10For the driver configuration in Fig. 3.37, give the current flowing
through the GND pin.
 
3.2.11 Using the data sheet excerpt from Fig. 3.20, give the maximum
propagation delay (tpd) for the 74HC04 inverter when powered
with VCC = +2v.
 
3.2.12Using the data sheet excerpt from Fig. 3.20, give the maximum
propagation delay from low to high (tPLH) for the 74HC04 inverter
when powered with VCC = +2v.
 
3.2.13Using the data sheet excerpt from Fig. 3.20, give the maximum
propagation delay from high to low (tPHL) for the 74HC04 inverter
when powered with VCC = +2v.
 
3.2.14Using the data sheet excerpt from Fig. 3.20, give the maximum
transition time (tt) for the 74HC04 inverter when powered with
VCC = +2v.
 

--- Page 137 ---
3.2.15Using the data sheet excerpt from Fig. 3.20, give the maximum rise
time (tr) for the 74HC04 inverter when powered with VCC = +2v.
 
3.2.16Using the data sheet excerpt from Fig. 3.20, give the maximum fall
time (tf) for the 74HC04 inverter when powered with VCC = +2v.
 
Section 3.3: Logic Families
3.3.1Provide the transistor-level schematic for a 4-input NAND gate. 
3.3.2Provide the transistor-level schematic for a 4-input NOR gate. 
3.3.3Provide the transistor-level schematic for a 2-input AND gate. 
3.3.4Provide the transistor-level schematic for a 2-input OR gate. 
3.3.5Provide the transistor-level schematic for a buffer.  
Section 3.4: Driving Loads
3.4.1In the driver configuration shown in Fig. 3.38, the buffer is driving
its maximum fan-out specification of 6. The maximum input current
for this logic family is II = 1 nA. What is the maximum output
current (IO) that the driver will need to source?
 

--- Page 138 ---
Fig. 3.38Driver Configuration 3
3.4.2For the pull-down driver configuration shown in Fig. 3.39, calculate
the value of the pull-down resistor (R) in order to ensure that the
output current does not exceed 20 mA.
Fig. 3.39Driver Configuration 4
 
3.4.3For the pull-up driver configuration shown in Fig. 3.40, calculate
the value of the pull-up resistor (R) in order to ensure that the output
current does not exceed 20 mA.
 

--- Page 139 ---
Fig. 3.40Driver Configuration 5
3.4.4For the LED driver configuration shown in Fig. 3.41 where an
output of HIGH on the driver will turn on the LED, calculate the
value of the resistor (R) in order to set the LED forward current to
5 mA. The LED has a forward voltage of 1.9v.
Fig. 3.41Driver Configuration 6
 
3.4.5For the LED driver configuration shown in Fig. 3.42 where an
output of LOW on the driver will turn on the LED, calculate the
value of the resistor (R) in order to set the LED forward current to
5 mA. The LED has a forward voltage of 1.9v.
 

--- Page 140 ---
Fig. 3.42Driver Configuration 7

--- Page 141 ---
(1)
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2017
Brock J. LaMeres, Introduction to Logic Circuits & Logic Design with VHDL , DOI 10.1007/978-3-
319-34195-8_4
4. Combinational Logic Design
Brock J. LaMeres1 
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Montana State
University, Bozeman, MT, USA
 
In this chapter we cover the techniques to synthesize, analyze, and
manipulate logic functions. The purpose of these techniques is to ultimately
create a logic circuit using the basic gates described in Chap. 3 from a truth
table or word description. This process is called combinational logic design.
Combinational logic refers to circuits where the output depends on the
present value of the inputs. This simple definition implies that there is no
storage capability in the circuitry and a change on the input immediately
impacts the output. To begin, we first define the rules of Boolean algebra,
which provide the framework for the legal operations and manipulations
that can be taken on a two-valued number system (i.e., a binary system). We
then explore a variety of logic design and manipulation techniques. These
techniques allow us to directly create a logic circuit from a truth table and
then to manipulate it to either reduce the number of gates necessary in the
circuit or to convert the logic circuit into equivalent forms using alternate
gates. The goal of this chapter is to provide an understanding of the basic
principles of combinational logic design.
Learning Outcomes—After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
4.1Describe the fundamental principles and theorems of Boolean algebra
and how to use them to manipulate logic expressions.
 

--- Page 142 ---
4.2Analyze a combinational logic circuit to determine its logic
expression, truth table, and timing information.  
4.3Synthesize a logic circuit in canonical form (sum of products or
product of sums) from a functional description including a truth table,
minterm list, or maxterm list.
 
4.4Synthesize a logic circuit in minimized form (sum of products or
product of sums) through algebraic manipulation or with a Karnaugh
map.
 
4.5Describe the causes of timing hazards in digital logic circuits and the
approaches to mitigate them.
 
4.1 Boolean Algebra
The term algebra refers to the rules of a number system. In Chap. 2 we
discussed the number of symbols and relative values of some of the
common number systems. Algebra defines the operations that are legal to
perform on that system. Once we have defined the rules for a system, we
can then use the system for more powerful mathematics such as solving for
unknowns and manipulating into equivalent forms. The ability to
manipulate into equivalent forms allows us to minimize the number of logic
operations necessary and also put into a form that can be directly
synthesized using modern logic circuits.
In 1854, English mathematician George Boole presented an abstract
algebraic framework for a system that contained only two states, true and
false. This framework essentially launched the field of computer science
even before the existence of the modern integrated circuits that are used to
implement digital logic today. In 1930, American mathematician Claude
Shannon applied Boole’s algebraic framework to his work on switching
circuits at Bell Labs, thus launching the field of digital circuit design and
information theory. Boole’s original framework is still used extensively in
modern digital circuit design and thus bears the name Boolean algebra.

--- Page 143 ---
Today, the term Boolean algebra is often used to describe not only George
Boole’s original work, but all of those that contributed to the field after him.
4.1.1 Operations
In Boolean algebra there are two valid states (true and false) and three core
operations. The operations are conjunction ( ∧ , equivalent to the AND
operation), disjunction ( ∨ , equivalent to the OR operation), and negation
(¬, equivalent to the NOT operation). From these three operations, more
sophisticated operations can be created including other logic functions (i.e.,
BUF, NAND, NOR, XOR, XNOR) and arithmetic. Engineers primarily use
the terms AND, OR, and NOT instead of conjunction, disjunction, and
negation. Similarly, engineers primarily use the symbols for these operators
described in Chap. 3 (e.g., ·, +, and ′) instead of ∧ , ∨ , and ¬.
4.1.2 Axioms
An axiom is a statement of truth about a system that is accepted by the user.
Axioms are very simple statements about a system, but need to be
established before more complicated theorems can be proposed. Axioms are
so basic that they do not need to be proved in order to be accepted. Axioms
can be thought of as the basic laws of the algebraic framework. The terms
axiom and postulate are synonymous and used interchangeably. In Boolean
algebra there are five main axioms. These axioms will appear redundant
with the description of basic gates from Chap. 3, but must be defined in this
algebraic context so that more powerful theorems can be proposed.
4.1.2.1 Axiom #1: Logical Values
This axiom states that in Boolean algebra, a variable A can only take on one
of the two values, 0 or 1. If the variable A is not 0, then it must be a 1, and
conversely, if it is not a 1, then it must be a 0.
Axiom #1—Boolean Values: A = 0 if A ≠ 1, conversely A = 1 if A ≠ 0.
4.1.2.2 Axiom #2: Definition of Logical Negation
This axiom defines logical negation. Negation is also called the NOT
operation or taking the complement. The negation operation is denoted

--- Page 144 ---
using either a prime (′), an inversion bar, or the negation symbol (¬). If the
complement is taken on a 0, it becomes a 1. If the complement is taken on a
1, it becomes a 0.
Axiom #2—Definition of Logical Negation: if A = 0 then A′ = 1,
conversely, if A = 1 then A′ = 0.
4.1.2.3 Axiom #3: Definition of a Logical Product
This axiom defines a logical product or multiplication. Logical
multiplication is denoted using either a dot (·), an ampersand (&), or the
conjunction symbol ( ∧ ). The result of logical multiplication is true when
both inputs are true and false otherwise.
Axiom #3—Definition of a Logical Product: A·B = 1 if A = B = 1
and A·B = 0 otherwise.
4.1.2.4 Axiom #4: Definition of a Logical Sum
This axiom defines a logical sum or addition. Logical addition is denoted
using either a plus sign (+) or the disjunction symbol ( ∨ ). The result of
logical addition is true when any of the inputs are true and false otherwise.
Axiom #4—Definition of a Logical Sum: A + B = 1 if A = 1 or B = 1
and A + B = 0 otherwise.
4.1.2.5 Axiom #5: Logical Precedence
This axiom defines the order of precedence for the three operators. Unless
the precedence is explicitly stated using parentheses, negation takes
precedence over a logical product and a logical product takes precedence
over a logical sum.
Axiom #5—Definition of Logical Precedence: NOT precedes AND,
AND precedes OR.
To illustrate Axiom #5, consider the logic function F = A′·B + C. In this
function, the first operation that would take place is the NOT operation on
A. This would be followed by the AND operation of A′ with B. Finally, the
result would be OR’d with C. The precedence of any function can also be
explicitly stated using parentheses such as F = (((A′) · B) + C).

--- Page 145 ---
4.1.3 Theorems
A theorem is a more sophisticated truth about a system that is not intuitively
obvious. Theorems are proposed and then must be proved. Once proved,
they can be accepted as a truth about the system going forward. Proving a
theorem in Boolean algebra is much simpler than in our traditional decimal
system due to the fact that variables can only take on one of the two values,
true or false. Since the number of input possibilities is bounded, Boolean
algebra theorems can be proved by simply testing the theorem using every
possible input code. This is called proof by exhaustion. The following
theorems are used widely in the manipulation of logic expressions and
reduction of terms within an expression.
4.1.3.1 DeMorgan’s Theorem of Duality
Augustus DeMorgan was a British mathematician and logician who lived
during the time of George Boole. DeMorgan is best known for his
contribution to the field of logic through the creation of what have been
later called the DeMorgan’s Theorems (often called DeMorgan’s laws).
There are two major theorems that DeMorgan proposed that expanded
Boolean algebra. The first theorem is named duality. Duality states that an
algebraic equality will remain true if all 0s and 1s are interchanged and all
AND and OR operations are interchanged. The new expression is called the
dual of the original expression. Example 4.1 shows the process of proving
duality using proof by exhaustion.
Example 4.1 Proving DeMorgan’s Theorem of Duality Using Proof by
Exhaustion

--- Page 146 ---
Duality is important for two reasons. First, it doubles the impact of a
theorem. If a theorem is proved to be true, then the dual of that theorem is
also proved to be true. This, in essence, gives twice the theorem with the
same amount of proving. Boolean algebra theorems are almost always
given in pairs, the original and the dual. That is why duality is covered as
the first theorem.
The second reason that duality is important is because it can be used to
convert between positive and negative logic. Until now, we have used
positive logic for all of our examples (i.e., a logic HIGH = true = 1 and a
logic LOW = false = 0). As mentioned earlier, this convention is arbitrary
and we could have easily chosen a HIGH to be false and a LOW to be true
(i.e., negative logic). Duality allows us to take a logic expression that has
been created using positive logic (F) and then convert it into an equivalent
expression that is valid for negative logic (FD). Example 4.2 shows the
process for how this works.

--- Page 147 ---
Example 4.2 Converting Between Positive and Negative Logic Using
Duality
One consideration when using duality is that the order of precedence
follows the original function. This means that in the original function, the
axiom for precedence states the order as NOT-AND-OR; however, this is
not necessarily the correct precedence order in the dual. For example, if the
original function was F = A · B + C, the AND operation of A and B would
take place first, and then the result would be OR’d with C. The dual of this
expression is FD = A + B · C. If the expression for FD was evaluated using

--- Page 148 ---
traditional Boolean precedence, it would show that FD does NOT give the
correct result per the definition of a dual function (i.e., converting a
function from positive to negative logic). The order of precedence for FD
must correlate to the precedence in the original function. Since in the
original function A and B were operated on first, they must also be operated
on first in the dual. In order to easily manage this issue, parentheses can be
used to track the order of operations from the original function to the dual.
If we put parentheses in the original function to explicitly state the
precedence of the operations, it would take the form F = (A · B) + C. These
parentheses can be mapped directly to the dual yielding FD = (A + B) · C.
This order of precedence in the dual is now correct.
Now that we have covered the duality operation, its usefulness, and its
pitfalls, we can formally define this theorem as:
DeMorgan’s Duality: An algebraic equality will remain true if all 0s
and 1s are interchanged and all AND and OR operations are interchanged.
Furthermore, taking the dual of a positive logic function will produce the
equivalent function using negative logic if the original order of precedence
is maintained.
4.1.3.2 Identity
An identity operation is one that when performed on a variable will yield
itself regardless of the variable’s value. The following is the formal
definition of identity theorem. Figure 4.1 shows the gate-level depiction of
this theorem.
Fig. 4.1Gate-level depiction of the identity theorem
Identity: OR’ing any variable with a logic 0 will yield the original
variable. The dual: AND’ing any variable with a logic 1 will yield the
original variable.
Original  Dual

--- Page 149 ---
A+0 = A  A•1 = A
The identity theorem is useful for reducing circuitry when it is
discovered that a particular input will never change values. When this is the
case, the static input variable can simply be removed from the logic
expression making the entire circuit a simple wire from the remaining input
variable to the output.
4.1.3.3 Null Element
A null element operation is one that, when performed on a constant value,
will yield that same constant value regardless of the values of any variables
within the same operation. The following is the formal definition of null
element. Figure 4.2 shows the gate-level depiction of this theorem.
Fig. 4.2Gate-level depiction of the null element theorem
Null Element: OR’ing any variable with a logic 1 will yield a logic 1
regardless of the value of the input variable. The dual: AND’ing any
variable with a logic 0 will yield a logic 0 regardless of the value of the
input variable.
Original  Dual
A+1 = 1  A•0 = 0
The null element theorem is also useful for reducing circuitry when it is
discovered that a particular input will never change values. It is also widely
used in computer systems in order to set (i.e., force to a logic 1) or clear
(i.e., force to a logic 0) the value of a storage element.
4.1.3.4 Idempotent
An idempotent operation is one that has no effect on the input, regardless of
the number of times the operation is applied. The following is the formal

--- Page 150 ---
definition of idempotence. Figure 4.3 shows the gate-level depiction of this
theorem.
Fig. 4.3Gate-level depiction of the idempotent theorem
Idempotent: OR’ing a variable with itself results in itself. The dual:
AND’ing a variable with itself results in itself.
Original  Dual
A+A = A  A•A = A
This theorem also holds true for any number of operations such as A + 
A + A + … + A = A and A · A · A · … · A = A.
4.1.3.5 Complements
This theorem describes an operation of a variable with the variable’s own
complement. The following is the formal definition of complements.
Figure 4.4 shows the gate-level depiction of this theorem.
Fig. 4.4Gate-level depiction of the complements theorem
Complements: OR’ing a variable with its complement will produce a
logic 1. The dual: AND’ing a variable with its complement will produce a
logic 0.
Original  Dual
A+A’ = 1  A•A’ = 0

--- Page 151 ---
The complement theorem is again useful for reducing circuitry when
these types of logic expressions are discovered.
4.1.3.6 Involution
An involution operation describes the result of double negation. The
following is the formal definition of involution. Figure 4.5 shows the gate-
level depiction of this theorem.
Fig. 4.5Gate-level depiction of the involution theorem
Involution: Taking the double complement of a variable will result in
the original variable.
Original
A’’ = A
This theorem is not only used to eliminate inverters but also provides us
a powerful tool for inserting inverters in a circuit. We will see that this is
used widely with the second of DeMorgan’s laws that will be introduced at
the end of this section.
4.1.3.7 Commutative Property
The term commutative is used to describe an operation in which the order
of the quantities or variables in the operation has no impact on the result.
The following is the formal definition of the commutative property.
Figure 4.6 shows the gate-level depiction of this theorem.
Fig. 4.6Gate-level depiction of commutative property

--- Page 152 ---
Commutative Property: Changing the order of variables in an OR
operation does not change the end result. The dual: Changing the order of
variables in an AND operation does not change the end result.
Original  Dual
A+B = B+A  A•B = B•A
One practical use of the commutative property is when wiring or routing
logic circuitry together. Example 4.3 shows how the commutative property
can be used to untangle crossed wires when implementing a digital system.
Example 4.3 Using the Commutative Property to Untangle Crossed Wires

--- Page 153 ---
4.1.3.8 Associative Property

--- Page 154 ---
The term associative is used to describe an operation in which the grouping
of the quantities or variables in the operation has no impact on the result.
The following is the formal definition of the associative property. Figure 4.7
shows the gate-level depiction of this theorem.
Fig. 4.7Gate-level depiction of the associative property
Associative Property: The grouping of variables doesn’t impact the
result of an OR operation. The dual: The grouping of variables doesn’t
impact the result of an AND operation.
Original        Dual
(A+B)+C = A+(B+C)  (A∙B)∙C = A∙(B∙C)
One practical use of the associative property is addressing fan-in
limitations of a logic family. Since the grouping of the input variables does
not impact the result, we can accomplish operations with large numbers of
inputs using multiple gates with fewer inputs. Example 4.4 shows the
process of using the associative property to address a fan-in limitation.
Example 4.4 Using the Associative Property to Address Fan-In
Limitations

--- Page 155 ---
4.1.3.9 Distributive Property
The term distributive describes how an operation on a parenthesized group
of operations (or higher precedence operations) can be distributed through
each term. The following is the formal definition of the distributive
property. Figure 4.8 shows the gate-level depiction of this theorem.
Fig. 4.8Gate-level depiction of the distributive property
Distributive Property: An operation on a parenthesized operation(s),
or higher precedence operator, will distribute through each term.

--- Page 156 ---
Original        Dual
A∙(B+C) = A∙B + A∙C  A+(B∙C) = (A+B)∙(A+C)
The distributive property is used as a logic manipulation technique. It
can be used to put a logic expression into a form more suitable for direct
circuit synthesis, or to reduce the number of logic gates necessary. Example
4.5 shows how to use the distributive property to reduce the number of
gates in a logic circuit.
Example 4.5 Using the Distributive Property to Reduce the Number of
Logic Gates in a Circuit
4.1.3.10 Absorption
The term absorption refers to when multiple logic terms within an
expression produce the same results. This allows one of the terms to be
eliminated from the expression, thus reducing the number of logic
operations. The remaining terms essentially absorb the functionality of the
eliminated term. This theorem is also called covering because the remaining
term essentially covers the functionality of both itself and the eliminated
term. The following is the formal definition of the absorption theorem.
Figure 4.9 shows the gate-level depiction of this theorem.

--- Page 157 ---
Fig. 4.9Gate-level depiction of absorption
Absorption: When a term within a logic expression produces the same
output(s) as another term, the second term can be removed without affecting
the result.
Original  Dual
A+A∙B = A  A∙(A+B) = A
This theorem is better understood by looking at the evaluation of each
term with respect to the original expression. Example 4.6 shows how the
absorption theorem can be proven through proof by exhaustion by
evaluating each term in a logic expression.
Example 4.6 Proving the Absorption Theorem Using Proof by Exhaustion
4.1.3.11 Uniting
The uniting theorem, also called combining or minimization, provides a way
to remove variables from an expression when they have no impact on the
outcome. This theorem is one of the most widely used techniques for the

--- Page 158 ---
reduction of the number of gates needed in a combinational logic circuit.
The following is the formal definition of the uniting theorem. Figure 4.10
shows the gate-level depiction of this theorem.
Fig. 4.10Gate-level depiction of uniting
Uniting: When a variable (B) and its complement (B′) appear in
multiple product terms with a common variable (A) within a logical OR
operation, the variable B does not have any effect on the result and can be
removed.
Original      Dual
A∙B +A∙B’ = A  (A+B)∙(A+B’) = A
This theorem can be proved using prior theorems. Example 4.7 shows
how the uniting theorem can be proved using a combination of the
distributive property, the complements theorem, and the identity theorem.
Example 4.7 Proving of the Uniting Theorem
4.1.3.12 DeMorgan’s Theorem

--- Page 159 ---
Now we look at the second of DeMorgan’s laws. This second theorem is
simply known as DeMorgan’s theorem. This theorem provides a technique
to manipulate a logic expression that uses AND gates into one that uses OR
gates and vice versa. It can also be used to manipulate traditional Boolean
logic expressions that use AND-OR-NOT operators, into equivalent forms
that use NAND and NOR gates. The following is the formal definition of
DeMorgan’s theorem. Figure 4.11 shows the gate-level depiction of this
theorem.
Fig. 4.11 Gate-level depiction of DeMorgan’s theorem
DeMorgan’s Theorem: An OR operation with both inputs inverted is
equivalent to an AND operation with the output inverted. The dual: An
AND operation with both inputs inverted is equivalent to an OR operation
with the output inverted.
Original      Dual
A’ + B’ = (A∙B)’  A’ ∙ B’ = (A + B)’
This theorem is used widely in modern logic design because it bridges
the gap between the design of logic circuitry using Boolean algebra and the
physical implementation of the circuitry using CMOS. Recall that Boolean

--- Page 160 ---
algebra is defined for only three operations, the AND, the OR, and
inversion. CMOS, on the other hand, can only directly implement negative-
type gates such as NAND, NOR, and NOT. DeMorgan’s theorem allows us
to design logic circuitry using Boolean algebra and synthesize logic
diagrams with AND, OR, and NOT gates, and then directly convert the
logic diagrams into an equivalent form using NAND, NOR, and NOT gates.
As we’ll see in the next section, Boolean algebra produces logic
expressions in two common forms. These are the sum of products (SOP)
and the product of sums (POS) forms. Using a combination of involution
and DeMorgan’s theorem, SOP and POS forms can be converted into
equivalent logic circuits that use only NAND and NOR gates. Example 4.8
shows a process to convert a sum of products form into one that uses only
NAND gates.
Example 4.8 Converting a Sum of Products Form into One That Uses
Only NAND Gates

--- Page 161 ---
Example 4.9 shows a process to convert a product of sums form into one
that uses only NOR gates.

--- Page 162 ---
Example 4.9 Converting a Product of Sums Form into One That Uses
Only NOR Gates


--- Page 163 ---
DeMorgan’s theorem can also be accomplished algebraically using a
process known as breaking the bar and flipping the operator. This process
again takes advantage of the involution theorem, which allows double
negation without impacting the result. When using this technique in
algebraic form, involution takes the form of a double-inversion bar. If an
inversion bar is broken, the expression will remain true as long as the
operator directly below the break is flipped (AND to OR, OR to AND).
Example 4.10 shows how to use this technique when converting an OR gate
with its inputs inverted into an AND gate with its output inverted.
Example 4.10 Using DeMorgan's Theorem in Algebraic Form (1)
Example 4.11 shows how to use this technique when converting an AND
gate with its inputs inverted into an OR gate with its output inverted.
Example 4.11 Using DeMorgan's Theorem in Algebraic Form (2)

--- Page 164 ---
Table 4.1 gives a summary of all the Boolean algebra theorems just
covered. The theorems are grouped in this table with respect to the number
of variables that they contain. This grouping is the most common way these
theorems are presented.
Table 4.1Summary of Boolean algebra theorems


--- Page 165 ---
4.1.4 Functionally Complete Operation Sets
A set of Boolean operators is said to be functionally complete when the set
can implement all possible logic functions. The set of operators {AND, OR,
NOT} is functionally complete because every other operation can be
implemented using these three operators (i.e., NAND, NOR, BUF, XOR,
XNOR). The DeMorgan’s theorem showed us that all AND and OR
operations can be replaced with NAND and NOR operators. This means
that NAND and NOR operations could be by themselves functionally
complete if they could perform a NOT operation. Figure 4.12 shows how a
NAND gate can be configured to perform a NOT operation. This
configuration allows a NAND gate to be considered functionally complete
because all other operations can be implemented.
Fig. 4.12Configuration to use a NAND gate as an inverter
This approach can also be used on a NOR gate to implement an inverter.
Figure 4.13 shows how a NOR gate can be configured to perform a NOT
operation, thus also making it functionally complete.

--- Page 166 ---
Fig. 4.13Configuration to use a NOR gate as an inverter
4.2 Combinational Logic Analysis
Combinational logic analysis refers to the act of deciphering the operation
of a circuit from its final logic diagram. This is a useful skill that can aid
designers when debugging their circuits. This can also be used to
understand the timing performance of a circuit and to reverse-engineer an
unknown design.
4.2.1 Finding the Logic Expression from a Logic
Diagram
Combinational logic diagrams are typically written with their inputs on the
left and their output on the right. As the inputs change, the intermediate

--- Page 167 ---
nodes, or connections, within the diagram hold the interim computations
that contribute to the ultimate circuit output. These computations propagate
from left to right until ultimately the final output of the system reaches its
final steady-state value. When analyzing the behavior of a combinational
logic circuit a similar left-to-right approach is used. The first step is to label
each intermediate node in the system. The second step is to write in the
logic expression for each node based on the preceding logic operation(s).
The logic expressions are written working left-to-right until the output of
the system is reached and the final logic expression of the circuit has been
found. Consider the example of this analysis in Example 4.12.
Example 4.12 Determining the Logic Expression from a Logic Diagram
4.2.2 Finding the Truth Table from a Logic Diagram
The final truth table of a circuit can also be found in a similar manner as the
logic expression. Each internal node within the logic diagram can be
evaluated working from the left to the right for each possible input code.

--- Page 168 ---
Each subsequent node can then be evaluated using the values of the
preceding nodes. Consider the example of this analysis in Example 4.13.
Example 4.13 Determining the Truth Table from a Logic Diagram
4.2.3 Timing Analysis of a Combinational Logic
Circuit

--- Page 169 ---
Real logic gates have a propagation delay (tpd, tPHL, or tPLH) as presented in
Chap. 3. Performing a timing analysis on a combinational logic circuit
refers to observing how long it takes for a change in the inputs to propagate
to the output. Different paths through the combinational logic circuit will
take different times to compute since they may use gates with different
delays. When determining the delay of the entire combinational logic circuit
we always consider the longest delay path. This is because this delay
represents the worst-case scenario. As long as we wait for the longest path
to propagate through the circuit, then we are ensured that the output will
always be valid after this time. To determine which signal path has the
longest delay, we map out each and every path the inputs can take to the
output of the circuit. We then sum up the gate delay along each path. The
path with the longest delay dictates the delay of the entire combinational
logic circuit. Consider this analysis shown in Example 4.14.
Example 4.14 Determining the Delay of a Combinational Logic Circuit

--- Page 171 ---
4.3 Combinational Logic Synthesis
4.3.1 Canonical Sum of Products
One technique to directly synthesize a logic circuit from a truth table is to
use a canonical sum of products topology based on minterms . The term
canonical refers to this topology yielding potentially unminimized logic. A
minterm is a product term (i.e., an AND operation) that will be true for one
and only one input code. The minterm must contain every input variable in
its expression. Complements are applied to the input variables as necessary
in order to produce a true output for the individual input code. We define
the word literal to describe an input variable which may or may not be
complemented. This is a more useful word because if we say that a minterm
“must include all variables,” it implies that all variables are included in the
term uncomplemented. A more useful statement is that a minterm “must
include all literals.” This now implies that each variable must be included,
but it can be in the form of itself or its complement (e.g., A or A′).
Figure 4.14 shows the definition and gate-level depiction of a minterm
expression. Each minterm can be denoted using the lower case “m” with the
row number as a subscript.


--- Page 172 ---
Fig. 4.14Definition and gate-level depiction of a minterm
For an arbitrary truth table, a minterm can be used for each row
corresponding to a true output. If each of these minterms’ outputs are fed
into a single OR gate, then a sum of products logic circuit is formed that
will produce the logic listed in the truth table. In this topology, any input
code that corresponds to an output of 1 will cause its corresponding
minterm to output a 1. Since a 1 on any input of an OR gate will cause the
output to go to a 1, the output of the minterm is passed to the final result.
Example 4.15 shows this process. One important consideration of this
approach is that no effort has been taken to minimize the logic expression.
This unminimized logic expression is also called the canonical sum. The
canonical sum is logically correct but uses the most amount of circuitry
possible for a given truth table. This canonical sum can be the starting point
for minimization using Boolean algebra.
Example 4.15 Creating a Canonical Sum of Products Logic Circuit Using
Minterms

--- Page 173 ---
4.3.2 The Minterm List (Σ)
A minterm list is a compact way to describe the functionality of a logic
circuit by simply listing the row numbers that correspond to an output of 1
in the truth table. The ∑ symbol is used to denote a minterm list. All input
variables must be listed in the order they appear in the truth table. This is

--- Page 174 ---
necessary because since a minterm list uses only the row numbers to
indicate which input codes result in an output of 1, the minterm list must
indicate how many variables comprise the row number, which variable is in
the most significant position, and which is in the least significant position.
After the ∑ symbol, the row numbers corresponding to a true output are
listed in a comma-delimited format within parentheses. Example 4.16
shows the process for creating a minterm list from a truth table.
Example 4.16 Creating a Minterm List from a Truth Table
A minterm list contains the same information as the truth table, the
canonical sum, and the canonical sum of products logic diagram. Since the
minterms themselves are formally defined for an input code, it is trivial to
go back and forth between the minterm list and these other forms. Example
4.17 shows how a minterm list can be used to generate an equivalent truth
table, canonical sum, and canonical sum of products logic diagram.
Example 4.17 Creating Equivalent Functional Representations from a
Minterm List

--- Page 175 ---
4.3.3 Canonical Product of Sums (POS)

--- Page 176 ---
Another technique to directly synthesize a logic circuit from a truth table is
to use a canonical product of sums topology based on maxterms . A
maxterm is a sum term (i.e., an OR operation) that will be false for one and
only one input code. The maxterm must contain every literal in its
expression. Complements are applied to the input variables as necessary in
order to produce a false output for the individual input code. Figure 4.15
shows the definition and gate-level depiction of a maxterm expression.
Each maxterm can be denoted using the upper case “M” with the row
number as a subscript.
Fig. 4.15Definition and gate level depiction of a maxterm
For an arbitrary truth table, a maxterm can be used for each row
corresponding to a false output. If each of these maxterms outputs are fed
into a single AND gate, then a product of sums logic circuit is formed that
will produce the logic listed in the truth table. In this topology, any input
code that corresponds to an output of 0 will cause its corresponding
maxterm to output a 0. Since a 0 on any input of an AND gate will cause
the output to go to a 0, the output of the maxterm is passed to the final
result. Example 4.18 shows this process. This approach is complementary

--- Page 177 ---
to the sum of products approach. In the sum of products approach based on
minterms, the circuit operates by producing 1s that are passed to the output
for the rows that require a true output. For all other rows, the output is false.
A product of sums approach based on maxterms operates by producing 0s
that are passed to the output for the rows that require a false output. For all
other rows, the output is true. These two approaches produce the equivalent
logic functionality. Again, at this point no effort has been taken to minimize
the logic expression. This unminimized form is called a canonical product.
The canonical product is logically correct, but uses the most amount of
circuitry possible for a given truth table. This canonical product can be the
starting point for minimization using the Boolean algebra theorems.
Example 4.18 Creating a Product of Sums Logic Circuit Using Maxterms

--- Page 178 ---
4.3.4 The Maxterm List (Π)

--- Page 179 ---
A maxterm list is a compact way to describe the functionality of a logic
circuit by simply listing the row numbers that correspond to an output of 0
in the truth table. The Π symbol is used to denote a maxterm list. All literals
used in the logic expression must be listed in the order they appear in the
truth table. After the Π symbol, the row numbers corresponding to a false
output are listed in a comma-delimited format within parentheses. Example
4.19 shows the process for creating a maxterm list from a truth table.
Example 4.19 Creating a Maxterm List from a Truth Table
A maxterm list contains the same information as the truth table, the
canonical product, and the canonical product of sums logic diagram.
Example 4.20 shows how a maxterm list can be used to generate these
equivalent forms.
Example 4.20 Creating Equivalent Functional Representations from a
Maxterm List

--- Page 180 ---
4.3.5 Minterm and Maxterm List Equivalence

--- Page 181 ---
The examples in Examples 4.17 and 4.20 illustrate how minterm and
maxterm lists produce the exact same logic functionality but in a
complementary fashion. It is trivial to switch back and forth between
minterm lists and maxterm lists. This is accomplished by simply changing
the list type (i.e., min to max, max to min) and then switching the row
numbers between those listed and those not listed. Example 4.21 shows
multiple techniques for representing equivalent logic functionality as a truth
table.
Example 4.21 Creating Equivalent Forms to Represent Logic
Functionality

--- Page 183 ---
4.4 Logic Minimization
We now look at how to reduce the canonical expressions into equivalent
forms that use less logic. This minimization is key to reducing the
complexity of the logic prior to implementing in real circuitry. This reduces
the amount of gates needed, placement area, wiring, and power
consumption of the logic circuit.
4.4.1 Algebraic Minimization
Canonical expressions can be reduced algebraically by applying the
theorems covered in prior sections. This process typically consists of a
series of factoring based on the distributive property followed by replacing
variables with constants (i.e., 0s and 1s) using the complements theorem.
Finally, constants are removed using the identity theorem. Example 4.22
shows this process.
Example 4.22 Minimizing a Logic Expression Algebraically

--- Page 184 ---
The primary drawback of this approach is that it requires recognition of
where the theorems can be applied. This can often lead to missed
minimizations. Computer automation is often the best mechanism to
perform this minimization for large logic expressions.
4.4.2 Minimization Using Karnaugh Maps
A Karnaugh map is a graphical way to minimize logic expressions. This
technique is named after Maurice Karnaugh, American physicist, who
introduced the map in its latest form in 1953 while working at Bell Labs.

--- Page 185 ---
The Karnaugh map (or K-map) is a way to put a truth table into a form that
allows logic minimization through a graphical process. This technique
provides a graphical process that accomplishes the same result as factoring
variables via the distributive property and removing variables via the
complements and identity theorems. K-maps present a truth table in a form
that allows variables to be removed from the final logic expression in a
graphical manner.
4.4.2.1 Formation of a K-map
A K-map is constructed as a two-dimensional grid. Each cell within the
map corresponds to the output for a specific input code. The cells are
positioned such that neighboring cells only differ by one bit in their input
codes. Neighboring cells are defined as cells immediately adjacent
horizontally and immediately adjacent vertically. Two cells positioned
diagonally next to each other are not considered neighbors. The input codes
for each variable are listed along the top and side of the K-map. Consider
the construction of a 2-input K-map shown in Fig. 4.16.

--- Page 186 ---
Fig. 4.16Formation of a 2-input K-map
When constructing a 3-input K-map, it is important to remember that
each input code can only differ from its neighbor by one bit. For example,
the two codes 01 and 10 differ by two bits (i.e., the MSB is different and the
LSB is different); thus they could not be neighbors; however, the codes 01-
11 and 11-10 can be neighbors. As such, the input codes along the top of the
3-input K-map must be ordered accordingly (i.e., 00-01-11-10). Consider
the construction of a 3-input K-map shown in Fig. 4.17. The rows and
columns that correspond to the input literals can now span multiple rows
and columns. Notice how in this 3-input K-map, the literals A, A′, B, and B′
all correspond to two columns. Also, notice that B′ spans two columns, but
the columns are on different edges of the K-map. The side edges of the 3-
input K-map are still considered neighbors because the input codes for these
columns only differ by one bit. This is an important attribute once we get to
the minimization of variables because it allows us to examine an input

--- Page 187 ---
literal’s impact not only within the obvious adjacent cells but also when the
variables wrap around the edges of the K-map.
Fig. 4.17Formation of a 3-input K-map
When constructing a 4-input K-map, the same rules apply that the input
codes can only differ from their neighbors by one bit. Consider the
construction of a 4-input K-map in Fig. 4.18. In a 4-input K-map,
neighboring cells can wrap around both the top-to-bottom edges in addition
to the side-to-side edges. Notice that all 16 cells are positioned within the
map so that their neighbors on the top, bottom, and sides only differ by one
bit in their input codes.

--- Page 188 ---
Fig. 4.18Formation of a 4-input K-map
4.4.2.2 Logic Minimization Using K-maps (Sum of
Products)

--- Page 189 ---
Now we look at using a K-map to create a minimized logic expression in an
SOP form. Remember that each cell with an output of 1 has a minterm
associated with it, just as in the truth table. When two neighboring cells
have outputs of 1, it graphically indicates that the two minterms can be
reduced into a minimized product term that will cover both outputs.
Consider the example given in Fig. 4.19.
Fig. 4.19Observing how K-maps visually highlight logic minimizations
These observations can be put into a formal process to produce a
minimized SOP logic expression using a K-map. The steps are as follows:
1. Circle groups of 1s in the K-map following the rules:  

--- Page 190 ---
Each circle should contain the largest number of 1s possible.
The circles encompass only neighboring cells (i.e., side-to-side
sides and/or top and bottom).
The circles must contain a number of 1s that is a power of 2 (i.e.,
1, 2, 4, 8, or 16).
Enter as many circles as possible without having any circles fully
cover another circle.
Each circle is called a Prime Implicant.
2. Create a product term for each prime implicant following the rules:
Each variable in the K-map is evaluated one by one.
If the circle covers a region where the input variable is a 1, then
include it in the product term uncomplemented.
If the circle covers a region where the input variable is a 0, then
include it in the product term complemented.
If the circle covers a region where the input variable is both a 0
and 1, then the variable is excluded from the product term.
 
3. Sum all of the product terms for each prime implicant. 
Let’s apply this approach to our 2-input K-map example. Example 4.23
shows the process of finding a minimized sum of products logic expression
for a 2-input logic circuit using a K-map. This process yielded the same
SOP expression as the algebraic minimization and observations shown in
Fig. 4.19, but with a formalized process.
Example 4.23 Using a K-map to Find a Minimized Sum of Products
Expression (2-Input)

--- Page 191 ---
Let’s now apply this process to our 3-input K-map example. Example 4.24
shows the process of finding a minimized sum of products logic expression
for a 3-input logic circuit using a K-map. This example shows circles that
overlap. This is legal as long as one circle does not fully encompass
another. Overlapping circles are common since the K-map process dictates
that circles should be drawn that group the largest number of ones possible
as long as they are in powers of 2. Forming groups of ones using ones that
have already been circled is perfectly legal to accomplish larger groupings.
The larger the grouping of ones, the more chance there is for a variable to
be excluded from the product term. This results in better minimization of
the logic.

--- Page 192 ---
Example 4.24 Using a K-map to Find a Minimized Sum of Products
Expression (3-Input)
Let’s now apply this process to our 4-input K-map example. Example 4.25
shows the process of finding a minimized sum of products logic expression
for a 4-input logic circuit using a K-map.
Example 4.25 Using a K-map to Find a Minimized Sum of Products
Expression (4-Input)

--- Page 194 ---
4.4.2.3 Logic Minimization Using K-maps (Product
of Sums)
K-maps can also be used to create minimized product of sums logic
expressions. This is the same concept as how a minterm list and maxterm
list each produces the same logic function, but in complementary fashions.
When creating a product of sums expression from a K-map, groups of 0s
are circled. For each circle, a sum term is derived with a negation of
variables similar to when forming a maxterm (i.e., in the input variable is a
0, then it is included uncomplemented in the sum term and vice versa). The
final step in forming the minimized POS expression is to AND all of the
sum terms together. The formal process is as follows:
1. Circle groups of 0s in the K-map following the rules:
Each circle should contain the largest number of 0s possible.
The circles encompass only neighboring cells (i.e., side-to-side
sides and/or top and bottom).
The circles must contain a number of 0s that is a power of 2 (i.e.,
1, 2, 4, 8, or 16).
Enter as many circles as possible without having any circles fully
cover another circle.
Each circle is called a prime implicant.
 
2. Create a sum term for each prime implicant following the rules:
Each variable in the K-map is evaluated one by one.
If the circle covers a region where the input variable is a 1, then
include it in the sum term complemented.
If the circle covers a region where the input variable is a 0, then
include it in the sum term uncomplemented.
If the circles cover a region where the input variable is both a 0
and 1, then the variable is excluded from the sum term.
 
3. Multiply all of the sum terms for each prime implicant.

--- Page 195 ---
 Let’s apply this approach to our 2-input K-map example. Example 4.26
shows the process of finding a minimized product of sums logic expression
for a 2-input logic circuit using a K-map. Notice that this process yielded
the same logic expression as the SOP approach shown in Example 4.23.
This illustrates that both the POS and SOP expressions produce the correct
logic for the circuit.
Example 4.26 Using a K-map to Find a Minimized Product of Sums
Expression (2-Input)
Let’s now apply this process to our 3-input K-map example. Example 4.27
shows the process of finding a minimized product of sums logic expression
for a 3-input logic circuit using a K-map. Notice that the logic expression in
POS form is not identical to the SOP expression found in Example 4.24;
however, using a few steps of algebraic manipulation shows that the POS
expression can be put into a form that is identical to the prior SOP
expression. This illustrates that both the POS and SOP produce equivalent
functionality for the circuit.

--- Page 196 ---
Example 4.27 Using a K-map to Find a Minimized Product of Sums
Expression (3-Input)
Let’s now apply this process to our 4-input K-map example. Example 4.28
shows the process of finding a minimized product of sums logic expression

--- Page 197 ---
for a 4-input logic circuit using a K-map.
Example 4.28 Using a K-map to Find a Minimized Product of Sums
Expression (4-Input)

--- Page 198 ---
4.4.2.4 Minimal Sum

--- Page 199 ---
One situation that arises when minimizing logic using a K-map is that some
of the prime implicants may be redundant. Consider the example in
Fig. 4.20.


--- Page 200 ---
Fig. 4.20Observing redundant prime implicants in a K-map
We need to define a formal process for identifying redundant prime
implicants that can be removed without impacting the result of the logic
expression. Let’s start with examining the sum of products form. First, we
define the term essential prime implicant as a prime implicant that cannot
be removed from the logic expression without impacting its result. We then
define the term minimal sum as a logic expression that represents the most
minimal set of logic operations to accomplish a sum of products form.
There may be multiple minimal sums for a given truth table, but each would
have the same number of logic operations. In order to determine if a prime
implicant is essential, we first put in each and every possible prime
implicant into the K-map. This gives a logic expression known as the
complete sum. From this point we identify any cells that have only one
prime implicant covering them. These cells are called distinguished one
cells. Any prime implicant that covers a distinguished one cell is defined as
an essential prime implicant. All prime implicants that are not essential are
removed from the K-map. A minimal sum is then simply the sum of all
remaining product terms associated with the essential prime implicants.
Example 4.29 shows how to use this process.
Example 4.29 Deriving the Minimal Sum from a K-map

--- Page 201 ---
This process is identical for the product of sums form to produce the
minimal product.
4.4.3 Don’t Cares
There are often times when framing a design problem that there are specific
input codes that require exact output values, but there are other codes where
the output value doesn’t matter. This can occur for a variety of reasons,
such as knowing that certain input codes will never occur due to the nature
of the problem or that the output of the circuit will only be used under
certain input codes. We can take advantage of this situation to produce a
more minimal logic circuit. We define an output as a don’t care when it

--- Page 202 ---
doesn’t matter whether it is a 1 or 0 for the particular input code. The
symbol for a don’t care is “X.” We take advantage of don’t cares when
performing logic minimization by treating them as whatever output value
will produce a minimal logic expression. Example 4.30 shows how to use
this process.
Example 4.30 Using Don’t Cares to Produce a Minimal SOP Logic
Expression


--- Page 203 ---
4.4.4 Using XOR Gates
While Boolean algebra does not include the exclusive-OR and exclusive-
NOR operations, XOR and XNOR gates do indeed exist in modern
electronics. They can be a useful tool to provide logic circuitry with less
operations, sometimes even compared to a minimal sum or product
synthesized using the techniques just described. An XOR/XNOR operation
can be identified by putting the values from a truth table into a K-map. The
XOR/XNOR operations will result in a characteristic checkerboard pattern
in the K-map. Consider the following patterns for XOR and XNOR gates in
Figs. 4.21, 4.22, 4.23, and 4.24.
Fig. 4.21XOR and XNOR checkerboard patterns observed in K-maps (2-input)


--- Page 204 ---
Fig. 4.22XOR and XNOR checkerboard patterns observed in K-maps (3-input)
Fig. 4.23XOR checkerboard pattern observed in K-maps (4-input)
Fig. 4.24XNOR checkerboard pattern observed in K-maps (4-input)

--- Page 205 ---
4.5 Timing Hazards and Glitches
Timing hazards, or glitches, refer to unwanted transitions on the output of a
combinational logic circuit. These are most commonly due to different
delay paths through the gates in the circuit. In real circuitry there is always
a finite propagation delay through each gate. Consider the circuit shown in
Fig. 4.25 where gate delays are included and how they can produce
unwanted transitions.

--- Page 206 ---
Fig. 4.25Examining the source of a timing hazard (or glitch) in a combinational logic circuit
These timing hazards are given unique names based on the type of
transition that occurs. A static 0 timing hazard is when the input switches
between two input codes that both yield an output of 0 but the output
momentarily switches to a 1. A static 1 timing hazard is when the input

--- Page 207 ---
switches between two input codes that both yield an output of 1 but the
output momentarily switches to a 0. A dynamic hazard is when the input
switches between two input codes that result in a real transition on the
output (i.e., 0 to 1 or 1 to 0), but the output has a momentary glitch before
reaching its final value. These definitions are shown in Fig. 4.26.
Fig. 4.26Timing hazard definitions
Timing hazards can be addressed in a variety of ways. One way is to try
to match the propagation delays through each path of the logic circuit. This
can be difficult, particularly in modern logic families such as CMOS. In the
example in Fig. 4.25, the root cause of the different propagation delays was
due to an inverter on one of the variables. It seems obvious that this could
be addressed by putting buffers on the other inputs with equal delays as the
inverter. This would create a situation where all input codes would arrive at
the first stage of AND gates at the same time regardless of whether they
were inverted or not and eliminate the hazards; however, CMOS
implements a buffer as two inverters in series, so it is difficult to insert a
buffer in a circuit with an equal delay to an inverter. Addressing timing
hazards in this way is possible, but it involves a time-consuming and
tedious process of adjusting the transistors used to create the buffer and
inverter to have equal delays.

--- Page 208 ---
Another technique to address timing hazards is to place additional
circuitry in the system that will ensure the correct output while the input
codes switch. Consider how including a nonessential prime implicant can
eliminate a timing hazard in Example 4.31. In this approach, the minimal
sum from Fig. 4.25 is instead replaced with the complete sum. The use of
the complete sum instead of the minimal sum can be shown to eliminate
both static and dynamic timing hazards. The drawback of this approach is
the addition of extra circuitry in the combinational logic circuit (i.e.,
nonessential prime implicants).
Example 4.31 Eliminating a Timing Hazard by Including Nonessential
Product Terms

--- Page 210 ---
Summary
Boolean algebra defines the axioms and theorems that guide the
operations that can be performed on a two-valued number system.
Boolean algebra theorems allow logic expressions to be manipulated to
make circuit synthesis simpler. They also allow logic expressions to be
minimized.
The delay of a combinational logic circuit is always dictated by the
longest delay path from the inputs to the output.
The canonical form of a logic expression is one that has not been
minimized.
A canonical sum of products form is a logic synthesis technique based
on minterms. A minterm is a product term that will output a one for
only one unique input code. A minterm is used for each row of a truth
table corresponding to an output of a one. Each of the minterms is then
summed together to create the final system output.
A minterm list is a shorthand way of describing the information in a
truth table. The symbol “Σ” is used to denote a minterm list. Each of
the input variables is added to this symbol as comma-delimited
subscripts. The row number is then listed for each row corresponding
to an output of a one.
A canonical product of sums form is a logic synthesis technique based
on maxterms. A maxterm is a sum term that will output a zero for only
one unique input code. A maxterm is used for each row of a truth table
corresponding to an output of a zero. Each of the maxterms is then
multiplied together to create the final system output.

--- Page 211 ---
A maxterm list is a shorthand way of describing the information in a
truth table. The symbol “Π” is used to denote a maxterm list. Each of
the input variables is added to this symbol as comma-delimited
subscripts. The row number is then listed for each row corresponding
to an output of a zero.
Canonical logic expressions can be minimized through a repetitive
process of factoring common variables using the distributive property
and then eliminating remaining variables using a combination of the
complements and identity theorems.
A Karnaugh map (K-map) is a graphical approach to minimizing logic
expressions. A K-map arranges a truth table into a grid in which the
neighboring cells have input codes that differ by only one bit. This
allows the impact of an input variable on a group of outputs to be
quickly identified.
A minimized sum of products expression can be found from a K-map
by circling neighboring ones to form groups that can be produced by a
single product term. Each product term (aka prime implicant) is then
summed together to form the circuit output.
A minimized product of sums expression can be found from a K-map
by circling neighboring zeros to form groups that can be produced by a
single sum term. Each sum term (aka prime implicant) is then
multiplied together to form the circuit output.
A minimal sum or minimal product is a logic expression that contains
only essential prime implicants and represents the smallest number of
logic operations possible to produce the desired output.
A don’t care (X) can be used when the output of a truth table row can
be either a zero or a one without affecting the system behavior. This
typically occurs when some of the input codes of a truth table will
never occur. The value for the row of a truth table containing a don’t
care output can be chosen to give the most minimal logic expression.
In a K-map, don’t cares can be included to form the largest groupings
in order to give the least amount of logic.
While exclusive-OR gates are not used in Boolean algebra, they can be
visually identified in K-maps by looking for checkerboard patterns.

--- Page 212 ---
Timing hazards are temporary glitches that occur on the output of a
combinational logic circuit due to timing mismatches through different
paths in the circuit. Hazards can be minimized by including additional
circuitry in the system or by matching the delay of all signal paths.
Exercise Problems
Section 4.1: Boolean Algebra
4.1.1 Which Boolean algebra theorem describes the situation where any
variable OR’d with itself will yield itself?
 
4.1.2 Which Boolean algebra theorem describes the situation where any
variable that is double complemented will yield itself?
 
4.1.3 Which Boolean algebra theorem describes the situation where any
variable OR’d with a 1 will yield a 1?
 
4.1.4 Which Boolean algebra theorem describes the situation where a
variable that exists in multiple product terms can be factored out?
 
4.1.5 Which Boolean algebra theorem describes the situation where
when output(s) corresponding to a term within an expression are
handled by another term the original term can be removed?
 
4.1.6 Which Boolean algebra theorem describes the situation where any
variable AND’d with its complement will yield a 0?
 
4.1.7 Which Boolean algebra theorem describes the situation where any
variable AND’d with a 0 will yield a 0?
 
4.1.8 Which Boolean algebra theorem describes the situation where an
AND gate with its inputs inverted is equivalent to an OR gate with
its outputs inverted?
 
4.1.9 Which Boolean algebra theorem describes the situation where a
variable that exists in multiple sum terms can be factored out?  

--- Page 213 ---
4.1.10Which Boolean algebra theorem describes the situation where an
OR gate with its inputs inverted is equivalent to an AND gate with
its outputs inverted?
 
4.1.11 Which Boolean algebra theorem describes the situation where the
grouping of variables in an OR operation does not affect the result?
 
4.1.12Which Boolean algebra theorem describes the situation where any
variable AND’d with itself will yield itself?
 
4.1.13Which Boolean algebra theorem describes the situation where the
order of variables in an OR operation does not affect the result?
 
4.1.14Which Boolean algebra theorem describes the situation where any
variable AND’d with a 1 will yield itself?
 
4.1.15Which Boolean algebra theorem describes the situation where the
grouping of variables in an AND operation does not affect the
result?
 
4.1.16Which Boolean algebra theorem describes the situation where any
variable OR’d with its complement will yield a 1?
 
4.1.17Which Boolean algebra theorem describes the situation where the
order of variables in an AND operation does not affect the result?
 
4.1.18Which Boolean algebra theorem describes the situation where a
variable OR’d with a 0 will yield itself?
 
4.1.19Use proof by exhaustion to prove that an OR gate with its inputs
inverted is equivalent to an AND gate with its outputs inverted.
 
4.1.20Use proof by exhaustion to prove that an AND gate with its inputs
inverted is equivalent to an OR gate with its outputs inverted. 

--- Page 214 ---
Section 4.2: Combinational Logic Analysis
4.2.1For the logic diagram given in Fig. 4.27, give the logic expression
for the output F.
Fig. 4.27Combinational Logic Analysis 1
 
4.2.2For the logic diagram given in Fig. 4.27, give the truth table for the
output F.
 
4.2.3For the logic diagram given in Figure 4.27, give the delay.  
4.2.4For the logic diagram given in Fig. 4.28, give the logic expression
for the output F.
Fig. 4.28Combinational Logic Analysis 2
 
4.2.5For the logic diagram given in Fig. 4.28, give the truth table for the
output F.
 
4.2.6For the logic diagram given in Fig. 4.28, give the delay.  
4.2.7For the logic diagram given in Fig. 4.29, give the logic expression
for the output F.  

--- Page 215 ---
Fig. 4.29Combinational Logic Analysis 3
4.2.8For the logic diagram given in Fig. 4.29, give the truth table for the
output F.
 
4.2.9For the logic diagram given in Fig. 4.29, give the delay.  
Section 4.3: Combinational Logic Synthesis
4.3.1 For the 2-input truth table in Fig. 4.30, give the canonical sum of
products (SOP) logic expression.
Fig. 4.30Combinational Logic Synthesis 1
 
4.3.2 For the 2-input truth table in Fig. 4.30, give the canonical sum of
products (SOP) logic diagram.
 
4.3.3 For the 2-input truth table in Fig. 4.30, give the minterm list.  
4.3.4 For the 2-input truth table in Fig. 4.30, give the canonical product
of sums (POS) logic expression.  

--- Page 216 ---
4.3.5 For the 2-input truth table in Fig. 4.30, give the canonical product
of sums (POS) logic diagram.
 
4.3.6 For the 2-input truth table in Fig. 4.30, give the maxterm list.  
4.3.7 For the 2-input minterm list in Fig. 4.31, give the canonical sum of
products (SOP) logic expression.
Fig. 4.31Combinational Logic Synthesis 2
 
4.3.8 For the 2-input minterm list in Fig. 4.31, give the canonical sum of
products (SOP) logic diagram.
 
4.3.9 For the 2-input minterm list in Fig. 4.31, give the truth table.  
4.3.10For the 2-input minterm list in Fig. 4.31, give the canonical
product of sums (POS) logic expression.
 
4.3.11 For the 2-input minterm list in Fig. 4.31, give the canonical
product of sums (POS) logic diagram.
 
4.3.12For the 2-input minterm list in Fig. 4.31, give the maxterm list.  
4.3.13For the 2-input maxterm list in Fig. 4.32, give the canonical sum of
products (SOP) logic expression.
Fig. 4.32Combinational Logic Synthesis 3
 

--- Page 217 ---
4.3.14For the 2-input maxterm list in Fig. 4.32, give the canonical sum of
products (SOP) logic diagram.  
4.3.15For the 2-input maxterm list in Fig. 4.32, give the minterm list.  
4.3.16For the 2-input maxterm list in Fig. 4.32, give the canonical
product of sums (POS) logic expression.
 
4.3.17For the 2-input maxterm list in Fig. 4.32, give the canonical
product of sums (POS) logic diagram.
 
4.3.18For the 2-input maxterm list in Fig. 4.32, give the truth table.  
4.3.19For the 3-input truth table in Fig. 4.33, give the canonical sum of
products (SOP) logic expression.
Fig. 4.33Combinational Logic Synthesis 4
 
4.3.20For the 3-input truth table in Fig. 4.33, give the canonical sum of
products (SOP) logic diagram.
 
4.3.21For the 3-input truth table in Fig. 4.33, give the minterm list.  
4.3.22For the 3-input truth table in Fig. 4.33, give the canonical product
of sums (POS) logic expression.
 
Forthe3-inputtruthtableinFig.4.33,givethecanonicalproduct

--- Page 218 ---
4.3.23For the 3input truth table in Fig. 4.33, give the canonical product
of sums (POS) logic diagram.  
4.3.24For the 3-input truth table in Fig. 4.33, give the maxterm list.  
4.3.25For the 3-input minterm list in Fig. 4.34, give the canonical sum of
products (SOP) logic expression.
Fig. 4.34Combinational Logic Synthesis 5
 
4.3.26For the 3-input minterm list in Fig. 4.34, give the canonical sum of
products (SOP) logic diagram.
 
4.3.27For the 3-input minterm list in Fig. 4.34, give the truth table.
 
4.3.28For the 3-input minterm list in Fig. 4.34, give the canonical
product of sums (POS) logic expression.
 
4.3.29For the 3-input minterm list in Fig. 4.34, give the canonical
product of sums (POS) logic diagram.
 
4.3.30For the 3-input minterm list in Fig. 4.34, give the maxterm list.  
4.3.31For the 3-input maxterm list in Fig. 4.35, give the canonical sum of
products (SOP) logic expression.
Fig. 4.35Combinational Logic Synthesis 6
 
4.3.32For the 3-input maxterm list in Fig. 4.35, give the canonical sum of
products (SOP) logic diagram.  

--- Page 219 ---
4.3.33For the 3-input maxterm list in Fig. 4.35, give the minterm list.  
4.3.34For the 3-input maxterm list in Fig. 4.35, give the canonical
product of sums (POS) logic expression.
 
4.3.35For the 3-input maxterm list in Fig. 4.35, give the canonical
product of sums (POS) logic diagram.
 
4.3.36For the 3-input maxterm list in Fig. 4.35, give the truth table.  
4.3.37For the 4-input truth table in Fig. 4.36, give the canonical sum of
products (SOP) logic expression.
Fig. 4.36Combinational Logic Synthesis 7
 
4.3.38For the 4-input truth table in Fig. 4.36, give the canonical sum of
products(SOP)logicdiagram

--- Page 220 ---
products (SOP) logic diagram.
 
4.3.39For the 4-input truth table in Fig. 4.36, give the minterm list.  
4.3.40For the 4-input truth table in Fig. 4.36, give the canonical product
of sums (POS) logic expression.
 
4.3.41For the 4-input truth table in Fig. 4.36, give the canonical product
of sums (POS) logic diagram.
 
4.3.42For the 4-input truth table in Fig. 4.36, give the maxterm list.  
4.3.43For the 4-input minterm list in Fig. 4.37, give the canonical sum of
products (SOP) logic expression.
Fig. 4.37Combinational Logic Synthesis 8
 
4.3.44For the 4-input minterm list in Fig. 4.37, give the canonical sum of
products (SOP) logic diagram.
 
4.3.45For the 4-input minterm list in Fig. 4.37, give the truth table.  
4.3.46For the 4-input minterm list in Fig. 4.37, give the canonical
product of sums (POS) logic expression.
 
4.3.47For the 4-input minterm list in Fig. 4.37, give the canonical
product of sums (POS) logic diagram.
 
4.3.48For the 4-input minterm list in Fig. 4.37, give the maxterm list.  
4.3.49For the 4-input maxterm list in Fig. 4.38, give the canonical sum of
products (SOP) logic expression.  

--- Page 221 ---
Fig. 4.38Combinational Logic Synthesis 9
4.3.50For the 4-input maxterm list in Fig. 4.38, give the canonical sum of
products (SOP) logic diagram.
 
4.3.51For the 4-input maxterm list in Fig. 4.38, give the minterm list.  
4.3.52For the 4-input maxterm list in Fig. 4.38, give the canonical
product of sums (POS) logic expression.
 
4.3.53For the 4-input maxterm list in Fig. 4.38, give the canonical
product of sums (POS) logic diagram.
 
4.3.54For the 4-input maxterm list in Fig. 4.38, give the truth table.  
Section 4.4: Logic Minimization
4.4.1 For the 2-input truth table in Fig. 4.39, use a K-map to derive a
minimized sum of products (SOP) logic expression.
Fig. 4.39Logic Minimization 1
 
4.4.2 For the 2-input truth table in Fig. 4.39, use a K-map to derive a
minimized product of sums (POS) logic expression.
 
4.4.3 For the 2-input truth table in Fig. 4.40, use a K-map to derive a
minimized sum of products (SOP) logic expression.
  

--- Page 222 ---
Fig. 4.40Logic Minimization 2
4.4.4 For the 2-input truth table in Fig. 4.41, use a K-map to derive a
minimized product of sums (POS) logic expression.
Fig. 4.41Logic Minimization 3
 
4.4.5 For the 2-input truth table in Fig. 4.42, use a K-map to derive a
minimized sum of products (SOP) logic expression.
Fig. 4.42Logic Minimization 4
 
4.4.6 For the 2-input truth table in Fig. 4.42, use a K-map to derive a
minimized product of sums (POS) logic expression.
 
4.4.7 For the 3-input truth table in Fig. 4.43, use a K-map to derive a
minimized sum of products (SOP) logic expression.
Fig. 4.43Logic Minimization 5
 

--- Page 223 ---
4.4.8 For the 3-input truth table in Fig. 4.43, use a K-map to derive a
minimized product of sums (POS) logic expression.  
4.4.9 For the 3-input truth table in Fig. 4.44, use a K-map to derive a
minimized sum of products (SOP) logic expression.
Fig. 4.44Logic Minimization 6
 
4.4.10For the 3-input truth table in Fig. 4.44, use a K-map to derive a
minimized product of sums (POS) logic expression.
 
4.4.11 For the 3-input truth table in Fig. 4.45, use a K-map to derive a
minimized sum of products (SOP) logic expression.
Fig. 4.45Logic Minimization 7
 
4.4.12For the 3-input truth table in Fig. 4.45, use a K-map to derive a
minimized product of sums (POS) logic expression.
 
4.4.13For the 3-input truth table in Fig. 4.46, use a K-map to derive a
minimized sum of products (SOP) logic expression.
  

--- Page 224 ---
Fig. 4.46Logic Minimization 8
4.4.14For the 3-input truth table in Fig. 4.46, use a K-map to derive a
minimized product of sums (POS) logic expression.
 
4.4.15For the 4-input truth table in Fig. 4.47, use a K-map to derive a
minimized sum of products (SOP) logic expression.
Fig. 4.47Logic Minimization 9
 
4.4.16For the 4-input truth table in Fig. 4.47, use a K-map to derive a
minimized product of sums (POS) logic expression.
 
4.4.17For the 4-input truth table in Fig. 4.48, use a K-map to derive a
minimized sum of products (SOP) logic expression.
  

--- Page 225 ---
Fig. 4.48Logic Minimization 10
4.4.18For the 4-input truth table in Fig. 4.48, use a K-map to derive a
minimized product of sums (POS) logic expression.
 
4.4.19For the 4-input truth table in Fig. 4.49, use a K-map to derive a
minimized sum of products (SOP) logic expression.
Fig. 4.49Logic Minimization 11
 
4.4.20For the 4-input truth table in Fig. 4.49, use a K-map to derive a
minimized product of sums (POS) logic expression.
 
4.4.21For the 4-input truth table in Fig. 4.50, use a K-map to derive a
minimized sum of products (SOP) logic expression.
  

--- Page 226 ---
Fig. 4.50Logic Minimization 12
4.4.22For the 4-input truth table in Fig. 4.50, use a K-map to derive a
minimized product of sums (POS) logic expression.
 
4.4.23For the 3-input truth table and K-map in Fig. 4.51, provide the row
number(s) of any distinguished one-cells.
Fig. 4.51Logic Minimization 13
 
4.4.24For the 3-input truth table and K-map in Fig. 4.51, give the product
terms for the essential prime implicants.
 
4.4.25For the 3-input truth table and K-map in Fig. 4.51, give the
minimal sum of products logic expression.
 
4.4.26For the 3-input truth table and K-map in Fig. 4.51, give the
complete sum of products logic expression.
 
4.4.27For the 4-input truth table and K-map in Fig. 4.52, provide the row
number(s)ofanydistinguishedone-cells.

--- Page 227 ---
u be(s) o a y dst gus ed oe ce s.
Fig. 4.52Logic Minimization 14
 
4.4.28For the 4-input truth table and K-map in Fig. 4.52, give the product
terms for the essential prime implicants.
 
4.4.29For the 4-input truth table and K-map in Fig. 4.52, give the
minimal sum of products (SOP) logic expression.
 
4.4.30For the 4-input truth table and K-map in Fig. 4.52, give the
complete sum of products (SOP) logic expression.
 
4.4.31For the 4-input truth table and K-map in Fig. 4.53, give the
minimal sum of products (SOP) logic expression by exploiting
“don’t cares.”
 

--- Page 228 ---
Fig. 4.53Logic Minimization 15
4.4.32For the 4-input truth table and K-map in Fig. 4.53, give the
minimal product of sums (POS) logic expression by exploiting
“don’t cares.”
 
4.4.33For the 4-input truth table and K-map in Fig. 4.54, give the
minimal product of sums (POS) logic expression by exploiting
“don’t cares.”
Fig. 4.54Logic Minimization 16
 
4.4.34For the 4-input truth table and K-map in Fig. 4.54, give the
minimal product of sums (POS) logic expression by exploiting
“don’t cares”.
 

--- Page 229 ---
Section 4.5: Timing Hazards and Glitches
4.5.1Describe the situation in which a static-1 timing hazard may occur.  
4.5.2Describe the situation in which a static-0 timing hazard may occur.  
4.5.3In which topology will a static-1 timing hazard occur (SOP, POS, or
both)?
 
4.5.4In which topology will a static-0 timing hazard occur (SOP, POS, or
both)?
 
4.5.5For the 3-input truth table and K-map in Fig. 4.51, give the product
term that helps eliminate static-1 timing hazards in this circuit.
 
4.5.6For the 3-input truth table and K-map in Fig. 4.51, give the sum
term that helps eliminate static-0 timing hazards in this circuit.
 
4.5.7For the 4-input truth table and K-map in Fig. 4.52, give the product
term that helps eliminate static-1 timing hazards in this circuit.
 
4.5.8For the 4-input truth table and K-map in Fig. 4.52, give the sum
term that helps eliminate static-0 timing hazards in this circuit.
 

--- Page 230 ---
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2017
Brock J. LaMeres, Introduction to Logic Circuits & Logic Design with VHDL , DOI 10.1007/978-3-
319-34195-8_5

--- Page 231 ---
(1)
5. VHDL (Part 1)
Brock J. LaMeres1 
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Montana State
University, Bozeman, MT, USA
 
Based on the material presented in Chap. 4, there are a few observations
about logic design that are apparent. First, the size of logic circuitry can
scale quickly to the point where it is difficult to design by hand. Second, the
process of moving from a high-level description of how a circuit works
(e.g., a truth table) to a form that is ready to be implemented with real
circuitry (e.g., a minimized logic diagram) is straightforward and well
defined. Both of these observations motivate the use of computer-aided
design (CAD) tools to accomplish logic design. This chapter introduces
hardware description languages (HDLs) as a means to describe digital
circuitry using a text-based language. HDLs provide a means to describe
large digital systems without the need for schematics, which can become
impractical in very large designs. HDLs have evolved to support logic
simulation at different levels of abstraction. This provides designers the
ability to begin designing and verifying functionality of large systems at a
high level of abstraction and postpone the details of the circuit
implementation until later in the design cycle. This enables a top-down
design approach that is scalable across different logic families. HDLs have
also evolved to support automated synthesis, which allows the CAD tools to
take a functional description of a system (e.g., a truth table) and
automatically create the gate-level circuitry to be implemented in real
hardware. This allows designers to focus their attention on designing the
behavior of a system and not spend as much time performing the formal
logic synthesis steps that were presented in Chap. 4. The intent of this
chapter is to introduce HDLs and their use in the modern digital design
flow. This chapter covers the basics of designing combinational logic in an

--- Page 232 ---
HDL and also hierarchical design. The more advanced concepts of HDLs
such as sequential logic design, high-level abstraction, and adding
functionality to an HDL through additional libraries and packages are
covered later so that the reader can get started quickly using HDLs to gain
experience with the languages and design flow.
There are two dominant hardware description languages in use today.
They are VHDL and Verilog. VHDL stands for v ery high speed integrated
circuit h ardware d escription l anguage. Verilog is not an acronym but
rather a trade name. The use of these two HDLs is split nearly equally
within the digital design industry. Once one language is learned it is simple
to learn the other language, so the choice of the HDL to learn first is
somewhat arbitrary. In this text we use VHDL to learn the concepts of an
HDL. VHDL is stricter in its syntax and typecasting than Verilog, so it is a
good platform for beginners as it provides more of a scaffold for the
description of circuits. This helps avoid some of the common pitfalls that
beginners typically encounter. The goal of this chapter is to provide an
understanding of the basic principles of hardware description languages.
Learning Outcomes—After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
5.1Describe the role of hardware description languages in modern digital
design.
 
5.2Describe the fundamentals of design abstraction in modern digital
design.
 
5.3Describe the modern digital design flow based on hardware
description languages.
 
5.4Describe the fundamental constructs of VHDL.  
5.5Design a VHDL model for a combinational logic circuit using
concurrent modeling techniques (signal assignments and logical
operators, conditional signal assignments, and selected signal
assignments).
 
Design a VHDL model for a combinational logic circuit using a

--- Page 233 ---
5.6
 g g g
structural design approach.  
5.7Describe the role of a VHDL test bench.
 
5.1 History of Hardware Description Languages
The invention of the integrated circuit is most commonly credited to two
individuals who filed patents on different variations of the same basic
concept within 6 months of each other in 1959. Jack Kilby filed the first
patent on the integrated circuit in February of 1959 titled “Miniaturized
Electronic Circuits” while working for Texas Instruments. Robert Noyce
was the second to file a patent on the integrated circuit in July of 1959 titled
“Semiconductor Device and Lead Structure” while at a company he
cofounded called Fairchild Semiconductor. Kilby went on to win the Nobel
Prize in Physics in 2000 for his invention, while Noyce went on to cofound
Intel Corporation in 1968 with Gordon Moore. In 1971, Intel introduced the
first single-chip microprocessor using integrated circuit technology, the
Intel 4004. This microprocessor IC contained 2300 transistors. This series
of inventions launched the semiconductor industry, which was the driving
force behind the growth of Silicon Valley, and led to 40 years of
unprecedented advancement in technology that has impacted every aspect
of the modern world.
Gordon Moore, cofounder of Intel, predicted in 1965 that the number of
transistors on an integrated circuit would double every 2 years. This
prediction, now known as Moore’s law, has held true since the invention of
the integrated circuit. As the number of transistors on an integrated circuit
grew, so did the size of the design and the functionality that could be
implemented. Once the first microprocessor was invented in 1971, the
capability of CAD tools increased rapidly enabling larger designs to be
accomplished. These larger designs, including newer microprocessors,
enabled the CAD tools to become even more sophisticated and, in turn,
yield even larger designs. The rapid expansion of electronic systems based
on digital integrated circuits required that different manufacturers needed to
produce designs that were compatible with each other. The adoption of

--- Page 234 ---
logic family standards helped manufacturers ensure that their parts would
be compatible with other manufacturers at the physical layer (e.g., voltage
and current); however, one challenge that was encountered by the industry
was a way to document the complex behavior of larger systems. The use of
schematics to document large digital designs became too cumbersome and
difficult to understand by anyone besides the designer. Word descriptions of
the behavior were easier to understand, but even this form of documentation
became too voluminous to be effective for the size of designs that were
emerging.
In 1983, the US Department of Defense (DoD) sponsored a program to
create a means to document the behavior of digital systems that could be
used across all of its suppliers. This program was motivated by a lack of
adequate documentation for the functionality of application-specific
integrated circuits (ASICs) that were being supplied to the DoD. This lack
of documentation was becoming a critical issue as ASICs would come to
the end of their life cycle and need to be replaced. With the lack of a
standardized documentation approach, suppliers had difficulty reproducing
equivalent parts to those that had become obsolete. The DoD contracted
three companies (Texas Instruments, IBM, and Intermetrics) to develop a
standardized documentation tool that provided detailed information about
both the interface (i.e., inputs and outputs) and the behavior of digital
systems. The new tool was to be implemented in a format similar to a
programming language. Due to the nature of this type of language-based
tool, it was a natural extension of the original project scope to include the
ability to simulate the behavior of a digital system. The simulation
capability was desired to span multiple levels of abstraction to provide
maximum flexibility. In 1985, the first version of this tool, called VHDL,
was released. In order to gain widespread adoption and ensure consistency
of use across the industry, VHDL was turned over to the Institute of
Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) for standardization. IEEE is a
professional association that defines a broad range of open technology
standards. In 1987, IEEE released the first industry standard version of
VHDL. The release was titled IEEE 1076-1987. Feedback from the initial
version resulted in a major revision of the standard in 1993 titled IEEE
1076-1993. While many minor revisions have been made to the 1993
release, the 1076-1993 standard contains the vast majority of VHDL

--- Page 235 ---
functionality in use today. The most recent VHDL standard is IEEE 1076-
2008.
Also in 1983, the Verilog HDL was developed by Automated Integrated
Design Systems as a logic simulation language. The development of Verilog
took place completely independent from the VHDL project. Automated
Integrated Design Systems (renamed Gateway Design Automation in 1985)
was acquired by CAD tool vendor Cadence Design Systems in 1990. In
response to the rapid adoption of the open VHDL standard, Cadence made
the Verilog HDL open to the public in order to stay competitive. IEEE once
again developed the open standard for this HDL, and in 1995 released the
Verilog standard titled IEEE 1364.
The development of CAD tools to accomplish automated logic synthesis
can be dated back to the 1970s when IBM began developing a series of
practical synthesis engines that were used in the design of their mainframe
computers; however, the main advancement in logic synthesis came with
the founding of a company called Synopsis in 1986. Synopsis was the first
company to focus on logic synthesis directly from HDLs. This was a major
contribution because designers were already using HDLs to describe and
simulate their digital systems, and now logic synthesis became integrated in
the same design flow. Due to the complexity of synthesizing highly abstract
functional descriptions, only lower levels of abstraction that were
thoroughly elaborated were initially able to be synthesized. As CAD tool
capability evolved, synthesis of higher levels of abstraction became
possible, but even today not all functionality that can be described in an
HDL can be synthesized.
The history of HDLs, their standardization, and the creation of the
associated logic synthesis tools are key to understanding the use and
limitations of HDLs. HDLs were originally designed for documentation and
behavioral simulation. Logic synthesis tools were developed independently
and modified later to work with HDLs. This history provides some
background into the most common pitfalls that beginning digital designers
encounter, that being that most any type of behavior can be described and
simulated in an HDL, but only a subset of well-described functionality can
be synthesized. Beginning digital designers are often plagued by issues
related to designs that simulate perfectly but that will not synthesize
correctly. In this book, an effort is made to introduce VHDL at a level that
provides a reasonable amount of abstraction while preserving the ability to

--- Page 236 ---
be synthesized. Figure 5.1 shows a timeline of some of the major
technology milestones that have occurred in the past 150 years in the field
of digital logic and HDLs.
Fig. 5.1Major milestones in the advancement of digital logic and HDLs

--- Page 237 ---
5.2 HDL Abstraction
HDLs were originally defined to be able to model behavior at multiple
levels of abstraction. Abstraction is an important concept in engineering
design because it allows us to specify how systems will operate without
getting consumed prematurely with implementation details. Also, by
removing the details of the lower level implementation, simulations can be
conducted in reasonable amounts of time to model the higher level
functionality. If a full computer system was simulated using detailed models
for every MOSFET, it would take an impracticable amount of time to
complete. Figure 5.2 shows a graphical depiction of the different layers of
abstraction in digital system design.

--- Page 238 ---
Fig. 5.2Levels of design abstraction
The highest level of abstraction is the system level. At this level,
behavior of a system is described by stating a set of broad specifications.
An example of a design at this level is a specification such as “the computer
system will perform 10 Tera Floating Point Operations per Second (10
TFLOPS) on double precision data and consume no more than 100 Watts of
power.” Notice that these specifications do not dictate the lower level
details such as the type of logic family or the type of computer architecture
to use. One level down from the system level is the algorithmic level. At
this level, the specifications begin to be broken down into subsystems, each
with an associated behavior that will accomplish a part of the primary task.

--- Page 239 ---
At this level, the example computer specifications might be broken down
into subsystems such as a central processing unit (CPU) to perform the
computation and random access memory (RAM) to hold the inputs and
outputs of the computation. One level down from the algorithmic level is
the register transfer level (RTL). At this level, the details of how data is
moved between and within subsystems are described in addition to how the
data is manipulated based on system inputs. One level down from the RTL
level is the gate level. At this level, the design is described using basic gates
and registers (or storage elements). The gate level is essentially a schematic
(either graphically or text based) that contains the components and
connections that will implement the functionality from the above levels of
abstraction. One level down from the gate level is the circuit level. The
circuit level describes the operation of the basic gates and registers using
transistors, wires, and other electrical components such as resistors and
capacitors. Finally, the lowest level of design abstraction is the material
level. This level describes how different materials are combined and shaped
in order to implement the transistors, devices, and wires from the circuit
level.
HDLs are designed to model behavior at all of these levels with the
exception of the material level. While there is some capability to model
circuit-level behavior such as MOSFETs as ideal switches and pull-up/pull-
down resistors, HDLs are not typically used at the circuit level. Another
graphical depiction of design abstraction is known as the Gajski and
Kuhn’s Y-chart. A Y-chart depicts abstraction across three different design
domains: behavioral, structural, and physical. Each of these design domains
contains levels of abstraction (i.e., system, algorithm, RTL, gate, and
circuit). An example Y-chart is shown in Fig. 5.3.

--- Page 240 ---
Fig. 5.3Y-Chart of design abstraction
A Y-chart also depicts how the abstraction levels of different design
domains are related to each other. A top-down design flow can be
visualized in a Y-chart by spiraling inward in a clockwise direction. Moving
from the behavioral domain to the structural domain is the process of
synthesis. Whenever synthesis is performed, the resulting system should be
compared with the prior behavioral description. This checking is called
verification. The process of creating the physical circuitry corresponding to
the structural description is called implementation. The spiral continues
down through the levels of abstraction until the design is implemented at a
level that the geometries representing circuit elements (transistors, wires,
etc.) are ready to be fabricated in silicon. Figure 5.4 shows the top-down
design process depicted as an inward spiral on the Y-chart.

--- Page 241 ---
Fig. 5.4Y-Chart illustrating top-down design approach
The Y-chart represents a formal approach for large digital systems. For
large systems that are designed by teams of engineers, it is critical that a
formal, top-down design process is followed to eliminate potentially costly
design errors as the implementation is carried out at lower levels of
abstraction.

--- Page 242 ---
5.3 The Modern Digital Design Flow
When performing a smaller design or the design of fully contained
subsystems, the process can be broken down into individual steps. These
steps are shown in Fig. 5.5. This process is given generically and applies to
both classical and modern digital design. The distinction between classical
and modern is that modern digital design uses HDLs and automated CAD
tools for simulation, synthesis, place and route, and verification.

--- Page 243 ---
Fig. 5.5Generic digital design flow
This generic design process flow can be used across classical and
modern digital design, although modern digital design allows additional
verification at each step using automated CAD tools. Figure 5.6 shows how
this flow is used in the classical design approach of a combinational logic
circuit.

--- Page 244 ---
Fig. 5.6Classical digital design flow

--- Page 245 ---
The modern design flow based on HDLs includes the ability to simulate
functionality at each step of the process. Functional simulations can be
performed on the initial behavioral description of the system. At each step
of the design process the functionality is described in more detail,
ultimately moving toward the fabrication step. At each level, the detailed
information can be included in the simulation to verify that the functionality
is still correct and that the design is still meeting the original specifications.
Figure 5.7 shows the modern digital design flow with the inclusion of
simulation capability at each step.

--- Page 246 ---
Fig. 5.7Modern digital design flow

--- Page 247 ---
5.4 VHDL Constructs
Now we begin looking at the details of VHDL. A VHDL design describes a
single system in a single file. The file has the suffix *.vhd. Within the file,
there are two parts that describe the system: the entity and the
architecture. The entity describes the interface to the system (i.e., the
inputs and outputs) and the architecture describes the behavior. The
functionality of VHDL (e.g., operators, signal types, functions) is defined in
the package. Packages are grouped within a library. IEEE defines the base
set of functionality for VHDL in the standard package. This package is
contained within a library called IEEE. The library and package inclusion is
stated at the beginning of a VHDL file before the entity and architecture.
Additional functionality can be added to VHDL by including other
packages, but all packages are based on the core functionality defined in the
standard package. As a result, it is not necessary to explicitly state that a
design is using the IEEE standard package because it is inherent in the use
of VHDL. All functionality described in this chapter is for the IEEE
standard package while other common packages are covered in Chap. 8.
Figure 5.8 shows a graphical depiction of a VHDL file.

--- Page 248 ---
Fig. 5.8The anatomy of a VHDL file
VHDL is not case sensitive. Also, each VHDL assignment, definition,
or declaration is terminated with a semicolon (;). As such, line wraps are
allowed and do not signify the end of an assignment, definition, or
declaration. Line wraps can be used to make the VHDL more readable.
Comments in VHDL are preceded with two dashes (i.e., --) and continue
until the end of the line. All user-defined names in VHDL must start with
an alphabetic letter, not a number. User-defined names are not allowed to be
the same as any VHDL keyword. This chapter contains many definitions of
syntax in VHDL. The following notations will be used throughout the
chapter when introducing new constructs:
bold = VHDL keyword, use as is
italics= User-defined name
<> = A required characteristic such as a data type and input/output
5.4.1 Data Types
In VHDL, every signal, constant, variable, and function must be assigned a
data type. The IEEE standard package provides a variety of predefined data
types. Some data types are synthesizable, while others are only for
modeling abstract behavior. The following are the most commonly used
data types in the VHDL standard package.

--- Page 249 ---
5.4.1.1 Enumerated Types
An enumerated type is one in which the exact values that the type can take
on are defined.
Type Values that the type can take on
bit {0, 1}
boolean{false, true}
character{“any of the 256 ASCII characters defined in ISO 8859-1”}
The type bit is synthesizable while Boolean and character are not. The
individual scalar values are indicated by putting them inside single quotes
(e.g., ‘0,’ ‘a,’ ‘true’).
5.4.1.2 Range Types
A range type is one that can take on any value within a range.
Type Values that the type can take on
integerWhole numbers between −2,147,483,648 to +2,147,483,647
real Fractional numbers between −1.7e38 to +1.7e38
The integer type is a 32-bit, signed, two’s complement number and is
synthesizable. If the full range of integer values is not desired, this type can
be bounded by including range <min> to <max>. The real type is a 32-bit,
floating point value and is not directly synthesizable unless an additional
package is included that defines the floating point format. The values of
these types are indicated by simply using the number without quotes (e.g.,
33, 3.14).
5.4.1.3 Physical Types
A physical type is one that contains both a value and units. In VHDL, time
is the primary supported physical type.
TypeValues that the type can take on
timeWhole numbers between −2,147,483,648 to +2,147,483,647
(unit relationships)fs (femtosecond, 10−15), base unit

--- Page 250 ---
  ps = 1000 fs(picosecond, 10−12)
  ns = 1000 ps(nanosecond, 10−9)
  μs = 1000 ns(microsecond, 10−6)
  ms = 1000 μs(millisecond, 10−3)
  s = 1000 ms(second)
  min = 60 s (minute)
  h = 60 min (hour)
The base unit for time is fs, meaning that if no units are provided, the
value is assumed to be in femtoseconds. The value of time is held as a 32-
bit, signed number and is not synthesizable.
5.4.1.4 Vector Types
A vector type is one that consists of a linear array of scalar types.
Type Construction
bit_vectorA linear array of type bit
string A linear array of type character
The size of a vector type is defined by including the maximum index,
the keyword downto, and the minimum index. For example, if a signal
called BUS_A was given the type bit_vector(7 downto 0), it would create a
vector of 8 scalars, each of type bit. The leftmost scalar would have an
index of 7 and the rightmost scalar would have an index of 0. Each of the
individual scalars within the vector can be accessed by providing the index
number in parentheses. For example, BUS_A(0) would access the scalar in
the rightmost position. The indices do not always need to have a minimum
value of 0, but this is the most common indexing approach in logic design.
The type bit_vector is synthesizable while string is not. The values of these
types are indicated by enclosing them inside double quotes (e.g., “0011,”
“abcd”).
5.4.1.5 User-Defined Enumerated Types
A user-defined enumerated type is one in which the name of the type is
specified by the user in addition to all of the possible values that the type

--- Page 251 ---
can assume. The creation of a user-defined enumerated type is shown
below:
type name is (value1, value2, …);
Example:
type traffic_light is (red, yellow, green);
In this example, a new type is created called traffic_light. If we declared
a new signal called Sig1 and assigned it the type traffic_light, the signal
could only take on values of red, yellow, and green. User-defined
enumerated types are synthesizable in specific applications.
5.4.1.6 Array Type
An array contains multiple elements of the same type. Elements within an
array can be scalar or vectors. In order to use an array, a new type must be
declared that defines the configuration of the array. Once the new type is
created, signals may be declared of that type. The range of the array must
be defined in the array type declaration. The range is specified with integers
(min and max) and either the keywords downto or to. The creation of an
array type is shown below:
type name is array (<range>) of <element_type>;
Example:
type block_8x16 is array (0 to 7) bit_vector(15
downto 0);
signal my_array : block_8x16;
In this example, the new array type is declared with eight elements. The
beginning index of the array is 0 and the ending index is 7. Each element in
the array is a 16-bit vector of type bit_vector.
5.4.1.7 Subtypes

--- Page 252 ---
A subtype is a constrained version, or subset of another type. Subtypes are
user defined, although a few commonly used subtypes are predefined in the
standard package. The following is the syntax for declaring a subtype and
two examples of commonly used subtypes (NATURAL and POSTIVE) that
are defined in the standard package:
subtype name is <type> range <min> to <max>;
Example:
subtype NATURAL is integer range 0 to 255;
subtype POSTIVE is integer range 1 to 256;
5.4.2 Libraries and Packages
As mentioned earlier, the IEEE standard package is implied when using
VHDL; however, we can use it as an example of how to include packages in
VHDL. The keyword library is used to signify that packages are going to
be added to the VHDL design from the specified library. The name of the
library follows this keyword. To include a specific package from the library,
a new line is used with the keyword use followed by the package details.
The package syntax has three fields separated with a period. The first field
is the library name. The second field is the package name. The third field is
the specific functionality of the package to be included. If all functionality
of a package is to be used, then the keyword all is used in the third field.
Examples of how to include some of the commonly used packages from the
IEEE library are shown below:
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
use IEEE.numeric_std.all;
use IEEE.std_logic_textio.all;
5.4.3 The Entity
The entity in VHDL describes the inputs and outputs of the system. These
are called ports. Each port needs to have its name, mode, and type
specified. The name is user defined. The mode describes the direction data
is transferred through the port and can take on values of in, out, inout, and

--- Page 253 ---
buffer. The type is one of the legal data types described above. Port names
with the same mode and type can be listed on the same line separated by
commas. The definition of an entity is given below:
entity entity_name is
    port (port_name : <mode> <type>;
port_name : <mode> <type>);
end entity;
Example 5.1 shows multiple approaches for defining an entity.
Example 5.1 Defining VHDL Entities
5.4.4 The Architecture
The architecture in VHDL describes the behavior of a system. There are
numerous techniques to describe behavior in VHDL that span multiple
levels of abstraction. The architecture is where the majority of the design
work is conducted. The form of a generic architecture is given below:
architecture architecture_name of <entity
associated with> is
-- user-defined enumerated type
declarations    (optional)

--- Page 254 ---
-- signal declarations                      
(optional)
-- constant declarations                
        (optional)
-- component
declarations                        (optional)
begin
-- behavioral description of the system goes here
end architecture;
5.4.4.1 Signal Declarations
A signal that is used for internal connections within a system is declared in
the architecture. Each signal must be declared with a type. The signal can
only be used to make connections of like types. A signal is declared with
the keyword signal followed by a user-defined name, colon, and the type.
Signals of like type can be declared on the same line separated with a
comma. All of the legal data types described above can be used for signals.
Signals represent wires within the system, so they do not have a direction or
mode. Signals cannot have the same name as a port in the system in which
they reside. The syntax for a signal declaration is as follows:
signal name : <type>;
Example:
signal node1 : bit;
signal a1, b1 : integer;
signal Bus3 : bit_vector (15 downto 0);
signal C_int : integer range 0 to 255;
VHDL supports a hierarchical design approach. Signal names can be the
same within a subsystem as those at a higher level without conflict.
Figure 5.9 shows an example of legal signal naming in a hierarchical
design.

--- Page 255 ---
Fig. 5.9VHDL signals and systems
5.4.4.2 Constant Declarations
A constant is useful for representing a quantity that will be used multiple
times in the architecture. The syntax for declaring a constant is as follows:
constant constant_name : <type> := <value>;
Example:
constant BUS_WIDTH : integer := 32;
Once declared, the constant name can now be used throughout the
architecture. The following example illustrates how we can use a constant
to define the size of a vector. Notice that since we defined the constant to be
the actual width of the vector (i.e., 32 bits), we need to subtract one from its
value when defining the indices (i.e., 31 downto 0).
Example:
signal BUS_A : bit_vector (BUS_WIDTH-1 downto
0);
5.4.4.3 Component Declarations

--- Page 256 ---
A component is the term used for a VHDL subsystem that is instantiated
within a higher level system. If a component is going to be used within a
system, it must be declared in the architecture before the begin statement.
The syntax for a component declaration is as follows:
component component_name
    port (port_name : <mode> <type>;
port_name : <mode> <type>);
end component;
The port definitions of the component must match the port definitions of
the subsystem’s entity exactly. As such, these lines are typically copied
directly from the lower level systems VHDL entity description. Once
declared, a component can be instantiated after the begin statement in the
architecture as many times as needed.
5.5 Modeling Concurrent Functionality in VHDL
It is important to remember that VHDL is a hardware description language,
not a programming language. In a programming language, the lines of code
are executed sequentially as they appear in the source file. In VHDL, the
lines of code represent the behavior of real hardware. As a result, all signal

--- Page 257 ---
assignments are by default executed concurrently unless specifically noted
otherwise. All operations in VHDL must be on like types and the result
must be assigned to the same type as the operation inputs.
5.5.1 VHDL Operators
There are a variety of predefined operators in the IEEE standard package. It
is important to note that operators are defined to work on specific data types
and that not all operators are synthesizable.
5.5.1.1 Assignment Operator
VHDL uses <= for all signal assignments and := for all variable and
initialization assignments. These assignment operators work on all data
types. The target of the assignment goes on the left of these operators and
the input arguments go on the right.
Example:
F1 <= A;     -- F1 and A must be the same size
and type
F2 <= ‘0’;      -- F2 is type bit in this
example
F3 <= “0000”;     -- F3 is type bit_vector(3
downto 0) in this example
F4 <= “hello”;    -- F4 is type string in this
example
F5 <= 3.14;     -- F5 is type real in this
example
F6 <= x”1A”;     -- F6 is type bit_vector(7
downto 0), x”1A” is in HEX
5.5.1.2 Logical Operators
VHDL contains the following logical operators:
OperatorOperation
not Logical negation
and Logical AND
nand Logical NAND

--- Page 258 ---
OperatorOperation
or Logical OR
nor Logical NOR
xor Logical exclusive-OR
xnor Logical exclusive-NOR
These operators work on types bit, bit_vector, and boolean. For
operations on the type bit_vector, the input vectors must be the same size
and will take place in a bit-wise fashion. For example, if two 8-bit buses
called BusA and BusB were AND’d together, BusA(0) would be
individually AND’d with BusB(0), BusA(1) would be individually AND’d
with BusB(1), etc. The not operator is a unary operation (i.e., it operates on
a single input), and the keyword is put before the signal being operated on.
All other operators have two or more inputs and are placed in between the
input names.
Example:
F1 <= not A;
F2 <= B and C;
The order of precedence in VHDL is different from that in Boolean
algebra. The NOT operator is a higher priority than all other operators. All
other logical operators have the same priority and have no inherent
precedence. This means that in VHDL, the AND operator will not precede
the OR operation as it does in Boolean algebra. Parentheses are used to
explicitly describe precedence. If operators are used that have the same
priority and parentheses are not provided, then the operations will take
place on the signals listed first moving left to right in the signal assignment.
The following are examples on how to use these operators.
Example:
F3 <= not D nand E;         -- D will be
complemented first, the result
                                             --
will then be NAND’d with E, then the
                     -- result will be assigned
to F3

--- Page 259 ---
F4 <= not (F or G);         -- the parentheses
take precedence so
                     -- F will be OR’d with G
first, then                                  --
complemented, and then assigned to F4.
F5 <= H nor I nor J;    -- logic operations can
have any number of
                         -- inputs.
F6 <= K xor L xnor M;     -- XOR and XNOR have
the same priority so with
                         -- no parentheses
given, the logic operations
                         -- will take place
on the signals from
                         -- left to right. K
will be XOR’d with L first,
                         -- then the result
will be XNOR’d with M.
5.5.1.3 Numerical Operators
VHDL contains the following numerical operators:
OperatorOperation
+ Addition
- Subtraction
* Multiplication
/ Division
mod Modulus
rem Remainder
abs Absolute value
** Exponential
These operators work on types integer and real. Note that the default
VHDL standard does not support numerical operators on types bit and
bit_vector.

--- Page 260 ---
5.5.1.4 Relational Operators
VHDL contains the following relational operators. These operators compare
two inputs of the same type and returns the type Boolean (i.e., true or false).
OperatorReturns true if the comparison is:
= Equal
/= Not equal
< Less than
<= Less than or equal
> Greater than
>= Greater than or equal
5.5.1.5 Shift Operators
VHDL contains the following shift operators. These operators work on
vector types bit_vector and string.
OperatorOperation
sll Shift left logical
srl Shift right logical
sla Shift left arithmetic
sra Shift right arithmetic
rol Rotate left
ror Rotate right
The syntax for using a shift operation is to provide the name of the
vector followed by the desired shift operator, followed by an integer
indicating how many shift operations to perform. The target of the
assignment must be of the same type and size as the input.
Example:
A <= B srl 3;            -- A is assigned the
result of a logical shift                     --
right 3 times on B.
5.5.1.6 Concatenation Operator

--- Page 261 ---
In VHDL the & is used to concatenate multiple signals. The target of this
operation must be the same size of the sum of the sizes of the input
arguments.
Example:
Bus1 <= “11” & “00”;    -- Bus1 must be 4-bits
and will be assigned
           -- the value “1100”
Bus2 <= BusA & BusB;    -- If BusA and BusB are
4-bits, then Bus2
                               -- must be
8-bits.
Bus3 <= ‘0’ & BusA;     -- This attaches a
leading ‘0’ to BusA. Bus3
                               -- must be
5-bits
5.5.2 Concurrent Signal Assignments
Concurrent signal assignments are accomplished by simply using the <=
operator after the begin statement in the architecture. Each individual
assignment will be executed concurrently and synthesized as separate logic
circuits. Consider the following example.
Example:
X <= A;
Y <= B;
Z <= C;
When simulated, these three lines of VHDL will make three separate
signal assignments at the exact same time. This is different from a
programming language that will first assign A to X, then B to Y, and finally
C to Z. In VHDL this functionality is identical to three separate wires. This
description will be directly synthesized into three separate wires.
Below is another example of how concurrent signal assignments in
VHDL differ from a sequentially executed programming language.

--- Page 262 ---
Example:
A <= B;
B <= C;
In a VHDL simulation, the signal assignments of C to B and B to A will
take place at the same time; however, during synthesis, the signal B will be
eliminated from the design since this functionality describes two wires in
series. Automated synthesis tools will eliminate this unnecessary signal
name. This is not the same functionality that would result if this example
was implemented as a sequentially executed computer program. A
computer program would execute the assignment of B to A first, and then
assign the value of C to B second. In this way, B represents a storage
element that is passed to A before it is updated with C.
5.5.3 Concurrent Signal Assignments with Logical
Operators
Each of the logical operators described in Sect. 5.5.1.2 can be used in
conjunction with concurrent signal assignments to create individual
combinational logic circuits. Example 5.2 shows how to design a VHDL
model of a combinational logic circuit using this approach.
Example 5.2 Modeling Logic Using Concurrent Signal Assignments and
Logical Operators

--- Page 263 ---
5.5.4 Conditional Signal Assignments
Logical operators are good for describing the behavior of small circuits;
however, in the prior example we still needed to create the canonical sum of
products logic expression by hand before describing the functionality in
VHDL. The true power of an HDL is when the behavior of the system can
be described fully without requiring any hand design. A conditional signal

--- Page 264 ---
assignment allows us to describe a concurrent signal assignment using
Boolean conditions that effect the values of the result. In a conditional
signal assignment, the keyword when is used to describe the signal
assignment for a particular Boolean condition. The keyword else is used to
describe the signal assignments for any other conditions. Multiple Boolean
conditions can be used to fully describe the output of the circuit under all
input conditions. Logical operators can also be used in the Boolean
conditions to create more sophisticated conditions. The Boolean conditions
can be encompassed within parentheses for readability. The syntax for a
conditional signal assignment is shown below:
signal_name <= expression_1 when condition_1 else
     expression_2 when condition_2 else
      :
     expression_n;
Example:
F1 <= ‘0’ when A=‘0’ else ‘1’;
F2 <= ‘1’ when (A=’0’ and B=’1’) else ‘0’;
F3 <= A when (C = D) else B;
An important consideration of conditional signal assignments is that
they are still executed concurrently. Each assignment represents a separate,
combinational logic circuit. In the above example, F1, F2, and F3 will be
implemented as three separate circuits. Example 5.3 shows how to design a
VHDL model of a combinational logic circuit using conditional signal
assignments. Note that this example uses the same truth table as in Example
5.2 to illustrate a comparison between approaches.
Example 5.3 Modeling Logic Using Conditional Signal Assignments

--- Page 265 ---
5.5.5 Selected Signal Assignments
A selected signal assignment provides another technique to implement
concurrent signal assignments. In this approach, the signal assignment is
based on a specific value on the input signal. The keyword with is used to
begin the selected signal assignment. It is then followed by the name of the
input that will be used to dictate the value of the output. Only a single
variable name can be listed as the input. This means that if the assignment
is going to be based on multiple variables, they must first be concatenated

--- Page 266 ---
into a single vector name before starting the selected signal assignment.
After the input is listed, the keyword select signifies the beginning of the
signal assignments. An assignment is made to a signal based on a list of
possible input values that follow the keyword when. Multiple values of the
input codes can be used and are separated by commas. The keyword others
is used to cover any input values that are not explicitly stated. The syntax
for a selected signal assignment is as follows:
with input_name select
signal_name <= expression_1 when condition_1,
     expression_2 when condition_2,
       :             expression_n when
others;
Example:
with A select
F1 <= ‘1’ when ‘0’, -- F1 will be assigned ‘1’
when A=’0’
  ‘0’ when ‘1’; -- F1 will be assigned ‘0’ when
A=’1’
AB <= A&B; -- concatenate A and B so that they
can be used as a vector
with AB select
F2 <= ‘0’ when “00”, -- F2 will be assigned ‘0’
when AB=”00”
  ‘1’ when “01”,
  ‘1’ when “10”,
  ‘0’ when “11”;
with AB select
F3 <= ‘1’ when “01”,
‘1’ when “10”,
‘0’ when others;
One feature of selected signal assignments that makes its form even
more compact is that multiple input codes that correspond to the same

--- Page 267 ---
output assignment can be listed on the same line pipe (|)-delimited. The
example for F3 can be equivalently described as:
with AB select
F3 <= ‘1’ when “01” | “10”,
  ‘0’ when others;
Example 5.4 shows how to design a VHDL model of a combinational
logic circuit using selected signal assignments. Note that this example again
uses the same truth table as in Examples 5.2 and 5.3 to illustrate a
comparison between approaches.
Example 5.4 Modeling Logic Using Selected Signal Assignments

--- Page 268 ---
5.5.6 Delayed Signal Assignments

--- Page 269 ---
VHDL provides the ability to delay a concurrent signal assignment in order
to more accurately model the behavior of real gates. The keyword after is
used to delay an assignment by a certain amount of time. The magnitude of
the delay is provided as type time. The syntax for delaying an assignment is
as follows:
signal_name <= <expression> after <time>;
Example:
A <= B after 3us;        
C <= D and E after 10ns;        
If an input pulse is shorter in duration than the amount of the delay, the
input pulse is ignored. This is called the inertial delay model. Example 5.5
shows how to design a VHDL model with a delayed signal assignment
using the inertial delay model.
Example 5.5 Modeling Logic Using Delayed Signal Assignments (Inertial
Delay Model)
Ignoring brief input pulses on the input accurately models the behavior of
on-chip gates. When the input pulse is faster than the delay of the gate, the

--- Page 270 ---
output of the gate does not have time to respond. As a result, there will not
be a logic change on the output. If it is desired to have all pulses on the
inputs show up on the outputs when modeling the behavior of other types of
digital logic, the keyword transport is used in conjunction with the after
statement. This is called the transport delay model:
signal_name <= transport <expression> after
<time>;
Example 5.6 shows how to perform a delayed signal assignment using
the transport delay model.
Example 5.6 Modeling Logic Using Delayed Signal Assignments
(Transport Delay Model)


--- Page 271 ---
5.6 Structural Design Using Components
Structural design in VHDL refers to including lower level subsystems
within a higher level system in order to produce the desired functionality. A
purely structural VHDL design would not contain any behavioral modeling
in the architecture such as signal assignments, but instead just contain the
instantiation and interconnections of other subsystems. A subsystem is
called a component in VHDL. For any component that is going to be used
in an architecture, it must be declared before the begin statement. Refer to
Sect. 5.4.4.3 for the syntax of declaring a component. A specific component
only needs to be declared once. After the begin statement it can be used as
many times as necessary. Each component is executed concurrently.
5.6.1 Component Instantiation
The term instantiation refers to the use or inclusion of the component in the
VHDL system. When a component is instantiated, it needs to be given a
unique identifying name. This is called the instance name. To instantiate a
component, the instance name is given first, followed by a colon and then
the component name. The last part of instantiating a component is

--- Page 272 ---
connecting signals to its ports. The way in which signals are connected to
the ports of the component is called the port map. The syntax for
instantiating a component is as follows:
instance_name : <component name>
port map (<port connections>);
There are two techniques to connect signals to the ports of the
component, explicit port mapping and positional port mapping.
5.6.1.1 Explicit Port Mapping
In explicit port mapping the name of each port of the component is given,
followed by the connection indicator =>, followed by the signal it is
connected to. The port connections can be listed in any order since the
details of the connection (i.e., port name to signal name) are explicit. Each
connection name is separated by a comma. The syntax for explicit port
mapping is as follows:
instance_name : <component name>
port map (port1 => signal1, port2 => signal2, …);
Example 5.7 shows how to design a VHDL model of a combinational
logic circuit using structural VHDL and explicit port mapping. Note that
this example again uses the same truth table as in Examples 5.2, 5.3, and
5.4 to illustrate a comparison between approaches.
Example 5.7 Modeling Logic Using Structural VHDL (Explicit Port
Mapping)

--- Page 273 ---
5.6.1.2 Positional Port Mapping

--- Page 274 ---
In positional port mapping the names of the ports of the component are not
explicitly listed. Instead, the signals are listed in the same order that the
ports of the component were defined. Each signal name is separated by a
comma. This approach requires less text to describe but can also lead to
misconnections due to mismatches in the order of the signals being
connected. The syntax for positional port mapping is as follows:
instance_name : <component name>
port map (signal1, signal2, …);
Example 5.8 shows how to create the same structural VHDL model as
in Example 5.7, but using positional port mapping instead.
Example 5.8 Modeling Logic Using Structural VHDL (Positional Port
Mapping)


--- Page 275 ---
5.7 Overview of Simulation Test Benches
One of the essential components of the modern digital design flow is
verifying functionality through simulation. This simulation takes place at
many levels of abstraction. For a system to be tested, there needs to be a
mechanism to generate input patterns to drive the system and then observe
the outputs to verify correct operation. The mechanism to do this in VHDL
is called a test bench. A test bench is a file in VHDL that has no inputs or
outputs. The test bench declares the system to be tested as a component and
then instantiates it. The test bench generates the input conditions and drives
them into the input ports of the system being tested. VHDL contains
numerous methods to generate stimulus patterns. Since a test bench will not
be synthesized, very abstract behavioral modeling can be used to generate
the inputs. The output of the system can be viewed as a waveform in a
simulation tool. VHDL also has the ability to check the outputs against the
expected results and notify the user if differences occur. Figure 5.10 gives
an overview of how test benches are used in VHDL. The techniques to
generate the stimulus patterns are covered in Chap. 8.

--- Page 276 ---
Fig. 5.10Overview of VHDL test benches

--- Page 277 ---
Summary
The modern digital design flow relies on computer-aided engineering
(CAE) and computer-aided design (CAD) tools to manage the size and
complexity of today’s digital designs.
Hardware description languages (HDLs) allow the functionality of
digital systems to be entered using text. VHDL and Verilog are the two
most common HDLs in use today.
VHDL was originally created to document the behavior of large digital
systems and support functional simulations.
The ability to automatically synthesize a logic circuit from a VHDL
behavioral description became possible approximately 10 years after
the original definition of VHDL. As such, only a subset of the
behavioral modeling techniques in VHDL can be automatically
synthesized.
HDLs can model digital systems at different levels of design
abstraction. These include the system, algorithmic, RTL, gate, and
circuit levels. Designing at a higher level of abstraction allows more
complex systems to be modeled without worrying about the details of
the implementation.
In a VHDL source file there are three main sections. These are the
package, the entity, and the architecture. Including a package allows
additional functionality to be included in VHDL. The entity is where
the inputs and outputs of the system are declared. The architecture is
where the behavior of the system is described.

--- Page 278 ---
A port is an input or output to a system that is declared in the entity. A
signal is an internal connection within the system that is declared in
the architecture. A signal is not visible outside of the system.
A component is how a VHDL system uses another subsystem. A
component is first declared, which defines the name and entity of the
subsystem to be used. The component can then be instantiated one or
more times. The ports of the component can be connected using either
explicit or positional port mapping.
Concurrency is the term that describes operations being performed in
parallel. This allows real-world system behavior to be modeled.
VHDL contains three direct techniques to model concurrent logic
behavior. These are concurrent signal assignments with logical
operators, conditional signal assignments, and selected signal
assignments.
VHDL components are also treated as concurrent subsystems.
Delay can be modeled in VHDL using either the initial or transport
model.
A simulation test bench is a VHDL file that drives stimulus into a
device under test (DUT). Test benches do not have inputs or outputs
and are not synthesizable.
Exercise Problems
Section 5.1: History of HDLs
5.1.1What was the original purpose of VHDL?  
5.1.2Can all of the functionality that can be described in VHDL be
simulated?
 
5.1.3Can all of the functionality that can be described in VHDL be
synthesized?
 
Section 5.2: HDL Abstraction
5.2.1 Give the level of design abstraction that the following statement

--- Page 279 ---
relates to: if there is ever an error in the system, it should return to
the reset state.  
5.2.2 Give the level of design abstraction that the following statement
relates to: once the design is implemented in a sum of products
form, DeMorgan’s theorem will be used to convert it to a NAND-
gate-only implementation.
 
5.2.3 Give the level of design abstraction that the following statement
relates to: the design will be broken down into two subsystems: one
that will handle data collection and the other that will control data
flow.
 
5.2.4 Give the level of design abstraction that the following statement
relates to: the interconnect on the IC should be changed from
aluminum to copper to achieve the performance needed in this
design.
 
5.2.5 Give the level of design abstraction that the following statement
relates to: the MOSFETs need to be able to drive at least eight
other loads in this design.
 
5.2.6 Give the level of design abstraction that the following statement
relates to: this system will contain 1 host computer and support up
to 1000 client computers.
 
5.2.7 Give the design domain that the following activity relates to:
drawing the physical layout of the CPU will require 6 months of
engineering time.
 
5.2.8 Give the design domain that the following activity relates to: the
CPU will be connected to four banks of memory.
 
5.2.9 Give the design domain that the following activity relates to: the
fan-in specifications for this logic family require excessive logic
circuitry to be used.
 

--- Page 280 ---
5.2.10Give the design domain that the following activity relates to: the
performance specifications for this system require one TFLOP at
<5 W.
 
Section 5.3: The Modern Digital Design Flow
5.3.1Which step in the modern digital design flow does the following
statement relate to: a CAD tool will convert the behavioral model
into a gate-level description of functionality.
 
5.3.2Which step in the modern digital design flow does the following
statement relate to: after realistic gate and wiring delays are
determined, one last simulation should be performed to make sure
that the design meets the original timing requirements.
 
5.3.3Which step in the modern digital design flow does the following
statement relate to: if the memory is distributed around the
perimeter of the CPU, the wiring density will be minimized.
 
5.3.4Which step in the modern digital design flow does the following
statement relate to: the design meets all requirements so now I’m
building the hardware that will be shipped.
 
5.3.5Which step in the modern digital design flow does the following
statement relate to: the system will be broken down into three
subsystems with the following behaviors.
 
5.3.6Which step in the modern digital design flow does the following
statement relate to: this system needs to have 10 Gbytes of memory.
 
5.3.7Which step in the modern digital design flow does the following
statement relate to: to meet the power requirements, the gates will be
implemented in the 74HC logic family.
 
Section 5.4: VHDL Constructs

--- Page 281 ---
5.4.1 In which construct of VHDL are the inputs and outputs of the
system defined?  
5.4.2 In which construct of VHDL is the behavior of the system
described?
 
5.4.3 Which construct is used to add additional functionality such as data
types to VHDL?
 
5.4.4 What are all the possible values that the type bit can take on in
VHDL?
 
5.4.5 What are all the possible values that the type Boolean can take on
in VHDL?
 
5.4.6 What is the range of decimal numbers that can be represented
using the type integer in VHDL?
 
5.4.7 What is the width of the vector defined using the type
bit_vector(63 downto 0)?
 
5.4.8 What is the syntax for indexing the most significant bit in the type
bit_vector(31 downto 0)? Assume the vector is named example.
 
5.4.9 What is the syntax for indexing the least significant bit in the type
bit_vector(31 downto 0)? Assume the vector is named example.
 
5.4.10What is the difference between an enumerated type and a range
type?
 
5.4.11 What scalar type does a bit_vector consist of?  
5.4.12What scalar type does a string consist of?  
Section 5.5: Modeling Concurrent Functionality in VHDL

--- Page 282 ---
5.5.1 Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
3-input minterm list shown in Fig. 5.11. Use concurrent signal
assignments and logical operators. Declare your entity to match the
block diagram provided. Use the type bit for your ports.
Fig. 5.11 System E Functionality
 
5.5.2 Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
3-input minterm list shown in Fig. 5.11. Use conditional signal
assignments. Declare your entity to match the block diagram
provided. Use the type bit for your ports.
 
5.5.3 Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
3-input minterm list shown in Fig. 5.11. Use selected signal
assignments. Declare your entity to match the block diagram
provided. Use the type bit for your ports.
 
5.5.4 Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
3-input maxterm list shown in Fig. 5.12. Use concurrent signal
assignments and logical operators. Declare your entity to match the
block diagram provided. Use the type bit for your ports.
Fig. 5.12System F Functionality
 
5.5.5 Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
3-input maxterm list shown in Fig. 5.12. Use conditional signal
assignments. Declare your entity to match the block diagram
providedUsethetypebitforyourports
 

--- Page 283 ---
provided. Use the type bit for your ports.
5.5.6 Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
3-input maxterm list shown in Fig. 5.12. Use selected signal
assignments. Declare your entity to match the block diagram
provided. Use the type bit for your ports.
 
5.5.7 Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
3-input truth table shown in Fig. 5.13. Use concurrent signal
assignments and logical operators. Declare your entity to match the
block diagram provided. Use the type bit for your ports.
Fig. 5.13System G Functionality
 
5.5.8 Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
3-input truth table shown in Fig. 5.13. Use conditional signal
assignments. Declare your entity to match the block diagram
provided. Use the type bit for your ports.
 
5.5.9 Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
3-input truth table shown in Fig. 5.13. Use selected signal
assignments. Declare your entity to match the block diagram
provided. Use the type bit for your ports.
 
5.5.10Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
4-input minterm list shown in Fig. 5.14. Use concurrent signal
assignments and logical operators. Declare your entity to match the
block diagram provided. Use the type bit for your ports.
 

--- Page 284 ---
Fig. 5.14System I Functionality
5.5.11 Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
4-input minterm list shown in Fig. 5.14. Use conditional signal
assignments. Declare your entity to match the block diagram
provided. Use the type bit for your ports.
 
5.5.12Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
4-input minterm list shown in Fig. 5.14. Use selected signal
assignments. Declare your entity to match the block diagram
provided. Use the type bit for your ports.
 
5.5.13Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
4-input maxterm list shown in Fig. 5.15. Use concurrent signal
assignments and logical operators. Declare your entity to match the
block diagram provided. Use the type bit for your ports.
Fig. 5.15System J Functionality
 
5.5.14Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
4-input maxterm list shown in Fig. 5.15. Use conditional signal
assignments. Declare your entity to match the block diagram
provided. Use the type bit for your ports.
 
5.5.15Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
4-input maxterm list shown in Fig. 5.15. Use selected signal
assignments. Declare your entity to match the block diagram
 

--- Page 285 ---
provided. Use the type bit for your ports.
5.5.16Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
4-input truth table shown in Fig. 5.16. Use concurrent signal
assignments and logical operators. Declare your entity to match the
block diagram provided. Use the type bit for your ports.
Fig. 5.16System K Functionality
 
5.5.17Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
4-input truth table shown in Fig. 5.16. Use conditional signal
assignments. Declare your entity to match the block diagram
provided. Use the type bit for your ports.
 
5.5.18Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
4-input truth table shown in Fig. 5.16. Use selected signal
assignments. Declare your entity to match the block diagram
provided. Use the type bit for your ports.
 
Section 5.6: Structural Design in VHDL

--- Page 286 ---
5.6.1Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
3-input minterm list shown in Fig. 5.11. Use a structural design
approach and basic gates. You will need to create whatever basic
gates are needed for your design (e.g., INV1, AND2, OR4) and then
instantiate them in your upper level architecture to create the desired
functionality. The lower level gates can be implemented with
concurrent signal assignments and logical operators (e.g., F <= not
A). Declare your entity to match the block diagram provided. Use
the type bit for your ports.
 
5.6.2Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
3-input maxterm list shown in Fig. 5.12. Use a structural design
approach and basic gates. You will need to create whatever basic
gates are needed for your design (e.g., INV1, AND2, OR4) and then
instantiate them in your upper level architecture to create the desired
functionality. The lower level gates can be implemented with
concurrent signal assignments and logical operators (e.g., F <= not
A). Declare your entity to match the block diagram provided. Use
the type bit for your ports.
 
5.6.3Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
3-input truth table shown in Fig. 5.13. Use a structural design
approach and basic gates. You will need to create whatever basic
gates are needed for your design (e.g., INV1, AND2, OR4) and then
instantiate them in your upper level architecture to create the desired
functionality. The lower level gates can be implemented with
concurrent signal assignments and logical operators (e.g., F <= not
A). Declare your entity to match the block diagram provided. Use
the type bit for your ports.
 
5.6.4Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
4-input minterm list shown in Fig. 5.14. Use a structural design
approach and basic gates. You will need to create whatever basic
gates are needed for your design (e.g., INV1, AND2, OR4) and then
instantiate them in your upper level architecture to create the desired
functionality. The lower level gates can be implemented with
concurrent signal assignments and logical operators (e.g., F <= not
A)DeclareyourentitytomatchtheblockdiagramprovidedUse
 

--- Page 287 ---
A). Declare your entity to match the block diagram provided. Use
the type bit for your ports.
5.6.5Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
4-input maxterm list shown in Fig. 5.15. Use a structural design
approach and basic gates. You will need to create whatever basic
gates are needed for your design (e.g., INV1, AND2, OR4) and then
instantiate them in your upper level architecture to create the desired
functionality. The lower level gates can be implemented with
concurrent signal assignments and logical operators (e.g., F <= not
A). Declare your entity to match the block diagram provided. Use
the type bit for your ports.
 
5.6.6Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
4-input truth table shown in Fig. 5.16. Use a structural design
approach and basic gates. You will need to create whatever basic
gates are needed for your design (e.g., INV1, AND2, OR4) and then
instantiate them in your upper level architecture to create the desired
functionality. The lower level gates can be implemented with
concurrent signal assignments and logical operators (e.g., F <= not
A). Declare your entity to match the block diagram provided. Use
the type bit for your ports.
 
Section 5.7: Overview of Simulation Test Benches
5.7.1What is the purpose of a test bench? 
5.7.2Does a test bench have input and output ports? 
5.7.3Can a test bench be simulated?  
5.7.4Can a test bench be synthesized?  

--- Page 288 ---
(1)
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2017
Brock J. LaMeres, Introduction to Logic Circuits & Logic Design with VHDL , DOI 10.1007/978-3-
319-34195-8_6
6. MSI Logic
Brock J. LaMeres1 
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Montana State
University, Bozeman, MT, USA
 
This chapter introduces a group of combinational logic building blocks that
are commonly used in digital design. As we move into systems that are
larger than individual gates, there are naming conventions that are used to
describe the size of the logic. Table 6.1 gives these naming conventions. In
this chapter we look at medium-scale integrated circuit (MSI) logic. Each of
these building blocks can be implemented using the combinational logic
design steps covered in Chaps. 4 and 5. The goal of this chapter is to provide
an understanding of the basic principles of MSI logic.
Table 6.1Naming convention for the size of digital systems


--- Page 289 ---
Learning Outcomes—After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
6.1Design a decoder circuit using both the classical digital design
approach and the modern HDL-based approach.
 
6.2Design an encoder circuit using both the classical digital design
approach and the modern HDL-based approach.
 
6.3Design a multiplexer circuit using both the classical digital design
approach and the modern HDL-based approach.
 
6.4Design a demultiplexer circuit using both the classical digital design
approach and the modern HDL-based approach.
 
6.1 Decoders
A decoder is a circuit that takes in a binary code and has outputs that are
asserted for specific values of that code. The code can be of any type or size
(e.g., unsigned, two’s complement). Each output will assert for only specific
input codes. Since combinational logic circuits only produce a single output,
this means that within a decoder, there will be a separate combinational logic
circuit for each output.
6.1.1 Example: One-Hot Decoder
A one-hot decoder is a circuit that has n inputs and 2n outputs. Each output
will assert for one and only one input code. Since there are 2n outputs, there
will always be one and only one output asserted at any given time. Example
6.1 shows the process of designing a 2-to-4 one-hot decoder by hand (i.e.,
using the classical digital design approach).
Example 6.1 2-to-4 One-Hot Decoder—Logic Synthesis by Hand

--- Page 290 ---
As decoders get larger, it is necessary to use hardware description languages
to model their behavior. Example 6.2 shows how to model a 3-to-8 one-hot
decoder in VHDL with concurrent signal assignments and logic operators.
Example 6.2 3-to-8 One-Hot Decoder—VHDL Modeling Using Logical
Operators

--- Page 291 ---
This description can be further simplified by using vector notation for the
ports and describing the functionality using either conditional or select signal
assignment. Example 6.3 shows how to model the 3-to-8 one-hot decoder in
VHDL with conditional and select signal assignments.

--- Page 292 ---
Example 6.3 3-to-8 One-Hot Decoder—VHDL Modeling Using
Conditional and Select Signal Assignments


--- Page 293 ---
6.1.2 Example: Seven-Segment Display Decoder
A seven-segment display decoder is a circuit used to drive character displays
that are commonly found in applications such as digital clocks and
household appliances. A character display is made up of seven individual
LEDs, typically labeled a–g. The input to the decoder is the binary
equivalent of the decimal or Hex character that is to be displayed. The output
of the decoder is the arrangement of LEDs that will form the character.
Decoders with 2-inputs can drive characters “0” to “3.” Decoders with 3-
inputs can drive characters “0” to “7.” Decoders with 4-inputs can drive
characters “0” to “F” with the case of the Hex characters being “A, b, c or C,
d, E, and F.”
Let’s look at an example of how to design a 3-input, seven-segment
decoder by hand. The first step in the process is to create the truth table for
the outputs that will drive the LEDs in the display. We’ll call these outputs
Fa, Fb, …, Fg. Example 6.4 shows how to construct the truth table for the
seven-segment display decoder. In this table, a logic 1 corresponds to the
LED being ON.
Example 6.4 Seven-Segment Display Decoder—Truth Table


--- Page 294 ---
If we wish to design this decoder by hand we need to create seven separate
combinational logic circuits. Each of the outputs (Fa–Fg) can be put into a 3-
input K-map to find the minimized logic expression. Example 6.5 shows the
design of the decoder from the truth table in Example 6.4 by hand.
Example 6.5 Seven-Segment Display Decoder—Logic Synthesis by Hand

--- Page 295 ---
This same functionality can be modeled in VHDL using concurrent signal
assignments with logical operators. Example 6.6 shows how to model the

--- Page 296 ---
seven-segment decoder in VHDL using concurrent signal assignments with
logic operators.
Example 6.6 Seven-Segment Display Decoder—Modeling Using Logical
Operators
Again, a more compact description of the decoder can be accomplished if
the ports are described as vectors and a conditional or select signal
assignment is used. Example 6.7 shows how to model the seven-segment
decoder in VHDL using conditional and selected signal assignments.
Example 6.7 Seven-Segment Display Decoder—Modeling Using
Conditional and Selected Signal Assignments

--- Page 298 ---
6.2 Encoders
An encoder works in the opposite manner as a decoder. An assertion on a
specific input port corresponds to a unique code on the output port.
6.2.1 Example: One-Hot Binary Encoder
A one-hot binary encoder has n outputs and 2n inputs. The output will be an
n-bit, binary code which corresponds to an assertion on one and only one of
the inputs. Example 6.8 shows the process of designing a 4-to-2 binary
encoder by hand (i.e., using the classical digital design approach).
Example 6.8 4-to-2 Binary Encoder—Logic Synthesis by Hand

--- Page 299 ---
In VHDL this can be implemented using logical operators, conditional signal
assignments, or selected signal assignments. In the conditional and selected
signal assignments, if an output is not listed for each and every input
possibility, then an output must be specified to cover any remaining input
conditions. In the conditional signal assignment, the covering value is
specified after the final else statement. In the selected signal assignment, the
covering value is specified using the when others clause. Example 6.9 shows
how to model the encoder in VHDL using each of the abovementioned
modeling techniques.
Example 6.9 4-to-2 Binary Encoder—VHDL Modeling

--- Page 301 ---
6.3 Multiplexers
A multiplexer is a circuit that passes one of its multiple inputs to a single
output based on a select input. This can be thought of as a digital switch. The
multiplexer has n select lines, 2n inputs, and one output. Example 6.10
shows the process of designing a 2-to-1 multiplexer by hand (i.e., using the
classical digital design approach).
Example 6.10 2-to-1 Multiplexer—Logic Synthesis by Hand

--- Page 302 ---
Again, in VHDL a multiplexer can be implemented using different
behavioral models. Let’s look at the modeling of a 4-to-1 multiplexer in
VHDL using logical operators, conditional signal assignments, and selected
signal assignments. This multiplexer requires two select lines to address
each of the four input lines. Each of the product terms in the multiplexer
logic expression must include both select lines. The polarity of the select
lines is chosen so that when an input is selected, its product term will allow
the input to pass to the OR gate. In the VHDL implementation of the
multiplexer using conditional and selected signal assignments, since every
possible value of Sel is listed, it is not necessary to use a final else or when
others clause. Example 6.11 shows the VHDL modeling of a 4-to-1
multiplexer.
Example 6.11 4-to-1 Multiplexer—VHDL Modeling

--- Page 304 ---
6.4 Demultiplexers
A demultiplexer works in a complementary fashion to a multiplexer. A
demultiplexer has one input that is routed to one of its multiple outputs. The
output that is active is dictated by a select input. A demux has n select lines
that chooses to route the input to one of its 2n outputs. When an output is not
selected, it outputs a logic 0. Example 6.12 shows the process of designing a
1-to-2 demultiplexer by hand (i.e., using the classical digital design
approach).
Example 6.12 1-to-2 Demultiplexer—Logic Synthesis by Hand

--- Page 305 ---
Again, in VHDL a demultiplexer can be implemented using different
behavioral models. Example 6.13 shows the modeling of a 1-to-4
demultiplexer in VHDL using logical operators, conditional signal
assignments, and selected signal assignments. This demultiplexer requires
two select lines in order to choose between the four outputs.
Example 6.13 1-to-4 Demultiplexer—VHDL Modeling

--- Page 307 ---
Summary
The term medium-scale integrated circuit (MSI) logic refers to a set of
basic combinational logic circuits that implement simple, commonly
used functions such as decoders, encoders, multiplexers, and
demultiplexers. MSI logic can also include operations such as
comparators and simple arithmetic circuits.
While an MSI logic circuit may have multiple outputs, each output
requires its own unique logic expression that is based on the system
inputs.
A decoder is a system that has a greater number of outputs than inputs.
The behavior of each output is based on each unique input code.
An encoder a system that has a greater number of inputs than outputs. A
compressed output code is produced based on which input(s) lines are
asserted.
A multiplexer is a system that has one output and multiple inputs. At
any given time, one and only one input is routed to the output based on
the value on a set of select lines. For n select lines, a multiplexer can
support 2n inputs.
A demultiplexer is a system that has one input and multiple outputs.
The input is routed to one of the outputs depending on the value on a
set of select lines. For n select lines, a demultiplexer can support 2n
outputs.
HDLs are particularly useful for describing MSI logic due to their
abstract modeling capability. Through the use of Boolean conditions
and vector assignments, the behavior of MSI logic can be modeled in a
compact and intuitive manner.
Exercise Problems
Section 6.1—Decoders

--- Page 308 ---
6.1.1Design a 4-to-16 one-hot decoder by hand. The block diagram and
truth table for the decoder are given in Fig. 6.1. Give the minimized
logic expressions for each output (i.e., F0, F1, …, F15) and the full
logic diagram for the system.
Fig. 6.14-to-16 One-Hot Decoder Functionality
 
6.1.2Design a VHDL model for a 4-to-16 one-hot decoder using
concurrent signal assignments and logical operators. Use the entity
definition given in Fig. 6.2.
Fig. 6.24-to-16 One-Hot Decoder Entity
 

--- Page 309 ---
g y
6.1.3Design a VHDL model for a 4-to-16 one-hot decoder using
conditional signal assignments. Use the entity definition given in
Fig. 6.2.
 
6.1.4Design a VHDL model for a 4-to-16 one-hot decoder using selected
signal assignments. Use the entity definition given in Fig. 6.2.
 
6.1.5Design a 4-input, seven-segment HEX character decoder by hand.
The system has four inputs called A, B, C, and D. The system has
seven outputs called Fa, Fb, Fc, Fd, Fe, Ff, and Fg. These outputs drive
the individual LEDs within the display. A logic 1 on an output
corresponds to the LED being ON. The display will show the HEX
characters 0–9, A, b, c, d, E, and F corresponding to the 4-bit input
code on A. A template for creating the truth tables for this system is
provided in Fig. 6.3. Provide the minimized logic expressions for
each of the seven outputs and the overall logic diagram for the
decoder.
 

--- Page 310 ---
Fig. 6.37-Segment Display Decoder Truth Table
6.1.6Design a VHDL model for a 4-input, seven-segment HEX character
decoder using conditional signal assignments. Use the entity

--- Page 311 ---
g g g y
definition given in Fig. 6.4 for your design. The system has a 4-bit
input vector called A and a 7-bit output vector called F. The
individual scalars within the output vector (i.e., F(6 downto 0))
correspond to the character display segments a, b, c, d, e, f, and g,
respectively. A logic 1 on an output corresponds to the LED being
ON. The display will show the HEX characters 0–9, A, b, c, d, E,
and F corresponding to the 4-bit input code on A. A template for
creating the truth table is provided in Fig. 6.3. The signals in this
table correspond to the entity in this problem as follows: A = A(3), B 
= A(2), C = A(1), D = A(0), Fa = F(6), Fb = F(5), Fc = F(4), Fd = F(3),
Fe = F(2), Ff = F(1), and Fg = F(0).
Fig. 6.47-Segment Display Decoder Entity
 
6.1.7Design a VHDL model for a 4-input, seven-segment HEX character
decoder using selected signal assignments. Use the entity definition
given in Fig. 6.4 for your design. The system has a 4-bit input vector
called A and a 7-bit output vector called F. The individual scalars
within the output vector (i.e., F(6 downto 0)) correspond to the
character display segments a, b, c, d, e, f, and g, respectively. A logic
1 on an output corresponds to the LED being ON. The display will
show the HEX characters 0–9, A, b, c, d, E, and F corresponding to
the 4-bit input code on A. A template for creating the truth table for
this system is provided in Fig. 6.3. The signals in this table
correspond to the entity in this problem as follows: A = A(3), B = 
A(2), C = A(1), D = A(0), Fa = F(6), Fb = F(5), Fc = F(4), Fd = F(3),
Fe = F(2), Ff = F(1), and Fg = F(0).
 
Section 6.2—Encoders
6.2.1Design an 8-to-3 binary encoder by hand. The block diagram and
truth table for the encoder are given in Fig. 6.5. Give the logic
expressions for each output and the full logic diagram for the system.
 

--- Page 312 ---
Fig. 6.58-to-3 One-Hot Encoder Functionality
6.2.2Design a VHDL model for an 8-to-3 binary encoder using concurrent
signal assignments and logical operators. Use the entity definition
given in Fig. 6.6 for your design.
Fig. 6.68-to-3 One-Hot Encoder Entity
 
6.2.3Design a VHDL model for an 8-to-3 binary encoder using
conditional signal assignments. Use the entity definition given in
Fig. 6.6 for your design.
 
6.2.4Design a VHDL model for an 8-to-3 binary encoder using selected
signal assignments. Use the entity definition given in Fig. 6.6 for
your design.
 
Section 6.3—Multiplexers
6.3.1Design an 8-to-1 multiplexer by hand. The block diagram and truth
table for the multiplexer are given in Fig. 6.7. Give the minimized 

--- Page 313 ---
logic expressions for the output and the full logic diagram for the
system.
Fig. 6.78-to-1 Multiplexer Functionality
6.3.2Design a VHDL model for an 8-to-1 multiplexer using concurrent
signal assignments and logical operators. Use the entity definition
given in Fig. 6.8 for your design.
Fig. 6.88-to-1 Multiplexer Entity
 
6.3.3Design a VHDL model for an 8-to-1 multiplexer using conditional
signal assignments. Use the entity definition given in Fig. 6.8 for
your design.
 
6.3.4Design a VHDL model for an 8-to-1 multiplexer using selected
signal assignments. Use the entity definition given in Fig. 6.8 for
your design.
 
Section 6.4—Demultiplexers
6.4.1Design a 1-to-8 demultiplexer by hand. The block diagram and truth
table for the demultiplexer are given in Fig. 6.9. Give the minimized 

--- Page 314 ---
logic expressions for each output and the full logic diagram for the
system.
Fig. 6.91-to-8 Demultiplexer Functionality
6.4.2Design a VHDL model for a 1-to-8 demultiplexer using concurrent
signal assignments and logical operators. Use the entity definition
given in Fig. 6.10 for your design.
Fig. 6.101-to-8 Demultiplexer Entity
 
6.4.3Design a VHDL model for a 1-to-8 demultiplexer using conditional
signal assignments. Use the entity definition given in Fig. 6.10 for
your design.
 

--- Page 315 ---
6.4.4Design a VHDL model for a 1-to-8 demultiplexer using selected
signal assignments. Use the entity definition given in Fig. 6.10 for
your design.
 

--- Page 316 ---
(1)
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2017
Brock J. LaMeres, Introduction to Logic Circuits & Logic Design with VHDL , DOI 10.1007/978-3-
319-34195-8_7
7. Sequential Logic Design
Brock J. LaMeres1 
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Montana State
University, Bozeman, MT, USA
 
In this chapter we begin looking at sequential logic design. Sequential logic
design differs from combinational logic design in that the outputs of the
circuit depend not only on the current values of the inputs but also on the
past values of the inputs. This is different from the combinational logic
design where the output of the circuitry depends only on the current values
of the inputs. The ability of a sequential logic circuit to base its outputs on
both the current and past inputs allows more sophisticated and intelligent
systems to be created. We begin by looking at sequential logic storage
devices, which are used to hold the past values of a system. This is followed
by an investigation of timing considerations of sequential logic circuits. We
then look at some useful circuits that can be created using only sequential
logic storage devices. Finally, we look at one of the most important logic
circuits in digital systems, the finite-state machine (FSM). The goal of this
chapter is to provide an understanding of the basic operation of sequential
logic circuits.
Learning Outcomes—After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
7.1Describe the operation of a sequential logic storage device. 
7.2Describe sequential logic timing considerations.  

--- Page 317 ---
7.3Design a variety of common circuits based on sequential storage
devices (toggle flops, ripple counters, switch debouncers, and shift
registers).
 
7.4Design an FSM using the classical digital design approach. 
7.5Design a counter using the classical digital design approach and using
an HDL-based, structural approach.
 
7.6Describe the FSM reset condition.  
7.7Analyze an FSM to determine its functional operation and maximum
clock frequency.
 
7.1 Sequential Logic Storage Devices
7.1.1 The Cross-Coupled Inverter Pair
The first thing that is needed in sequential logic is a storage device. The
fundamental storage device in sequential logic is based on a positive
feedback configuration. Consider the circuit in Fig. 7.1. This circuit
configuration is called the cross-coupled inverter pair. In this circuit if the
input of U1 starts with a value of 1, it will produce an output of Q = 0. This
output is fed back to the input of U2, thus producing an output of Qn = 1.
Qn is fed back to the original input of U1, thus reinforcing the initial
condition. This circuit will hold, or store, a logic 0 without being driven by
any other inputs. This circuit operates in a complementary manner when the
initial value of U1 is a 0. With this input condition, the circuit will store a
logic 1 without being driven by any other inputs.

--- Page 318 ---
Fig. 7.1Storage using a cross-coupled inverter pair
7.1.2 Metastability
The cross-coupled inverter pair in Fig. 7.1 exhibits what is called
metastable behavior due to its positive-feedback configuration.
Metastability refers to when a system can exist in a state of equilibrium
when undisturbed but can be moved to a different, more stable state of
equilibrium when sufficiently disturbed. Systems that exhibit high levels of
metastability have an equilibrium state that is highly unstable, meaning that
if disturbed even slightly the system will move rapidly to a more stable
point of equilibrium. The cross-coupled inverter pair is a highly metastable
system. This system actually contains three equilibrium states. The first is
when the input of U1 is exactly between a logic 0 and logic 1 (i.e., VCC/2).
In this state, the output of U1 is also exactly VCC/2. This voltage is fed back
to the input of U2, thus producing an output of exactly VCC/2 on U2. This
in turn is fed back to the original input on U1 reinforcing the initial state.
Despite this system being at equilibrium in this condition, this state is
highly unstable. With minimal disturbance to any of the nodes within the
system, it will move rapidly to one of the two more stable states. The two
stable states for this system are when Q = 0 or when Q = 1 (see Fig. 7.1).
Once the transition begins between the unstable equilibrium state toward
one of the two more stable states, the positive feedback in the system
continually reinforces the transition until the system reaches its final state.
In electrical systems, this initial disturbance is caused by the presence of

--- Page 319 ---
noise, or unwanted voltage in the system. Noise can come from many
sources including random thermal motion of charge carriers in the
semiconductor materials, electromagnetic energy, or naturally occurring
ionizing particles. Noise is present in every electrical system so the cross-
coupled inverter pair will never be able to stay in the unstable equilibrium
state where all nodes are at VCC/2.
The cross-coupled inverter pair has two stable states; thus it is called a
bistable element. In order to understand the bistable behavior of this circuit,
let’s look at its behavior when the initial input value on U1 is set directly
between a logic 0 and logic 1 (i.e., VCC/2) and how a small amount of noise
will cause the system to move toward a stable state. Recall that an inverter
is designed to have an output that quickly transitions between a logic LOW
and HIGH in order to minimize the time spent in the uncertainty region.
This is accomplished by designing the inverter to have what is called gain.
Gain can be thought of as a multiplying factor that is applied to the input of
the circuit when producing the output (i.e., Vout = gain∙Vin). The gain for an
inverter will be negative since the output moves in the opposite direction of
the input. The inverter is designed to have a very high gain such that even
the smallest change on the input when in the transition region will result in
a large change on the output. Consider the behavior of this circuit shown in
Fig. 7.2. In this example, let’s represent the gain of the inverter as −g and
see how the system responds when a small positive voltage noise (Vn) is
added to the VCC/2 input on U1.

--- Page 320 ---
Fig. 7.2Examining metastability moving toward the state Q = 0

--- Page 321 ---
Figure 7.3 shows how the system responds when a small negative
voltage noise (−Vn) is added to the VCC/2 input on U1.
Fig. 7.3Examining metastability moving toward the state Q = 1
7.1.3 The SR Latch
While the cross-coupled inverter pair is the fundamental storage concept for
sequential logic, there is no mechanism to set the initial value of Q. All that

--- Page 322 ---
is guaranteed is that the circuit will store a value in one of the two stable
states (Q = 0 or Q = 1). The SR Latch provides a means to control the initial
values in this positive-feedback configuration by replacing the inverters
with NOR gates. In this circuit, S stands for set and indicates when the
output is forced to a logic 1 (Q = 1), and R stands for reset and indicates
when the output is forced to a logic 0 (Q = 0). When both S = 0 and R = 0,
the SR Latch is put into a store mode and it will hold the last value of Q. In
all of these input conditions, Qn is the complement of Q. Consider the
behavior of the SR Latch during its store state shown in Fig. 7.4.


--- Page 323 ---
Fig. 7.4SR Latch behavior—store state (S = 0, R = 0)
The SR Latch has two input conditions that will force the outputs to
known values. The first condition is called the set state. In this state, the
inputs are configured as S = 1 and R = 0. This input condition will force the
outputs to Q = 1 (e.g., setting Q) and Qn = 0. The second input condition is
called the reset state. In this state the inputs are configured as S = 0 and R = 
1. This input condition will force the outputs to Q = 0 (i.e., resetting Q) and
Qn = 1. Consider the behavior of the SR Latch during its set and reset states
shown in Fig. 7.5.
Fig. 7.5SR Latch behavior—set (S = 1, R = 0) and reset (S = 0, R = 1) states
The final input condition for the SR Latch leads to potential
metastability and should be avoided. When S = 1 and R = 1, the outputs of
the SR Latch will both go to logic 0’s. The problem with this state is that if
the inputs subsequently change to the store state (S = 0, R = 0), the outputs
will go metastable and then settle in one of the two stable states (Q = 0 or Q 

--- Page 324 ---
= 1). The reason this state is avoided is because the final resting state of the
SR Latch is random and unknown. Consider this operation shown in
Fig. 7.6.
Fig. 7.6SR Latch behavior—don’t use state (S = 1 and R = 1)
Figure 7.7 shows the final truth table for the SR Latch.
Fig. 7.7SR Latch truth table
The SR Latch has some drawbacks when it comes to implementation
with real circuitry. First, it takes two independent inputs to control the
outputs. Second, the state where S = 1 and R = 1 causes problems when real
propagation delays are considered through the gates. Since it is impossible
to match the delays exactly between U1 and U2, the SR Latch may
occasionally enter this state and experience momentary metastable

--- Page 325 ---
behavior. In order to address these issues, a number of improvements can be
made to this circuit to create two of the most commonly used storage
devices in sequential logic, the D-Latch and the D-flip-flop. In order to
understand the operation of these storage devices, two incremental
modifications are made to the SR Latch. The first is called the S′R′ Latch
and the second is the SR Latch with enable. These two circuits are rarely
implemented and are only explained to understand how the SR Latch is
modified to create a D-Latch and ultimately a D-flip-flop.
7.1.4 The S′R′ Latch
The S′R′ Latch operates in a similar manner as the SR Latch with the
exception that the input codes corresponding to the store, set, and reset
states are complemented. To accomplish this complementary behavior, the
S′R′ Latch is implemented with NAND gates configured in a positive-
feedback configuration. In this configuration, the S′R′ Latch will store the
last output when S′ = 1 and R′ = 1. It will set the output (Q = 1) when S′ = 0
and R′ = 1. Finally, it will reset the output (Q = 0) when S′ = 1 and R′ = 0.
Consider the behavior of the S′R′ Latch during its store state shown in
Fig. 7.8.

--- Page 326 ---
Fig. 7.8S′R′ Latch behavior—store state (S′ = 1, R′ = 1)
Just as with the SR Latch, the S′R′ Latch has two input configurations to
control the values of the outputs. Consider the behavior of the S′R′ Latch
during its set and reset states shown in Fig. 7.9.

--- Page 327 ---
Fig. 7.9S′R′ Latch behavior—set (S′ = 0, R′ = 1) and reset (S′ = 1, R′ = 0) states
And finally, just as with the SR Latch, the S′R′ Latch has a state that
leads to potential metastability and should be avoided. Consider the
operation of the S′R′ Latch when the inputs are configured as S′ = 0 and R′ 
= 0 shown in Fig. 7.10.


--- Page 328 ---
Fig. 7.10S′R′ Latch behavior—don’t use state (S′ = 0 and R′ = 0)
The final truth table for the S′R′ Latch is given in Fig. 7.11.
Fig. 7.11 S′R′ Latch truth table
7.1.5 SR Latch with Enable
The next modification that is made in order to move toward a D-Latch and
ultimately a D-flip-flop is to add an enable line to the S′R′ Latch. The
enable is implemented by adding two NAND gates on the input stage of the
S′R′ Latch. The SR Latch with enable is shown in Fig. 7.12. In this
topology, the use of NAND gates changes the polarity of the inputs, so this
circuit once again has a set state where S = 1, R = 0 and a reset state of S = 0
and R = 1. The enable line is labeled C, which stands for clock. The
rationale for this will be demonstrated upon moving through the
explanation of the D-Latch.
Fig. 7.12SR Latch with enable schematic

--- Page 329 ---
Recall that any time a 0 is present on one of the inputs to a NAND gate,
the output will always be a 1 regardless of the value of the other inputs. In
the SR Latch with enable configuration, any time C = 0, the outputs of U3
and U4 will be 1’s and will be fed into the inputs of the cross-coupled
NAND gate configuration (U1 and U2). Recall that the cross-coupled
configuration of U1 and U2 is an S′R′ Latch and will be put into a store
state when S′ = 1 and R′ = 1. This is the store state (C = 0). When C = 1, it
has the effect of inverting the values of the S and R inputs before they reach
U1 and U2. This condition allows the set state to be entered when S = 1, R 
= 0, and C = 1 and the reset state to be entered when S = 0, R = 1, and C = 1.
Consider this operation in Fig. 7.13.

--- Page 330 ---
Fig. 7.13SR Latch with enable behavior—store, set, and reset

--- Page 331 ---
Again, there is a potential metastable state when S = 1, R = 1, and C = 1
that should be avoided. There is also a second store state when S = 0, R = 0,
and C = 1 that is not used because storage is to be dictated by the C input.
7.1.6 The D-Latch
The SR Latch with enable can be modified to create a new storage device
called a D-Latch. Instead of having two separate input lines to control the
outputs of the latch, the R input of the latch is instead driven with an
inverted version of the S input. This prevents the S and R inputs from ever
being the same value and removes the two “Don’t Use” states in the truth
table shown in Fig. 7.12. The new, single input is renamed D to stand for
data. This new circuit still has the behavior that it will store the last value of
Q and Qn when C = 0. When C = 1, the output will be Q = 1 when D = 1 and
will be Q = 0 when D = 0. The behavior of the output when C = 1 is called
tracking the input. The D-Latch schematic, symbol, and truth table are
given in Fig. 7.14.
Fig. 7.14D-Latch schematic, symbol, and truth table
The timing diagram for the D-Latch is shown in Fig. 7.15.

--- Page 332 ---
Fig. 7.15D-Latch timing diagram
7.1.7 The D-Flip-Flop
The final and most widely used storage device in sequential logic is the D-
flip-flop. The D-flip-flop is similar in behavior to the D-Latch with the
exception that the store mode is triggered by a transition, or edge on the
clock signal instead of a level. This allows the D-flip-flop to implement
higher frequency systems since the outputs are updated in a shorter amount
of time. The schematic, symbol, and truth table are given in Fig. 7.16 for a
rising edge triggered D-flip-flop. To indicate that the device is edge
sensitive, the input for the clock is designated with a “>.” The U3 inverter
in this schematic creates the rising edge behavior. If U3 is omitted, this
circuit would be a negative edge triggered D-flip-flop.

--- Page 333 ---
Fig. 7.16D-flip-flop (rising edge triggered) schematic, symbol, and truth table
The D-flip-flop schematic shown above is called a master/slave
configuration because of how the data is passed through the two D-Latches
(U1 and U2). Due to the U4 inverter, the two D-Latches will always be in
complementary modes. When U1 is in hold mode, U2 will be in track mode
and vice versa. When the clock signal transitions HIGH, U1 will store the
last value of data. During the time when the clock is HIGH, U2 will enter
track mode and pass this value to Q. In this way, the data is latched into the
storage device on the rising edge of the clock and is present on Q. This is
the master operation of the device because U1, or the first D-Latch, is
holding the value, and the second D-Latch (the slave) is simply passing this
value to the output Q. When the clock transitions LOW, U2 will store the
output of U1. Since there is a finite delay through U1, the U2 D-Latch is
able to store the value before U1 fully enters track mode. U2 will drive Q
for the duration of the time that the clock is LOW. This is the slave
operation of the device because U2, or the second D-Latch, is holding the
value. During the time the clock is LOW, U1 is in track mode, which passes
the input data to the middle of the D-flip-flop preparing for the next rising
edge of the clock. The master/slave configuration creates a behavior where
the Q output of the D-flip-flop is only updated with the value of D on a
rising edge of the clock. At all other times, Q holds the last value of D. An
example timing diagram for the operation of a rising edge D-flip-flop is
given in Fig. 7.17.

--- Page 334 ---
Fig. 7.17D-flip-flop (rising edge triggered) timing diagram
D-flip-flops often have additional signals that will set the initial
conditions of the outputs that are separate from the clock. A reset input is
used to force the outputs to Q = 0 and Qn = 1. A preset input is used to force
the outputs to Q = 1 and Qn = 0. In most modern D-flip-flops, these inputs
are active LOW, meaning that the line is asserted when the input is a 0.
Active LOW inputs are indicated by placing an inversion bubble on the
input pin of the symbol. These lines are typically asynchronous, meaning

--- Page 335 ---
that when they are asserted, action is immediately taken to alter the outputs.
This is different from a synchronous input in which action is only taken on
the edge of the clock. Figure 7.18 shows the symbols and truth tables for
two D-flip-flop variants, one with an active LOW reset and another with
both an active LOW reset and active LOW preset.
Fig. 7.18D-flip-flop with asynchronous reset and preset
D-flip-flops can also be created with an enable line. An enable line
controls whether or not the output is updated. Enable lines are synchronous,
meaning that when they are asserted, the outputs will be updated on the
rising edge of the clock. When de-asserted, the outputs are not updated.
This behavior in effect ignores the clock input when de-asserted.
Figure 7.19 shows the symbol and truth table for a D-flip-flop with a
synchronous enable.

--- Page 336 ---
Fig. 7.19D-flip-flop with synchronous enable
The behavior of the D-flip-flop allows us to design systems that are
synchronous to a clock signal. A clock signal is a periodic square wave that
dictates when events occur in a digital system. A synchronous system based
on D-flip-flops will allow the outputs of its storage devices to be updated
upon a rising edge of the clock. This is advantageous because when the Q
outputs are storing values they can be used as inputs for combinational
logic circuits. Since combinational logic circuits contain a certain amount of
propagation delay before the final output is calculated, the D-flip-flop can
hold the inputs at a steady value while the output is generated. Since the
input on a D-flip-flop is ignored during all other times, the output of a
combinational logic circuit can be fed back as an input to a D-flip-flop. This
gives a system the ability to generate outputs based on the current values of
inputs in addition to past values of the inputs that are being held on the
outputs of D-flip-flops. This is the definition of sequential logic. An
example synchronous, sequential system is shown in Fig. 7.20.


--- Page 337 ---
Fig. 7.20An example synchronous system based on a D-flip-flop
7.2 Sequential Logic Timing Considerations
There are a variety of timing specifications that need to be met in order to
successfully design circuits using sequential storage devices. The first
specification is called the setup time (tsetup or ts). The setup time specifies
how long the data input needs to be at a steady state before the clock event.
The second specification is called the hold time (thold or th). The hold time
specifies how long the data input needs to be at a steady state after the clock
event. If these specifications are violated (i.e., the input transitions too close
to the clock transition), the storage device will not be able to determine
whether the input was a 1 or 0 and will go metastable. The time a storage
device will remain metastable is a deterministic value and is specified by
the part manufacturer (tmeta). In general, metastability should be avoided;
however, knowing the maximum duration of metastability for a storage
device allows us to design circuits to overcome potential metastable
conditions. During the time the device is metastable, the output will have
random behavior. It may go to a steady state 1, or a steady state 0, or toggle

--- Page 338 ---
between a 0 and 1 uncontrollably. Once the device comes out of
metastability, it will come to rest in one of its two stable states (Q = 0 or Q 
= 1). The final resting state is random and unknown. Another specification
for sequential storage devices is the delay from the time a clock transition
occurs to the point that the data is present on the Q output. This
specification is called the Clock-to-Q delay and is given the notation tCQ.
These specifications are shown in Fig. 7.21.
Fig. 7.21Sequential storage device timing specifications


--- Page 339 ---
7.3 Common Circuits Based on Sequential Storage
Devices
Sequential logic storage devices give us the ability to create sophisticated
circuits that can make decisions based on the current and past values of the
inputs; however, there are a variety of simple, yet useful, circuits that can be
created with only these storage devices. This section introduces a few of
these circuits.
7.3.1 Toggle Flop Clock Divider
A toggle flop is a circuit that contains a D-flip-flop configured with its Qn
output wired back to its D input. This configuration is also commonly
referred to as a T-Flip-Flop or T-Flop. In this circuit, the only input is the
clock signal. Let’s examine the behavior of this circuit when its outputs are
initialized to Q = 0 and Qn = 1. Since Qn is wired to the D input, a logic 1 is
present on the input before the first clock edge. Upon a rising edge of the
clock, Q is updated with the value of D. This puts the outputs at Q = 1 and
Qn = 0. With these outputs, now a logic 0 is present on the input before the
next clock edge. Upon the next rising edge of the clock, Q is updated with
the value of D. This time the outputs go to Q = 0 and Qn = 1. This behavior
continues indefinitely. The circuit is called a toggle flop because the outputs
simply toggle between a 0 and 1 every time there is a rising edge of the
clock. This configuration produces outputs that are square waves with
exactly half the frequency of the incoming clock. As a result, this circuit is
also called a clock divider. This circuit can be given its own symbol with a
label of “T” indicating that it is a toggle flop. The configuration of a toggle
flop (T-Flop) and timing diagram are shown in Fig. 7.22.

--- Page 340 ---
Fig. 7.22Toggle flop clock frequency divider
7.3.2 Ripple Counter
The toggle flop configuration can be used to create a simple binary counter
called a ripple counter. In this configuration, the Qn output of a toggle flop
is used as the clock for a subsequent toggle flop. Since the output of the
first toggle flop is a square wave that is ½ the frequency of the incoming
clock, this configuration will produce an output on the second toggle flop
that is ¼ the frequency of the incoming clock. This is by nature the
behavior of a binary counter. The output of this counter is present on the Q
pins of each toggle flop. Toggle flops are added until the desired width of
the counter is achieved with each toggle flop representing one bit of the
counter. Since each toggle flop produces the clock for the subsequent latch,
the clock is said to ripple through the circuit, hence the name ripple counter.
A 3-bit ripple counter is shown in Fig. 7.23.

--- Page 341 ---
Fig. 7.233-Bit ripple counter
7.3.3 Switch Debouncing
Another useful circuit based on sequential storage devices is a switch
debouncer. Mechanical switches have a well-known issue of not producing
clean logic transitions on their outputs when pressed. This becomes
problematic when using a switch to create an input for a digital device
because it will cause unwanted logic-level transitions on the output of the
gate. In the case of a clock input, this unwanted transition can cause a
storage device to unintentionally latch incorrect data.
The primary cause of these unclean logic transitions is due to the
physical vibrations of the metal contacts when they collide with each other

--- Page 342 ---
during a button press or switch actuation. Within a mechanical switch, there
is typically one contact that is fixed and another that is designed to move
when the button is pressed. The contact that is designed to move can be
thought of as a beam that is fixed on one side and free on the other. As the
free side of the beam moves toward the fixed contact in order to close the
circuit, it will collide and then vibrate just as a tuning fork does when
struck. The vibration will eventually diminish and the contact will come to
rest, thus making a clean electrical connection; however, during the
vibration period the moving contact will bounce up and down on the
destination contact. This bouncing causes the switch to open and close
multiple times before coming to rest in the closed position. This
phenomenon is accurately referred to as switch bounce. Switch bounce is
present in all mechanical switches and gets progressively worse as the
switches are used more and more.
Figure 7.24 shows some of the common types of switches found in
digital systems. The term pole is used to describe the number of separate
circuits controlled by the switch. The term throw is used to describe the
number of separate closed positions the switch can be in.
Fig. 7.24Common types of mechanical switches
Let’s look at switch bounce when using a SPST switch to provide an
input to a logic gate. An SPST requires a resistor and can be configured to
provide either a logic HIGH or LOW when in the open position and the
opposite logic level when in the closed position. The example configuration
in Fig. 7.25 provides a logic LOW when in the open position and a logic

--- Page 343 ---
HIGH when in the closed position. In the open position, the input to the
gate (SW) is pulled to GND to create a logic LOW. In the closed position,
the input to the gate is pulled to VCC to create a logic HIGH. A resistor is
necessary to prevent a short circuit between VCC and GND when the switch
is closed. Since the input current specification for a logic gate is very small,
the voltage developed across the resistor due to the gate input current is
negligible. This means that the resistor can be inserted in the pull-down
network without developing a noticeable voltage. When the switch closes,
the free-moving contact will bounce off of the destination contact numerous
times before settling in the closed position. During the time while the
switch is bouncing, the switch will repeatedly toggle between the open
(HIGH) and closed (LOW) positions.
Fig. 7.25Switch bouncing in a single-pole, single-throw switch

--- Page 344 ---
A possible solution to eliminate this switch bounce is to instead use an
SPDT switch in conjunction with a sequential storage device. Before
looking at this solution, we need to examine an additional condition
introduced by the SPDT switch. The SPDT switch has what is known as
break-before-make behavior. The term break is used to describe when a
switch is open while the term make is used to describe when the switch is
closed. When an SPDT switch is pressed, the input will be floating during
the time when the free-moving contact is transitioning toward the
destination contact. During this time, the output of the switch is unknown
and can cause unwanted logic transitions if it is being used to drive the
input of a logic gate.
Let’s look at switch bounce when using an SPDT switch without
additional circuitry to handle bouncing. An SPDT has two positions that the
free-moving contact can make a connection to (i.e., double throw). When
using this switch to drive a logic level into a gate, one position is configured
as a logic HIGH and the other a logic LOW. Consider the SPDT switch
configuration in Fig. 7.26. Position 1 of the SPDT switch is connected to
GND, while position 2 is connected to VCC. When unpressed the switch is
in position 1. When pressed, the free-moving contact will transition from
position 1 to 2. During the transition the free-moving contact is floating.
This creates a condition where the input to the gate (SW) is unknown. This
floating input will cause unpredictable behavior on the output of the gate.
Upon reaching position 2, the free-moving contact will bounce off of the
destination contact. This will cause the input of the logic gate to toggle
between a logic HIGH and floating repeatedly until the free-moving contact
comes to rest in position 2.

--- Page 345 ---
Fig. 7.26Switch bouncing in a single-pole, double-throw switch
The SPDT switch is ideal for use with an S′R′ Latch in order to produce
a clean logic transition. This is because during the break portion of the
transition, an S′R′ Latch can be used to hold the last value of the switch.
This is unique to the SPDT configuration. The SPST switch in comparison
does not have the break characteristic; rather it always drives a logic level
in both of its possible positions. Consider the debounce circuit for an SPDT
switch in Fig. 7.27. This circuit is based on an S′R′ Latch with two pull-up
resistors. Since the S′R′ Latch is created using NAND gates, this circuit is
commonly called a NAND-Debounce circuit. In the unpressed
configuration, the switch drives S′ = 0 and the R2 pull-up resistor drives R′ 
= 1. This creates a logic 0 on the output of the circuit (Qn = 0). During a

--- Page 346 ---
switch press, the free-moving contact is floating; thus it is not driving in a
logic level into the S′R′ Latch. Instead, both pull-up resistors pull S′ and R′
to 1’s. This puts the latch into its hold mode and the output will remain at a
logic 0 (Qn = 0). Once the free-moving contact reaches the destination
contact, the switch will drive R′ = 0. Since at this point the R1 pull-up is
driving S′ = 1, the latch outputs a logic 1 (Qn = 1). When the free-moving
contact bounces off of the destination contact, it will put the latch back into
the hold mode; however, this time the last value that will be held is Qn = 1.
As the switch continues to bounce, the latch will move between the Qn = 1
and Qn=“Last Qn” states, both of which produce an output of 1. In this way,
the SPDT switch in conjunction with the S′R′ Latch produces a clean 0 to 1
logic transition despite the break-before-make behavior of the switch and
the contact bounce.

--- Page 347 ---
Fig. 7.27NAND debounce circuit for an SPDT switch

--- Page 348 ---
7.3.4 Shift Registers
A shift register is a chain of D-flip-flops where each is connected to a
common clock. The output of the first D-flip-flop is connected to the input
of the second D-flip-flop. The output of the second D-flip-flop is connected
to the input of the third D-flip-flop, and so on. When data is present on the
input to the first D-flip-flop, it will be latched upon the first rising edge of
the clock. On the second rising edge of the clock, the same data will be
latched into the second D-flip-flop. This continues on each rising edge of
the clock until the data has been shifted entirely through the chain of D-flip-
flops. Shift registers are commonly used to convert a serial string of data
into a parallel format. If an n-bit, serial sequence of information is clocked
into the shift register, after n clocks the data will be held on each of the D-
flip-flop outputs. At this moment, the n-bits can be read as a parallel value.
Consider the shift register configuration shown in Fig. 7.28.

--- Page 349 ---
Fig. 7.284-Bit shift register
7.4 Finite-State Machines

--- Page 350 ---
Now we turn our attention to one of the most powerful sequential logic
circuits, the FSM. An FSM, or state machine, is a circuit that contains a
predefined number of states (i.e., a finite number of states). The machine
can exist in one and only one state at a time. The circuit transitions between
states based on a triggering event, most commonly the edge of a clock, in
addition to the values of any inputs of the machine. The number of states
and all possible transitions are predefined. Through the use of states and a
predefined sequence of transitions, the circuit is able to make decisions on
the next state to transition to based on a history of past states. This allows
the circuit to create outputs that are more intelligent compared to a simple
combinational logic circuit that has outputs based only on the current values
of the inputs.
7.4.1 Describing the Functionality of an FSM
The design of a state machine begins with an abstract word description of
the desired circuit behavior. We will use a design example of a push-button
motor controller to describe all of the steps involved in creating an FSM.
Example 7.1 starts the FSM design process by stating the word description
of the system.
Example 7.1 Push-Button Window Controller—Word Description
7.4.1.1 State Diagrams

--- Page 351 ---
A state diagram is a graphical way to describe the functionality of an FSM.
A state diagram is a form of a directed graph, in which each state (or
vertex) within the system is denoted as a circle and given a descriptive
name. The names are written inside of the circles. The transitions between
states are denoted using arrows with the input conditions causing the
transitions written next to them. Transitions (or edges) can move to
different states upon particular input conditions or remain in the same state.
For a state machine implemented using sequential logic storage, an
evaluation of when to transition states is triggered every time the storage
devices update their outputs. For example, if the system was implemented
using rising edge triggered D-flip-flops, then an evaluation would occur on
every rising edge of the clock.
There are two different types of output conditions for a state machine.
The first is when the output only depends on the current state of the
machine. This type of system is called a Moore machine . In this case, the
outputs of the system are written inside of the state circles. This indicates
the output value that will be generated for each specific state. The second
output condition is when the outputs depend on both the current state and
the system inputs. This type of system is called a Mealy machine . In this
case, the outputs of the system are written next to the state transitions
corresponding to the appropriate input values. Outputs in a state diagram
are typically written inside of parentheses. Example 7.2 shows the
construction of the state diagram for our push-button window controller
design.
Example 7.2 Push-Button Window Controller—State Diagram

--- Page 352 ---
7.4.1.2 State Transition Tables
The state diagram can now be described in a table format that is similar to a
truth table. This puts the state machine behavior in a form that makes logic
synthesis straightforward. The table contains the same information as in the

--- Page 353 ---
state diagram. The state that the machine exists in is called the current state.
For each current state that the machine can reside in, every possible input
condition is listed along with the destination state of each transition. The
destination state for a transition is called the next state. Also listed in the
table are the outputs corresponding to each current state and, in the case of a
Mealy machine, the output corresponding to each input condition. Example
7.3 shows the construction of the state transition table for the push-button
window controller design. This information is identical to the state diagram
given in Example 7.2.
Example 7.3 Push-Button Window Controller—State Transition Table
7.4.2 Logic Synthesis for an FSM
Once the behavior of the state machine has been described, it can be
directly synthesized. There are three main components of a state machine:
the state memory, the next state logic, and the output logic. Figure 7.29
shows a block diagram of a state machine highlighting these three
components. The next state logic block is a group of combinational logic
that produces the next state signals based on the current state and any
system inputs. The state memory holds the current state of the system. The
current state is updated with next state on every rising edge of the clock,
which is indicated with the “>” symbol within the block. This behavior is
created using D-flip-flops where the current state is held on the Q outputs of
the D-flip-flops, while the next state is present on the D inputs of the D-flip-
flops. In this way, every rising edge of the clock will trigger an evaluation
of which state to move to next. This decision is based on the current state
and the current inputs. The output logic block is a group of combinational

--- Page 354 ---
logic that creates the outputs of the system. This block always uses the
current state as an input and, depending on the type of machine (Mealy vs.
Moore), uses the system inputs. It is useful to keep this block diagram in
mind when synthesizing FSM as it will aid in keeping the individual design
steps separate and clear.
Fig. 7.29Main components of a finite-state machine
7.4.2.1 State Memory
The state memory is the circuitry that will hold the current state of the
machine. Upon a rising edge of a clock it will update the current state with
the next state. At all other times, the next state input is ignored. This gives
time for the next state logic circuitry to compute the results for the next
state. This behavior is identical to that of a D-flip-flop; thus the state
memory is simply one or more D-flip-flops. The number of D-flip-flops
required depends on how the states are encoded. State encoding is the
process of assigning a binary value to the descriptive names of the states
from the state diagram and state transition tables. Once the descriptive

--- Page 355 ---
names have been converted into representative codes using 1’s and 0’s, the
states can be implemented in real circuitry. The assignment of codes is
arbitrary and can be selected in order to minimize the circuitry needed in
the machine.
There are three main styles of state encoding. The first is straight binary
encoding. In this approach the state codes are simply a set of binary counts
(i.e., 00, 01, 10, 11 …). The binary counts are assigned starting at the
beginning of the state diagram and incrementally assigned toward the end.
This type of encoding has the advantage that it is very efficient in
minimizing the number of D-flip-flops needed for the state memory. With n
D-flip-flops, 2 n states can be encoded. When a large number of states is
required, the number of D-flip-flops can be calculated using the rules of
logarithmic math. Example 7.4 shows how to solve for the number of bits
needed in the binary state code based on the number of states in the
machine.
Example 7.4 Solving for the Number of Bits Needed for Binary State
Encoding

--- Page 356 ---
The second type of state encoding is called gray code encoding. A gray
code is one in which the value of a code differs by only one bit from any of
its neighbors (i.e., 00, 01, 11, 10 …). A gray code is useful for reducing the
number of bit transitions on the state codes when the machine has a
transition sequence that is linear. Reducing the number of bit transitions can
reduce the amount of power consumption and noise generated by the
circuit. When the state transitions of a machine are highly nonlinear, a gray
code encoding approach does not provide any benefit. Gray code is also an
efficient coding approach. With n D-flip-flops, 2 n states can be encoded
just as in binary encoding. Figure 7.30 shows the process of creating n-bit,
gray code patterns.

--- Page 357 ---
Fig. 7.30Creating an n-bit gray code pattern
The third common technique to encode states is using one-hot
encoding. In this approach, a separate D-flip-flop is asserted for each state
in the machine. For an n-state machine, this encoding approach requires n
D-flip-flops. For example, if a machine had three states, the one-hot state
codes would be “001,” “010,” and “100.” This approach has the advantage
that the next state logic circuitry is very simple; further, there is less chance
that the different propagation delays through the next state logic will cause
an inadvertent state to be entered. This approach is not as efficient as binary
and gray code in terms of minimizing the number of D-flip-flops because it
requires one D-flip-flop for each state; however, in modern digital
integrated circuits that have abundant D-flip-flops, one-hot encoding is
commonly used.
Figure 7.31 shows the differences between these three state encoding
approaches.

--- Page 358 ---
Fig. 7.31Comparison of different state encoding approaches
Once the codes have been assigned to the state names, each of the bits
within the code must be given a unique signal name. The signal names are
necessary because the individual bits within the state code are going to be
implemented with real circuitry so each signal name will correspond to an
actual node in the logic diagram. These individual signal names are called
state variables. Unique variable names are needed for both the current state
and next state signals. The current state variables are driven by the Q
outputs of the D-flip-flops holding the state codes. The next state variables
are driven by the next state logic circuitry and are connected to the D inputs
of the D-flip-flops. State variable names are commonly chosen that are
descriptive both in terms of their purpose and connection location. For
example, current state variables are often given the names Q, Q_cur or
Q_current to indicate that they come from the Q outputs of the D-flip-flops.
Next state variables are given names such as Q*, Q_nxt or Q_next to
indicate that they are the next value of Q and are connected to the D input
of the D-flip-flops. Once state codes and state variable names are assigned,
the state transition table is updated with the detailed information.
Returning to our push-button window controller example, let’s encode
our states in straight binary and use the state variable names of Q_cur and
Q_nxt. Example 7.5 shows the process of state encoding and the new state
transition table.
Example 7.5 Push-Button Window Controller—State Encoding

--- Page 359 ---
7.4.2.2 Next State Logic
The next step in the state machine design is to synthesize the next state
logic. The next state logic will compute the values of the next state
variables based on the current state and the system inputs. Recall that a
combinational logic function drives one and only one output bit. This
means that every bit within the next state code needs to have a dedicated
combinational logic circuit. The state transition table contains all of the
necessary information to synthesize the next state logic including the exact
output values of each next state variable for each and every input
combination of state code and system input(s).
In our push-button window controller example, we only need to create
one combinational logic circuit because there is only one next state variable
(Q_nxt). The inputs to the combinational logic circuit are Q_cur and Press.
Notice that the state transition table was created such that the order of the
input values is listed in a binary count just as in a formal truth table
formation. This makes synthesizing the combinational logic circuit

--- Page 360 ---
straightforward. Example 7.6 shows the steps to synthesize the next state
logic for this push-button window controller.
Example 7.6 Push-Button Window Controller—Next State Logic
7.4.2.3 Output Logic
The next step in the state machine design is to synthesize the output logic.
The output logic will compute the values of the system outputs based on the
current state and, in the case of a Mealy machine, the system inputs. Each
of the output signals will require a dedicated combinational logic circuit.
Again, the state transition table contains all of the necessary information to
synthesize the output logic.
In our push-button window controller example, we need to create one
circuit to compute the output “Open_CW” and one circuit to compute the
output “Close_CCW.” In this example, the inputs to these circuits are the

--- Page 361 ---
current state (Q_cur) and the system input (Press). Example 7.7 shows the
steps to synthesize the output logic for the push-button window controller.
Example 7.7 Push-Button Window Controller—Output Logic
7.4.2.4 The Final Logic Diagram
The final step in the design of the state machine is to create the logic
diagram. It is useful to recall the block diagram for a state machine from
Fig. 7.29. A logic diagram begins by entering the state memory. Recall that
the state memory consists of D-flip-flops that hold the current state code.
One D-flip-flop is needed for every current state variable. When entering
the D-flip-flops, it is useful to label them with the current state variable they
will be holding. The next part of the logic diagram is the next state logic.

--- Page 362 ---
Each of the combinational logic circuits that compute the next state
variables should be drawn to the left of D-flip-flop holding the
corresponding current state variable. The output of each next state logic
circuit is connected to the D input of the corresponding D-flip-flop. Finally,
the output logic is entered with the inputs to the logic coming from the
current state and potentially from the system inputs.
Example 7.8 shows the process for creating the final logic diagram for
our push-button window controller. Notice that the state memory is
implemented with one D-flip-flop since there is only 1-bit in the current
state code (Q_cur). The next state logic is a combinational logic circuit that
computes Q_nxt based on the values of Q_cur and Press. Finally, the output
logic consists of two separate combinational logic circuits to compute the
system outputs Open_CW and Close_CCW based on Q_cur and Press. In
this diagram the Qn output of the D-flip-flop could have been used for the
inverted versions of Q_cur; however, inversion bubbles were used instead
in order to make the diagram more readable.
Example 7.8 Push-Button Window Controller—Logic Diagram
7.4.3 FSM Design Process Overview
The entire FSM design process is given in Fig. 7.32.

--- Page 363 ---
Fig. 7.32Finite-state machine design flow
7.4.4 FSM Design Examples
7.4.4.1 Serial Bit Sequence Detector
Let’s consider the design of a 3-bit serial sequence detector. Example 7.9
provides the word description, state diagram, and state transition table for
this FSM.
Example 7.9 Serial Bit Sequence Detector (Part 1)

--- Page 364 ---
Example 7.10 provides the state encoding and next state logic synthesis for
the 3-bit serial bit sequence detector.
Example 7.10 Serial Bit Sequence Detector (Part 2)

--- Page 365 ---
Example 7.11 shows the output logic synthesis and final logic diagram for
the 3-bit serial bit sequence detector.

--- Page 366 ---
Example 7.11 Serial Bit Sequence Detector (Part 3)
7.4.4.2 Vending Machine Controller

--- Page 367 ---
Let’s now look at the design of a simple vending machine controller.
Example 7.12 provides the word description, state diagram, and state
transition table for this FSM.
Example 7.12 Vending Machine Controller (Part 1)


--- Page 368 ---
Example 7.13 provides the state encoding and next state logic synthesis for
the simple vending machine controller.
Example 7.13 Vending Machine Controller (Part 2)
Example 7.14 shows the output logic synthesis and final logic diagram for
the vending machine controller.
Example 7.14 Vending Machine Controller (Part 3)

--- Page 371 ---
7.5 Counters
A counter is a special type of FSM. A counter will traverse the states within
a state diagram in a linear fashion continually circling around all states.
This behavior allows a special type of output topology called state-encoded
outputs. Since each state in the counter represents a unique counter output,
the states can be encoded with the associated counter output value. In this
way, the current state code of the machine can be used as the output of the
entire system.
7.5.1 2-Bit Binary Up Counter
Let’s consider the design of a 2-bit binary up counter. Example 7.15
provides the word description, state diagram, state transition table, and state
encoding for this counter.
Example 7.15 2-bit Binary Up Counter (Part 1)

--- Page 372 ---
Example 7.16 shows the next state and output logic synthesis, the final
logic diagram, and resultant representative timing diagram for the 2-bit
binary up counter.
Example 7.16 2-Bit Binary Up Counter (Part 2)

--- Page 373 ---
7.5.2 2-Bit Binary Up/Down Counter

--- Page 374 ---
Let’s now consider a 2-bit binary up/down counter. In this type of counter,
there is an input that dictates whether the counter increments or decrements.
This counter can still be implemented as a Moore machine and use state-
encoded outputs. Example 7.17 provides the word description, state
diagram, state transition table, and state encoding for this counter.
Example 7.17 2-Bit Binary Up/Down Counter (Part 1)

--- Page 375 ---
Example 7.18 shows the next state and output logic synthesis, the final
logic diagram, and resultant representative timing diagram for the 2-bit
binary up/down counter.
Example 7.18 2-Bit Binary Up/Down Counter (Part 2)

--- Page 376 ---
7.5.3 2-Bit Gray Code Up Counter

--- Page 377 ---
A gray code counter is one in which the output only differs by one bit from
its prior value. This type of counter can be implemented using state-
encoded outputs by simply encoding the states in gray code. Let’s consider
the design of a 2-bit gray code up counter. Example 7.19 provides the word
description, state diagram, state transition table, and state encoding for this
counter.
Example 7.19 2-Bit Gray Code Up Counter (Part 1)


--- Page 378 ---
Example 7.20 shows the next state and output logic synthesis, the final
logic diagram, and resultant representative timing diagram for the 2-bit gray
code up counter.
Example 7.20 2-Bit Gray Code Up Counter (Part 2)

--- Page 379 ---
7.5.4 2-Bit Gray Code Up/Down Counter

--- Page 380 ---
Let’s now consider a 2-bit gray code up/down counter. In this type of
counter, there is an input that dictates whether the counter increments or
decrements. This counter can still be implemented as a Moore machine and
use state-encoded outputs. Example 7.21 provides the word description,
state diagram, state transition table, and state encoding for this counter.
Example 7.21 2-Bit Gray Code Up/Down Counter (Part 1)

--- Page 381 ---
Example 7.22 shows the next state and output logic synthesis, the final
logic diagram, and resultant representative timing diagram for the 2-bit gray
code up/down counter.
Example 7.22 2-Bit Gray Code Up/Down Counter (Part 2)

--- Page 382 ---
7.5.5 3-Bit One-Hot Up Counter

--- Page 383 ---
A one-hot counter creates an output in which one and only one bit is
asserted at a time. In an up counter configuration, the assertion is made on
the least significant bit first, followed by the next higher significant bit, and
so on (i.e., 001, 010, 100, 001 …). A one-hot counter can be created using
state-encoded outputs. For an n-bit counter, the machine will require n D-
flip-flops. Let’s consider a 3-bit one-hot up counter. Example 7.23 provides
the word description, state diagram, state transition table, and state
encoding for this counter.
Example 7.23 3-Bit One-Hot Up Counter (Part 1)


--- Page 384 ---
Example 7.24 shows the next state and output logic synthesis, the final
logic diagram, and resultant representative timing diagram for the 3-bit one-
hot up counter.
Example 7.24 3-Bit One-Hot Up Counter (Part 2)


--- Page 385 ---
7.5.6 3-Bit One-Hot Up/Down Counter
Let’s now consider a 3-bit one-hot up/down counter. In this type of counter,
there is an input that dictates whether the counter increments or decrements.
This counter can still be implemented as a Moore machine and use state-
encoded outputs. Example 7.25 provides the word description, state
diagram, state transition table, and state encoding for this counter.
Example 7.25 3-Bit One-Hot Up/Down Counter (Part 1)


--- Page 386 ---
Example 7.26 shows the next state and output logic synthesis for the 3-bit
one-hot up/down counter.
Example 7.26 3-Bit One-Hot Up/Down Counter (Part 2)
Finally, Example 7.27 shows the logic diagram and resultant representative
timing diagram for the counter.
Example 7.27 3-Bit One-Hot Up/Down Counter (Part 3)

--- Page 388 ---
7.6 Finite-State Machine’s Reset Condition
The one-hot counter designs in Examples 7.23 and 7.25 were the first FSM
examples that had an initial state that was not encoded with all 0’s. Notice
that all of the other FSM examples had initial states with state codes
comprised of all 0’s (e.g., w_closed = 0, S0 = “00,” C0 = “00,” GC_0 
= “00”). When the initial state is encoded with all 0’s, the FSM can be put
into this state by asserting the reset line of all of the D-flip-flops in the state
memory. By asserting the reset line, the Q outputs of all of the D-Flip-Flips
are forced to 0’s. This sets the initial current state value to whatever state is
encoded with all 0’s. The initial state of a machine is often referred to as the
reset state. The circuitry to initialize state machines is often omitted from
the logic diagram as it is assumed that the necessary circuitry will exist in
order to put the state machine into the reset state. If the reset state is
encoded with all 0’s, then the reset line can be used alone; however, if the
reset state code contains 1’s, then both the reset and preset lines must be
used to put the machine into the reset state upon start up. Let’s look at the
behavior of the one-hot up counter again. Figure 7.33 shows how using the
reset lines of the D-flip-flops alone will cause the circuit to operate
incorrectly. Instead, a combination of the reset and preset lines must be used
to get the one-hot counter into its initial state of Hot_0 = “001”.

--- Page 389 ---
Fig. 7.33Finite-state machine reset state
Resets are most often asynchronous so that they can immediately alter
the state of the FSM. If a reset was implemented in a synchronous manner
and there was a clock failure, the system could not be reset since there
would be no more subsequent clock edges that would recognize that the
reset line was asserted. An asynchronous reset allows the system to be fully
restarted even in the event of a clock failure.

--- Page 390 ---
7.7 Sequential Logic Analysis
Sequential logic analysis refers to the act of deciphering the operation of a
circuit from its final logic diagram. This is similar to combinational logic
analysis with the exception that the storage capability of the D-flip-flops
must be considered. This analysis is also used to understand the timing of a
sequential logic circuit and can be used to predict the maximum clock rate
that can be used.
7.7.1 Finding the State Equations and Output Logic
Expressions of an FSM
When given the logic diagram for an FSM and it is desired to reverse-
engineer its behavior, the first step is to determine the next state logic and
output logic expressions. This can be accomplished by first labeling the
current and next state variables on the inputs and outputs of the D-flip-flops
that are implementing the state memory of the FSM. The outputs of the D-
flip-flops are labeled with arbitrary current state variable names (e.g.,
Q1_cur, Q0_cur) and the inputs are labeled with arbitrary next state variable
names (e.g., Q1_nxt, Q0_nxt). The numbering of the state variables can be
assigned to the D-flip-flops arbitrarily as long as the current and next state
bit numbering is matched. For example, if a D-flip-flop is labeled to hold
bit 0 of the state code, its output should be labeled Q0_cur and its input
should be labeled Q0_nxt.
Once the current state variable nets are labeled in the logic diagram, the
expressions for the next state logic can be found by analyzing the
combinational logic circuitry driving the next state variables (e.g., Q1_nxt,

--- Page 391 ---
Q0_nxt). The next state logic expressions will be in terms of the current
state variables (e.g., Q1_cur, Q0_cur) and any inputs to the FSM.
The output logic expressions can also be found by analyzing the
combinational logic driving the outputs of the FSM. Again, these will be in
terms of the current state variables and potentially the inputs to the FSM.
When analyzing the output logic, the type of machine can be determined. If
the output logic only depends on combinational logic that is driven by the
current state variables, the FSM is a Moore machine. If the output logic
depends on both the current state variables and the FSM inputs, the FSM is
a Mealy machine. An example of this analysis approach is given in
Example 7.28.
Example 7.28 Determining the Next State Logic and Output Logic
Expression of an FSM

--- Page 392 ---
7.7.2 Finding the State Transition Table of an FSM
Once the next state logic and output logic expressions are known, the state
transition table can be created. It is useful to assign more descriptive names
to all possible state codes in the FSM. The number of unique states possible
depends on how many D-flip-flops are used in the state memory of the

--- Page 393 ---
FSM. For example, if the FSM uses two D-flip-flops there are four unique
state codes (i.e., 00, 01, 10, 11). We can assign descriptive names such as
S0 = 00, S1 = 01, S2 = 10, and S3 = 11. When first creating the transition
table, we assign labels and list each possible state code. If a particular code
is not used, it can be removed from the transition table at the end of the
analysis. The state code that the machine will start in can be found by
analyzing its reset and preset connections. This code is typically listed first
in the table. The transition table is then populated with all possible
combinations of current states and inputs. The next state codes and output
logic values can then be populated by evaluating the next state logic and
output logic expressions found earlier. An example of this analysis is shown
in Example 7.29.
Example 7.29 Determining the State Transition Table of an FSM

--- Page 394 ---
7.7.3 Finding the State Diagram of an FSM
Once the state transition table is found, creating the state diagram becomes
possible. We start the diagram with the state corresponding to the reset
state. We then draw how the FSM transitions between each of its possible

--- Page 395 ---
states based on the inputs to the machine and list the corresponding outputs.
An example of this analysis is shown in Example 7.30.
Example 7.30 Determining the State Diagram of an FSM


--- Page 396 ---
7.7.4 Determining the Maximum Clock Frequency
of an FSM
The maximum clock frequency is often one of the banner specifications for
a digital system. The clock frequency of an FSM depends on a variety of
timing specifications within the sequential circuit including the setup and
hold time of the D-flip-flop, the clock-to-Q delay of the D-flip-flop, the
combinational logic delay driving the input of the D-flip-flop, the delay of
the interconnect that wires the circuit together, and the desired margin for
the circuit. The basic concept of analyzing the timing of FSM is to
determine how long we must wait after a rising (assuming a rising edge
triggered D-flip-flop) clock edge occurs until the subsequent rising clock
edge can occur. The amount of time that must be allowed between rising
clock edges depends on how much delay exists in the system. A sufficient
amount of time must exist between clock edges to allow the logic
computations to settle so that on the next clock edge the D-flip-flops can
latch in a new value on their inputs.
Let’s examine all of the sources of delay in an FSM. Let’s begin by
assuming that all logic values are at a stable value and we experience a
rising clock edge. The value present on the D input of the D-flip-flop is
latched into the storage device and will appear on the Q output after one
clock-to-Q delay of the device (tCQ). Once the new value is produced on the
output of the D-flip-flop, it is then used by a variety of combinational logic
circuits to produce the next state codes and the outputs of the FSM. The
next state code computation is typically longer than the output computation,
so let’s examine that path. The new value on Q propagates through the
combinational logic circuitry and produces the next state code at the D
input of the D-flip-flop. The delay to produce this next state code includes
wiring delay in addition to gate delay. When analyzing the delay of the
combinational logic circuitry (tcmb) and the delay of the interconnect (tint),
the worst-case path is always considered. Once the new logic value is
produced by the next state logic circuitry, it must remain stable for a certain
amount of time in order to meet the D-flip-flop’s setup specification (tsetup).
Once this specification is met, the D-flip-flop could be clocked with the
next clock edge; however, this represents a scenario without any margin in
the timing. This means that if anything in the system caused the delay to
increase even slightly, the D-flip-flop could go metastable. To avoid this

--- Page 397 ---
situation, margin is included in the delay (tmargin). This provides some
padding so that the system can reliably operate. A margin of 10 % is typical
in digital systems. The time that must exist between rising clock edges is
then simply the sum of all of these sources of delay (tCQ + tcmb + tint + tsetup 
+ tmargin). Since the time between rising clock edges is defined as the period
of the signal (T), this value is also the definition of the period of the fastest
clock. Since the frequency of a signal is simply f = 1/T, the maximum clock
frequency for the FSM is the reciprocal of the sum of the delay.
One specification that is not discussed in the above description is the
hold time of the D-flip-flop (thold). The hold specification is the amount of
time that the input to the D-flip-flop must remain constant after the clock
edge. In modern storage devices, this time is typically very small and
considerably less than the tCQ specification. If the hold specification is less
than tCQ it can be ignored because the output of the D-flip-flop will not
change until after one tCQ anyway. This means that the hold requirements
are inherently met. This is the situation with the majority of modern D-flip-
flops. In the rare case that the hold time is greater than tCQ, then it is used in
place of tCQ in the summation of delays. Figure 7.34 gives the summary of
the maximum clock frequency calculation when analyzing an FSM.

--- Page 398 ---
Fig. 7.34Timing analysis of a finite-state machine
Let’s take a look at an example of how to use this analysis. Example
7.31 shows this analysis for the FSM analyzed in prior sections but this
time considering the delay specifications of each device.
Example 7.31 Determining the Maximum Clock Frequency of an FSM

--- Page 400 ---
Summary
Sequential logic refers to a circuit that bases its outputs on both the
present and past values of the inputs. Past values are held in sequential
logic storage device.
All sequential logic storage devices are based on a cross-coupled
feedback loop. The positive-feedback loop formed in this
configuration will hold either a 1 or a 0. This is known as a bistable
device.
If the inputs of the feedback loop in a sequential logic storage device
are driven to exactly between a 1 and a 0 (i.e., Vcc/2) and then
released, the device will go metastable. Metastability refers to the
behavior where the device will ultimately be pushed toward one of the
two stable states in the system, typically by electrical noise. Once the
device begins moving toward one of the stable states, the positive
feedback will reinforce the transition until it reaches the stable state.
The stable state that the device will move toward is random and
unknown.
Cross-coupled inverters are the most basic form of the positive-
feedback loop configuration. To give the ability to drive the outputs of
the storage device to known values, the inverters are replaced with
NOR gates to form the SR Latch. A variety of other modifications can
be made to the loop configuration to ultimately produce a D-latch and
D-flip-flop.
A D-flip-flop will update its Q output with the value on its D input on
every triggering edge of a clock. The amount of time that it takes for

--- Page 401 ---
the Q output to update after a triggering clock edge is called the “t-
clock-to-Q” (tCQ) specification.
The setup and hold times of a D-flip-flop describe how long before
(tsetup) and after (thold) the triggering clock edge that the data on the D
input of the device must be stable. If the D input transitions too close
to the triggering clock edge (i.e., violating a setup or hold
specification) then the device will go metastable and the ultimate value
on Q is unknown.
A synchronous system is one in which all logic transitions occur based
on a single timing event. The timing event is typically the triggering
edge of a clock.
There are a variety of common circuits that can be accomplished using
just sequential storage devices. Examples of these circuits include
switch debouncing, toggle-flops, ripple counters, and shift registers.
An FSM is a system that produces outputs based on the current value
of the inputs and a history of past inputs. The history of inputs is
recorded as states that the machine has been in. As the machine
responds to new inputs, it transitions between states. This allows an
FSM to make more sophisticated decisions about what outputs to
produce by knowing its history.
A state diagram is a graphical way to describe the behavior of an FSM.
States are represented using circles and transitions are represented
using arrows. Outputs are listed either inside of the state circle or next
to the transition arrow.
A state transition table contains the same information as a state
diagram, but in tabular format. This allows the system to be more
easily synthesized because the information is in a form similar to a
truth table.
The first step in FSM synthesis is creating the state memory. The state
memory consists of a set of D-flip-flops that hold the current state of
the FSM. Each state in the FSM must be assigned a binary code. The
type of encoding is arbitrary; however, there are certain encoding types
that are commonly used such as binary, gray code, and one-hot. Once
the codes are assigned, state variables need to be defined for each bit

--- Page 402 ---
position for both the current state and the next state codes. The state
variables for the current state represent the Q outputs of the D-flip-
flops, which hold the current state code. The state variables for the
next state code represent the D inputs of the D-flip-flops. A D-flip-flop
is needed for each bit in the state code. On the triggering edge of a
clock, the current state will be updated with the next state code.
The second step in FSM synthesis is creating the next state logic. The
next state logic is combinational logic circuitry that produces the next
state codes based on the current state variables and any system inputs.
The next state logic drives the D inputs of the D-flip-flops in the state
memory.
The third step in FSM synthesis is creating the output logic. The output
logic is combinational logic circuitry that produces the system outputs
based on the current state, and potentially the system inputs.
The output logic always depends on the current state of an FSM. If the
output logic also depends on the system inputs, the machine is a Mealy
machine. If the output logic does not depend on the system inputs, the
machine is a Moore machine.
A counter is a special type of FSM in which the states are traversed
linearly. The linear progression of states allows the next state logic to
be simplified. The complexity of the output logic in a counter can also
be reduced by encoding the states with the desired counter output for
that state. This technique, known as state-encoded outputs, allows the
system outputs to simply be the current state of the FSM.
The reset state of an FSM is the state that the machine will go to when
it begins operation. The state code for the reset state must be
configured using the reset and/or preset lines of the D-flip-flops. If
only reset lines are used on the D-flip-flops, the reset state must be
encoded using only zeros.
Given the logic diagram for a state machine, the logic expression for
the next state memory and the output logic can be determined by
analyzing the combinational logic driving the D inputs of the state
memory (i.e., the next state logic) and the combinational logic driving
the system outputs (i.e., the output logic).

--- Page 403 ---
Given the logic diagram for a state diagram, the state diagram can be
determined by first finding the logic expressions for the next state and
output logic. The number of D-flip-flops in the logic diagram can then
be used to calculate the possible number of state codes that the
machine has. The state codes are then used to calculate the next state
logic and output values. From this information a state transition table
can be created and in turn the state diagram.
The maximum frequency of an FSM is found by summing all sources
of time delay that must be accounted for before the next triggering
edge of the clock can occur. These sources include tCQ, the worst-case
combinational logic path, the worst-case interconnect delay path, the
setup/hold time of the D-flip-flops, and any margin that is to be
included. The sum of these timing delays represents the smallest
period (T) that the clock can have. This is then converted to frequency.
If the tCQ time is greater than or equal to the hold time, the hold time
can be ignored in the maximum frequency calculation. This is because
the outputs of the D-flip-flops are inherently held while the D-flip-
flops are producing the next output value. The time it takes to change
the outputs after a triggering clock edge is defined as tCQ. This means
as long as tCQ ≥ thold, the hold time specification is inherently met since
the logic driving the next state codes uses the Q outputs of the D-flip-
flops.
Exercise Problems
For some of the following exercise problems you will be asked to design a
VHDL model and perform a functional simulation. You will be provided
with a test bench for each of these problems. The details of how to create
your own VHDL test bench are provided later in Chap. 8. For some of the
following exercise problems you will be asked to use D-flip-flops as part of
a VHDL design. You will be provided with the model of the D-flip-flop and
can declare it as a component in your design. The VHDL entity for a D-flip-
flop is given in Fig. 7.35. Keep in mind that this D-flip-flop has an active
LOW reset. This means that when the reset line is pulled to a 0, the outputs
will go to Q = 0 and Qn = 1. When the reset line is LOW, the incoming
clock is ignored. Once the reset line goes HIGH, the D-flip-flop resumes

--- Page 404 ---
normal behavior. The details of how to create your own model of a D-flip-
flop are provided later in Chap. 8.
Fig. 7.35D-Flip-Flop Entity
Section 7.1—Sequential Logic Storage Devices
7.1.1 What does the term metastability refer to in a sequential storage
device?
 
7.1.2 What does the term bistable refer to in a sequential storage device? 
7.1.3 You are given a cross-coupled inverter pair in which all nodes are
set to Vcc/2. Why will this configuration always move to a more
stable state?
 
7.1.4 An SR Latch essentially implements the same cross-coupled
feedback loop to store information as in a cross-coupled inverter
pair. What is the purpose of using NOR gates instead of inverters
in the SR Latch configuration?
 
7.1.5 Why isn’t the input condition S = R = 1 used in an SR Latch? 
7.1.6 How will the output Q behave in an SR Latch if the inputs
continuously switch between S = 0, R = 1 and S = 1, R = 1 every
10ns?
 

--- Page 405 ---
10 ns?
7.1.7 How do D-flip-flops enable synchronous systems? 
7.1.8 What signal in the D-flip-flop in Fig. 7.35 has the highest priority? 
7.1.9 For the timing diagram shown in Fig. 7.36, draw the outputs Q and
Qn for a rising edge-triggered D-flip-flop with active LOW.
Fig. 7.36D-Flip-Flop Timing Diagram Exercise 1
 
7.1.10For the timing diagram shown in Fig. 7.37, draw the outputs Q and
Qn for a rising edge-triggered D-flip-flop with active LOW.
Fig. 7.37`D-Flip-Flop Timing Diagram Exercise 2
 
7.1.11 For the timing diagram shown in Fig. 7.38, draw the outputs Q and
Qn for a rising edge-triggered D-flip-flop with active LOW.  

--- Page 406 ---
Q g g gg p p
Fig. 7.38D-Flip-Flop Timing Diagram Exercise 3
Section 7.2—Sequential Logic Timing Considerations
7.2.1What timing specification is violated in a D-flip-flop when the data
is not held long enough before the triggering clock edge occurs?
 
7.2.2What timing specification is violated in a D-flip-flop when the data
is not held long enough after the triggering clock edge occurs?
 
7.2.3What is the timing specification for a D-flip-flop that describes how
long after the triggering clock edge occurs that the new data will be
present on the Q output?
 
7.2.4What is the timing specification for a D-flip-flop that describes how
long after the device goes metastable that the outputs will settle to
known states.
 
7.2.5If the Q output of a D-flip-flop is driving the D input of another D-
flip-flop from the same logic family, can the hold time be ignored if
it is less than the clock-to-Q delay? Provide an explanation as to
why or why not.
 

--- Page 407 ---
Section 7.3—Common Circuits Based on Sequential Storage
Devices
7.3.1In a toggle flop (T-flop) configuration, the Qn output of the D-flip-
flop is routed back to the D input. This can lead to a hold time
violation if the output arrives on the input too quickly. Under what
condition(s) is a hold time violate not an issue?
 
7.3.2In a toggle flop (T-flop) configuration, what timing specifications
dictate how quickly the next edge of the incoming clock can occur?
 
7.3.3One drawback of a ripple counter is that the delay through the
cascade of D-flip-flops can become considerable for large counters.
At what point does the delay of a ripple counter prevent it from
being useful?
 
7.3.4A common use of a ripple counter is in the creation of a 2 n
programmable clock divider. In a ripple counter, bit(0) has a
frequency that is exactly 1/2 of the incoming clock, bit(1) has a
frequency that is exactly 1/4 of the incoming clock, bit(2) has a
frequency that is exactly 1/8 of the incoming clock, etc. This
behavior can be exploited to create a divided down output clock that
is divided by multiples of 2n by selecting a particular bit of the
counter. The typical configuration of this programmable clock
divider is to route each bit of the counter to an input of a
multiplexer. The select lines going to the multiplexer choose which
bit of the counter is used as the divided down clock output. This
architecture is shown in Fig. 7.39. Design a VHDL model to
implement the programmable clock divider shown in this figure.
Use the entity definition provided in this figure for your design. Use
a 4-bit ripple counter to produce four divided versions of the clock
(1/2, 1/4, 1/8, and 1/16). Your system will take in two select lines
that will choose which version of the clock is to be routed to the
output. Instantiate the D-flip-flops model provided to implement the
ripple counter. Implement the 4-to-1 multiplexer using conditional
signal assignments. The multiplexer does not need to be its own
component.
 

--- Page 408 ---
Fig. 7.39Programmable Clock Entity
7.3.5What phenomenon causes switch bounce in an SPST switch? 
7.3.6What two phenomena causes switch bounce in a SPDT switch? 
Section 7.4—Finite-State Machines
7.4.1 For the state diagram in Fig. 7.40, answer the following questions
regarding the number of D-flip-flops needed to implement the state
memory of the FSM.
 

--- Page 409 ---
Fig. 7.40FSM 1 State Diagram
a) How many D-flip-flops will this machine take if the states are
encoded in binary?
 
b) How many D-flip-flops will this machine take if the states are
encoded in gray code?
 
c) How many D-flip-flops will this machine take if the states are
encoded in one-hot?
 
7.4.2 For the state diagram in Fig. 7.40, is this a Mealy or Moore
machine?
 
7.4.3 Design the FSM circuitry by hand to implement the behavior
described by the state diagram in Fig. 7.40. Name the current state
variables Q1_cur and Q0_cur and name the next state variables
Q1_nxt and Q0_nxt. Use the following state codes:
Start = “00”
Midway = “01”
Done = “10”
a) What is the next state logic expression for Q1_nxt? 
b) What is the next state logic expression for Q0_nxt? 
 

--- Page 410 ---
) g p Q
c) What is the output logic expression for Dout? 
d) Draw the final logic diagram for this machine. 
7.4.4 Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
state diagram in Fig. 7.40. Use the entity definition provided in
Fig. 7.41 for your design. Name the current state variables Q1_cur
and Q0_cur and name the next state variables Q1_nxt and Q0_nxt.
Instantiate the D-flip-flop model provided to implement your state
memory. Use concurrent signal assignments with logical operators
for the implementation of your next state and output logic.
Fig. 7.41FSM 1 Entity
 
7.4.5 Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
state diagram in Fig. 7.40. Use the entity definition provided in
Fig. 7.41 for your design. Name the current state variables Q1_cur
and Q0_cur and name the next state variables Q1_nxt and Q0_nxt.
Instantiate the D-flip-flop model provided to implement your state
memory. Use conditional signal assignments for the
implementation of your next state and output logic.
 
7.4.6 Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
state diagram in Fig. 7.40. Use the entity definition provided in
Fig. 7.41 for your design. Name the current state variables Q1_cur
and Q0_cur and name the next state variables Q1_nxt and Q0_nxt.
Instantiate the D-flip-flop model provided to implement your state
memory. Use selected signal assignments for the implementation
ofyournextstateandoutputlogic
 

--- Page 411 ---
of your next state and output logic.
7.4.7 For the state diagram in Fig. 7.42, answer the following questions
regarding the number of D-flip-flops needed to implement the state
memory of the FSM.
Fig. 7.42FSM 2 State Diagram
a) How many D-flip-flops will this machine take if the states are
encoded in binary?
 
b) How many D-flip-flops will this machine take if the states are
encoded in gray code?
 
c) How many D-flip-flops will this machine take if the states are
encoded in one-hot?
 
 
7.4.8 For the state diagram in Fig. 7.42, is this a Mealy or Moore
machine?
 
7.4.9 Design the FSM circuitry by hand to implement the behavior
described by the state diagram in Fig. 7.42. Name the current state
variables Q1_cur and Q0_cur and name the next state variables
 

--- Page 412 ---
Q _ Q _
Q1_nxt and Q0_nxt. Also, use the following state codes:
S0 = “00”
S1 = “01”
S2 = “10”
S3 = “11”
a) What is the next state logic expression for Q1_nxt? 
b) What is the next state logic expression for Q0_nxt? 
c) What is the output logic expression for Dout? 
d) Draw the final logic diagram for this machine. 
7.4.10Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
state diagram in Fig. 7.42. Use the entity definition provided in
Fig. 7.43 for your design. Name the current state variables Q1_cur
and Q0_cur and name the next state variables Q1_nxt and Q0_nxt.
Instantiate the D-flip-flop model provided to implement your state
memory. Use concurrent signal assignments with logical operators
for the implementation of your next state and output logic.
Fig. 7.43FSM 2 Entity
 
7.4.11 Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
state diagram in Fig. 7.42. Use the entity definition provided in
Fig. 7.43 for your design. Name the current state variables Q1_cur
and Q0_cur and name the next state variables Q1_nxt and Q0_nxt.
Instantiate the D-flip-flop model provided to implement your state
memory.Useconditionalsignalassignments forthe
 

--- Page 413 ---
e oy. Use co dt o a sg a assg e ts o t e
implementation of your next state and output logic.
7.4.12Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
state diagram in Fig. 7.42. Use the entity definition provided in
Fig. 7.43 for your design. Name the current state variables Q1_cur
and Q0_cur and name the next state variables Q1_nxt and Q0_nxt.
Instantiate the D-flip-flop model provided to implement your state
memory. Use selected signal assignments for the implementation
of your next state and output logic.
 
7.4.13Design a 4-bit serial bit sequence detector by hand similar to the
one described in Example 7.9. The input to your state detector is
called DIN and the output is called FOUND. Your detector will
assert FOUND anytime there is a 4-bit sequence of “0101.” For all
other input sequences the output is not asserted.
a) Provide the state diagram for this FSM.  
b) Encode your states using binary encoding. How many D-flip-
flops does it take to implement the state memory for this
FSM?
 
c) Provide the state transition table for this FSM.  
d) Synthesize the combinational logic expressions for the next
state logic.
 
e) Synthesize the combinational logic expression for the output
logic.
 
f) Is this machine a Mealy or Moore machine?  
g) Draw the logic diagram for this FSM.  
 
7.4.14Design a 20 cent vending machine controller by hand similar to the

--- Page 414 ---
one described in Example 7.12. Your controller will take in nickels
and dimes and dispense a product anytime the customer has
entered 20 cents. Your FSM has two inputs, Nin and Din. Nin is
asserted whenever the customer enters a nickel while Din is
asserted anytime the customer enters a dime. Your FSM has two
outputs, Dispense and Change. Dispense is asserted anytime the
customer has entered at least 20 cents and Change is asserted
anytime the customer has entered more than 20 cents and needs a
nickel in change.
a) Provide the state diagram for this FSM.  
b) Encode your states using binary encoding. How many D-flip-
flops does it take to implement the state memory for this
FSM?
 
c) Provide the state transition table for this FSM.  
d) Synthesize the combinational logic expressions for the next
state logic.
 
e) Synthesize the combinational logic expressions for the output
logic.
 
f) Is this machine a Mealy or Moore machine?  
g) Draw the logic diagram for this FSM.  
 
7.4.15Design an FSM by hand that controls a traffic light at the
intersection of a busy highway and a seldom used side road. You
will be designing the control signals for just the red, yellow, and
green lights facing the highway. Under normal conditions, the
highway has a green light. The side road has a car detector that
indicates when a car pulls up by asserting a signal called CAR.
WhenCARisassertedyouwillchangethehighwaytrafficlight
 

--- Page 415 ---
When CAR is asserted, you will change the highway traffic light
from green to yellow. Once yellow, you will always go to red.
Once in the red position, a built-in timer will begin a countdown
and provide your controller a signal called TIMEOUT when 15 s
has passed. Once TIMEOUT is asserted, you will change the
highway traffic light back to green. Your system will have three
outputs GRN, YLW, and RED that control when the highway
facing traffic lights are on (1 = ON, 0 = OFF).
a) Provide the state diagram for this FSM.  
b) Encode your states using binary encoding. How many D-flip-
flops does it take to implement the state memory for this
FSM?
 
c) Provide the state transition table for this FSM.  
d) Synthesize the combinational logic expressions for the next
state logic.
 
e) Synthesize the combinational logic expressions for the output
logic.
 
f) Is this machine a Mealy or Moore machine?  
g) Draw the logic diagram for this FSM.  
Section 7.5—Counters
7.5.1Design a 3-bit binary up counter by hand. This state machine will
need eight states and require three bits for the state variable codes.
Name the current state variables Q2_cur, Q1_cur, and Q0_cur and
the next state variables Q2_nxt, Q1_nxt, and Q0_nxt. The output of
your counter will be a 3-bit vector called Count.
a) What is the next state logic expression for Q2_nxt? 
 

--- Page 416 ---
b) What is the next state logic expression for Q1_nxt? 
c) What is the next state logic expression for Q0_nxt? 
d) What is the output logic expression for Count(2)? 
e) What is the output logic expression for Count(1)? 
f) What is the output logic expression for Count(0)? 
g) Draw the logic diagram for this counter.  
7.5.2Design a VHDL model for a 3-bit binary up counter. Instantiate the
D-flip-flop model provided to implement your state memory. Use
whatever concurrent signal assignment modeling approach you wish
to model the next state and output logic. Use the VHDL entity
provided in Fig. 7.44 for your design.
Fig. 7.443-Bit Binary Up Counter Entity
 
7.5.3Design a 3-bit binary up/down counter by hand. The counter will
have an input called “Up” that will dictate the direction of the
counter. When Up = 1, the counter should increment and when Up = 
0 it should decrement. This state machine will need eight states and
require three bits for the state variable codes. Name the current state
variables Q2_cur, Q1_cur, and Q0_cur and the next state variables
Q2_nxt, Q1_nxt, and Q0_nxt. The output of your counter will be a
3-bit vector called Count.
a) What is the next state logic expression for Q2_nxt? 
 

--- Page 417 ---
b) What is the next state logic expression for Q1_nxt? 
c) What is the next state logic expression for Q0_nxt? 
d) What is the output logic expression for Count(2)? 
e) What is the output logic expression for Count(1)? 
f) What is the output logic expression for Count(0)? 
g) Draw the logic diagram for this counter.  
7.5.4Design a VHDL model for a 3-bit binary up/down counter.
Instantiate the D-flip-flop model provided to implement your state
memory. Use whatever concurrent signal assignment modeling
approach you wish to model the next state and output logic. Use the
VHDL entity provided in Fig. 7.45 for your design.
Fig. 7.453-Bit Binary Up/Down Counter Entity
 
7.5.5Design a 3-bit gray code up counter by hand. This state machine
will need eight states and require three bits for the state variable
codes. Name the current state variables Q2_cur, Q1_cur, and
Q0_cur and the next state variables Q2_nxt, Q1_nxt, and Q0_nxt.
The output of your counter will be a 3-bit vector called Count.
a) What is the next state logic expression for Q2_nxt? 
b) What is the next state logic expression for Q1_nxt? 
 

--- Page 418 ---
) g p Q
c) What is the next state logic expression for Q0_nxt?
 
d) What is the output logic expression for Count(2)? 
e) What is the output logic expression for Count(1)? 
f) What is the output logic expression for Count(0)? 
g) Draw the logic diagram for this counter.  
7.5.6Design a VHDL model for a 3-bit gray code up counter. Instantiate
the D-flip-flop model provided to implement your state memory.
Use whatever concurrent signal assignment modeling approach you
wish to model the next state and output logic. Use the VHDL entity
provided in Fig. 7.46 for your design.
Fig. 7.463-Bit Gray Code Up Counter Entity
 
7.5.7Design a 3-bit gray code up/down counter by hand. The counter will
have an input called “Up” that will dictate the direction of the
counter. When Up = 1, the counter should increment and when Up = 
0 it should decrement. This state machine will need eight states and
require three bits for the state variable codes. Name the current state
variables Q2_cur, Q1_cur, and Q0_cur and the next state variables
Q2_nxt, Q1_nxt, and Q0_nxt. The output of your counter will be a
3-bit vector called Count.
a) What is the next state logic expression for Q2_nxt? 
 

--- Page 419 ---
b) What is the next state logic expression for Q1_nxt? 
c) What is the next state logic expression for Q0_nxt?
 
d) What is the output logic expression for Count(2)? 
e) What is the output logic expression for Count(1)? 
f) What is the output logic expression for Count(0)? 
g) Draw the logic diagram for this counter.  
7.5.8Design a VHDL model for a 3-bit gray code up/down counter.
Instantiate the D-flip-flop model provided to implement your state
memory. Use whatever concurrent signal assignment modeling
approach you wish to model the next state and output logic. Use the
VHDL entity provided in Fig. 7.47 for your design.
Fig. 7.473-Bit Gray Code Up/Down Counter Entity
 
Section 7.6—Finite-State Machine’s Reset Condition
7.6.1Are resets typically synchronous or asynchronous?  
7.6.2Why is it necessary to have a reset/preset condition in an FSM? 
7.6.3How does the reset/preset condition correspond to the behavior
described in the state diagram?
 
764 Whenisitnecessarytoalsousethepresetline(s)ofaD-flip-flop

--- Page 420 ---
7.6.4When is it necessary to also use the preset line(s) of a D-flip-flop
instead of just the reset line(s) when implementing the state memory
of an FSM?  
7.6.5If an FSM has eight unique states that are encoded in binary and all
D-flip-flops used for the state memory use their reset lines, what is
the state code that the machine will go to upon reset?
 
Section 7.7—Sequential Logic Analysis
7.7.1 For the FSM logic diagram in Fig. 7.48, give the next state logic
expression for Q_nxt.
Fig. 7.48Sequential Logic Analysis 1
 
7.7.2 For the FSM logic diagram in Fig. 7.48, give the output logic
expression for Tout.
 
7.7.3 For the FSM logic diagram in Fig. 7.48, give the state transition
table.
 
7.7.4 For the FSM logic diagram in Fig. 7.48, give the state diagram. 
7.7.5 For the FSM logic diagram in Fig. 7.48, give the maximum clock
frequency.
 
7.7.6 For the FSM logic diagram in Fig. 7.49, give the next state logic
expression for Q_nxt.
  

--- Page 421 ---
Fig. 7.49Sequential Logic Analysis 2
7.7.7 For the FSM logic diagram in Fig. 7.49, give the output logic
expression for F.
 
7.7.8 For the FSM logic diagram in Fig. 7.49, give the state transition
table.
 
7.7.9 For the FSM logic diagram in Fig. 7.49, give the state diagram. 
7.7.10For the FSM logic diagram in Fig. 7.49, give the maximum clock
frequency.
 
7.7.11 For the FSM logic diagram in Fig. 7.50, give the next state logic
expressions for Q1_nxt and Q0_nxt.
Fig. 7.50Sequential Logic Analysis 3
 

--- Page 422 ---
7.7.12For the FSM logic diagram in Fig. 7.50, give the output logic
expression for Return.
 
7.7.13For the FSM logic diagram in Fig. 7.50, give the state transition
table.
 
7.7.14For the FSM logic diagram in Fig. 7.50, give the state diagram. 
7.7.15For the FSM logic diagram in Fig. 7.50, give the maximum clock
frequency.
 

--- Page 423 ---
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2017
Brock J. LaMeres, Introduction to Logic Circuits & Logic Design with VHDL , DOI 10.1007/978-3-
319-34195-8_8

--- Page 424 ---
(1)
8. VHDL (Part 2)
Brock J. LaMeres1 
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Montana State
University, Bozeman, MT, USA
 
In Chap. 5 VHDL was presented as a way to describe the behavior of
concurrent systems. The modeling techniques presented were appropriate
for combinational logic because these types of circuits have outputs
dependent only on the current values of their inputs. This means a model
that continuously performs signal assignments provides an accurate model
of this circuit behavior. In Chap. 7 sequential logic storage devices were
presented that did not continuously update their outputs based on the
instantaneous values of their inputs. Instead, sequential storage devices only
update their outputs based upon an event, most often the edge of a clock
signal. The modeling techniques presented in Chap. 5 are unable to
accurately describe this type of behavior. In this chapter we describe the
VHDL constructs to model signal assignments that are triggered by an
event in order to accurately model sequential logic. We can then use these
techniques to describe more complex sequential logic circuits such as finite-
state machines and register transfer-level systems. This chapter also
presents how to create test benches and looks at commonly used packages
that increase the capability and accuracy with which VHDL can model
modern systems. The goal of this chapter is to give an understanding of the
full capability of hardware description languages.
Learning Outcomes—After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
8.1Describe the behavior of a VHDL process and how it is used to model
sequential logic circuits.
 
8.2Model combinational logic circuits using a process and conditional
 i t t

--- Page 425 ---
programming constructs.
 
8.3Describe how and why signal attributes are used in VHDL models. 
8.4Design a test bench to verify the functional operation of a system. 
8.5Describe the capabilities provided by the most common VHDL
packages.
 
8.1 The Process
VHDL uses a process to model signal assignments that are based on an
event. A process is a technique to model behavior of a system; thus a
process is placed in the VHDL architecture after the begin statement. The
signal assignments within a process have unique characteristics that allow
them to accurately model sequential logic. First, the signal assignments do
not take place until the process ends or is suspended. Second, the signal
assignments will be made only once each time the process is triggered.
Finally, the signal assignments will be executed in the order that they
appear within the process. This assignment behavior is called a sequential
signal assignment. Sequential signal assignments allow a process to model
register transfer-level behavior where a signal can be used as both the
operand of an assignment and the destination of a different assignment
within the same process. VHDL provides two techniques to trigger a
process, the sensitivity list and the wait statement.
8.1.1 Sensitivity List
A sensitivity list is a mechanism to control when a process is triggered (or
started). A sensitivity list contains a list of signals that the process is
sensitive to. If there is a transition on any of the signals in the list, the
process will be triggered and the signal assignments in the process will be
made. The following is the syntax for a process that uses a sensitivity list:
process_name : process (<signal_name1>,
<signal_name2>, …)

--- Page 426 ---
    -- variable declarations
    begin
       sequential_signal_assignment_1
        sequential_signal_assignment_2
             :
end process;
Let’s look at a simple model for a flip flop.
Example:
FlipFlop : process (Clock)
    begin
        Q <= D;
end process;
In this example, a transition on the signal clock (LOW to HIGH or
HIGH to LOW) will trigger the process. The signal assignment of D to Q
will be executed once the process ends. When the signal clock is not
transitioning, the process will not trigger and no assignments will be made
to Q, thus modeling the behavior of Q holding its last value. This behavior
is close to modeling the behavior of a real D-flip-flop, but more constructs
are needed to model behavior that is sensitive to only a particular type of
transition (i.e., rising or falling edge). These constructs will be covered
later.
8.1.2 The Wait Statement
A wait statement is a mechanism to suspend (or stop) a process and allow
signal assignments to be executed without the need for the process to end.
When using a wait statement, a sensitivity list is not used. Without a
sensitivity list, the process will immediately trigger. Within the process, the
wait statement is used to stop and start the process. There are three ways in
which wait statements can be used. The first is an indefinite wait. In the
following example, the process does not contain a sensitivity list, so it will
trigger immediately. The keyword wait is used to suspend the process.

--- Page 427 ---
Once this statement is reached, the signal assignments to Y1 and Y2 will be
executed and the process will suspend indefinitely.
Example:
Proc_Ex1 : process    
    begin             
        Y1 <= '0';         
        Y2 <= '1';         
        wait;         
end process;
The second technique to use a wait statement to suspend a process is to
use it in conjunction with the keyword for and a time expression. In the
following example, the process will trigger immediately since it does not
contain a sensitivity list. Once the process reaches the wait statement, it will
suspend and execute the first signal assignment to CLK (CLK <= ‘0’). After
5 ns, the process will start again. Once it reaches the second wait statement,
it will suspend and execute the second signal assignment to CLK (CLK 
<= “1”). After another 5 ns, the process will start again and immediately
end due to the end process statement. After the process ends, it will
immediately trigger again due to the lack of a sensitivity list and repeat the
behavior just described. This behavior will continue indefinitely. This
example creates a square wave called CLK with a period of 10 ns.
Example:
Proc_Ex2 : process    
    begin             
        CLK <= '0'; wait for 5 ns;
        CLK <= '1'; wait for 5 ns;
end process;
The third technique to use a wait statement to suspend a process is to
use it in conjunction with the keyword until and a Boolean condition. In the
following example, the process will again trigger immediately because
there is not a sensitivity list present. The process will then immediately
suspend and only resume once a Boolean condition becomes true (i.e.,
Counter > 15). Once this condition is true, the process will start again. Once
it reaches the second wait statement, it will execute the first signal

--- Page 428 ---
assignment to RollOver (RollOver <= “1”). After 1 ns, the process will
resume. Once the process ends, it will execute the second signal assignment
to RollOver (RollOver <= “0”).
Example:
Proc_Ex3 : process    
    begin             
        wait until (Counter > 15);           --
first wait statement
        RollOver <= '1'; wait for 1 ns;     --
second wait statement
        RollOver <= '0';
end process;
Wait statements are typically not synthesizable and are most often used
for creating stimulus patterns in test benches.
8.1.3 Sequential Signal Assignments
One of the more confusing concepts of a process is how sequential signal
assignments behave. The rules of signal assignments within a process are as
follows:
Signals cannot be declared within a process.
Signal assignments do not take place until the process ends or
suspends.
Signal assignments are executed in the sequence they appear in the
process (once the process ends or process suspends).
Let’s take a look at an example of how signals behave in a process.
Example 8.1 shows the behavior of sequential signal assignments when
executed within a process. Intuitively, we would assume that F will be the
complement of A; however, due to the way that sequential signal
assignments are performed within a process, this is not the case. In order to
understand this behavior, let’s look at the situation where A transitions from
a 0 to a 1 with B = 0 and F = 0 initially. This transition triggers the process
since A is listed in the sensitivity list. When the process triggers, A = 1
since this is where the input resides after the triggering transition. The first

--- Page 429 ---
signal assignment (B <= A) will cause B = 1, but this assignment occurs
only after the process ends. This means that when the second signal
assignment is evaluated (F <= not B), it uses the initial value of B from
when the process triggered (B = 0) since B is not updated to a 1 until the
process ends. The second assignment yields F = 1. When the process ends,
A = 1, B = 1, and F = 1. The behavior of this process will always result in A 
= B = F. This is counterintuitive because the statement F <= not B leads us
to believe that F will always be the complement of A and B; however, this
is not the case due to the way that signal assignments are only updated in a
process upon suspension or when the process ends.
Example 8.1 Behavior of Sequential Signal Assignments Within a Process
Now let’s consider how these assignments behave when executed as
concurrent signal assignments. Example 8.2 shows the behavior of the same
signal assignments as in Example 8.1, but this time outside of a process. In
this model, the statements are executed concurrently and produce the
expected behavior of F being the complement of A.
Example 8.2 Behavior of Concurrent Signal Assignments Outside a
Process

--- Page 430 ---
While the behavior of the sequential signal assignments initially seems
counterintuitive, it is necessary in order to model the behavior of sequential
storage devices and will become clear once more VHDL constructs have
been introduced.
8.1.4 Variables
There are situations inside of processes in which it is desired for
assignments to be made instantaneously instead of when the process
suspends. For these situations, VHDL provides the concept of a variable. A
variable has the following characteristics:
Variables only exist within a process.
Variables are defined in a process before the begin statement.
Once the process ends, variables are removed from the system. This
means that assignments to variables cannot be made by systems
outside of the process.
Assignments to variables are made using the “:=” operator.
Assignments to variables are made instantaneously.
A variable is declared before the begin statement in a process. The
syntax for declaring a variable is as follows:

--- Page 431 ---
      variable variable_name : <type> :=
<initial_value>;
Let’s reconsider the example in Example 8.1, but this time we’ll use a
variable in order to accomplish instantaneous signal assignments within the
process. Example 8.3 shows this approach to model the behavior where F is
the complement of A.
Example 8.3 Variable Assignment Behavior
8.2 Conditional Programming Constructs

--- Page 432 ---
One of the more powerful features that processes provide in VHDL is the
ability to use conditional programming constructs such as if/then clauses,
case statements, and loops. These constructs are only available within a
process, but their use is not limited to modeling sequential logic. As we’ll
see, the characteristics of a process also support modeling of combinational
logic circuits, so these conditional constructs are a very useful tool in
VHDL. This provides the ability to model both combinational and
sequential logic using the more familiar programming language constructs.
8.2.1 If/Then Statements
An if/then statement provides a way to make conditional signal assignments
based on Boolean conditions. The if portion of statement is followed by a
Boolean condition that if evaluated TRUE will cause the signal assignment
after the then statement to be performed. If the Boolean condition is
evaluated FALSE, no assignment is made. VHDL provides multiple
variants of the if/then statement. An if/then/else statement provides a final
signal assignment that will be made if the Boolean condition is evaluated
false. An if/then/elsif statement allows multiple Boolean conditions to be
used. The syntax for the various forms of the VHDL if/then statement is as
follows:
if boolean_condition then sequential_statement
end if;
if boolean_condition then sequential_statement_1
else sequential_statement_2
end if;
if boolean_condition_1 then
sequential_statement_1
elsif boolean_condition_2 then
sequential_statement_2
:
:
elsif boolean_condition_n then
sequential_statement_n
end if;

--- Page 433 ---
if boolean_condition_1 then
sequential_statement_1
elsif boolean_condition_2 then
sequential_statement_2
:
:
elsif boolean_condition_n then
sequential_statement_n
else sequential_statement_n+1
end if;
Let’s take a look at using an if/then statement to describe the behavior
of a combinational logic circuit. Recall that a combinational logic circuit is
one in which the output depends on the instantaneous values of the inputs.
This behavior can be modeled by placing all of the inputs to the circuit in
the sensitivity list of a process. A change on any of the inputs in the
sensitivity list will trigger the process and cause the output to be updated.
Example 8.4 shows how to model a 3-input combinational logic circuit
using if/then statements within a process.
Example 8.4 Using If/Then Statements to Model Combinational Logic

--- Page 434 ---
8.2.2 Case Statements

--- Page 435 ---
A case statement is another technique to model signal assignments based on
Boolean conditions. As with the if/then statement, a case statement can only
be used inside of a process. The statement begins with the keyword case
followed by the input signal name that assignments will be based off of.
The input signal name can be optionally enclosed in parentheses for
readability. The keyword when is used to specify a particular value (or
choice) of the input signal that will result in associated sequential signal
assignments. The assignments are listed after the => symbol. The following
is the syntax for a case statement:
case (input_name) is
when choice_1 => sequential_statement(s);
when choice_2 => sequential_statement(s);
:
: when choice_n => sequential_statement(s);
end case;
When not all of the possible input conditions (or choices) are specified,
a when others clause is used to provide signal assignments for all other
input conditions. The following is the syntax for a case statement that uses a
when others clause:
case (input_name) is
when choice_1 => sequential_statement(s);
when choice_2 => sequential_statement(s);
:
: when others => sequential_statement(s);
end case;
Multiple choices that correspond to the same signal assignments can be
pipe delimited in the case statement. The following is the syntax for a case
statement with pipe-delimited choices:
case (input_name) is
when choice_1 | choice_2 =>
sequential_statement(s);
when others => sequential_statement(s);
end case;

--- Page 436 ---
The input signal for a case statement must be a single signal name. If
multiple scalars are to be used as the input expression for a case statement,
they should be concatenated either outside of the process resulting in a new
signal vector or within the process resulting in a new variable vector.
Example 8.5 shows how to model a 3-input combinational logic circuit
using case statements within a process.
Example 8.5 Using Case Statements to Model Combinational Logic

--- Page 437 ---
If/then statements can be embedded within a case statement and,
conversely, case statements can be embedded within an if/then statement.

--- Page 438 ---
8.2.3 Infinite Loops
A loop within VHDL provides a mechanism to perform repetitive
assignments infinitely. This is useful in test benches for creating stimulus
such as clocks or other periodic waveforms. A loop can only be used within
a process. The keyword loop is used to signify the beginning of the loop.
Sequential signal assignments are then inserted. The end of the loop is
signified with the keywords end loop. Within the loop, the wait for, wait
until, and after statements are all legal. Signal assignments within a loop
will be executed repeatedly forever unless an exit or next statement is
encountered. The exit clause provides a Boolean condition that will force
the loop to end if the condition is evaluated true. When using the exit
statement, an additional signal assignment is typically placed after the loop
to provide the desired behavior when the loop is not active. Using flow
control statements such as wait for and wait after provides a means to avoid
having the loop immediately executed again after exiting. The next clause
provides a way to skip the remaining signal assignments and begin the next
iteration of the loop. The following is the syntax for an infinite loop in
VHDL:
loop
exit when boolean_condition;        -- optional
exit statement
next when boolean_condition;        -- optional
next statement
sequential_statement(s);
end loop;
Consider the following example of an infinite loop that generates a
clock signal (CLK) with a period of 100 ns. In this example, the process
does not contain a sensitivity list, so a wait statement must be used to
control the signal assignments. This process in this example will trigger
immediately and then enter the infinite loop and never exit.
Example:
Clock_Proc1 : process
begin
loop    

--- Page 439 ---
     CLK <= not CLK;
     wait for 50 ns;
end loop;
end process;
Now consider the following loop example that will generate a clock
signal with a period of 100 ns with an enable (EN) line. This loop will
produce a periodic clock signal as long as EN = 1. When EN = 0, the clock
output will remain at CLK = 0. An exit condition is placed at the beginning
of the loop to check if EN = 0. If this condition is true, the loop will exit and
the clock signal will be assigned a 0. The process will then wait until EN = 
1. Once EN = 1, the process will end and then immediately trigger again
and reenter the loop. When EN = 1, the clock signal will be toggled (CLK 
<= not CLK) and then wait for 50 ns. This toggling behavior will repeat as
long as EN = 1.
Example:
Clock_Proc2 : process
begin
loop    
     exit when EN='0';
     CLK <= not CLK;
     wait for 50 ns;
end loop;
CLK <= '0';
wait until EN='1';
end process;
It is important to keep in mind that infinite loops that continuously
make signal assignments without the use of sensitivity lists or wait
statements will cause logic simulators to hang.
8.2.4 While Loops
A while loop provides a looping structure with a Boolean condition that
controls its execution. The loop will only execute as long as its condition is

--- Page 440 ---
evaluated true. The following is the syntax for a VHDL while loop:
while boolean_condition loop
sequential_statement(s);
end loop;
Let’s implement the previous example of a loop that generates a clock
signal (CLK) with a period of 100 ns as long as EN = 1. The Boolean
condition for the while loop is EN = 1. When EN = 1, the loop will be
executed indefinitely. When EN = 0, the while loop will be skipped. In this
case, an additional signal assignment is necessary to model the desired
behavior when the loop is not used (i.e., CLK = 0).
Example:
Clock_Proc3 : process
begin
while (EN='1') loop
CLK <= not CLK;
wait for 50 ns;
end loop;
CLK <= '0';
wait until EN='1';
end process;
8.2.5 For Loops
A for loop provides the ability to create a loop that will execute a
predefined number of times. The range of the loop is specified with integers
(min, max) at the beginning of the for loop. A loop variable is implicitly
declared in the loop that will increment (or decrement) from min to max of
the range. The loop variable is of type integer. If it is desired to have the
loop variable increment from min to max, the keyword to is used when
specifying the range of the loop. If it is desired to have the loop variable
decrement max to min, the keyword downto is used when specifying the
range of the loop. The loop variable can be used within the loop as an index
for vectors; thus the for loop is useful for automatically accessing and

--- Page 441 ---
assigning multiple signals within a single loop structure. The following is
the syntax for a VHDL for loop in which the loop variable will increment
from min to max of the range:
for loop_variable in min to max loop
sequential_statement(s);
end loop;
The following is the syntax for a VHDL for loop in which the loop
variable will decrement from max to min of the range:
for loop_variable in max downto min loop
sequential_statement(s);
end loop;
For loops are useful for test benches in which a range of patterns are to
be created. For loops are also synthesizable as long as the complete
behavior of the desired system is described by the loop. The following is an
example of creating a simple counter using the loop variable. The signal
Count_Out in this example is of type integer. This allows the loop variable i
to be assigned to Count_Out each time through the loop since the loop
variable is also of type integer. This counter will count from 0 to 15 and
then repeat. The count will increment every 50 ns.
Example:
Counter_Proc : process
begin
for i in 0 to 15 loop
Count_Out <= i;
wait for 50 ns;
end loop;
end process;

--- Page 442 ---
8.3 Signal Attributes
There are situations where we want to describe behavior that is based on
more than just the current value of a signal. For example, a real D-flip-flop
will only update its outputs on a particular type of transition (i.e., rising or
falling). In order to model this behavior, we need to specify more
information about the signal. This is accomplished by using attributes.
Attributes provide additional information about a signal other than just its
present value. An attribute can provide information such as past values,
whether an assignment was made to a signal, or when the last time an
assignment resulted in a value change. A signal attribute is implemented by
placing an apostrophe (’) after the signal name and then listing the VHDL
attribute keyword. Different attributes will result in different output types.
Attributes that yield Boolean output types can be used as inputs to Boolean
decision conditions for other VHDL constructs. Other attributes can be used
to define the range of new vectors by referencing the size of existing
vectors or automatically defining the number of iterations in a loop. Finally,
some attributes can be used to create self-checking test benches that
monitor the impact of circuit delays on the functionality of a system. The
following are a list of the commonly used, predefined VHDL signal
attributes. The example signal name A is used to illustrate how scalar
attributes operate. The example signal B is used to illustrate how vector
attributes operate with type bit_vector (7 downto 0).
Attribute Information returned Type returned
A’event True when signal A changes, false otherwiseBoolean
A’active True when an assignment is made to A, false otherwiseBoolean

--- Page 443 ---
Attribute Information returned Type returned
A’last_eventTime when signal A last changed Time
A’last_activeTime when signal A was last assigned to Time
A’last_valueThe previous value of A Same type as A
B’length Size of the vector (e.g., 8) Integer
B’left Left bound of the vector (e.g., 7) Integer
B’right Right bound of the vector (e.g., 0) Integer
B’range Range of the vector “(7 downto 0)” String
Signal attributes can be used to model edge-sensitive behavior. Let’s
look at the model for a simple D-flip-flop. A process is used to model the
synchronous behavior of the D-flip-flop. The sensitivity list contains only
the Clock input. The D input is not included in the sensitivity list because a
change on D should not trigger the process. Attributes and logical operators
are not allowed in the sensitivity list of a process. As a result, the process
will trigger on every edge of the clock signal. Within the process, an if/then
statement is used with the Boolean condition (Clock’event and Clock=‘1’)
in order to make signal assignments only on a rising edge of the clock. The
syntax for this Boolean condition is understood and is synthesizable by all
CAD tools. An else clause is not included in the if/then statement. This
implies that when there is not a rising edge, no assignments will be made to
the outputs and they will simply hold their last value. Example 8.6 shows
how to model a simple D-flip-flop using attributes. Note that this example
does not model the reset behavior of a real D-flip-flop.
Example 8.6 Behavioral Modeling of a Rising Edge-Triggered D-Flip-
Flop Using Attributes

--- Page 444 ---
8.4 Test Benches
The functional verification of VHDL designs is accomplished through
simulation using a test bench. A test bench is a VHDL system that
instantiates the system to be tested as a component and then generates the
input patterns and observes the outputs. The system being tested is often
called a device under test (DUT) or unit under test (UUT). Test benches are
only used for simulation, so we can use abstract modeling techniques that
are unsynthesizable to generate the stimulus patterns. VHDL also contains
specific functionality to report on the status of a test and also automatically

--- Page 445 ---
check that the outputs are correct. Example 8.7 shows how to create a
simple test bench to verify the operation of SystemX. The test bench does
not have any inputs or outputs; thus there are no ports declared in the entity.
SystemX is declared as a component in the test bench and then instantiated
(DUT1). Internal signals are declared to connect to the component under
test (A_TB, B_TB, C_TB, F_TB). A process is then used to drive the inputs
of SystemX. Within the process, wait statements are used to control the
execution of the signal assignments; thus the process does not have a
sensitivity list. Each possible input code is generated within the process.
The output (F_TB) is observed using a simulation tool in either the form of
a waveform or a table listing.
Example 8.7 Creating a VHDL Test Bench

--- Page 446 ---
8.4.1 Report Statement
The keyword report can be used within a test bench in order to provide the
status of the current test. A report statement will print a string to the
transcript window of the simulation tool. The report output also contains an
optional severity level. There are four levels of severity (ERROR,

--- Page 447 ---
WARNING, NOTE, and FAILURE). The severity level FAILURE will halt
a simulation while the levels ERROR, WARNING, and NOTE will allow the
simulation to continue. If the severity level is omitted, the report is assumed
to be a severity level of NOTE. The syntax for using a report statement is as
follows:
      report "string to be printed" severity
<level>;
Let’s look at how we could use the report function within the example
test bench to print the current value of the input pattern to the transcript
window of the simulator. Example 8.8 shows the new process and resulting
transcript output of the simulator when using report statements.
Example 8.8 Using Report Statements in a VHDL Test Bench

--- Page 448 ---
8.4.2 Assert Statement
The assert statement provides a mechanism to check a Boolean condition
before using the report statement. This allows report outputs to be
selectively printed based on the values of signals in the system under test.
This can be used to print either the successful operation or the failure of a
system. If the Boolean condition associated with the assert statement is
evaluated true, it will not execute the subsequent report statement. If the
Boolean condition is evaluated false, it will execute the subsequent report

--- Page 449 ---
statement. The assert statement is always used in conjunction with the
report statement. The following is the syntax for the assert statement:
      assert boolean_condition report "string"
severity <level>;
Let’s look at how we could use the assert function within the example
test bench to check whether the output (F_TB) is correct. In the example in
Example 8.9, the system passes the first pattern but fails the second.
Example 8.9 Using Assert Statements in a VHDL Test Bench


--- Page 450 ---
8.5 Packages
One of the drawbacks of the VHDL standard package is that it provides
limited functionality in its synthesizable data types. The bit and bit_vector,
while synthesizable, lack the ability to accurately model many of the
topologies implemented in modern digital systems. Of primary interest are
topologies that involve multiple drivers connected to a single wire. The
standard package will not permit this type of connection; however, this type
of topology is a common way to interface multiple nodes on a shared
interconnection. Furthermore, the standard package does not provide many
useful features for these types, such as don’t cares, arithmetic using the +
and − operators, type conversion functions, or the ability to read/write
external files. To increase the functionality of VHDL, packages are included
in the design.
8.5.1 STD_LOGIC_1164
In the late 1980s, the IEEE 1164 standard was released that added
functionality to VHDL to allow a multi-valued logic system (i.e., a signal
can take on more values than just 0 and 1). This standard also provided a
mechanism for multiple drivers to be connected to the same signal. An
updated release in 1993 called IEEE 1164-1993 was the most significant
update to this standard and contains the majority of functionality used in
VHDL today. Nearly all systems described in VHDL include the 1164
standard as a package. This package is included by adding the following
syntax at the beginning of the VHDL file:
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;

--- Page 451 ---
This package defines four new data types: std_ulogic,
std_ulogic_vector, std_logic, and std_logic_vector. The std_ulogic and
std_logic are enumerated, scalar types that can provide a multi-valued logic
system. The types std_ulogic_vector and std_logic_vector are vector types
containing a linear array of scalar types std_ulogic and std_logic,
respectively. The scalar types can take on nine different values as described
below:
ValueDescription Notes
U Uninitialized Default initial value
X Forcing unknown 
0 Forcing 0  
1 Forcing 1  
Z High impedance 
W Weak unknown 
L Weak 0 Pull-down
H Weak 1 Pull-up
– Don’t care Used for synthesis only
These values can be assigned to signals by enclosing them in single
quotes (scalars) or double quotes (vectors).
Example:
A <= 'X';       -- assignment to a scalar
(std_ulogic or std_logic)
V <= "01ZH";    -- assignment to a 4-bit vector
(std_ulogic_vector or
                  --     std_logic_vector)
The type std_ulogic is unresolved (note: the “u” standard for
“unresolved”). This means that if a signal is being driven by two circuits
with type std_ulogic, the VHDL simulator will not be able to resolve the
conflict and it will result in a compiler error. The std_logic type is resolved.
This means that if a signal is being driven by two circuits with type
std_logic, the VHDL simulator will be able to resolve the conflict and will
allow the simulation to continue. Figure 8.1 shows an example of a shared
signal topology and how conflicts are handled when using various data
types.

--- Page 452 ---
Fig. 8.1STD_LOGIC_1164 unresolved vs. resolved conflict handling
8.5.1.1 STD_LOGIC Resolution Function
The std_logic_1164 will resolve signal conflict of type std_logic using a
resolution function. The nine allowed values each has a relative drive
strength that allows a resolution to be made in the event of conflict.
Whenever there is a conflict, the simulator will consult the resolution
function to determine the value of the signal. Figure 8.2 shows the relative
drive strengths of the nine possible signal values provided by the
std_logic_1164 package and the resolution function table.

--- Page 453 ---
Fig. 8.2STD_LOGIC_1164 resolution function
8.5.1.2 STD_LOGIC_1164 Logical Operators
The std_logic_1164 also contains new definitions for all of the logical
operators (and, nand, or, nor, xor, xnor, not) for types std_ulogic and
std_logic. These are required since these data types can take on more logic
values than just a 0 or 1; thus the logical operator definitions from the
standard package are not sufficient.
8.5.1.3 STD_LOGIC_1164 Edge Detection
Functions
The std_logic_1164 also provides functions for the detection of rising or
falling transitions on a signal. The functions rising_edge() and
falling_edge() provide a more readable form of this functionality compared
to the (Clock’event and Clock = “1”) approach. Example 8.10 shows the use

--- Page 454 ---
of the rising_edge() function to model the behavior of a rising edge-
triggered D-flip-flop.
Example 8.10 Behavioral Modeling of a D-Flip-Flop Using the
rising_edge() Function
8.5.1.4 STD_LOGIC-Type Conversion Functions
The std_logic_1164 package also provides functions to convert between
data types. Functions exist to convert between bit, std_ulogic, and
std_logic. Functions also exist to convert between these types’ vector forms
(bit_vector, std_ulogic_vector, and std_logic_vector). The functions are
listed below.
Name Input type Return type
To_bit() std_ulogic bit

--- Page 455 ---
Name Input type Return type
To_bitvector() std_ulogic_vectorbit_vector
To_bitvector() std_logic_vectorbit_vector
To_StdULogic() bit std_ulogic
To_StdULogicVector()bit_vector std_ulogic_vector
To_StdULogicVector()std_logic_vectorstd_ulogic_vector
To_StdLogicVector() bit_vector std_logic_vector
To_StdLogicVector() std_ulogic_vectorstd_logic_vector
When using these functions, the function name and input signal are
placed to the right of the assignment operator and the target signal is placed
on the left.
Example:
A <= To_bit(B);                  -- B is type
std_ulogic, A is type bit
V <= To_StdLogicVector(C);         -- C is type
bit_vector, V is std_logic_vector    
When identical function names exist that can have different input data
types, the VHDL compiler will automatically decide which function to use
based on the input argument type. For example, the function “To_bitvector”
exists for an input of std_ulogic_vector and std_logic_vector. When using
this function, the compiler will automatically detect which input type is
being used and select the corresponding function variant. No additional
syntax is required by the designer in this situation.
8.5.2 NUMERIC_STD
The numeric_std package provides numerical computation for types
std_logic and std_logic_vector. When performing binary arithmetic, the
results of arithmetic operations and comparisons vary greatly depending on
whether the binary number is unsigned or signed. As a result, the
numeric_std package defines two new data types, unsigned and signed. An
unsigned type is defined to have its MSB in the leftmost position of the
vector, and the LSB in the rightmost position of the vector. A signed
number uses two’s complement representation with the leftmost bit of the
vector being the sign bit. When declaring a signal to be one of these types,

--- Page 456 ---
it is implied that these represent the encoding of an underlying native type
of std_logic/std_logic_vector. The use of unsigned/signed types provides
the interpretation of how arithmetic, logical, and comparison operators will
perform. This also implies that the numeric_std package requires the
std_logic_1164 to always be included. While the numeric_std package
includes an inclusion call of the std_logic_1164 package, it is common to
explicitly include both the std_logic_1164 and the numeric_std packages in
the main VHDL file. The VHDL compiler will ignore redundant package
statements. The syntax for including these packages is as follows:
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;    -- defines types
std_ulogic and std_logic
use IEEE.numeric_std.all;       -- defines types
unsigned and signed
8.5.2.1 NUMERIC_STD Arithmetic Functions
The numeric_std package provides support for a variety of arithmetic
functions for the types unsigned and signed. These include +, −, *, /, mod,
rem, and abs functions. These arithmetic operations behave differently for
the unsigned versus signed types, but the VHDL compiler will
automatically use the correct operation based on the types of the input
arguments.
Most synthesis tools support the addition, subtraction, and
multiplication operators in this package. This provides a higher level of
abstraction when modeling arithmetic circuitry. Recall that the VHDL
standard package does not support addition, subtraction, and multiplication
of types bit/bit_vector using the +, −, and * operators. Using the
numeric_std package gives the ability to model these arithmetic operations
with a synthesizable data type using the more familiar mathematical
operators. The division, modulo, remainder, and absolute value functions
are not synthesizable directly from this package.
Example:
F <= A + B;             -- A, B, F are type
unsigned(3 downto 0)
F <= A - B;

--- Page 457 ---
8.5.2.2 NUMERIC_STD Logical Functions
The numeric_std package provides support for all of the logical operators
(and, nand, or, nor, xor, xnor, not) for types unsigned and signed. It also
provides two new shift functions shift_left() and shift_right(). These shift
functions will fill the vacant position in the vector after the shift with a 0;
thus these are logical shifts. This package also provides two new rotate
functions rotate_left() and rotate_right().
8.5.2.3 NUMERIC_STD Comparison Functions
The numeric_std package provides support for all of the comparison
functions for types unsigned and signed. These include >, <, <=, >=, =, and
/=. These comparisons return type Boolean.
Example: (A = “0000”, B = “1111”)
if (A < B) then    -- This condition is TRUE if
A and B are UNSIGNED
:
if (A < B) then    -- This condition is FALSE if
A and B are SIGNED
8.5.2.4 NUMERIC_STD Edge Detection Functions
The numeric_std also provides the functions rising_edge() and
falling_edge() for the detection of rising or falling edge transition detection
for types unsigned and signed.
8.5.2.5 NUMERIC_STD Conversion Functions
The numeric_std package contains a variety of useful conversion functions.
Of particular usefulness are functions between the type integer and to/from
unsigned/signed. This allows behavioral models for counters, adders, and
subtractors to be implemented using the more readable type integer. After
the functionally has been described, a conversion can be used to turn the
result into types unsigned or signed to provide a synthesizable output.
When converting an integer to a vector, a size argument is included. The

--- Page 458 ---
size argument is of type integer and provides the number of bits in the
vector that the integer will be converted to:
Name Input type Return type
To_integer()Unsigned Integer
To_integer()Signed Integer
To_unsigned()integer, <size>Unsigned (size-1 downto 0)
To_signed()Integer, <size>Signed (size-1 downto 0)
8.5.2.6 NUMERIC_STD Type Casting
VHDL contains a set of built-in type casting operations that are commonly
used with the numeric_std package to convert between std_logic_vector and
unsigned/signed. Since the types unsigned/signed are based on the
underlying type std_logic_vector, the conversion is simply known as
casting. The following are the built-in type casting capabilities in VHDL.:
Name Input type Return type
std_logic_vector()Unsigned std_logic_vector
std_logic_vector()Signed std_logic_vector
unsigned() std_logic_vectorUnsigned
signed() std_logic_vectorSigned
When using these type casts, they are placed on the right-hand side of
the assignment exactly as a conversion function.
Example:
A <= std_logic_vector(B); -- B is unsigned, A is
std_logic_vector
C <= unsigned(D);     -- D is std_logic_vector,
C is unsigned
Type casts and conversion functions can be compounded in order to
perform multiple conversions in one assignment. This is useful when
converting between types that do not have a direct cast or conversion
function. Let’s look at the example of converting an integer to an 8-bit
std_logic_vector where the number being represented is unsigned. The first
step is to convert the integer to an unsigned type. This can be accomplished

--- Page 459 ---
with the to_unsigned function defined in the numeric_std package. This can
be embedded in a second cast from unsigned to std_logic_vector. In the
following example, E is the target of the operation and is of type std_logic
vector. F is the argument of assignment and is of type integer. Recall that
the to_unsigned conversions require both the input integer name and the
size of the unsigned vector being converted to.
Example:
      E <= std_logic_vector(to_unsigned(F, 8));
8.5.3 NUMERIC_STD_UNSIGNED
When using the numeric_std package, the data types unsigned and signed
must be used in order to get access to the numeric operators. While this
provides ultimate control over the behavior of the signal operations and
comparisons, many designs may only use unsigned types. In order to
provide a mechanism to treat all vectors as unsigned while leaving their
type as std_logic_vector, the numeric_std_unsigned package was created.
When this package is used, it will treat all std_logic_vectors in the design as
unsigned. This package requires the std_logic_1164 and numeric_std
packages to be previously included. When used, all signals and ports can be
declared as std_logic/std_logic_vector and they will be treated as unsigned
when performing arithmetic operations and comparisons. The following is
an example of how to include this package:
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
use IEEE.numeric_std.all;
use IEEE.numeric_std_unsigned.all;
8.5.3.1 NUMERIC_STD_UNSIGNED Conversion
Functions
The numeric_std_unsigned package contains a few more type conversions
beyond the numeric_std package. These additional conversions are as
follows:
Name Input type Return type

--- Page 460 ---
Name Input type Return type
To_Integer std_logic_vectorInteger
To_StdLogicVectorUnsigned std_logic_vector
8.5.4 NUMERIC_BIT
The numeric_bit package provides numerical computation for types bit and
bit_vector. Since the vast majority of VHDL designs today use types
std_logic/std_logic_vector instead of bit/bit_vector, this package is rarely
used. This package is included by adding the following syntax at the
beginning of the VHDL file in the design:
library IEEE;
use IEEE.numeric_bit.all; -- defines types
unsigned and signed
The numeric_bit package is nearly identical to numeric_std. It defines
data types unsigned and signed, which provide information on the
encoding style of the underlying data types bit and bit_vector. All of the
arithmetic, logical, and comparison functions defined in numeric_std are
supported in numeric_bit (+, −, *, /, mod, rem, abs, and, nand, or, nor,
xor, xnor, not, >, <, <=, >=, =, /=) for types unsigned and signed. This
package also provides the same edge detection (rising_edge(),
falling_edge()), shift (shift_left(), shift_right()), and rotate (rotate_left(),
rotate_right()) functions for types unsigned and signed.
The primary difference between numeric_bit and numeric_std is that
numeric_bit also provides support for the shift/rotate operators from the
standard package (sll, srl, rol, ror). Also, the conversion functions are
defined only for conversions between integer, unsigned, and signed.
Name Input type Return type
To_integerUnsigned Integer
To_integerSigned Integer
To_unsignedInteger, <size>Unsigned (size-1 downto 0)
To_signed Integer, <size>Signed (size-1 downto 0)
8.5.5 NUMERIC_BIT_UNSIGNED

--- Page 461 ---
The numeric_bit_unsigned package provides a way to treat all
bit/bit_vectors in a design as unsigned numbers. The syntax for including
the numeric_bit_unsigned package is shown below. In this example, all
bit/bit_vectors will be treated as unsigned numbers for all arithmetic
operations and comparisons:
library IEEE;
use IEEE.numeric_bit.all;
use IEEE.numeric_bit_unsigned.all;
8.5.5.1 NUMERIC_BIT_UNSIGNED Conversion
Functions
The numeric_bit_unsigned package contains a few more type conversions
beyond the numeric_bit package. These additional conversions are as
follows:
Name Input type Return type
To_integerstd_logic_vectorInteger
To_BitVectorUnsigned bit_vector
8.5.6 MATH_REAL
The math_real package provides numerical computation for the type real.
The type real is the VHDL type used to describe a 32-bit floating point
number. None of the operators provided in the math_real package are
synthesizable. This package is primarily used for test benches. This package
is included by adding the following syntax at the beginning of the VHDL
file in the design:
library IEEE;
use IEEE.math_real.all;
The math_real package defines a set of commonly used constants,
which are shown below.
Constant name TypeValue Description
MATH_E Real2.718 Value of e

--- Page 462 ---
Constant name TypeValue Description
MATH_1_E Real0.367 Value of 1/e
MATH_PI Real3.141 Value of pi
MATH_1_PI Real0.318 Value of 1/pi
MATH_LOG_OF_2Real0.693 Natural log of 2
MATH_LOG_OF_10Real2.302 Natural log of10
MATH_LOG2_OF_EReal1.442 log base 2 of e
MATH_LOG10_OF_EReal0.434 log base 10 of e
MATH_SQRT2 Real1.414 sqrt of 2
MATH_SQRT1_2 Real0.707 sqrt of 1/2
MATH_SQRT_PI Real1.772 sqrt of pi
MATH_DEG_TO_RADReal0.017 Conversion factor from degree to radian
MATH_RAD_TO_DEGReal57.295Conversion factor from radian to degree
Only three digits of accuracy are shown in this table; however, the
constants defined in the math_real package have full 32-bit accuracy. The
math_real package provides a set of commonly used floating point
operators for the type real.
Function nameReturn typeDescription
SIGN Real Returns sign of input
CEIL Real Returns smallest integer value
FLOOR Real Returns largest integer value
ROUND Real Rounds input up/down to whole number
FMAX Real Returns largest of two inputs
FMIN Real Returns smallest of two inputs
SQRT Real Returns square root of input
CBRT Real Returns cube root of input
** Real Raise to power of (X**Y)
EXP Real eX
LOG Real log(X)
SIN Real sin(X)
COS Real cos(X)
TAN Real tan(X)
ASIN Real asin(X)
ACOS Real acos(X)
ATAN Real atan(X)

--- Page 463 ---
Function nameReturn typeDescription
ATAN2 Real atan(X/Y)
SINH Real sinh(X)
COSH Real cosh(X)
TANH Real tanh(X)
ASINH Real asinh(X)
ACOSH Real acosh(X)
ATANH Real atanh(X)
8.5.7 MATH_COMPLEX
The math_complex package provides numerical computation for complex
numbers. Again, nothing in this package is synthesizable and is typically
used only for test benches. This package is included by adding the
following syntax at the beginning of the VHDL file in the design:
library IEEE;
use IEEE.math_complex.all;
This package defines three new data types, complex, complex_vector,
and complex_polar. The type complex is defined with two fields, real and
imaginary. The type complex_vector is a linear array of type complex. The
type complex_polar is defined with two fields, magnitude and angle. This
package provides a set of common operations for use with complex
numbers. This package also supports the arithmetic operators +, −, *, and /
for the type complex.
Function name Return type Description
CABS Real Absolute value of complex number
CARG Real (radians) Returns angle of complex number
CMPLX Complex Returns complex number form of input
CONJ Complex or complex_polarReturns complex conjugate
CSQRT Real Returns square root
CEXP Real Returns eZ of complex input
COMPLEX_TO_POLARcomplex_polar Convert complex to complex_polar
POLAR_TO_COMPLEXComplex Convert complex_polar to complex

--- Page 464 ---
8.5.8 TEXTIO and STD_LOGIC_TEXTIO
The textio package provides the ability to read and write to/from external
input/output (I/O). External I/O refers to items such as files or the standard
input/output of a computer. This package contains functions that allow the
values of signals and variables to be read and written in addition to strings.
This allows more sophisticated output messages to be created compared to
the report statement alone, which can only output strings. The ability to
read in values from a file allows sophisticated test patterns to be created
outside of VHDL and then read in during simulation for testing a system. It
is important to keep in mind that the term “I/O” refers to external files or
the transcript window, not the inputs and outputs of a system model. The
textio package is not synthesizable and is only used in test benches. The
textio package is within the STD library and is included in a VHDL design
using the following syntax:
library STD;
use STD.textio.all;
This package by itself only supports reading and writing types bit,
bit_vector, integer, character, and string. Since the majority of synthesizable
designs use types std_logic and std_logic_vector, an additional package was
created that added support for these types. The package is called
std_logic_textio and is located within the IEEE library. The syntax for
including this package is below:
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_textio.all;
The textio package defines two new types for interfacing with external
I/O. These types are file and line. The type file is used to identify or create a
file for reading/writing within the VHDL design. The syntax for declaring a
file is as follows:
      file file_handle : <file_type> open
<file_mode> is <"filename">;

--- Page 465 ---
Declaring a file will automatically open the file and keep it open until
the end of the process that is using it. The file_handle is a unique identifier
for the file that is used in subsequent procedures. The file handle name is
user defined. A file handle eliminates the need to specify the entire file
name each time a file access procedure is called. The file_type describes the
information within the file. There are two supported file types, TEXT and
INTF. A TEXT file is one that contains strings of characters. This is the
most common type of file used as there are functions that can convert
between types string, bit/bit_vector and std_logic/std_logic_vector. This
allows all of the information in the file to be stored as characters, which
makes the file readable by other programs. An INTF file type contains only
integer values and the information is stored as a 32-bit, signed binary
number. The file_mode describes whether the file will be read from or
written to. There are two supported modes, WRITE_MODE and
READ_MODE. The filename is given within double quotes and is user
defined. It is common to enter an extension on the file so that it can be
opened by other programs (e.g., output.txt). Declaring a file always takes
place within a process before the process begins statement. The following
are examples of how to declare files.:
file Fout: TEXT open WRITE_MODE is
"output_file.txt";
file Fin: TEXT open READ_MODE is
"input_file.txt";
The information within a file is accessed (either read or written) using
the concept of a line. In the textio package, a file is interpreted as a
sequence of lines, each containing either a string of characters or an integer
value. The type line is used as a temporary buffer when accessing a line
within the file. When accessing a file, a variable is created of type line. This
variable is then used to either hold information that is read from a line in
the file or to hold the information that is to be written to a line in the file. A
variable is necessary for this behavior since assignments to/from the file
must be made immediately. As such, a line variable is always declared
within a process before the process begins statement. The syntax for
declaring a variable of type line is as follows:

--- Page 466 ---
      variable <line_variable_name> : line;
There are two procedures that allow information to be transferred
between a line variable in VHDL and a line in a file. These procedures are
readline() and writeline(). Their syntax is as follows:
readline(<file_handle>, <line_variable_name>);
writeline(<file_handle>, <line_variable_name>);
The transfer of information between a line variable and a line in a file
using these procedures is accomplished on the entire line. There is no
mechanism to read or write only a portion of the line in a file. Once a file is
opened/created using a file declaration, the lines are accessed in the order
they appear in the file. The first procedure called (either readline() or
writeline()) will access the first line of the file. The next time a procedure is
called, it will access the second line of the file. This will continue until all
of the lines have been accessed. The textio package provides a function to
indicate when the end of the file has been reached when performing a
readline(). This function is called endfile() and returns type Boolean. This
function will return true once the end of the file has been reached.
Figure 8.3 shows a graphical representation of how the textio package
handles external file access.

--- Page 467 ---
Fig. 8.3IEEE.textio package interpretation of files
Two additional procedures are provided to add or retrieve information
to/from the line variable within the VHDL test bench. These procedures are
read() and write(). The syntax for these procedures is as follows:
read(<line_variable_name>,
<destination_variable> );
write(<line_variable_name>, <source_variable> );
When using the read() procedure, the information in the line variable is
treated as space delimited. This means that each read() procedure will
retrieve the information from the line variable until it reaches a white space.
This allows multiple read() procedures to be used in order to parse the
information into separate destination_variable names. The
destination_variable must be of the appropriate type and size of the
information being read from the file. For example, if the field in the line
being read is a four-character string (“wxyz”), then a destination variable

--- Page 468 ---
must be defined of type string(1 to 4). If the field being read is a 2-bit
std_logic_vector, then a destination variable must be defined of type
std_logic_vector(1 downto 0). The read() procedure will ignore the
delimiting white space character.
When using the write() procedure, the source_destination is assumed to
be of type bit, bit_vector, integer, std_logic, or std_logic_vector. If it is
desired to enter a text string directly, then the function string is used with
the format string’<“characters…”>. Multiple write() procedures can be
used to insert information into the line variable. Each subsequent write
procedure appends the information to the end of the string. This allows
different types of information to be interleaved (e.g., text, signal value,
text).
8.5.8.1 Example: Writing to an External File from a
Test Bench
Let’s look at an example of a test bench that writes information about the
tests being conducted to an external file. Example 8.11 shows the model for
the system to be tested (SystemX) and an overview of the test bench
approach (SystemX_TB).
Example 8.11 Writing to an External File from a Test Bench (Part 1)

--- Page 469 ---
Example 8.12 shows the details of the test bench model. In this test bench, a
file is declared in order to create “output_file.txt”. This file is given the
handle Fout. A line variable is also declared called current_line to act as a
temporary buffer to hold information that will be written to the file. The
procedure write() is used to add information to the line variable. The first
write() procedure is used to create a text message (“Beginning Test…”).
Notice that since the information to be written to the line variable is of type
string, a conversion function must be used within the write() procedure
(e.g.,. string’(Beginning Test…”). This message is written as the first line in
the file using the writeline() procedure. After an input vector has been
applied to the DUT, a new line is constructed containing descriptive text,
the input vector value, and the output value from the DUT. This message is
repeated for each input code in the test bench.

--- Page 470 ---
Example 8.12 Writing to an External File from a Test Bench (Part 2)
Example 8.13 shows the resulting file that is created from this test bench.

--- Page 471 ---
Example 8.13 Writing to an External File from a Test Bench (Part 3)
8.5.8.2 Example: Writing to STD_OUTPUT from a
Test Bench
The textio package also provides the ability to write to the standard output
of the computer instead of to an external file. The standard output of the
computer is typically routed to the transcript window of the simulator. This
is accomplished by using a reserved file handle called OUTPUT. When
using this file handle, a new file does not need to be declared in the test
bench since it is already defined as part of the textio package. The reserved
file handle name OUTPUT can be used directly in the writeline()
procedure.
Let’s look at an example of a test bench that outputs information about
the test being conducted to STD_OUT. Example 8.14 shows this test bench
approach. The test bench is identical as the one used in Example 8.12 with
the exception that the writeline() procedure outputs are directed to the
STD_OUTPUT of the computer using the reserved file handle name
OUTPUT instead of to an external file.

--- Page 472 ---
Example 8.14 Writing to STD_OUT from a Test Bench (Part 1)


--- Page 473 ---
Example 8.15 shows the output from the test bench. This output is
displayed in the transcript window of the simulation tool.
Example 8.15 Writing to STD_OUT from a Test Bench (Part 2)
8.5.8.3 Example: Reading from an External File in a
Test Bench
Let’s now look at an example of reading test vectors from an external file.
Example 8.16 shows the test bench setup. In this example, the SystemX
design from the prior example will be tested using vectors provided by an
external file (input_file.txt). The test bench will read in each line of the file
individually and sequentially. After reading a line, the test bench will drive
the DUT with the input vector. In order to verify correct operation, the
results will be written to the STD_OUTPUT of the computer.
Example 8.16 Reading from an External File in a Test Bench (Part 1)

--- Page 474 ---
In order to read the external vectors, a file is declared in READ_MODE.
This opens the external file and allows the VHDL test bench to access its
lines. A variable is declared to hold the line that is read using the readline()
procedure. In this example, the line variable for reading is called
“current_read_line”. A variable is also declared that will ultimately hold the
vector that is extracted from current_read_line. This variable (called
current_read_field) is declared to be of type std_logic_vector(2 downto 0)
because the vectors in the file are 3-bit values. Once the line is read from
the file using the readline() procedure, the vector can be read from the line
variable using the read() procedure. Once the value resides in the
current_read_field variable, it can be assigned to the DUT input signal
vector ABC_TB. A set of messages are then written to the STD_OUTPUT
of the computer using the reserved file handle OUTPUT. The messages
contain descriptive text in addition to the values of the input vector and
output value of the DUT. Example 8.17 shows the process to implement this
behavior in the test bench.
Example 8.17 Reading from an External File in a Test Bench (Part 2)

--- Page 475 ---
Example 8.18 shows the results of this test bench, which are written to
STD_OUTPUT.
Example 8.18 Reading from an External File in a Test Bench (Part 3)


--- Page 476 ---
8.5.8.4 Example: Reading Space-Delimited Data
from an External File in a Test Bench
As mentioned earlier, information in a line variable is treated as white space
delimited by the read() procedure. This allows more information than just a
single vector to be read from a file. When a read() procedure is performed
on a line variable, it will extract information until it reaches either a white
space or the end-of-line character. If a white space is encountered, the
read() procedure will end. Let’s take a look at an example of how to read
information from a file when it contains both strings and vectors. Example
8.19 shows the test bench setup where an external file is to be read that
contains both a text heading and test vector on each line. Since the header
and the vector are separated with a white space character, two read()
procedures need to be used to independently extract these distinct fields
from the line variable.
Example 8.19 Reading Space-Delimited Data from an External File in a
Test Bench (Part 1)


--- Page 477 ---
The test bench will transfer a line from the file into a line variable using the
readline() procedure just as in the previous example; however, this time two
different variables will need to be defined in order to read the two separate
fields in the line. Each variable must be declared to be the proper type and
size for the information in the field. For example, the first field in the file is
a string of seven characters. As a result, the first variable declared
(current_read_field1) will be of type string(1 to 7). Recall that strings are
typically indexed incrementally from left to right starting with the index 1.
The second field in the file is a 3-bit vector, so the second variable declared
(current_read_field2) will be of type std_logic_vector(2 downto 0). Each
time a line is retrieved from the file using the readline() procedure, two
subsequent read() procedures can be performed to extract the two fields
from the line variable. The second field (i.e., the vector) can be used to
drive the input of the DUT. In this example, both fields are written to
STD_OUTPUT in addition to the output of the DUT to verify proper
functionality. Example 8.20 shows the test bench process which models this
behavior.
Example 8.20 Reading Space-Delimited Data from an External File in a
Test Bench (Part 2)

--- Page 478 ---
Example 8.21 shows the results of this test bench, which are written to
STD_OUTPUT.
Example 8.21 Reading Space-Delimited Data from an External File in a
Test Bench (Part 3)

--- Page 479 ---
8.5.9 Legacy Packages
(STD_LOGIC_ARITH/UNSIGNED/SIGNED)
Prior to the release of the numeric_std package by IEEE, Synopsis, Inc.
created a set of packages to provide computational operations for types
std_logic and std_logic_vector. Since these arithmetic packages were
defined very early in the life of VHDL, they were widely adopted.
Unfortunately, due to these packages not being standardized through a
governing body such as IEEE, vendors began modifying the packages to
meet proprietary needs. This led to a variety of incompatibility issues that
have plagued these packages. As a result, all new designs requiring
computational operations should be based on the IEEE numeric_std
package. While the IEEE standard is the recommended numerical package
for VHDL, the original Synopsis packages are still commonly found in
designs and in design examples, so providing an overview of their
functionality is necessary.
Synopsis, Inc. created the std_logic_arith package to provide
computational operations for types std_logic and std_logic_vector. Just as
with the numeric_std package, this package defines two new types,
unsigned and signed. Arithmetic, comparison, and shift operators are
provided for these types that include +, −, *, abs, >, <, <=, >=, =, /=, shl,
and shr. This package also provides a set of conversion functions between

--- Page 480 ---
types unsigned, signed, std_logic_vector, and integer. The syntax for these
conversions is as follows:
Name Input type Return type
CONV_INTEGER Unsigned Integer
CONV_INTEGER Signed Integer
CONV_UNSIGNED Integer, <size> Unsigned
CONV_UNSIGNED Signed Unsigned
CONV_SIGNED Integer, <size> Signed
CONV_SIGNED Unsigned Signed
CONV_STD_LOGIC_VECTORInteger, <size> std_logic_vector(size-1 downto 0)
CONV_STD_LOGIC_VECTORUnsigned, <size>std_logic_vector(size-1 downto 0)
CONV_STD_LOGIC_VECTORSigned, <size>std_logic_vector(size-1 downto 0)
The Synopsis packages have the ability to treat all std_logic_vectors in
a design as either unsigned or signed by including an additional package.
The std_logic_unsigned package, when included in conjunction with the
std_logic_arith package, will treat all std_logic_vectors in the design as
unsigned numbers. The syntax for using the Synopsis arithmetic packages
on unsigned numbers is as follows. The std_logic_1164 package is required
to define types std_logic/std_logic_vector. The std_logic_arith package
provides the computational operators for types std_logic/std_logic_vector.
Finally, the std_logic_unsigned package treats all
std_logic/std_logic_vector types as unsigned numbers when performing
arithmetic operations:
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
use IEEE.std_logic_arith.all;
use IEEE.std_logic_unsigned.all;
The std_logic_signed package works in a similar manner with the
exception that it treats all std_logic/std_logic_vector types as signed
numbers when performing arithmetic operations. The std_logic_unsigned
and std_logic_signed packages are never used together since they will
conflict with each other.
The syntax for using the std_logic_signed package is as follows:

--- Page 481 ---
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
use IEEE.std_logic_arith.all;
use IEEE.std_logic_signed.all;
One of the more confusing aspects of the Synopsis packages is that they
are included in the IEEE library. This means that both the numeric_std
package (IEEE standard) and the std_logic_arith package (Synopsis, non-
standard) are part of the same library, but one is recommended while the
other is not. This is due to the fact that the Synopsis packages were
developed first, and putting them into the IEEE library was the most natural
location since this library was provided as part of the VHDL standard.
When the numeric_std package was standardized by IEEE, it also was
naturally inserted into the IEEE library. As a result, today’s IEEE library
contains both styles of packages.
Summary
To model sequential logic, an HDL needs to be able to trigger signal
assignments based on a triggering event. This is accomplished in
VHDL using a process.

--- Page 482 ---
A sensitivity list is a way to control when a VHDL process is triggered.
A sensitivity list contains a list of signals. If any of the signals in the
sensitivity list transition it will cause the process to trigger. If a
sensitivity list is omitted, the process will trigger immediately.
Signal assignments are made when a process suspends. There are two
techniques to suspend a process. The first is using the wait statement.
The second is simply ending the process.
Sensitivity lists and wait statements are never used at the same time.
Sensitivity lists are used to model synthesizable logic while wait
statements are used for test benches.
When signal assignments are made in a process, they are made in the
order they are listed in the process. If assignments are made to the
same signal within a process, only the last assignment will take place
when the process suspends.
If assignments are needed to occur prior to the process suspending, a
variable is used. In VHDL, variables only exist within a process.
Variables are defined when a process triggers and deleted when the
process ends.
Processes also allow more advanced modeling constructs in VHDL.
These include if/then statements, case statements, infinite loops, while
loops, and for loops.
Signal attributes allow additional information to be observed about a
signal other than its value.
A test bench is a way to simulate a device under test (DUT) by
instantiating it as a component, driving in stimulus, and observing the
outputs. Test benches do not have inputs or outputs and are
unsynthesizable.
The report and assert statements provide a way to perform automatic
checking of the outputs of a DUT within a test bench.
The IEEE STD_LOGIC_1164 package provides more realistic data
types for modeling modern digital systems. This package provides the
std_ulogic and std_logic data types. These data types can take on nine
different values (U, X, 0, 1, Z, W, L, H, and -). The std_logic data type

--- Page 483 ---
provides a resolution function that allows multiple outputs to be
connected to the same signal. The resolution function will determine
the value of the signal based on a predefined priority given in the
function.
The IEEE STD_LOGIC_1164 package provides logical operators and
edge detection functions for the types std_ulogic and std_logic. It also
provides conversion functions to and from the type bit.
The IEEE NUMERIC_STD package provides the data types unsigned
and signed. These types use the underlying data type std_logic. These
types provide the ability to treat vectors as either unsigned or two’s
complement codes.
The IEEE NUMERIC_STD package provides arithmetic operations
for the types unsigned and signed. This package also provides
conversion functions and type casts to and from the types integer and
std_logic_vector.
The TEXTIO and STD_LOGIC_TEXTIO packages provide the
functionality to read and write to files from within a test bench. This
allows more sophisticated vector patterns to be driven into a DUT.
This also provides more sophisticated automatic checking of a DUT.
Exercise Problems
Section 8.1—The Process
8.1.1 When using a sensitivity list in a process, what will cause the
process to trigger?
 
8.1.2 When using a sensitivity list in a process, what will cause the
process to suspend?
 
8.1.3 When a sensitivity list is not used in a process, when will the
process trigger?
 
8.1.4 Can a sensitivity list and a wait statement be used in the same
process at the same time?
 

--- Page 484 ---
8.1.5 Does a wait statement trigger or suspend a process?  
8.1.6 When are signal assignments officially made in a process?
 
8.1.7 Why are assignments in a process called sequential signal
assignments?
 
8.1.8 Can signals be declared in a process?  
8.1.9 Are variables declared within a process visible to the rest of the
VHDL model (e.g., are they visible outside of the process)?
 
8.1.10What happens to a variable when a process ends?  
8.1.11 What is the assignment operator for variables?  
Section 8.2—Conditional Programming Constructs
8.2.1 Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
4-input truth table in Fig. 8.4. Use a process and an if/then
statement. Use std_logic and std_logic_vector types for your
signals. Declare the entity to match the block diagram provided.
Hint: Notice that there are far more input codes producing F = 0
than producing F = 1. Can you use this to your advantage to make
your VHDL model simpler?
 

--- Page 485 ---
Fig. 8.4System I Functionality
8.2.2 Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
4-input truth table in Fig. 8.4. Use a process and a case statement.
Use std_logic and std_logic_vector types for your signals. Declare
the entity to match the block diagram provided.
 
8.2.3 Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
4-input minterm list in Fig. 8.5. Use a process and an if/then
statement. Use std_logic and std_logic_vector types for your
signals. Declare the entity to match the block diagram provided.
Fig. 8.5System J Functionality
 
8.2.4 Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
4-input minterm list in Fig. 8.5. Use a process and a case
statement. Use std_logic and std_logic_vector types for your
signals. Declare the entity to match the block diagram provided.
 
8.2.5 Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
4i t t li ti Fi 86 U d if/th

--- Page 486 ---
4-input maxterm list in Fig. 8.6. Use a process and an if/then
statement. Use std_logic and std_logic_vector types for your
signals. Declare the entity to match the block diagram provided.
Fig. 8.6System K Functionality
 
8.2.6 Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
4-input maxterm list in Fig. 8.6. Use a process and a case
statement. Use std_logic and std_logic_vector types for your
signals. Declare the entity to match the block diagram provided.
 
8.2.7 Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
4-input truth table in Fig. 8.7. Use a process and an if/then
statement. Use std_logic and std_logic_vector types for your
signals. Declare the entity to match the block diagram provided.
Hint: Notice that there are far more input codes producing F = 1
than producing F = 0. Can you use this to your advantage to make
your VHDL model simpler?
 

--- Page 487 ---
Fig. 8.7System L Functionality
8.2.8 Design a VHDL model to implement the behavior described by the
4-input truth table in Fig. 8.7. Use a process and a case statement.
Use std_logic and std_logic_vector types for your signals. Declare
the entity to match the block diagram provided.
 
8.2.9 Figure 8.8 shows the topology of a 4-bit shift register when
implemented structurally using D-flip-flops. Design a VHDL
model to describe this functionality using a single process and
sequential signal assignments instead of instantiating D-flip-flops.
The figure also provides the block diagram for the entity
definition. Use std_logic and std_logic_vector types for your
signals.
Fig. 8.84-Bit Shift Register Functionality
 
8.2.10Design a VHDL model for a counter using a for loop with an
output type of integer. Figure 8.9 shows the block diagram for the
entity definition. The counter should increment from 0 to 31 and
then start over. Use wait statements within your process to update
the counter value every 10 ns. Consider using the loop variable of
the for loop to generate your counter value. NOTE: This design is
not synthesizable.
 

--- Page 488 ---
Fig. 8.9Integer Counter Block Diagram
8.2.11 Design a VHDL model for a counter using a for loop with an
output type of std_logic_vector(4 downto 0). Figure 8.10 shows
the block diagram for the entity definition. The counter should
increment from 000002 to 111112 and then start over. Use wait
statements within your process to update the counter value every
10 ns. Consider using the loop variable of the for loop to generate
an integer version of your count value, and then use a type
conversion function to convert the integer to std_logic_vector.
NOTE: This design is not synthesizable.
Fig. 8.105-Bit Binary Counter Block Diagram
 
Section 8.3—Signal Attributes
8.3.1What is the purpose of a signal attribute?  
8.3.2What is the data type returned when using the signal attribute
‘event?
 
8.3.3What is the data type returned when using the signal attribute
‘last_event?
 
8.3.4What is the data type returned when using the signal attribute
‘length?
 
Section 8.4—Test Benches

--- Page 489 ---
8.4.1Design a VHDL test bench to verify the functional operation of the
system in Fig. 8.4. Your test bench should drive in each input code
for the vector ABCD in the order they appear in the truth table (i.e.,
“0000”, “0001”, “0010”, …). Have your test bench change the input
pattern every 10 ns using the wait for statement within your
stimulus process.
 
8.4.2Design a VHDL test bench to verify the functional operation of the
system in Fig. 8.4 using report and assert statements. Your test
bench should drive in each input code for the vector ABCD in the
order they appear in the truth table (i.e., “0000”, “0001”, “0010”,
…). Have your test bench change the input pattern every 10 ns using
the wait for statement within your stimulus process. Use the report
and assert statements to output a message on the status of each test
to the simulation transcript window. For each input vector, create a
message that indicates the current input vector being tested, the
resulting output of your DUT, and whether the DUT output is
correct.
 
8.4.3Design a VHDL test bench to verify the functional operation of the
system in Fig. 8.5. Your test bench should drive in each input code
for the vector ABCD in the order they appear in the truth table (i.e.,
“0000”, “0001”, “0010”, …). Have your test bench change the input
pattern every 10 ns using the wait for statement within your
stimulus process.
 
8.4.4Design a VHDL test bench to verify the functional operation of the
system in Fig. 8.5 using report and assert statements. Your test
bench should drive in each input code for the vector ABCD in the
order they appear in the truth table (i.e., “0000”, “0001”, “0010”,
…). Have your test bench change the input pattern every 10 ns using
the wait for statement within your stimulus process. Use the report
and assert statements to output a message on the status of each test
to the simulation transcript window. For each input vector, create a
message that indicates the current input vector being tested, the
resulting output of your DUT, and whether the DUT output is
correct.
 

--- Page 490 ---
co ect.
8.4.5Design a VHDL test bench to verify the functional operation of the
system in Fig. 8.6. Your test bench should drive in each input code
for the vector ABCD in the order they appear in the truth table (i.e.,
“0000”, “0001”, “0010”, …). Have your test bench change the input
pattern every 10 ns using the wait for statement within your
stimulus process.
 
8.4.6Design a VHDL test bench to verify the functional operation of the
system in Fig. 8.6 using report and assert statements. Your test
bench should drive in each input code for the vector ABCD in the
order they appear in the truth table (i.e., “0000”, “0001”, “0010”,
…). Have your test bench change the input pattern every 10 ns using
the wait for statement within your stimulus process. Use the report
and assert statements to output a message on the status of each test
to the simulation transcript window. For each input vector create a
message that indicates the current input vector being tested, the
resulting output of your DUT, and whether the DUT output is
correct.
 
8.4.7Design a VHDL test bench to verify the functional operation of the
system in Fig. 8.7. Your test bench should drive in each input code
for the vector ABCD in the order they appear in the truth table (i.e.,
“0000”, “0001”, “0010”, …). Have your test bench change the input
pattern every 10 ns using the wait for statement within your
stimulus process.
 
8.4.8Design a VHDL test bench to verify the functional operation of the
system in Fig. 8.7 using report and assert statements. Your test
bench should drive in each input code for the vector ABCD in the
order they appear in the truth table (i.e., “0000”, “0001”, “0010”,
…). Have your test bench change the input pattern every 10 ns using
the wait for statement within your stimulus process. Use the report
and assert statements to output a message on the status of each test
tothesimulationtranscriptwindowForeachinputvectorcreatea
 

--- Page 491 ---
to the simulation transcript window. For each input vector, create a
message that indicates the current input vector being tested, the
resulting output of your DUT, and whether the DUT output is
correct.
Section 8.5—Packages
8.5.1 What are all the possible values that a signal of type std_logic can
take on?
 
8.5.2 What is the difference between the types std_ulogic and std_logic? 
8.5.3 If a signal of type std_logic is assigned both a 0 and Z at the same
time, what will the final signal value be?
 
8.5.4 If a signal of type std_logic is assigned both a 1 and X at the same
time, what will the final signal value be?
 
8.5.5 If a signal of type std_logic is assigned both a 0 and L at the same
time, what will the final signal value be?
 
8.5.6 Are any arithmetic operations provided for the type
std_logic_vector in the STD_LOGIC_1164 package?
 
8.5.7 If you declare a signal of type unsigned from the NUMERIC_STD
package, what are all the possible values that the signal can take
on?
 
8.5.8 If you declare a signal of type signed from the NUMERIC_STD
package, what are all the possible values that the signal can take
on?
 
8.5.9 If two signals (A and B) are declared of type signed from the
NUMERIC_STD package and hold the values A <= “1111” and B 
<= “0000”, which signal has a greater value?
 
If two signals (A and B) are declared of type unsigned from the

--- Page 492 ---
8.5.10 g ( ) yp g
NUMERIC_STD package and hold the values A <= “1111” and B 
<= “0000”, which signal has a greater value?  
8.5.11 If you are using the NUMERIC_STD package, what is the syntax
to convert a signal of type unsigned into std_logic_vector?
 
8.5.12If you are using the NUMERIC_STD package, what is the syntax
to convert a signal of type integer into std_logic_vector?
 
8.5.13Design a self-checking VHDL test bench that reads in test vectors
from an external file to verify the functional operation of the
system in Fig. 8.7. Create an input text file called
“input_vectors.txt” that contains each input code for the vector
ABCD in the order they appear in the truth table (i.e., “0000”,
“0001”, “0010”, …) on a separate line. The test bench should read
in each line of the file individually and use the corresponding input
vector to drive the DUT. Write the output results to an external file
called “output_vectors.txt”.
 
8.5.14Design a self-checking VHDL test bench that reads in test vectors
from an external file to verify the functional operation of the
system in Fig. 8.7. Create an input text file called
“input_vectors.txt” that contains each input code for the vector
ABCD in the order they appear in the truth table (i.e., “0000”,
“0001”, “0010”, …) on a separate line. The test bench should read
in each line of the file individually and use the corresponding input
vector to drive the DUT. Write the output results to the
STD_OUTPUT of the simulator.
 

--- Page 493 ---
(1)
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2017
Brock J. LaMeres, Introduction to Logic Circuits & Logic Design with VHDL , DOI 10.1007/978-3-
319-34195-8_9
9. Behavioral Modeling of Sequential
Logic
Brock J. LaMeres1 
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Montana State
University, Bozeman, MT, USA
 
In this chapter, we look at modeling sequential logic using the more
sophisticated behavioral modeling techniques presented in Chap. 8. We
begin by looking at modeling sequential storage devices. Next, we look at
the behavioral modeling of finite-state machines. Finally, we look at
register transfer level, or RTL modeling. The goal of this chapter is to
provide an understanding of how hardware description languages can be
used to create behavioral models of synchronous digital systems
Learning Outcomes—After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
9.1Design a VHDL behavioral model for a sequential logic storage
device.
 
9.2Describe the process for creating a VHDL behavioral model for a
finite-state machine.
 
9.3Design a VHDL behavioral model for a finite-state machine. 
9.4Design a VHDL behavioral model for a counter.  

--- Page 494 ---
9.5Design a VHDL register transfer level (RTL) model of a synchronous
digital system.
 
9.1 Modeling Sequential Storage Devices in VHDL
9.1.1 D-Latch
Let’s begin with the model of a simple D-Latch. Since the outputs of this
sequential storage device are not updated continuously, its behavior is
modeled using a process. Since we want to create a synthesizable model,
we use a sensitivity list to trigger the process instead of wait statements. In
the sensitivity list we need to include the C input since it controls when the
D-Latch is in track or store mode. We also need to include the D input in
the sensitivity list because during the track mode, the output Q will be
continuously assigned the value of D, so any change on D needs to trigger
the process. The use of an if/then statement is used to model the behavior
during track mode (C = 1). Since the behavior is not explicitly stated for
when C = 0, the outputs will hold their last value, which allows us to simply
end the if/then statement to complete the model. Example 9.1 shows the
behavioral model for a D-Latch.
Example 9.1 Behavioral Model of a D-Latch in VHDL


--- Page 495 ---
9.1.2 D-Flip-Flop
The rising edge behavior of a D-flip-flop is modeled using a (Clock’event
and Clock = ‘1’) Boolean condition within a process. The
(rising_edge(Clock)) function can also be used for type std_logic. Example
9.2 shows the behavioral model for a rising edge-triggered D-flip-flop with
both Q and Qn outputs.
Example 9.2 Behavioral Model of a D-Flip-Flop in VHDL
9.1.3 D-Flip-Flop with Asynchronous Reset
D-flip-flops typically have a reset line in order to initialize their outputs to a
known state (e.g., Q = 0, Qn = 1). Resets are asynchronous, meaning that
whenever they are asserted, assignments to the outputs take place
immediately. If a reset was synchronous, the output assignments would only
take place on the next rising edge of the clock. This behavior is undesirable
because if there is a system failure, there is no guarantee that a clock edge
will ever occur. Thus the reset may never take place. Asynchronous resets
are more desirable not only to put the D-flip-flops into a known state at
startup, but also to recover from a system failure that may have impacted
the clock signal. In order to model this asynchronous behavior, the reset
signal is placed in the sensitivity list. This allows both the clock and the
reset inputs to trigger the process. Within the process, an if/then/elsif
statement is used to determine whether the reset has been asserted or a
rising edge of the clock has occurred. The if/then/elsif statement first

--- Page 496 ---
checks whether the reset input has been asserted. If it has, it makes the
appropriate assignments to the outputs (Q = 0, Qn = 1). If the reset has not
been asserted, the elsif clause checks whether a rising edge of the clock has
occurred using the (Clock’event and Clock = ‘1’) Boolean condition. If it
has, the outputs are updated accordingly (Q <= D, Qn <= not D). A final
else statement is not included so that assignments to the outputs are not
made under any other condition. This models the store behavior of the D-
flip-flop. Example 9.3 shows the behavioral model for a rising edge-
triggered D-flip-flop with an asynchronous, active LOW reset.
Example 9.3 Behavioral Model of a D-Flip-Flop with Asynchronous
Reset in VHDL
9.1.4 D-Flip-Flop with Asynchronous Reset and
Preset

--- Page 497 ---
A D-flip-flop with both an asynchronous reset and asynchronous preset is
handled in a similar manner as the D-flip-flop in the prior section. The
preset input is included in the sensitivity list in order to trigger the process
whenever a transition occurs on either the clock, reset, or preset inputs. An
if/then/elsif statement is used to first check whether a reset has occurred;
then whether a preset has occurred; and finally, whether a rising edge of the
clock has occurred. Example 9.4 shows the model for a rising edge-
triggered D-flip-flop with asynchronous, active LOW reset and preset.
Example 9.4 Behavioral Model of a D-Flip-Flop with Asynchronous
Reset and Preset in VHDL
9.1.5 D-Flip-Flop with Synchronous Enable

--- Page 498 ---
An enable input is also a common feature of modern D-flip-flops. Enable
inputs are synchronous, meaning that when they are asserted, action is only
taken on the rising edge of the clock. This means that the enable input is not
included in the sensitivity list of the process. Since action is only taken
when there is a rising edge of the clock, a nested if/then statement is
included beneath the elsif (Clock’event and Clock = ‘1’) clause. Example
9.5 shows the model for a D-flip-flop with a synchronous enable (EN)
input. When EN = 1, the D-flip-flop is enabled and assignments are made to
the outputs only on the rising edge of the clock. When EN = 0, the D-flip-
flop is disabled and assignments to the outputs are not made. When
disabled, the D-flip-flop effectively ignores rising edges on the clock and
the outputs remain at their last values.
Example 9.5 Behavioral Model of a D-Flip-Flop with Synchronous
Enable in VHDL

--- Page 499 ---
9.2 Modeling Finite-State Machines in VHDL
Finite-state machines can be easily modeled using the behavioral constructs
from Chap. 8. The most common modeling practice for FSMs is to create a

--- Page 500 ---
new user-defined type that can take on the descriptive state names from the
state diagram. Two signals are then created of this type, current_state and
next_state. Once these signals are created, all of the functional blocks in the
state machine can use the descriptive state names in their conditional signal
assignments. The synthesizer will automatically assign the state codes
based on the most effective use of the target technology (e.g., binary, gray
code, one-hot). Within the VHDL state machine model, three processes are
used to describe each of the functional blocks, state memory, next state
logic, and output logic. In order to examine how to model a finite-state
machine using this approach, let’s use the push-button window controller
example from Chap. 7. Example 9.6 gives the overview of the design
objectives for this example and the state diagram describing the behavior to
be modeled in VHDL.
Example 9.6 Push-Button Window Controller in VHDL—Design
Description
Let’s begin by defining the entity. The system has an input called Press and
two outputs called Open_CW and Close_CCW. The system also has clock

--- Page 501 ---
and reset inputs. We will design the system to update on the rising edge of
the clock and have an asynchronous, active LOW, reset. Example 9.7 shows
the VHDL entity definition for this example.
Example 9.7 Push-Button Window Controller in VHDL—Entity
Definition
9.2.1 Modeling the States with User-Defined,
Enumerated Data Types
Now we begin designing the finite-state machine in VHDL using
behavioral modeling constructs. The first step is to create a new user-
defined, enumerated data type that can take on values that match the
descriptive state names we’ve chosen in the state diagram (i.e., w_closed
and w_open). This is accomplished by declaring a new type before the
begin statement in the architecture with the keyword type. For this example,
we will create a new type called State_Type and explicitly enumerate the
values that it can take on. This type can now be used in future signal
declarations. We then create two new signals called current_state and
next_state of type State_Type. These two signals will be used throughout
the VHDL model in order to provide a high-level, readable description of
the FSM behavior. The following syntax shows how to declare the new type
and declare the current_state and next_state signals:
type State_Type is (w_closed, w_open);
signal current_state, next_state : State_Type;
9.2.2 The State Memory Process

--- Page 502 ---
Now we model the state memory of the FSM using a process. This process
models the behavior of the D-flip-flops in the FSM that are holding the
current state on their Q outputs. Each time there is a rising edge of the
clock, the current state is updated with the next state value present on the D
inputs of the D-flip-flops. This process must also model the reset condition.
For this example we will have the state machine go to the w_closed state
when Reset is asserted. At all other times, the process will simply update
current_state with next_state on every rising edge of the clock. The process
model is very similar to the model of a D-flip-flop. This is as expected since
this process will synthesize into one or more D-flip-flops to hold the current
state. The sensitivity list contains only Clock and Reset and assignments are
only made to the signal current_state. The following syntax shows how to
model the state memory of this FSM example:
STATE_MEMORY : process (Clock, Reset)
begin
if (Reset = '0') then
current_state <= w_closed;
elsif (Clock'event and Clock='1') then
current_state <= next_state;
end if;
end process;
9.2.3 The Next State Logic Process
Now we model the next state logic of the FSM using a second process.
Recall that the next state logic is combinational logic; thus we need to
include all of the input signals that the circuit considers in the next state
calculation in the sensitivity list. The current_state signal will always be
included in the sensitivity list of the next state logic process in addition to
any inputs to the system. For this example the system has one other input
called Press. This process makes assignments to the next_state signal. It is
common to use a case statement to separate out the assignments that occur
at each state. At each state within the case statement, an if/then statement is
used to model the assignments for different input conditions on Press. The
following syntax shows how to model the next state logic of this FSM
example. Notice that we include a when others clause to ensure that the

--- Page 503 ---
state machine has a path back to the reset state in the case of an unexpected
fault:
NEXT_STATE_LOGIC : process (current_state, Press)
begin
case (current_state) is
when w_closed => if (Press = '1') then
next_state <= w_open;
else
next_state <= w_closed;
end if;
when w_open => if (Press = '1') then
next_state <= w_closed;
else
next_state <= w_open;
end if;
when others => next_state <= w_closed;
end case;
end process;
9.2.4 The Output Logic Process
Now we model the output logic of the FSM using a third process. Recall
that output logic is combinational logic; thus we need to include all of the
input signals that this circuit considers in the output assignments. The
current_state will always be included in the sensitivity list. If the FSM is a
Mealy machine, then the system inputs will also be included in the
sensitivity list. If the machine is a Moore machine, then only the
current_state will be present in the sensitivity list. For this example the
FSM is a Mealy machine, so the input Press needs to be included in the
sensitivity list. Note that this process only makes assignments to the outputs
of the machine (Open_CW and Close_CCW). The following syntax shows
how to model the output logic of this FSM example. Again, we include a
when others clause to ensure that the state machine has explicit output
behavior in the case of a fault:
OUTPUT_LOGIC : process (current_state, Press)
begin

--- Page 504 ---
case (current_state) is
when w_closed => if (Press = '1') then
Open_CW <= '1'; Close_CCW <= '0';
else
Open_CW <= '0'; Close_CCW <= '0';
end if;
when w_open => if (Press = '1') then
Open_CW <= '0'; Close_CCW <= '1';
else
Open_CW <= '0'; Close_CCW <= '0';
end if;
         when others => Open_CW <= '0'; Close_CCW
<= '0';         
end case;
end process;
Putting this all together in the VHDL architecture yields a functional
model for the FSM that can be simulated and synthesized. Once again, it is
important to keep in mind that since we did not explicitly assign the state
codes, the synthesizer will automatically assign the codes based on the most
efficient use of the target technology. Example 9.8 shows the entire
architecture for this example.
Example 9.8 Push-Button Window Controller in VHDL – Architecture

--- Page 505 ---
Example 9.9 shows the simulation waveform for this state machine. This
functional simulation was performed using ModelSim-Altera Starter
Edition 10.1d.
Example 9.9 Push-Button Window Controller in VHDL—Simulation
Waveform

--- Page 506 ---
9.2.5 Explicitly Defining State Codes with Subtypes
In the prior example, we did not have control over the state variable
encoding. While the previous example is the most common way to model
FSMs, there are situations where we would like to assign the state variable
codes manually. This is accomplished using a subtype and constants. A
subtype is simply a constrained type, meaning that it defines a subset of
values that an existing type can take on. For example, we could create a
subtype to constrain the std_logic data type to only allow values of 0 and 1
and not the values of U, X, Z, W, L, H, and -. This would not be considered
a new type since it is simply a constraint put upon the existing std_logic
type. A subtype defines the constraint and has a unique name that can be
used to declare other signals. To use this approach for manually encoding
the states of an FSM, we first declare a new subtype called State_Type that
is simply a version of the existing type std_logic. We then create constants
to represent the descriptive state names in the state diagram. These
constants are given the type State_Type and a specific value. The value
given is the state code we wish to assign to the particular state name.
Finally, the current_state and next_state signals are declared of type
State_Type. In this way, we can use the same VHDL processes as in the
previous example that use the descriptive state names from the state
diagram. The following is the VHDL syntax for manually assigning the
state codes using subtypes. This syntax would replace the State_Type
declaration in the previous example. Example 9.10 shows the resulting
simulation waveforms:
subtype State_Type is std_logic;
constant w_open : State_Type := ‘0’;

--- Page 507 ---
constant w_closed : State_Type := ‘1’;
signal current_state, next_state : State_Type;
Example 9.10 Push-Button Window Controller in VHDL—Explicit State
Codes
9.3 FSM Design Examples in VHDL
This section presents a set of example finite-state machine designs using the
behavioral modeling constructs of VHDL. These examples are the same
state machines that were presented in Chap. 7.
9.3.1 Serial Bit Sequence Detector in VHDL
Let’s look at the design of the serial bit sequence detector finite-state
machine from Chap. 7 using the behavioral modeling constructs of VHDL.
Example 9.11 shows the design description and entity definition for this
state machine.

--- Page 508 ---
Example 9.11 Serial Bit Sequence Detector in VHDL—Design
Description and Entity Definition
Example 9.12 shows the architecture for the serial bit sequence detector. In
this example, a user-defined type is created to model the descriptive state
names in the state diagram.
Example 9.12 Serial Bit Sequence Detector in VHDL – Architecture

--- Page 509 ---
Example 9.13 shows the functional simulation waveform for this design.
Example 9.13 Serial Bit Sequence Detector in VHDL—Simulation
Waveform

--- Page 510 ---
9.3.2 Vending Machine Controller in VHDL
Let’s now look at the design of the vending machine controller from Chap.
7 using the behavioral modeling constructs of VHDL. Example 9.14 shows
the design description and entity definition.
Example 9.14 Vending Machine Controller in VHDL—Design
Description and Entity Definition


--- Page 511 ---
Example 9.15 shows the VHDL architecture for the vending machine
controller. In this model, the descriptive state names Wait, 25¢, and 50¢
cannot be used directly. This is because Wait is a VHDL keyword and user-
defined names cannot begin with a number. Instead, the letter “s” is placed
in front of the state names in order to make them legal VHDL names (i.e.,
sWait, s25, s50).
Example 9.15 Vending Machine Controller in VHDL—Architecture

--- Page 512 ---
Example 9.16 shows the resulting simulation waveform for this design.

--- Page 513 ---
Example 9.16 Vending Machine Controller in VHDL—Simulation
Waveform
9.3.3 2-Bit, Binary Up/Down Counter in VHDL
Let’s now look at how a simple counter can be implemented using the
three-process behavioral modeling approach in VHDL. Example 9.17
shows the design description and entity definition for the 2-bit, binary
up/down counter FSM from Chap. 7.
Example 9.17 2-Bit Binary Up/Down Counter in VHDL—Design
Description and Entity Definition


--- Page 514 ---
Example 9.18 shows the architecture for the 2-bit up/down counter using
the three-process modeling approach. Since a counter’s outputs only depend
on the current state, counters are Moore machines. This simplifies the
output logic process since it only needs to contain the current state in its
sensitivity list.
Example 9.18 2-Bit Binary Up/Down Counter in VHDL—Architecture
(Three-Process Model)

--- Page 516 ---
Example 9.19 shows the resulting simulation waveform for this counter
finite-state machine.
Example 9.19 2-Bit Binary Up/Down Counter in VHDL—Simulation
Waveform
9.4 Modeling Counters in VHDL
Counters are a special case of finite-state machines because they move
linearly through their discrete states (either forward or backwards) and
typically are implemented with state-encoded outputs. Due to this
simplified structure and widespread use in digital systems, VHDL allows
counters to be modeled using a single process and with arithmetic operators
(i.e., + and −). This enables a more compact model and allows much wider
counters to be implemented.
9.4.1 Counters in VHDL Using the Type
UNSIGNED

--- Page 517 ---
Let’s look at how we can model a 4-bit, binary up counter with an output
called CNT. First, we want to model this counter using the “+” operator.
Recall that the “+” operator is not defined in the std_logic_1164 package.
We need to include the numeric_std package in order to add this capability.
Within the numeric_std package, the “+” operator is only defined for types
signed and unsigned (and not for std_logic_vector), so the output CNT will
be declared as type unsigned. Next, we want to implement the counter using
a signal assignment in the form CNT <= CNT + 1; however, since CNT is
an output port, it cannot be used as an argument (right hand side) in an
operation. We will need to create an internal signal to implement the
counter functionality (i.e., CNT_tmp). Since a signal does not contain
directionality, it can be used as both the target and an argument of an
operation. Outside of the counter process, a concurrent signal assignment is
used to continuously assign CNT_tmp to CNT in order to drive the output
of the system. This means that we need to create the internal signal
CNT_tmp of type unsigned also to support this assignment. Example 9.20
shows the VHDL model and simulation waveform for this counter. When
the counter reaches its maximum value of “1111,” it rolls over to “0000”
and continues counting because it is defined to only contain 4-bits.
Example 9.20 4-Bit Binary Up Counter in VHDL Using the Type
UNSIGNED

--- Page 518 ---
9.4.2 Counters in VHDL Using the Type INTEGER
Another common technique to model counters with a single process is to
use the type integer. The numeric_std package supports the “+” operator for
type integer. It also contains a conversion between the types integer and
unsigned/signed. This means a process can be created to model the counter
functionality with integers and then the result can be converted and
assigned to the output of the system of type unsigned. One thing that must
be considered when using integers is that they are defined as 32-bit, two’s
complement numbers. This means that if a counter is defined to use integers
and the maximum range of the counter is not explicitly controlled, the
counter will increment through the entire range of 32-bit values it can take
on. There are a variety of ways to explicitly bound the size of an integer
counter. The first is to use an if/then clause within the process to check for
the upper limit desired in the counter. For example, if we wish to create a 4-

--- Page 519 ---
bit binary counter, we will check if the integer counter has reached 15 each
time through the process. If it has, we will reset it to zero. Synthesizers will
recognize that the integer counter is never allowed to exceed 15 (or “1111”
for an unsigned counter) and remove the unused bits of the integer type
during implementation (i.e., the remaining 28-bits). Example 9.21 shows
the VHDL model and simulation waveform for this implementation of the
4-bit counter using integers.
Example 9.21 4-Bit Binary Up Counter in VHDL Using the Type
INTEGER


--- Page 520 ---
9.4.3 Counters in VHDL Using the Type
STD_LOGIC_VECTOR
It is often desired to have the ports of a system be defined of type
std_logic/std_logic_vector for compatibility with other systems. One
technique to accomplish this and also model the counter behavior internally
using std_logic_vector is through inclusion of the numeric_std_unsigned
package. This package allows the use of std_logic_vector when declaring
the ports and signals within the design and treats them as unsigned when
performing arithmetic and comparison functions. Example 9.22 shows the
VHDL model and simulation waveform for this alternative implementation
of the 4-bit counter.
Example 9.22 4-Bit Binary Up Counter in VHDL Using the Type
STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1)

--- Page 521 ---
If it is designed to have an output type of std_logic_vector and use an
integer in modeling the behavior of the counter, then a double conversion
can be used. In the following example, the counter behavior is modeled
using an integer type with range checking. A concurrent signal assignment
is used at the end of the architecture in order to convert the integer to type
std_logic_vector. This is accomplished by first converting the type integer
to unsigned and then converting the type unsigned to std_logic_vector.
Example 9.23 shows the VHDL model and simulation waveform for this
alternative implementation of the 4-bit counter.

--- Page 522 ---
Example 9.23 4-Bit Binary Up Counter in VHDL Using the Type
STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (2)
9.4.4 Counters with Enables in VHDL
Including an enable in a counter is a common technique to prevent the
counter from running continuously. When the enable is asserted, the counter
will increment on the rising edge of the clock as usual. When the enable is
de-asserted, the counter will simply hold its last value. Enable lines are
synchronous, meaning that they are only evaluated on the rising edge of the
clock. As such, they are modeled using a nested if/then statement within the

--- Page 523 ---
if/then statement checking for a rising edge of the clock. Example 9.24
shows an example model for a 4-bit counter with enable.
Example 9.24 4-Bit Binary Up Counter with Enable in VHDL
9.4.5 Counters with Loads
A counter with a load has the ability to set the counter to a specified value.
The specified value is provided on an input port (i.e., CNT_in) with the
same width as the counter output (CNT). A synchronous load input signal

--- Page 524 ---
(i.e., Load) is used to indicate when the counter should set its value to the
value present on CNT_in. Example 9.25 shows an example model for a 4-
bit counter with load capability.
Example 9.25 4-Bit Binary Up Counter with Load in VHDL


--- Page 525 ---
9.5 RTL Modeling
Register Transfer Level modeling refers to a level of design abstraction in
which vector data is moved and operated on in a synchronous manner. This
design methodology is widely used in data path modeling and computer
system design.
9.5.1 Modeling Registers in VHDL
The term register describes a circuit that operates in a similar manner as a
D-flip-flop with the exception that the input and output data are vectors.
This circuit is implemented with a set of D-flip-flops all connected to the
same clock, reset, and enable inputs. A register is a higher level of
abstraction that allows vector data to be stored without getting into the
details of the lower level implementation of the D-flip-flop components.
Example 9.26 shows an RTL model of an 8-bit, synchronous register. This
circuit has an active low, asynchronous reset that will cause the 8-bit output
Reg_Out to go to 0 when it is asserted. When the reset is not asserted, the
output will be updated with the 8-bit input Reg_In if the system is enabled
(EN = 1) and there is a rising edge on the clock. If the register is disabled
(EN = 0), the input clock is ignored. At all other times, the output holds its
last value.
Example 9.26 RTL Model of an 8-Bit Register in VHDL

--- Page 526 ---
9.5.2 Shift Registers in VHDL
A shift register is a circuit which consists of multiple registers connected in
series. Data is shifted from one register to another on the rising edge of the
clock. This type of circuit is often used in serial-to-parallel data converters.
Example 9.27 shows an RTL model for a 4-stage, 8-bit shift register. In the
simulation waveform, the data is shown in hexadecimal format.
Example 9.27 RTL Model of a 4-Stage, 8-Bit Shift Register in VHDL

--- Page 527 ---
9.5.3 Registers as Agents on a Data Bus
One of the powerful topologies that registers can easily model is a multi-
drop bus. In this topology, multiple registers are connected to a data bus as
receivers or agents. Each agent has an enable line that controls when it
latches information from the data bus into its storage elements. This

--- Page 528 ---
topology is synchronous, meaning that each agent and the driver of the data
bus ar connected to the same clock signal. Each agent has a dedicated,
synchronous enable line that is provided by a system controller elsewhere in
the design. Example 9.28 shows this multi-drop bus topology. In this
example system, three registers (A, B, and C) are connected to a data bus as
receivers. Each register is connected to the same clock and reset signals.
Each register has its own dedicated enable line (A_EN, B_EN, and C_EN).
Example 9.28 Registers as Agents on a Data Bus—System Topology
This topology can be modeled using RTL abstraction by treating each
register as a separate process. Example 9.29 shows how to describe this
topology with an RTL model in VHDL. Notice that the three processes
modeling the A, B, and C registers are nearly identical to each other with
the exception of the signal names they use.
Example 9.29 Registers as Agents on a Data Bus—RTL Model in VHDL

--- Page 529 ---
Example 9.30 shows the resulting simulation waveform for this system.
Each register is updated with the value on the data bus whenever its
dedicated enable line is asserted.
Example 9.30 Registers as Agents on a Data Bus—Simulation Waveform

--- Page 530 ---
Summary
A synchronous system is modeled with a process and a sensitivity list.
The clock and reset signals are always listed by themselves in the
sensitivity list. Within the process is an if/then statement. The first
clause of the if/then statement handles the asynchronous reset
condition while the second elsif clause handles the synchronous signal
assignments.
Edge sensitivity is modeled within a process using either the
(clock’event and clock = “1”) syntax or an edge detection function
provided by the STD_LOGIC_1164 package (i.e., rising_edge()).
Most D-flip-flops and registers contain a synchronous enable line.
This is modeled using a nested if/then statement within the main

--- Page 531 ---
process if/then statement. The nested if/then goes beneath the clause
for the synchronous signal assignments.
Generic finite-state machines are modeled using three separate
processes that describe the behavior of the next state logic, the state
memory, and the output logic. Separate processes are used because
each of the three functions in an FSM are dependent on different input
signals.
In VHDL, descriptive state names can be created for an FSM with a
user-defined, enumerated data type. The new type is first declared and
each of the descriptive state names are provided that the new data type
can take on. Two signals are then created called current_state and
next_state using the new data type. These two signals can then be
assigned the descriptive state names of the FSM directly. This
approach allows the synthesizer to assign the state codes arbitrarily. A
subtype can be used if it is desired to explicitly define the state codes.
Counters are a special type of finite-state machine that can be modeled
using a single process. Only the clock and reset signals are listed in the
sensitivity list of the counter process.
Registers are modeled in VHDL in a similar manner to a D-flip-flop
with a synchronous enable. The only difference is that the inputs and
outputs are n-bit vectors.
Exercise Problems
Section 9.1—Modeling Sequential Storage Devices in VHDL
9.1.1How does a VHDL model for a D-flip-flop handle treating reset as
the highest priority input?
 
9.1.2For a VHDL model of a D-flip-flop with a synchronous enable
(EN), why isn’t EN listed in the sensitivity list?
 
9.1.3For a VHDL model of a D-flip-flop with a synchronous enable
(EN), what is the impact of listing EN in the sensitivity list?
 
9.1.4For a VHDL model of a D-flip-flop with a synchronous enable
(EN),whyisthebehavioroftheenablemodeledusinganested

--- Page 532 ---
(EN), why is the behavior of the enable modeled using a nested
if/then statement under the clock edge clause rather than an
additional elsif clause in the primary if/then statement? 
Section 9.2—Modeling Finite-State Machines in VHDL
9.2.1 What is the advantage of using user-defined, enumerated data
types for the states when modeling a finite-state machine?
 
9.2.2 What is the advantage of using subtypes for the states when
modeling a finite-state machine?
 
9.2.3 When using the three-process behavioral modeling approach for
finite-state machines, does the next state logic process model
combinational or sequential logic?
 
9.2.4 When using the three-process behavioral modeling approach for
finite state machines, does the state memory process model
combinational or sequential logic?
 
9.2.5 When using the three-process behavioral modeling approach for
finite state machines, does the output logic process model
combinational or sequential logic?
 
9.2.6 When using the three-process behavioral modeling approach for
finite state machines, what inputs are listed in the sensitivity list of
the next state logic process?
 
9.2.7 When using the three-process behavioral modeling approach for
finite state machines, what inputs are listed in the sensitivity list of
the state memory process?
 
9.2.8 When using the three-process behavioral modeling approach for
finite state machines, what inputs are listed in the sensitivity list of
the output logic process?
 
9.2.9 When using the three-process behavioral modeling approach for
fi it t t hi h th ig l li t di th iti it

--- Page 533 ---
finite state machines, how can the signals listed in the sensitivity
list of the output logic process immediately tell whether the FSM is
a Mealy or a Moore machine?  
9.2.10Why is it not a good design approach to combine the next state
logic and output logic behavior into a single process?
 
Section 9.3—FSM Design Examples in VHDL
9.3.1Design a VHDL behavioral model to implement the finite-state
machine described by the state diagram in Fig. 9.1. Use the entity
definition provided in this figure for your design. Use the three-
process approach to modeling FSMs described in this chapter for
your design. Model the states in this machine with a user-defined
enumerated type.
Fig. 9.1FSM 1 State Diagram and Entity
 
9.3.2Design a VHDL behavioral model to implement the finite-state
machine described by the state diagram in Fig. 9.1. Use the entity
definition provided in this figure for your design. Use the three-
process approach to modeling FSMs described in this chapter for
your design. Explicitly assign binary state codes using VHDL
subtypes. Use the following state codes: Start = “00,” Midway 
=“01”Done=“10”
 

--- Page 534 ---
=  01, Done = 10.
9.3.3Design a VHDL behavioral model to implement the finite-state
machine described by the state diagram in Fig. 9.2. Use the entity
definition provided in this figure for your design. Use the three-
process approach to modeling FSMs described in this chapter for
your design. Model the states in this machine with a user-defined
enumerated type.
Fig. 9.2FSM 2 State Diagram and Entity
 
9.3.4Design a VHDL behavioral model to implement the finite-state
machine described by the state diagram in Fig. 9.2. Use the entity
definition provided in this figure for your design. Use the three-
process approach to modeling FSMs described in this chapter for
your design. Assign one-hot state codes using VHDL subtypes. Use
the following state codes: S0 = “0001,” S1 = “0010,” S2 = “0100,”
S3 = “1000.”
 
9.3.5Design a VHDL behavioral model for a 4-bit serial bit sequence
detector similar to Example 9.11. Use the entity definition provided
in Fig. 9.3. Use the three-process approach to modeling FSMs
 

--- Page 535 ---
g p pp g
described in this chapter for your design. The input to your sequence
detector is called DIN and the output is called FOUND. Your
detector will assert FOUND anytime there is a 4-bit sequence of
“0101.” For all other input sequences the output is not asserted.
Model the states in your machine with a user-defined enumerated
type.
Fig. 9.3Sequence Detector Entity
9.3.6Design a VHDL behavioral model for a 20-cent vending machine
controller similar to Example 9.14. Use the entity definition
provided in Fig. 9.4. Use the three-process approach to modeling
FSMs described in this chapter for your design. Your controller will
take in nickels and dimes and dispense a product anytime the
customer has entered 20 cents. Your FSM has two inputs, Nin and
Din. Nin is asserted whenever the customer enters a nickel while
Din is asserted anytime the customer enters a dime. Your FSM has
two outputs, Dispense and Change. Dispense is asserted anytime the
customer has entered at least 20 cents and Change is asserted
anytime the customer has entered more than 20 cents and needs a
nickel in change. Model the states in this machine with a user-
defined enumerated type.
Fig. 9.4Vending Machine Entity
 
9.3.7Design a VHDL behavioral model for a finite-state machine for a
traffic light controller. Use the entity definition provided in Fig. 9.5.
Thi i h bl d i i i i 7415Thi
 

--- Page 536 ---
This is the same problem description as in exercise 7.4.15. This
time, you will implement the functionality using the behavioral
modeling techniques presented in this chapter. Your FSM will
control a traffic light at the intersection of a busy highway and a
seldom used side road. You will be designing the control signals for
just the red, yellow, and green lights facing the highway. Under
normal conditions, the highway has a green light. The side road has
car detector that indicates when car pulls up by asserting a signal
called CAR. When CAR is asserted, you will change the highway
traffic light from green to yellow, and then from yellow to red. Once
in the red position, a built-in timer will begin a countdown and
provide your controller a signal called TIMEOUT when 15 s has
passed. Once TIMEOUT is asserted, you will change the highway
traffic light back to green. Your system will have three outputs
GRN, YLW, and RED, which control when the highway facing
traffic lights are on (1 = ON, 0 = OFF). Model the states in this
machine with a user-defined enumerated type.
Fig. 9.5Traffic Light Controller Entity
Section 9.4—Modeling Counters in VHDL
9.4.1 Design a VHDL behavioral model for a 16-bit, binary up counter
using a single process. The block diagram for the entity definition
is shown in Fig. 9.6. In your model, declare Count_Out to be of
type unsigned and implement the internal counter functionality
with a signal of type unsigned.
Fig. 9.616-Bit Binary Up Counter Block Diagram
 

--- Page 537 ---
9.4.2 Design a VHDL behavioral model for a 16-bit, binary up counter
using a single process. The block diagram for the entity definition
is shown in Fig. 9.6. In your model, declare Count_Out to be of
type unsigned and implement the internal counter functionality
with a signal of type integer.
 
9.4.3 Design a VHDL behavioral model for a 16-bit, binary up counter
using a single process. The block diagram for the entity definition
is shown in Fig. 9.6. In your model, declare Count_Out to be of
type std_logic_vector and implement the internal counter
functionality with a signal of type integer.
 
9.4.4 Design a VHDL behavioral model for a 16-bit, binary up counter
with enable using a single process. The block diagram for the
entity definition is shown in Fig. 9.7. In your model, declare
Count_Out to be of type unsigned and implement the internal
counter functionality with a signal of type unsigned.
Fig. 9.716-Bit Binary Counter with Enable Block Diagram
 
9.4.5 Design a VHDL behavioral model for a 16-bit, binary up counter
with enable using a single process. The block diagram for the
entity definition is shown in Fig. 9.7. In your model, declare
Count_Out to be of type unsigned and implement the internal
counter functionality with a signal of type integer.
 
9.4.6 Design a VHDL behavioral model for a 16-bit, binary up counter
with enable using a single process. The block diagram for the
entity definition is shown in Fig. 9.7. In your model, declare
Count_Out to be of type std_logic_vector and implement the
internal counter functionality with a signal of type integer.
 

--- Page 538 ---
y g yp g
9.4.7 Design a VHDL behavioral model for a 16-bit, binary up counter
with enable and load using a single process. The block diagram for
the entity definition is shown in Fig. 9.8. In your model, declare
Count_Out to be of type unsigned and implement the internal
counter functionality with a signal of type unsigned.
Fig. 9.816-Bit Binary Counter with Load Block Diagram
 
9.4.8 Design a VHDL behavioral model for a 16-bit, binary up counter
with enable and load using a single process. The block diagram for
the entity definition is shown in Fig. 9.8. In your model, declare
Count_Out to be of type unsigned and implement the internal
counter functionality with a signal of type integer.
 
9.4.9 Design a VHDL behavioral model for a 16-bit, binary up counter
with enable and load using a single process. The block diagram for
the entity definition is shown in Fig. 9.8. In your model, declare
Count_Out to be of type std_logic_vector and implement the
internal counter functionality with a signal of type integer.
 
9.4.10Design a VHDL behavioral model for a 16-bit, binary up/down
counter using a single process. The block diagram for the entity
definition is shown in Fig. 9.9. When Up = 1, the counter will
increment. When Up = 0, the counter will decrement. In your
model, declare Count_Out to be of type unsigned and implement
the internal counter functionality with a signal of type unsigned.
 

--- Page 539 ---
Fig. 9.916-Bit Binary Up/Down Counter Block Diagram
9.4.11 Design a VHDL behavioral model for a 16-bit, binary up/down
counter using a single process. The block diagram for the entity
definition is shown in Fig. 9.9. When Up = 1, the counter will
increment. When Up = 0, the counter will decrement. In your
model, declare Count_Out to be of type unsigned and implement
the internal counter functionality with a signal of type integer.
 
9.4.12Design a VHDL behavioral model for a 16-bit, binary up/down
counter using a single process. The block diagram for the entity
definition is shown in Fig. 9.9. When Up = 1, the counter will
increment. When Up = 0, the counter will decrement. In your
model, declare Count_Out to be of type std_logic_vector and
implement the internal counter functionality with a signal of type
integer.
 
Section 9.5—RTL Modeling
9.5.1In register transfer level modeling, how does the width of the
register relate to the number of D-flip-flops that will be synthesized?
 
9.5.2In register transfer level modeling, how is the synchronous data
movement managed if all registers are using the same clock?
 
9.5.3Design a VHDL RTL model of a 32-bit, synchronous register. The
block diagram for the entity definition is shown in Fig. 9.10. The
register has a synchronous enable. The register should be modeled
using a single process.
 

--- Page 540 ---
Fig. 9.1032-Bit Register Block Diagram
9.5.4Design a VHDL RTL model of an 8-stage, 16-bit shift register. The
block diagram for the entity definition is shown in Fig. 9.11. Each
stage of the shift register will be provided as an output of the system
(A, B, C, D, E, F, G, and H). Use std_logic or std_logic_vector for
all ports.
Fig. 9.11 16-Bit Shift Register Block Diagram
 
9.5.5Design a VHDL RTL model of the multi-drop bus topology in
Fig. 9.12. Each of the 16-bit registers (RegA, RegB, RegC, and
RegD) will latch the contents of the 16-bit data bus if their enable
line is asserted. Each register should be modeled using an individual
process.
 

--- Page 541 ---
Fig. 9.12Agents on a Bus Block Diagram

--- Page 542 ---
(1)
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2017
Brock J. LaMeres, Introduction to Logic Circuits & Logic Design with VHDL , DOI 10.1007/978-3-
319-34195-8_10
10. Memory
Brock J. LaMeres1 
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Montana State
University, Bozeman, MT, USA
 
This chapter introduces the basic concepts, terminology, and roles of
memory in digital systems. The material presented here will not delve into
the details of the device physics or low-level theory of operation. Instead,
the intent of this chapter is to give a general overview of memory
technology and its use in computer systems in addition to how to model
memory in VHDL. The goal of this chapter is to give an understanding of
the basic principles of semiconductor-based memory systems.
Learning Outcomes—After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
10.1Describe the basic architecture and terminology for semiconductor-
based memory systems.
 
10.2Describe the basic architecture of nonvolatile memory systems. 
10.3Describe the basic architecture of volatile memory systems. 
10.4Design a VHDL behavioral model of a memory system. 

--- Page 543 ---
10.1 Memory Architecture and Terminology
The term memory is used to describe a system with the ability to store
digital information. The term semiconductor memory refers to systems that
are implemented using integrated circuit technology. These types of
systems store the digital information using transistors, fuses, and/or
capacitors on a single semiconductor substrate. Memory can also be
implemented using technology other than semiconductors. Disk drives store
information by altering the polarity of magnetic fields on a circular
substrate. The two magnetic polarities (north and south) are used to
represent different logic values (i.e., 0 or 1). Optical disks use lasers to burn
pits into reflective substrates. The binary information is represented by light
either being reflected (no pit) or not reflected (pit present). Semiconductor
memory does not have any moving parts, so it is called solid-state memory
and can hold more information per unit area than disk memory. Regardless
of the technology used to store the binary data, all memory has common
attributes and terminology that are discussed in this chapter.
10.1.1 Memory Map Model
The information stored in memory is called the data. When information is
placed into memory, it is called a write. When information is retrieved from
memory, it is called a read. In order to access data in memory, an address
is used. While data can be accessed as individual bits, in order to reduce the
number of address locations needed, data is typically grouped into N-bit
words. If a memory system has N = 8, this means that 8 bits of data are
stored at each address. The number of address locations is described using
the variable M. The overall size of the memory is typically stated by saying
"MxN." For example, if we had a 16 × 8 memory system, that means that
there are 16 address locations, each capable of storing a byte of data. This
memory would have a capacity of 16 × 8 = 128 bits. Since the address is
implemented as a binary code, the number of lines in the address bus (n)
will dictate the number of address locations that the memory system will
have (M = 2n). Figure 10.1 shows a graphical depiction of how data resides
in memory. This type of graphic is called a memory map model.

--- Page 544 ---
Fig. 10.1Memory map model
10.1.2 Volatile vs. Nonvolatile Memory
Memory is classified into two categories depending on whether it can store
information when power is removed or not. The term nonvolatile is used to
describe memory that holds information when the power is removed, while
the term volatile is used to describe memory that loses its information when
power is removed. Historically, volatile memory is able to run at faster
speeds compared to nonvolatile memory, so it is used as the primary storage
mechanism while a digital system is running. Nonvolatile memory is
necessary in order to hold critical operation information for a digital system
such as start-up instructions, operations systems, and applications.
10.1.3 Read-Only vs. Read/Write Memory
Memory can also be classified into two categories with respect to how data
is accessed. Read-only memory (ROM) is a device that cannot be written
to during normal operation. This type of memory is useful for holding
critical system information or programs that should not be altered while the
system is running. Read/write memory refers to memory that can be read
and written to during normal operation and is used to hold temporary data
and variables.
10.1.4 Random Access vs. Sequential Access
Random access memory (RAM) describes memory in which any location
in the system can be accessed at any time. The opposite of this is sequential
access memory, in which not all address locations are immediately
available. An example of a sequential access memory system is a tape
drive. In order to access the desired address in this system, the tape spool
must be spun until the address is in a position that can be observed. Most

--- Page 545 ---
semiconductor memory in modern systems is random access. The terms
RAM and ROM have been adopted, somewhat inaccurately, to also
describe groups of memory with particular behavior. While the term ROM
technically describes a system that cannot be written to, it has taken on the
additional association of being the term to describe nonvolatile memory.
While the term RAM technically describes how data is accessed, it has
taken on the additional association of being the term to describe volatile
memory. When describing modern memory systems, the terms RAM and
ROM are used most commonly to describe the characteristics of the
memory being used; however, modern memory systems can be both
read/write and nonvolatile, and the majority of memory is random access.
10.2 Nonvolatile Memory Technology
10.2.1 ROM Architecture
This section describes some of the most common nonvolatile memory
technologies used to store digital information. An address decoder is used
to access individual data words within the memory system. The address
decoder asserts one and only one word line (WL) for each unique binary
address that is present on its input. This operation is identical to a binary-to-
one-hot decoder. For an n-bit address, the decoder can access 2n, or M
words in memory. The word lines historically run horizontally across the
memory array; thus they are often called row lines and the word line
decoder is often called the row decoder. Bit lines (BL) run perpendicular to
the word lines in order to provide individual bit storage access at the
intersection of the bit and word lines. These lines typically run vertically
through the memory array; thus they are often called column lines. The
output of the memory system (i.e., Data_Out) is obtained by providing an
address and then reading the word from buffered versions of the bit lines.
When a system provides individual bit access to a row, or access to multiple

--- Page 546 ---
data words sharing a row line, a column decoder is used to route the
appropriate bit line(s) to the data out port.
In a traditional ROM array, each bit line contains a pull-up network to
VCC. This provides the ability to store a logic 1 at all locations within the
array. If a logic 0 is desired at a particular location, an NMOS pull-down
transistor is inserted. The gate of the NMOS is connected to the appropriate
word line and the drain of the NMOS is connected to the bit line. When
reading, the word line is asserted and turns on the NMOS transistor. This
pulls the bit line to GND and produces a logic 0 on the output. When the
NMOS transistor is excluded, the bit line remains at a logic 1 due to the
pull-up network. Figure 10.2 shows the basic architecture of a ROM.

--- Page 547 ---
Fig. 10.2Basic architecture of read-only memory (ROM)
Figure 10.3 shows the operation of a ROM when information is being
read.

--- Page 548 ---
Fig. 10.3ROM operation during a read
Memory can be designed to be either asynchronous or synchronous.
Asynchronous memory updates its data outputs immediately upon
receiving an address. Synchronous memory only updates its data outputs

--- Page 549 ---
on the rising edge of a clock. The term latency is used to describe the delay
between when a signal is sent to the memory (either the address in an
asynchronous system or the clock in a synchronous system) and when the
data is available. Figure 10.4 shows a comparison of the timing diagrams
between asynchronous and synchronous ROM systems during a read cycle.
Fig. 10.4Asynchronous vs. synchronous ROM operation during a read cycle
10.2.2 Mask Read-Only Memory
A mask read-only memory (MROM) is a nonvolatile device that is
programmed during fabrication. The term mask refers to a transparent plate

--- Page 550 ---
that contains patterns to create the features of the devices on an integrated
circuit using a process called photolithography. An MROM is fabricated
with all of the features necessary for the memory device with the exception
of the final connections between the NMOS transistors and the word and bit
lines. This allows the majority of the device to be created prior to knowing
what the final information to be stored is. Once the desired information to
be stored is provided by the customer, the fabrication process is completed
by adding connections between certain NMOS transistors and the word/bit
lines in order to create logic 0s. Figure 10.5 shows an overview of the
MROM programming process.
Fig. 10.5MROM overview

--- Page 551 ---
10.2.3 Programmable Read-Only Memory
A programmable read-only memory (PROM) is created in a similar manner
as an MROM except that the programming is accomplished post-fabrication
through the use of fuses or anti-fuses. A fuse is an electrical connection that
is normally conductive. When a certain amount of current is passed through
the fuse it will melt, or blow, and create an open circuit. The amount of
current necessary to open the fuse is much larger than the current the fuse
would conduct during normal operation. An anti-fuse operates in the
opposite manner as a fuse. An anti-fuse is normally an open circuit. When a
certain amount of current is forced into the anti-fuse, the insulating material
breaks down and creates a conduction path. This turns the anti-fuse from an
open circuit into a wire. Again, the amount of current necessary to close the
anti-fuse is much larger than the current the anti-fuse would experience
during normal operation. A PROM uses fuses or anti-fuses in order to
connect/disconnect the NMOS transistors in the ROM array to the word/bit
lines. A PROM programmer is used to burn the fuses or anti-fuses. A
PROM can only be programmed once in this manner; thus it is a ROM and
nonvolatile. A PROM has the advantage that programming can take place
quickly as opposed to an MROM that must be programmed through device
fabrication. Figure 10.6 shows an example PROM device based on fuses.

--- Page 552 ---
Fig. 10.6PROM overview
10.2.4 Erasable Programmable Read-Only Memory
As an improvement to the one-time programming characteristic of PROMs,
an electrically programmable ROM with the ability to be erased with
ultraviolet (UV) light was created. The erasable programmable read-only
memory (EPROM) is based on a floating-gate transistor. In a floating-gate
transistor, an additional metal oxide structure is added to the gate of an
NMOS. This has the effect of increasing the threshold voltage. The
geometry of the second metal oxide is designed such that the threshold
voltage is high enough that normal CMOS logic levels are not able to turn
the transistor on (i.e., VT1 > VCC). This threshold can be changed by

--- Page 553 ---
applying a large electric field across the two metal structures in the gate.
This causes charge to tunnel into the secondary oxide, ultimately changing
it into a conductor. This phenomenon is called Fowler–Nordheim tunneling.
The new threshold voltage is low enough that normal CMOS logic levels
are not able to turn the transistors off (i.e., VT2 < GND). This process is how
the device is programmed. This process is accomplished using a dedicated
programmer; thus the EPROM must be removed from its system to
program. Figure 10.7 shows an overview of a floating-gate transistor and
how it is programmed.

--- Page 554 ---
Fig. 10.7Floating-gate transistor—programming
In order to change the floating-gate transistor back into its normal state,
the device is exposed to a strong ultraviolet light source. When the UV light
strikes the trapped charge in the secondary oxide, it transfers enough energy
to the charge particles that they can move back into the metal plates in the
gate. This, in effect, erases the device and restores it back to a state with a
high threshold voltage. EPROMs contain a transparent window on the top
of their package that allows the UV light to strike the devices. The EPROM

--- Page 555 ---
must be removed from its system to perform the erase procedure. When the
UV light erase procedure is performed, every device in the memory array is
erased. EPROMs are a significant improvement over PROMs because they
can be programmed multiple times; however, the programming and erase
procedures are manually intensive and require an external programmer and
external eraser. Figure 10.8 shows the erase procedure for a floating-gate
transistor using UV light.
Fig. 10.8Floating-gate transistor—erasing with UV light
An EPROM array is created in the exact same manner as in a PROM
array with the exception that additional programming circuitry is placed on
the IC and a transparent window is included on the package to facilitate
erasing. An EPROM is nonvolatile and read only since the programming
procedure takes place outside of its destination system.
10.2.5 Electrically Erasable Programmable Read-
Only Memory
In order to address the inconvenient programming and erasing procedures
associated with EPROMs, the electrically erasable programmable ROM
(EEPROM) was created. In this type of circuit, the floating-gate transistor is
erased by applying a large electric field across the secondary oxide. This
electric field provides the energy to move the trapped charge from the
secondary oxide back into the metal plates of the gate. The advantage of
this approach is that the circuitry to provide the large electric field can be
generated using circuitry on the same substrate as the memory array, thus
eliminating the need for an external UV light eraser. In addition, since the

--- Page 556 ---
circuitry exists to generate large on-chip voltages, the device can also be
programmed without the need for an external programmer. This allows an
EEPROM to be programmed and erased while it resides in its target
environment. Figure 10.9 shows the procedure for erasing a floating-gate
transistor using an electric field.
Fig. 10.9Floating-gate transistor—erasing with electricity
Early EEPROMs were very slow and had a limited number of
program/erase cycles; thus they were classified into the category of
nonvolatile, ROM. Modern floating-gate transistors are now capable of
access times on scale with other volatile memory systems; thus they have
evolved into one of the few nonvolatile, read/write memory technologies
used in computer systems today.
10.2.6 FLASH Memory
One of the early drawbacks of EEPROM was that the circuitry that
provided the capability to program and erase individual bits also added to
the size of each individual storage element. FLASH EEPROM was a
technology that attempted to improve the density of floating-gate memory
by programming and erasing in large groups of data, known as blocks. This
allowed the individual storage cells to shrink and provided higher density
memory parts. This new architecture was called NAND FLASH and
provided faster write and erase times coupled with higher density storage
elements. The limitation of NAND FLASH was that reading and writing
could only be accomplished in a block-by-block basis. This characteristic

--- Page 557 ---
precluded the use of NAND FLASH for run-time variables and data
storage, but was well suited for streaming applications such as audio/video
and program loading. As NAND FLASH technology advanced, the block
size began to shrink and software adapted to accommodate the block-by-
block data access. This expanded the applications that NAND FLASH
could be deployed in. Today, NAND FLASH memory is used in nearly all
portable devices (e.g., smart phones, tablets) and its use in solid-state hard
drives is on pace to replace hard disk drives and optical disks as the primary
nonvolatile storage medium in modern computers.
In order to provide individual word access, NOR FLASH was
introduced. In NOR FLASH, circuitry is added to provide individual access
to data words. This architecture provided faster read times than NAND
FLASH, but the additional circuitry causes the write and erase times to be
slower and the individual storage cell size to be larger. Due to NAND
FLASH having faster write times and higher density, it is seeing broader
scale adoption compared to NOR FLASH despite only being able to access
information in blocks. NOR FLASH is considered RAM while NAND
FLASH is typically not; however, as the block size of NAND FLASH is
continually reduced, its use for variable storage is becoming more
attractive. All FLASH memory is nonvolatile and read/write.
10.3 Volatile Memory Technology
This section describes some common volatile memory technologies used to
store digital information.
10.3.1 Static Random Access Memory

--- Page 558 ---
Static random access memory (SRAM) is a semiconductor technology that
stores information using a cross-coupled inverter feedback loop.
Figure 10.10 shows the schematic for the basic SRAM storage cell. In this
configuration, two access transistors (M1 and M2) are used to read and
write from the storage cell. The cell has two complementary ports called Bit
Line (BL) and Bit Line’ (BLn). Due to the inverting functionality of the
feedback loop, these two ports will always be the complement of each
other. This behavior is advantageous because the two lines can be compared
to each other to determine the data value. This allows the voltage levels
used in the cell to be lowered while still being able to detect the stored data
value. Word lines are used to control the access transistors. This storage
element takes six CMOS transistors to implement and is often called a 6 T
configuration. The advantage of this memory cell is that it has very fast
performance compared to other subsystems because of its underlying
technology being simple CMOS transistors. SRAM cells are commonly
implemented on the same IC substrate as the rest of the system, thus
allowing a fully integrated system to be realized. SRAM cells are used for
cache memory in computer systems.
Fig. 10.10SRAM storage element (6 T)
To build an SRAM memory system, cells are arranged in an array
pattern. Figure 10.11 shows a 4 × 4 SRAM array topology. In this
configuration, word lines are shared horizontally across the array in order to

--- Page 559 ---
provide addressing capability. An address decoder is used to convert the
binary encoded address into the appropriate word line assertions. N storage
cells are attached to the word line to provide the desired data word width.
Bit lines are shared vertically across the array in order to provide data
access (either read or write). A data line controller handles whether data is
read from or written to the cells based on an external write enable (WE)
signal. When WE is asserted (WE = 1), data will be written to the cells.
When WE is de-asserted (WE = 0), data will be read from the cells. The
data line controller also handles determining the correct logic value read
from the cells by comparing BL to BLn. As more cells are added to the bit
lines, the signal magnitude being driven by the storage cells diminishes due
to the additional loading of the other cells. This is where having
complementary data signals (BL and BLn) is advantageous because this
effectively doubles the magnitude of the storage cell outputs. The
comparison of BL to BLn is handled using a differential amplifier that
produces a full logic-level output even when the incoming signals are very
small.

--- Page 560 ---
Fig. 10.11 4 × 4 SRAM array topology
SRAM is volatile memory because when the power is removed, the
cross-coupled inverters are not able to drive the feedback loop and the data
is lost. SRAM is also read/write memory because the storage cells can be
easily read from or written to during normal operation.
Let’s look at the operation of the SRAM array when writing the 4-bit
word “0111” to address “01.” Figure 10.12 shows a graphical depiction of
this operation. In this write cycle, the row address decoder observes the

--- Page 561 ---
address input “01” and asserts WL1. Asserting this word line enables all of
the access transistors (i.e., M1 and M2 in Fig. 10.10) of the storage cells in
this row. The line drivers are designed to have a stronger drive strength than
the inverters in the storage cells so that they can override their values during
a write. The information “0111” is present on the Data_In bus and the write
enable control line is asserted (WE = 1) to indicate a write. The data line
controller passes the information to be stored to the line drivers, which in
turn converts each input into complementary signals and drives the bit lines.
This overrides the information in each storage cell connected to WL1. The
address decoder then de-asserts WL1 and the information is stored.

--- Page 562 ---
Fig. 10.12SRAM operation during a write cycle—storing “0111” to address “01”
Now let’s look at the operation of the SRAM array when reading a 4-bit
word from address “10.” Let’s assume that this row was storing the value
“1010.” Figure 10.13 shows a graphical depiction of this operation. In this
read cycle, the row address decoder asserts WL2, which allows the SRAM
cells to drive their respective bit lines. Note that each cell drives a
complementary version of its stored value. The input control line is de-
asserted (WE = 0), which indicates that the sense amps will read the BL and

--- Page 563 ---
BLn lines in order to determine the full logic value stored in each cell. This
logic value is then routed to the Data_Out port of the array. In an SRAM
array, reading from the cell does not impact the contents of the cell. Once
the read is complete, WL2 is de-asserted and the read cycle is complete.
Fig. 10.13SRAM operation during a read cycle—reading “0101” from address “10”
10.3.2 Dynamic Random Access Memory

--- Page 564 ---
Dynamic random access memory (DRAM) is a semiconductor technology
that stores information using a capacitor. A capacitor is a fundamental
electrical device that stores charge. Figure 10.14 shows the schematic for
the basic DRAM storage cell. The capacitor is accessed through a transistor
(M1). Since this storage element takes one transistor and one capacitor, it is
often referred to as a 1T1C configuration. Just as in SRAM memory, word
lines are used to access the storage elements. The term digit line is used to
describe the vertical connection to the storage cells. DRAM has an
advantage over SRAM in that the storage element requires less area to
implement. This allows DRAM memory to have much higher density
compared to SRAM.
Fig. 10.14DRAM storage element (1 T 1C)
There are a variety of considerations that must be accounted for when
using DRAM. First, the charge in the capacitor will slowly dissipate over
time due to the capacitors being non-ideal. If left unchecked, eventually the
data held in the capacitor will be lost. In order to overcome this issue,
DRAM has a dedicated circuit to refresh the contents of the storage cell. A
refresh cycle involves periodically reading the value stored on the capacitor
and then writing the same value back again at full signal strength. This
behavior also means that DRAM is volatile because when the power is
removed and the refresh cycle cannot be performed, the stored data is lost.
DRAM is also considered read/write memory because the storage cells can
be easily read from or written to during normal operation.
Another consideration when using DRAM is that the voltage of the
word line must be larger than VCC in order to turn on the access transistor.
In order to turn on an NMOS transistor, the gate terminal must be larger
than the source terminal by at least a threshold voltage (VT). In traditional

--- Page 565 ---
CMOS circuit design, the source terminal is typically connected to ground
(0v). This means that the transistor can be easily turned on by driving the
gate with a logic 1 (i.e., VCC) since this creates a VGS voltage much larger
than VT. This is not always the case in DRAM. In DRAM, the source
terminal is not connected to ground, but rather to the storage capacitor. In
the worst-case situation, the capacitor could be storing a logic 1 (i.e., VCC).
This means that in order for the word line to be able to turn on the access
transistor, it must be equal to or larger than (VCC + VT). This is an issue
because the highest voltage that the DRAM device has access to is VCC. In
DRAM, a charge pump is used to create a voltage larger than VCC + VT that
is driven on the word lines. Once this voltage is used, the charge is lost, so
the line must be pumped up again before its next use. The process of
“pumping up” takes time that must be considered when calculating the
maximum speed of DRAM. Figure 10.15 shows a graphical depiction of
this consideration.
Fig. 10.15DRAM charge pumping of word lines
Another consideration when using DRAM is how the charge in the
capacitor develops into an actual voltage on the digital line when the access
transistor is closed. Consider the simple 4 × 4 array of DRAM cells shown
in Fig. 10.16. In this topology, the DRAM cells are accessed using the same
approach as in the SRAM array from Fig. 10.11.

--- Page 566 ---
Fig. 10.16Simple 4 × 4 DRAM array topology
One of the limitations of this simple configuration is that the charge
stored in the capacitors cannot develop a full voltage level across the digit
line when the access transistor is closed. This is because the digit line itself
has capacitance that impacts how much voltage will be developed. In
practice, the capacitance of the digit line (CDL) is much larger than the
capacitance of the storage cell (CS) due to having significantly more area
and being connected to numerous other storage cells. This becomes an issue
because when the storage capacitor is connected to the digit line, the
resulting voltage on the digit line (VDL) is much less than the original
voltage on the storage cell (VS). This behavior is known as charge sharing
because when the access transistor is closed, the charge on both capacitors
is distributed across both devices and results in a final voltage that depends
on the initial charge in the system and the values of the two capacitors.

--- Page 567 ---
Example 10.1 shows an example of how to calculate the final digit line
voltage when the storage cell is connected.
Example 10.1 Calculating the final digit line voltage in a DRAM based
on charge sharing

--- Page 568 ---
The issue with the charge sharing behavior of a DRAM cell is that the final
voltage on the word line is not large enough to be detected by a standard
logic gate or latch. In order to overcome this issue, modern DRAM arrays

--- Page 569 ---
use complementary storage cells and sense amplifiers. The complementary
cells store the original data and its complement. Two digit lines (DL and
DLn) are used to read the contents of the storage cells. DL and DLn are
initially pre-charged to exactly VCC/2. When the access transistors are
closed, the storage cells will share their charge with the digit lines and move
them slightly away from VCC/2 in different directions. This allows twice the
voltage difference to be developed during a read. A sense amplifier is then
used to boost this small voltage difference into a full logic level that can be
read by a standard logic gate or latch. Figure 10.17 shows the modern
DRAM array topology based on complementary storage cells.

--- Page 570 ---
Fig. 10.17Modern DRAM array topology based on complementary storage cells
The sense amplifier is designed to boost small voltage deviations from
VCC/2 on DL and DLn to full logic levels. The sense amplifier sits in
between DL and DLn and has two complementary networks, the N-sense
amplifier, and the P-sense amplifier. The N-sense amplifier is used to pull a
signal that is below VCC/2 (either DL or DLn) down to GND. A control
signal (N-Latch or NLATn) is used to turn on this network. The P-sense
amplifier is used to pull a signal that is above VCC/2 (either DL or DLn) up

--- Page 571 ---
to VCC. A control signal (active pull-up or ACT) is used to turn on this
network. The two networks are activated in a sequence with the N-sense
network activating first. Figure 10.18 shows an overview of the operation of
a DRAM sense amplifier.
Fig. 10.18DRAM sense amplifier
Let’s now put everything together and look at the operation of a DRAM
system during a read operation. Figure 10.19 shows a simplified timing
diagram of a DRAM read cycle. This diagram shows the critical signals and
their values when reading a logic 1. Notice that there is a sequence of steps

--- Page 572 ---
that must be accomplished before the information in the storage cells can be
retrieved.
Fig. 10.19DRAM operation during a read cycle—reading a 1 from a storage cell
A DRAM write operation is accomplished by opening the access
transistors to the complementary storage cells using WL, disabling the pre-
charge drivers, and then writing full logic-level signals to the storage cells
using the Data_In line driver.

--- Page 573 ---
10.4 Modeling Memory with VHDL
10.4.1 Read-Only Memory in VHDL
Modeling of memory in VHDL is accomplished using the array data type.
Recall the syntax for declaring a new array type below:
type name is array (<range>) of <element_type>;
To create the ROM array, a new type is declared (e.g., ROM_type) that
is an array. The range represents the addressing of the memory array and is
provided as an integer. The element_type of the array specifies the data type
to be stored at each address and represents the data in the memory array.
The type of the element should be std_logic_vector with a width of N. To
define a 4 × 4 array of memory, we would use the following syntax.
Example:
type ROM_type is array (0 to 3) of
std_logic_vector(3 downto 0);
Notice that the address is provided as an integer (0–3). This will require
two address bits. Also notice that this defines 4-bit data words. Next, we
define a new constant of type ROM_type. When defining a constant, we
provide the contents at each address.
Example:
constant ROM : ROM_type := (0 => ”1110”,
1 => ”0010”,
2 => ”1111”,

--- Page 574 ---
3 => ”0100”);
At this point, the ROM array is declared and initialized. In order to
model the read behavior, a concurrent signal assignment is used. The
assignment will be made to the output data_out based on the incoming
address. The assignment to data_out will be the contents of the constant
ROM at a particular address. Since the index of a VHDL array needs to be
provided as an integer (e.g., 0,1,2,3) and the address of the memory system
is provided as a std_logic_vector, a type conversion is required. Since there
is not a direct conversion from type std_logic_vector to integer, two
conversions are required. The first step is to convert the address from
std_logic_vector to unsigned using the unsigned type conversion. This
conversion exists within the numeric_std package. The second step is to
convert the address from unsigned to integer using the to_integer
conversion. The final assignment is as follows:
Example:
data_out <= ROM(to_integer(unsigned(address)));
Example 10.2 shows the entire VHDL model for this memory system
and the simulation waveform. In the simulation, each possible address is
provided (i.e., “00,” “01,” “10,” and “11). For each address, the
corresponding information appears on the data_out port. Since this is an
asynchronous memory system, the data appears immediately upon receiving
a new address.
Example 10.2 Behavioral model of a 4 × 4 asynchronous read-only
memory in VHDL

--- Page 575 ---
Latency can be modeled in memory systems by using delayed signal
assignments. In the above example, if the memory system had a latency of
5 ns, this could be modeled using the following approach:
Example:
data_out <= ROM(to_integer(unsigned(address)))
after 5 ns;

--- Page 576 ---
A synchronous ROM can be created in a similar manner. In this
approach, a clock edge is used to trigger when the data_out port is updated.
A sensitivity list is used that contains only the signal clock to trigger the
assignment. A rising edge condition is then used in an if/then statement to
make the assignment only on a rising edge. Example 10.3 shows the VHDL
model and simulation waveform for this system. Notice that prior to the
first clock edge, the simulator does not know what to assign to data_out, so
it lists the value as uninitialized.
Example 10.3 Behavioral model of a 4 × 4 synchronous read-only
memory in VHDL

--- Page 577 ---
10.4.2 Read/Write Memory in VHDL
In a read/write memory model, a new type is created using a VHDL array
(e.g., RW_type) that defines the size of the storage system. To create the
memory, a new signal is declared with the array type.
Example:
type RW_type is array (0 to 3)
std_logic_vector(3 downto 0);

--- Page 578 ---
signal RW : RW_type;
Note that a signal is used in a read/write system as opposed to a
constant as in the ROM system. This is because a read/write system is
uninitialized until it is written to. A process is then used to model the
behavior of the memory system. Since this is an asynchronous system, all
inputs are listed in the sensitivity list (i.e., address, WE, and data_in). The
process first checks whether the write enable line is asserted (WE = 1),
which indicates that a write cycle is being performed. If it is, then it makes
an assignment to the RW signal at the location provided by the address
input with the data provided by the data_in input. Since the RW array is
indexed using integers, type conversions are required to convert the address
from std_logic_vector to integer. When WE is not asserted (WE = 0), a read
cycle is being performed. In this case, the process makes an assignment to
data_out with the contents stored at the provided address. This assignment
also requires type conversions to change the address from std_logic_vector
to integer. The following syntax implements this behavior.
Example:
MEMORY: process (address, WE, data_in)
begin
if (WE = '1') then
RW(to_integer(unsigned(address))) <= data_in;
else
data_out <= RW(to_integer(unsigned(address)));
end if;
end process;
A read/write memory does not contain information until its storage
locations are written to. As a result, if the memory is read from before it has
been written to, the simulation will return uninitialized. Example 10.4
shows the entire VHDL model for an asynchronous read/write memory and
the simulation waveform showing read/write cycles.
Example 10.4 Behavioral model of a 4 × 4 asynchronous read/write
memory in VHDL

--- Page 579 ---
A synchronous read/write memory is made in a similar manner with the
exception that a clock is used to trigger the signal assignments in the
sensitivity list. The WE signal acts as a synchronous control signal
indicating whether assignments are read from or written to the RW array.
Example 10.5 shows the entire VHDL model for a synchronous read/write
memory and the simulation waveform showing both read and write cycles.

--- Page 580 ---
Example 10.5 Behavioral model of a 4 × 4 synchronous read/write
memory in VHDL


--- Page 581 ---
Summary
The term memory refers to large arrays of digital storage. The
technology used in memory is typically optimized for storage density
at the expense of control capability. This is different from a D-flip-
flop, which is optimized for complete control at the bit level.
A memory device always contains an address bus input. The number
of bits in the address bus dictates how many storage locations can be
accessed. An n-bit address bus can access 2n (or M) storage locations.
The width of each storage location (N) allows the density of the
memory array to be increased by reading and writing vectors of data
instead of individual bits.
A memory map is a graphical depiction of a memory array. A memory
map is useful to give an overview of the capacity of the array and how
different address ranges of the array are used.
A read is an operation in which data is retrieved from memory. A write
is an operation in which data is stored to memory.
An asynchronous memory array responds immediately to its control
inputs. A synchronous memory array only responds on the triggering
edge of clock.
Volatile memory will lose its data when the power is removed.
Nonvolatile memory will retain its data when the power is removed.
ROM is a memory type that cannot be written to during normal
operation. Read/write (R/W) memory is a memory type that can be

--- Page 582 ---
written to during normal operation. Both ROM and R/W memory can
be read from during normal operation.
RAM is a memory type in which any location in memory can be
accessed at any time. In sequential access memory the data can only be
retrieved in a linear sequence. This means that in sequential memory
the data cannot be accessed arbitrarily.
The basic architecture of a ROM consists of intersecting bit lines
(vertical) and word lines (horizontal) that contain storage cells at their
crossing points. The data is read out of the ROM array using the bit
lines. Each bit line contains a pull-up resistor to initially store a logic 1
at each location. If a logic 0 is desired at a certain location, a pull-
down transistor is placed on a particular bit line with its gate connected
to the appropriate word line. When the storage cell is addressed, the
word line will assert and turn on the pull-down transistor producing a
logic 0 on the output.
There are a variety of technologies to implement the pull-down
transistor in a ROM. Different ROM architectures include MROMs,
PROMs, EPROMs, and EEPROMs. These memory types are
nonvolatile.
A R/W memory requires a storage cell that can be both read from and
written to during normal operation. A DRAM (dynamic RAM) cell is a
storage element that uses a capacitor to hold charge corresponding to a
logic value. An SRAM (static RAM) cell is a storage element that uses
a cross-coupled inverter pair to hold the value being stored in the
positive-feedback loop formed by the inverters. Both DRAM and
SRAM are volatile and random access.
The floating-gate transistor enables memory that is both nonvolatile
and R/W. Modern memory systems based on floating-gate transistor
technology allow writing to take place using the existing system power
supply levels. This type of R/W memory is called FLASH. In FLASH
memory, the information is read out in blocks; thus it is not technically
random access.
Memory can be modeled in VHDL using the array data type.
Exercise Problems

--- Page 583 ---
Section 10.1: Memory Architecture and Terminology
10.1.1For a 512 k × 32 memory system, how many unique address
locations are there? Give the exact number.
 
10.1.2For a 512 k × 32 memory system, what is the data width at each
address location?
 
10.1.3For a 512 k × 32 memory system, what is the capacity in bits?  
10.1.4For a 512 k × 32-bit memory system, what is the capacity in
bytes?
 
10.1.5For a 512 k × 32 memory system, how wide does the incoming
address bus need to be in order to access every unique address
location?
 
10.1.6Name the type of memory with the following characteristic: when
power is removed, the data is lost.
 
10.1.7Name the type of memory with the following characteristic: when
power is removed, the memory still holds its information.
 
10.1.8Name the type of memory with the following characteristic: it can
only be read from during normal operation.
 
10.1.9Name the type of memory with the following characteristic:
during normal operation, it can be read and written to.
 
10.1.10Name the type of memory with the following characteristic: data
can be accessed from any address location at any time.
 
10.1.11 10.1.11: Name the type of memory with the following
characteristic: data can only be accessed in consecutive order;
thus not every location of memory is available instantaneously.
 

--- Page 584 ---
Section 10.2: Nonvolatile Memory Technology
10.2.1Name the type of memory with the following characteristic: this
memory is nonvolatile, read/write, and only provides data access
in blocks.
 
10.2.2Name the type of memory with the following characteristic: this
memory uses a floating-gate transistor, can be erased with
electricity, and provides individual bit access.
 
10.2.3Name the type of memory with the following characteristic: this
memory is nonvolatile, read/write, and provides word-level data
access.
 
10.2.4Name the type of memory with the following characteristic: this
memory uses a floating-gate transistor that is erased with UV
light.
 
10.2.5Name the type of memory with the following characteristic: this
memory is programmed by blowing fuses or anti-fuses.
 
10.2.6Name the type of memory with the following characteristic: this
memory is partially fabricated prior to knowing the information to
be stored.
 
Section 10.3: Volatile Memory Technology
10.3.1How many transistors does it take to implement an SRAM cell? 
10.3.2Why doesn’t an SRAM cell require a refresh cycle?  
10.3.3Design a VHDL model for the SRAM system shown in Fig. 10.20.
Your storage cell should be designed such that its contents can be
overwritten by the line driver. Consider using a resolved data type
for this behavior that models drive strength (e.g., in std_logic, a 1
has a higher drive strength than an H). You will need to create a
 

--- Page 585 ---
g g )
system for the differential line driver with enable. This driver will
need to contain a high impedance state when disabled. Both your
line driver (Din) and receiver (Dout) are differential. These
systems can be modeled using simple if/then statements. Create a
test bench for your system that will write a 0 to the cell, then read
it back to verify that the 0 was stored, and then repeat the
write/read cycles for a 1.
Fig. 10.20SRAM Cell Block Diagram
10.3.4Why is a DRAM cell referred to as a 1 T 1C configuration? 
10.3.5Why is a charge pump necessary on the word lines of a DRAM
array?
 
10.3.6Why does a DRAM cell require a refresh cycle?  
10.3.7For the DRAM storage cell shown in Fig. 10.21, solve for the final
voltage on the digit line after the access transistor (M1) closes if
initially VS = VCC (i.e., the cell is storing a 1). In this system, CS 
= 5 pF, CDL = 10 pF, and VCC = +3.4v. Prior to the access transistor
closing, the digit line is pre-charged to VCC/2.
 

--- Page 586 ---
Fig. 10.21DRAM Charge Sharing Exercise
10.3.8For the DRAM storage cell shown in Fig. 10.21, solve for the final
voltage on the digit line after the access transistor (M1) closes if
initially VS = GND (i.e., the cell is storing a 0). In this system, CS 
= 5 pF, CDL = 10 pF, and VCC = +3.4v. Prior to the access transistor
closing, the digit line is pre-charged to VCC/2.
 
Section 10.4: Modeling Memory with VHDL
10.4.1Design a VHDL model for the 16 × 8, asynchronous, ROM system
shown in Fig. 10.22. The system should contain the information
provided in the memory map. Create a test bench to simulate your
model by reading from each of the 16 unique addresses and
observing Data_Out to verify that it contains the information in the
memory map.
 

--- Page 587 ---
Fig. 10.2216x8 Asynchronous ROM Block Diagram
10.4.2Design a VHDL model for the 16 × 8, synchronous, ROM system
shown in Fig. 10.23. The system should contain the information
provided in the memory map. Create a test bench to simulate your
model by reading from each of the 16 unique addresses and
observing Data_Out to verify that it contains the information in the
memory map.
Fig. 10.2316x8 Synchronous ROM Block Diagram
 
10.4.3Design a VHDL model for the 16 × 8, asynchronous, read/write
memory system shown in Fig. 10.24. Create a test bench to
simulate your model. Your test bench should first read from all of
theaddresslocationstoverifythattheyareuninitialized.Next,
 

--- Page 588 ---
t e addess ocato s to vey tat tey ae u t a ed. e t,
your test bench should write unique information to each of the
address locations. Finally, your test bench should read from each
address location to verify that the information that was written was
stored and can be successfully retrieved.
Fig. 10.2416x8 Asynchronous R/W Memory Block Diagram
10.4.4Design a VHDL model for the 16 × 8, synchronous, read/write
memory system shown in Fig. 10.25. Create a test bench to
simulate your model. Your test bench should first read from all of
the address locations to verify that they are uninitialized. Next,
your test bench should write unique information to each of the
address locations. Finally, your test bench should read from each
address location to verify that the information that was written was
stored and can be successfully retrieved.
Fig. 10.2516x8 Synchronous R/W Memory Block Diagram
 

--- Page 589 ---
(1)
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2017
Brock J. LaMeres, Introduction to Logic Circuits & Logic Design with VHDL , DOI 10.1007/978-3-
319-34195-8_11
11. Programmable Logic
Brock J. LaMeres1 
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Montana State
University, Bozeman, MT, USA
 
This chapter provides an overview of programmable logic devices (PLDs).
The term PLD is used as a generic description for any circuit that can be
programmed to implement digital logic. The technology and architectures
of PLDs have advanced over time. A historical perspective is given on how
the first programmable devices evolved into the programmable technologies
that are prevalent today. The goal of this chapter is to provide a basic
understanding of the principles of programmable logic devices.
Learning Outcomes—After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
11.1Describe the basic architecture and evolution of programmable logic
devices.
 
11.2Describe the basic architecture of Field Programmable Gate Arrays
(FPGAs).
 
11.1 Programmable Arrays
11.1.1 Programmable Logic Array

--- Page 590 ---
One of the first commercial PLDs developed using modern integrated
circuit technology was the programmable logic array (PLA). In 1970,
Texas Instrument introduced the PLA with an architecture that supported
the implementation of arbitrary, sum of product logic expressions. The PLA
was fabricated with a dense array of AND gates, called an AND plane, and
a dense array of OR gates, called an OR plane. Inputs to the PLA each had
an inverter in order to provide the original variable and its complement.
Arbitrary SOP logic expressions could be implemented by creating
connections between the inputs, the AND plane, and the OR plane. The
original PLAs were fabricated with all of the necessary features except the
final connections to implement the SOP functions. When a customer
provided the desired SOP expression, the connections were added as the
final step of fabrication. This configuration technique was similar to an
MROM approach. Figure 11.1 shows the basic architecture of a PLA.
Fig. 11.1 Programmable logic array (PLA) architecture
A more compact schematic for the PLA is drawn by representing all of
the inputs into the AND and OR gates with a single wire. Connections are
indicated by inserting Xs at the intersections of wires. Figure 11.2 shows

--- Page 591 ---
this simplified PLA schematic implementing two different SOP logic
expressions.
Fig. 11.2 Simplified PLA schematic
11.1.2 Programmable Array Logic
One of the drawbacks of the original PLA was that the programmability of
the OR plane caused significant propagation delays through the
combinational logic circuits. In order to improve on the performance of
PLAs, the programmable array logic (PAL) was introduced in 1978 by
the company Monolithic Memories, Inc. The PAL contained a
programmable AND plane and a fixed-OR plane. The fixed-OR plane
improved the performance of this programmable architecture. While not
having a programmable OR plane reduced the flexibility of the device, most
SOP expressions could be manipulated to work with a PAL. Another
contribution of the PAL was that the AND plane could be programmed

--- Page 592 ---
using fuses. Initially, all connections were present in the AND plane. An
external programmer was used to blow fuses in order to disconnect the
inputs from the AND gates. While the fuse approach provided one-time-
only programming, the ability to configure the logic post-fabrication was a
significant advancement over the PLA, which had to be programmed at the
manufacturer. Figure 11.3 shows the architecture of a PAL.
Fig. 11.3 Programmable array logic (PAL) architecture
11.1.3 Generic Array Logic
As the popularity of the PAL grew, additional functionality was
implemented to support more sophisticated designs. One of the most
significant improvements was the addition of an output logic macrocell
(OLMC). An OLMC provided a D-flip-flop and a selectable mux so that the
output of the SOP circuit from the PAL could be used either as the system
output or the input to a D-flip-flop. This enabled the implementation of
sequential logic and finite-state machines. The OLMC could also be used to
route the I/O pin back into the PAL to increase the number of inputs
possible in the SOP expressions. Finally, the OLMC provided a multiplexer

--- Page 593 ---
to allow feedback from either the PAL output or the output of the D-flip-
flop. This architecture was named a generic array logic (GAL) to
distinguish its features from a standard PAL. Figure 11.4 shows the
architecture of a GAL consisting of a PAL and an OLMC.
Fig. 11.4 Generic array logic (GAL) architecture
11.1.4 Hard Array Logic
For mature designs, PALs and GALs could be implemented as a hard
array logic (HAL) device. A HAL was a version of a PAL or GAL that had
the AND plane connections implemented during fabrication instead of
through blowing fuses. This architecture was more efficient for high-
volume applications as it eliminated the programming step post-fabrication
and the device did not need to contain the additional programming circuitry.

--- Page 594 ---
In 1983, Altera Inc. was founded as a programmable logic device
company. In 1984, Altera released its first version of a PAL with a unique
feature that it could be programmed and erased multiple times using a
programmer and an UV light source similar to an EEPROM.
11.1.5 Complex Programmable Logic Devices
As the demand for larger programmable devices grew, the PAL’s
architecture was not able to scale efficiently due to a number of reasons:
first, as the size of combinational logic circuits increased, the PAL
encountered fan-in issues in its AND plane; secondly, for each input that
was added to the PAL, the amount of circuitry needed on the chip grew
geometrically due to requiring a connection to each AND gate in addition to
the area associated with the additional OLMC. This led to a new PLD
architecture in which the on-chip interconnect was partitioned across
multiple PALs on a single chip. This partitioning meant that not all inputs to
the device could be used by each PAL, so the design complexity increased;
however, the additional programmable resources outweighed this drawback
and this architecture was broadly adopted. This new architecture was called
a complex programmable logic device (CPLD). The term simple
programmable logic device (SPLD) was created to describe all of the
previous PLD architectures (i.e., PLA, PAL, GAL, and HAL). Figure 11.5
shows the architecture of the CPLD.

--- Page 595 ---
Fig. 11.5 Complex PLD (CPLD) architecture
11.2 Field Programmable Gate Arrays
To address the need for even more programmable resources, a new
architecture was developed by Xilinx Inc. in 1985. This new architecture
was called a field programmable gate array (FPGA). An FPGA consists
of an array of programmable logic blocks (or logic elements) and a network
of programmable interconnect that can be used to connect any logic element

--- Page 596 ---
to any other logic element. Each logic block contained circuitry to
implement arbitrary combinational logic circuits in addition to a D-flip-flop
and a multiplexer for signal steering. This architecture effectively
implemented an OLMC within each block, thus providing ultimate
flexibility and providing significantly more resources for sequential logic.
Today, FPGAs are the most commonly used programmable logic device,
with Altera Inc. and Xilinx Inc. being the two largest manufacturers.
Figure 11.6 shows the generic architecture of an FPGA.

--- Page 597 ---
Fig. 11.6 Field programmable gate array (FPGA) architecture
11.2.1 Configurable Logic Block (or Logic Element)
The primary reconfigurable structure in the FPGA is the configurable logic
block (CLB) or logic element (LE). Xilinx Inc. uses the term CLB while
Altera uses LE. Combinational logic is implemented using a circuit called a
Look-Up Table (LUT), which can implement any arbitrary truth table. The

--- Page 598 ---
details of an LUT are given in the next section. The CLB/LE also contains a
D-flip-flop for sequential logic. A signal steering multiplexer is used to
select whether the output of the CLB/LE comes from the LUT or from the
D-flip-flop. The LUT can be used to drive a combinational logic expression
into the D input of the D-flip-flop, thus creating a highly efficient topology
for finite-state machines. A global routing network is used to provide
common signals to the CLB/LE such as clock, reset, and enable. This global
routing network can provide these common signals to the entire FPGA or
local groups of CLB/LEs. Figure 11.7 shows the topology of a simple
CLB/LE.
Fig. 11.7 Simple FPGA configurable logic block (or logic element)
CLB/LEs have evolved to include numerous other features such as carry
in/carry out signals so that arithmetic operations can be cascaded between
multiple blocks in addition to signal feedback and D-flip-flop initialization.

--- Page 599 ---
11.2.2 Look-Up Tables
An LUT is the primary circuit used to implement combinational logic in
FPGAs. This topology has also been adopted in modern CPLDs. In an LUT,
the desired outputs of a truth table are loaded into a local configuration
SRAM memory. The SRAM memory provides these values to the inputs of
a multiplexer. The inputs to the combinational logic circuit are then used as
the select lines to the multiplexer. For an arbitrary input to the
combinational logic circuit, the multiplexer selects the appropriate value
held in the SRAM and routes it to the output of the circuit. In this way, the
multiplexer looks up the appropriate output value based on the input code.
This architecture has the advantage that any logic function can be created
without creating a custom logic circuit. Also, the delay through the LUT is
identical regardless of what logic function is being implemented.
Figure 11.8 shows a 2-input combinational logic circuit implemented with a
4-input multiplexer.
Fig. 11.8 2-Input LUT implemented with a 4-input multiplexer
Fan-in limitations can be encountered quickly in LUTs as the number of
inputs of the combinational logic circuit being implemented grows. Recall
that multiplexers are implemented with an SOP topology in which each
product term in the first level of logic has a number of inputs equal to the

--- Page 600 ---
number of select lines plus one. Also recall that the sum term in the second
level of logic in the SOP topology has a number of inputs equal to the total
number of inputs to the multiplexer. In the example circuit shown in
Fig. 11.8, each product term in the multiplexer will have three inputs and
the sum term will have four inputs. As an illustration of how quickly fan-in
limitations are encountered, consider the implication of increasing the
number of inputs in Fig. 11.8 from two to three. In this new configuration,
the number of inputs in the product terms will increase from three to four
and the number of inputs in the sum term will increase from four to eight.
Eight inputs is often beyond the fan-in specifications of modern devices,
meaning that even a 3-input combinational logic circuit will encounter fan-
in issues when implemented using an LUT topology.
To address this issue, multiplexer functionality in LUTs is typically
implemented as a series of smaller, cascaded multiplexers. Each of the
smaller multiplexers progressively chooses which row of the truth table to
route to the output of the LUT. This eliminates fan-in issues at the expense
of adding additional levels of logic to the circuit. While cascading
multiplexers increase the overall circuit delay, this approach achieves a
highly consistent delay because regardless of the truth table output value,
the number of levels of logic through the multiplexers is always the same.
Figure 11.9 shows how the 2-input truth table from Fig. 11.8 can be
implemented using a 2-level cascade of 2-input multiplexers.

--- Page 601 ---
Fig. 11.9 2-Input LUT implemented with a 2-level cascade of 2-input multiplexers

--- Page 602 ---
If more inputs are needed in the LUT, additional MUX levels are added.
Figure 11.10 shows the architecture for a 3-input LUT implemented with a
3-level cascade of 2-input multiplexers.
Fig. 11.103-Input LUT implemented with a 3-level cascade of 2-input multiplexers
Modern FPGAs can have LUTs with up to 6 inputs. If even more inputs
are needed in a combinational logic expression, then multiple CLB/LEs are
used that form even larger LUTs.

--- Page 603 ---
11.2.3 Programmable Interconnect Points (PIPs)
The configurable routing network on an FPGA is accomplished using
programmable switches. A simple model for these switches is to use an
NMOS transistor. A configuration SRAM bit stores whether the switch is
opened or closed. On the FPGA, interconnect is routed vertically and
horizontally between the CLB/LEs with switching points placed throughout
the FPGA to facilitate any arbitrary routing configuration. Figure 11.11
shows how the routing can be configured into a full cross-point
configuration using programmable switches.


--- Page 604 ---
Fig. 11.11 FPGA programmable interconnect
11.2.4 Input/Output Block
FPGAs also contain input/output blocks (IOBs) that provide
programmable functionality for interfacing to external circuitry. The IOBs
contain both driver and receiver circuitry so that they can be programmed to
be either inputs or outputs. D-flip-flops are included in both the input and
output circuitry to support synchronous logic. Figure 11.12 shows the
architecture of an FPGA IOB.
Fig. 11.12FPGA input/output block (IOB)
11.2.5 Configuration Memory
All of the programming information for an FPGA is contained within
configuration SRAM that is distributed across the IC. Since this memory is
volatile, the FPGA will lose its configuration when power is removed.

--- Page 605 ---
Upon power-up, the FPGA must be programmed with its configuration
data. This data is typically held in a nonvolatile memory such as FLASH.
The “FP” in FPGA refers to the ability to program the device in the field, or
post-fabrication. The “GA” in FPGA refers to the array topology of the
programmable logic blocks or elements.
Summary
A programmable logic device (PLD) is a generic term for a circuit that
can be configured to implement arbitrary logic functions.
There are a variety of PLD architectures that have been used to
implement combinational logic. These include the PLA and PAL.
These devices contain an AND plane and an OR plane. The AND
plane is configured to implement the product terms of an SOP
expression. The OR plane is configured to implement the sum term of
an SOP expression.
A GAL increases the complexity of logic arrays by adding sequential
logic storage and programmable I/O capability.
A CPLD significantly increases the density of PLDs by connecting an
array of PALs together and surrounding the logic with I/O drivers.
FPGAs contain an array of programmable logic elements that each
consists of combinational logic capability and sequential logic storage.
FPGAs also contain a programmable interconnect network that
provides the highest level of flexibility in programmable logic.
An LUT is a simple method to create a programmable combinational
logic circuit. An LUT is simply a multiplexer with the inputs to the
circuit connected to the select lines of the MUX. The desired outputs

--- Page 606 ---
of the truth table are connected to the MUX inputs. As different input
codes arrive on the select lines of the MUX, they select the
corresponding logic value to be routed to the system output.
Exercise Problems
Section 11.1: Programmable Arrays
11.1.1Name the type of programmable logic described by the
characteristic: this device adds an output logic macrocell to a
traditional PAL.
 
11.1.2Name the type of programmable logic described by the
characteristic: this device combines multiple PALs on a single chip
with a partitioned interconnect system.
 
11.1.3Name the type of programmable logic described by the
characteristic: this device has a programmable AND plane and
programmable OR plane.
 
11.1.4Name the type of programmable logic described by the
characteristic: this device has a programmable AND plane and
fixed OR plane.
 
11.1.5Name the type of programmable logic described by the
characteristic: this device is a PAL or GAL that is programmed
during manufacturing.
 
11.1.6For the following unconfigured PAL schematic in Fig. 11.13, draw
in the connection points (i.e., the Xs) to implement the two SOP
logic expressions shown on the outputs.
 

--- Page 607 ---
Fig. 11.13Blank PAL Schematic
Section 11.2: Field Programmable Gate Arrays
11.2.1Give a general description of an FPGA that differentiates it from
other programmable logic devices.
 
11.2.2Which part of an FPGA is described by the following
characteristic: this is used to interface between the internal logic
and external circuitry.
 
11.2.3Which part of an FPGA is described by the following
characteristic: this is used to configure the on-chip routing.
 
11.2.4Which part of an FPGA is described by the following
characteristic: this is the primary programmable element that
makes up the array.
 
11.2.5Which part of an FPGA is described by the following
characteristic: this part is used to implement the combinational
logic within the array.
 

--- Page 608 ---
ogc wt  t e a ay.
11.2.6Draw the logic diagram of a 4-input LUT to implement the truth
table provided in Fig. 11.14. Implement the LUT with only 2-input
multiplexers. Be sure to label the exact location of the inputs (A,
B, C, and D), the desired value for each row of the truth table, and
the output (F) in the diagram.
Fig. 11.144-Input LUT Exercise
 

--- Page 609 ---
(1)
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2017
Brock J. LaMeres, Introduction to Logic Circuits & Logic Design with VHDL , DOI 10.1007/978-3-
319-34195-8_12
12. Arithmetic Circuits
Brock J. LaMeres1 
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Montana State
University, Bozeman, MT, USA
 
This chapter presents the design and timing considerations of circuits to
perform basic arithmetic operations including addition, subtraction,
multiplication, and division. A discussion is also presented on how to model
arithmetic circuits in VHDL. The goal of this chapter is to provide an
understanding of the basic principles of binary arithmetic circuits.
Learning Outcomes—After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
12.1Design a binary adder using both the classical digital design
approach and the modern HDL-based approach.
 
12.2Design a binary subtractor using both the classical digital design
approach and the modern HDL-based approach.
 
12.3Design a binary multiplier using both the classical digital design
approach and the modern HDL-based approach.
 
12.4Design a binary divider using both the classical digital design
approach and the modern HDL-based approach.
 

--- Page 610 ---
12.1 Addition
Binary addition is performed in a similar manner to performing decimal
addition by hand. The addition begins in the least significant position of the
number (p = 0). The addition produces the sum for this position. In the
event that this positional sum cannot be represented by a single symbol,
then the higher-order symbol is carried to the subsequent position (p = 1).
The addition in the next higher position must include the number that was
carried in from the lower positional sum. This process continues until all of
the symbols in the number have been operated on. The final positional sum
can also produce a carry, which needs to be accounted for in a separate
system.
Designing a binary adder involves creating a combinational logic circuit
to perform the positional additions. Since a combinational logic circuit can
only produce a scalar output, circuitry is needed to produce the sum and the
carry at each position. The binary adder size is predetermined and fixed
prior to implementing the logic (i.e., an n-bit adder). Both inputs to the
adder must adhere to the fixed size, regardless of their value. Smaller
numbers simply contain leading zeros in their higher-order positions. For an
n-bit adder, the largest sum that can be produced will require n + 1 bits. To
illustrate this, consider a 4-bit adder. The largest numbers that the adder will
operate on are 11112 + 11112. (or 1510 + 1510). The result of this addition is
111102 (or 3010). Notice that the largest sum produced fits within 5 bits, or
n + 1. When constructing an adder circuit, the sum is always recorded using
n-bits with a separate carry out bit. In our 4-bit example, the sum would be
expressed as “1110” with a carry out. The carry out bit can be used in
multiple word additions, used as part of the number when being decoded for
a display, or simply discarded as in the case when using two’s complement
numbers.
12.1.1 Half Adders
When creating an adder, it is desirable to design incremental subsystems
that can be reused. This reduces design effort and minimizes
troubleshooting complexity. The most basic component in the adder is
called a half adder. This circuit computes the sum and carry out on two
input arguments. The reason it is called a half adder instead of a full adder

--- Page 611 ---
is because it does not accommodate a carry in during the computation, thus
it does not provide all of the necessary functionality required for the
positional adder. Example 12.1 shows the design of a half adder. Notice that
two combinational logic circuits are required in order to produce the sum
(the XOR gate) and the carry out (the AND gate). These two gates are in
parallel to each other, thus the delay through the half adder is due to only
one level of logic.
Example 12.1Design of a half adder
12.1.2 Full Adders
A full adder is a circuit that still produces a sum and carry out, but
considers three inputs in the computations (A, B, and Cin). Example 12.2
shows the design of a full adder.

--- Page 612 ---
Example 12.2Design of a full adder
As mentioned before, it is desirable to reuse design components as we
construct more complex systems. One such design reuse approach is to
create a full adder using two half adders. This is straightforward for the sum
output since the logic is simply two cascaded XOR gates (Sum = 
A ⊕ B ⊕ Cin). The carry out is not as straightforward. Notice that the
expression for Cout derived in Example 12.2 contains the term (A + B). If
this term could be manipulated to use an XOR gate instead, it would allow
the full adder to take advantage of existing circuitry in the system.
Figure 12.1 shows a derivation of an equivalency that allows (A + B) to be
replaced with (A ⊕ B) in the Cout logic expression.

--- Page 613 ---
Fig. 12.1A useful logic equivalency that can be exploited in arithmetic circuits
The ability to implement the carry out logic using the expression Cout = 
A ⋅ B + (A ⊕ B) ⋅ Cin allows us to implement a full adder with two half adders
and the addition of a single OR gate. Example 12.3 shows this approach. In
this new configuration, the sum is produced in two levels of logic while the
carry out is produced in three levels of logic.

--- Page 614 ---
Example 12.3Design of a full adder out of half adders
12.1.3 Ripple Carry Adder (RCA)
The full adder can now be used in the creation of multi-bit adders. The
simplest architecture exploiting the full adder is called a ripple carry adder
(RCA). In this approach, full adders are used to create the sum and carry
out of each bit position. The carry out of each full adder is used as the carry
in for the next higher position. Since each subsequent full adder needs to
wait for the carry to be produced by the preceding stage, the carry is said to
ripple through the circuit, thus giving this approach its name. Example 12.4
shows how to design a 4-bit ripple carry adder using a chain of full adders.
Notice that the carry in for the full adder in position 0 is tied to a logic 0.
The 0 input has no impact on the result of the sum but enables a full adder
to be used in the 0th position.

--- Page 615 ---
Example 12.4Design of a 4-Bit Ripple Carry Adder (RCA)
While the ripple carry adder provides a simple architecture based on
design reuse, its delay can become considerable when scaling to larger
inputs sizes (e.g., n = 32 or n = 64). A simple analysis of the timing can be
stated such that if the time for a full adder to complete its positional sum is
tFA, then the time for an n-bit ripple carry adder to complete its computation
is tRCA = n ⋅ tFA.
If we examine the RCA in more detail, we can break down the delay in
terms of the levels of logic necessary for the computation. Example 12.5
shows the timing analysis of the 4-bit RCA. This analysis determines the
number of logic levels in the adder. The actual gate delays can then be
plugged in to find the final delay. The inputs to the adder are A, B, and Cin
and are always assumed to update at the same time. The first full adder
requires two levels of logic to produce its sum and three levels to produce
its carry out. Since the timing of a circuit is always stated as its worst case
delay, we say that the first full adder takes three levels of logic. When the
carry (C1) ripples to the next full adder (FA1), it must propagate through
two additional levels of logic in order to produce C2. Notice that the first
half adder in FA1 only depends on A1 and B1, thus it is able to perform this
computation immediately. This half adder can be considered as first-level
logic. More importantly, it means that when the carry in arrives (C1), only

--- Page 616 ---
two additional levels of logic are needed, not three. The levels of logic for
the RCA can be expressed as 3 + 2 ⋅ (n − 1). If each level of logic has a delay
of tgate, then a more accurate expression for the RCA delay is tRCA = (3 + 
2 ⋅ (n − 1)) ⋅ tgate.
Example 12.5Timing analysis of a 4-bit ripple carry adder
12.1.4 Carry Look Ahead Adder (CLA)
In order to address the potentially significant delay of a ripple carry adder, a
carry look ahead (CLA) adder was created. In this approach, additional
circuitry is included that produces the intermediate carry in signals
immediately instead of waiting for them to be created by the preceding full
adder stage. This allows the adder to complete in a fixed amount of time
instead of one that scales with the number of bits in the adder. Example
12.6 shows an overview of the design approach for a CLA.

--- Page 617 ---
Example 12.6Design of a 4-Bit Carry Look Ahead Adder (CLA)—Overview
For the CLA architecture to be effective, the look ahead circuitry needs
to be dependent only on the system inputs A, B, and Cin (i.e., C0). A
secondary characteristic of the CLA is that it should exploit as much design
reuse as possible. In order to examine the design reuse aspects of a multi-bit
adder, the concepts of carry generation (g) and propagation (p) are used.
A full adder is said to generate a carry if its inputs A and B result in Cout = 
1 when Cin = 0. A full adder is said to propagate a carry if its inputs A and
B result in Cout = 1 when Cin = 1. These simple statements can be used to
derive logic expressions for each stage of the adder that can take advantage
of existing logic terms from prior stages. Example 12.7 shows the
derivation of these terms and how algebraic substitutions can be exploited
to create look ahead circuitry for each full adder that is only dependent on
the system inputs. In these derivations, the variable i is used to represent
position since p is used to represent the propagate term.

--- Page 618 ---
Example 12.7Design of a 4-Bit Carry Look Ahead Adder (CLA)—algebraic formation
Example 12.8 shows a timing analysis of the 4-bit carry look ahead
adder. Notice that the full adders are modified to add the logic for the

--- Page 619 ---
generate and propagate bits in addition to removing the unnecessary gates
associated with creating the carry out.
Example 12.8Timing analysis of a 4-bit carry look ahead adder
The 4-bit CLA can produce the sum in four levels of logic as long as
fan-in specifications are met. As the CLA width increases, the look ahead
circuitry will become fan-in limited and additional stages will be required to
address the fan-in. Regardless, the CLA has considerably less delay than a
RCA as the width of the adder is increased.
12.1.5 Adders in VHDL

--- Page 620 ---
12.1.5.1 Structural Model of a Ripple Carry Adder
in VHDL
A structural model of a ripple carry adder is useful to visualize the
propagation delay of the circuit in addition to the impact of the carry
rippling through the chain. Example 12.9 shows the structural model for a
full adder in VHDL consisting of two half adders. The full adder is created
by instantiating two versions of the half adder as components. In this
example, all gates are modeled with a delay of 1ns.

--- Page 621 ---
Example 12.9Structural model of a full adder in VHDL using two half adders

--- Page 622 ---
Example 12.10 shows the structural model of a 4-bit ripple carry adder
in VHDL. The RCA is created by instantiating four full adders. Notice that
a logic 0 can be directly inserted into the port map of the first full adder to
model the behavior of C0 = 0.
Example 12.10Structural model of a 4-bit ripple carry adder in VHDL
When creating arithmetic circuitry, testing under all input conditions is
necessary to verify functionality. Testing under each and every input
condition can require a large number of input conditions. To test an n-bit
adder under each and every numeric input condition will take (2n)2 test
vectors. For our simple 4-bit adder example, this equates to 256 input

--- Page 623 ---
patterns. The large number of input patterns precludes the use of manual
signal assignments in the test bench to stimulate the circuit. One approach
to generating the input test patterns is to use nested for loops. Example
12.11 shows a test bench that uses two nested for loops to generate the 256
unique input conditions for the 4-bit ripple carry adder. Note that the loop
variables i and j are automatically created when the loops are declared.
Since the loop variables are defined as integers, type conversions are
required prior to driving the values into the RCA. The simulation waveform
illustrates how the ripple carry adder has a noticeable delay before the
output sum is produced. During the time the carry is rippling through the
adder chain, glitches can appear on each of the sum bits in addition to the
carry out signal. The values in this waveform are displayed as unsigned
decimal symbols to make the results easier to interpret.

--- Page 624 ---
Example 12.11 VHDL test bench for a 4-bit ripple carry adder using nested for loops

--- Page 625 ---
12.1.5.2 Structural Model of a Carry Look Ahead
Adder in VHDL
A carry look ahead adder can also be modeled using a combination of
concurrent signal assignments with logical operators and modified full
adder components. Example 12.12 shows a structural model for a 4-bit
CLA in VHDL. In this example, the gate delay is modeled using a constant
(tgate) of 1ns. The delay due to multiple levels of logic is entered manually
to simplify the model. The two cascaded XOR gates in the modified full
adder are modeled using a single signal assignment with 2*tgate of delay.

--- Page 626 ---
Example 12.12Structural model of a 4-bit carry look ahead adder in VHDL
Example 12.13 shows the simulation waveform for the 4-bit carry look
ahead adder. The outputs still have intermediate transitions while the

--- Page 627 ---
combinational logic is computing the results; however, the overall delay of
the adder is bound to < 4*tgate.
Example 12.134-Bit carry look ahead adder—simulation waveform
12.1.5.3 Behavior Model of an Adder Using
UNSIGNED Data Types
VHDL also supports adder models at a higher level of abstraction using the
“+” operator. While this operator is supported for the type integer in the
std_logic_1164 package, modeling adders using integers can be onerous
due to the multiple levels of casting, range checking, and manual handling
of carry out. A simpler approach to modeling adder behavior is to use the
types unsigned/signed and the “+” operator provided in the numeric_std
package. Temporary signals or variables of these types are required to
model the adder behavior with the “+” sign. Also, type casting is still
required when assigning the values back to the output ports. One advantage
of this approach is that range checking is eliminated because rollover is
automatically handled with these types.
Example 12.14 shows the behavioral model for a 4-bit adder in VHDL.
In this model, a 5-bit unsigned vector is created (Sum_uns). The two inputs,
A and B, are concatenated with a leading zero in order to facilitate
assigning the sum to this 5-bit vector. The advantage of this approach is that
the carry out of the adder is automatically included in the sum as the highest
position bit. Since A and B are of type std_logic_vector, they must be
converted to unsigned before the addition with the “+” operator can take

--- Page 628 ---
place. The concatenation, type conversion, and addition can all take place in
a single assignment.
Example 12.14Behavioral model of a 4-bit adder in VHDL
Example:
Sum_uns <= unsigned(('0' & A)) + unsigned(('0' &
B));
The 5-bit vector Sum_uns now contains the 4-bit sum and carry out.
The final step is to assign the separate components of this vector to the
output ports of the system. The 4-bit sum portion requires a type conversion
back to std_logic_vector before it can be assigned to the output port Sum.

--- Page 629 ---
Since the Cout port is a scalar, an unsigned signal can be assigned to it
directly without the need for a conversion.
Example:
Sum <= std_logic_vector(Sum_uns(3 downto 0));
Cout <= Sum_uns(4);
12.2 Subtraction
Binary subtraction can be accomplished by building a dedicated circuit
using a similar design approach as just described for adders. A more
effective approach is to take advantage of two’s complement representation
in order to reuse existing adder circuitry. Recall that taking the two’s
complement of a number will produce an equivalent magnitude number, but
with the opposite sign (i.e., positive to negative or negative to positive).
This means that all that is required to create a subtractor from an adder is to
first take the two’s complement of the subtrahend input. Since the steps to
take the two’s complement of a number involve complementing each of the
bits in the number and then adding 1, the logic required is relatively simple.
Example 12.15 shows a 4-bit subtractor using full adders. The subtrahend B
is inverted prior to entering the full adders. Also, the carry in bit C0 is set to
1. This handles the “adding 1” step of the two’s complement. All of the
carries in the circuit are now treated as borrows and the sum is now treated
as the difference.

--- Page 630 ---
Example 12.15Design of a 4-bit subtractor using full adders
A programmable adder/subtractor can be created with the use of a
programmable inverter and a control signal. The control signal will
selectively invert B and also change the C0 bit between a 0 (for adding) and
a 1 (for subtracting). Example 12.16 shows how an XOR gate can be used
to create a programmable inverter for use in a programmable
adder/subtractor circuit.

--- Page 631 ---
Example 12.16Creating a programmable inverter using an XOR Gate
We can now define a control signal called (ADDn/SUB) that will
control whether the circuit performs addition or subtraction. Example 12.17
shows the architecture of a 4-bit programmable adder/subtractor. It should
be noted that this programmability adds another level of logic to the circuit,
thus increasing its delay. The programmable architecture in Example 12.17
is shown for a ripple carry adder; however, this approach works equally
well for a carry look ahead adder architecture.
Example 12.17Design of a 4-bit programmable adder/subtractor

--- Page 632 ---
When using two’s complement representation in arithmetic, care must
be taken to monitor for two’s complement overflow. Recall that when using
two’s complement representation, the number of bits of the numbers is
fixed (e.g., 4-bits) and if a carry/borrow out is generated, it is ignored. This
means that the Cout bit does not indicate whether two’s complement
overflow occurred. Instead, we must construct additional circuitry to
monitor the arithmetic operations for overflow. Recall from Chap. 2 that
two’s complement overflow occurs in any of these situations:
The sum of like signs results in an answer with opposite sign
(i.e., Positive + Positive = Negative or Negative + Negative = 
Positive).
The subtraction of a positive number from a negative number results in
a positive number
(i.e., Negative – Positive = Positive).
The subtraction of a negative number from a positive number results in
a negative number
(i.e., Positive – Negative = Negative).
The construction of circuitry for these conditions is straightforward
since the sign bit of all numbers involved in the operation indicates whether
the number is positive or negative. The sign bits of the input arguments and
the output are fed into combinational logic circuitry that will assert for any
of the above conditions. These signals are then logically combined to create
two’s complement overflow signal.


--- Page 633 ---
12.3 Multiplication
12.3.1 Unsigned Multiplication
Binary multiplication is performed in a similar manner to performing
decimal multiplication by hand. Recall the process for long multiplication.
First, the two numbers are placed vertically over one another with their least
significant digits aligned. The upper number is called the multiplicand and
the lower number is called the multiplier. Next, we multiply each individual
digit within multiplier with the entire multiplicand, starting with the least
position. The result of this interim multiplication is called the partial
product. The partial product is recorded with its least significant digit
aligned with the corresponding position of the multiplier digit. Finally, all
partial products are summed to create the final product of the
multiplication. This process is often called the shift and add approach.
Example 12.18 shows the process for performing long multiplication on
decimal numbers highlighting the individual steps.
Example 12.18Performing long multiplication on decimal numbers
Binary multiplication follows this same process. Example 12.19 shows
the process for performing long multiplication on binary numbers. Note that
the inputs represent the largest unsigned numbers possible using 4-bits, thus
producing the largest possible product. The largest product will require 8-
bits to be represented. This means that for any multiplication of n-bit inputs,
the product will require 2 ⋅ n bits for the result.

--- Page 634 ---
Example 12.19Performing long multiplication on binary numbers
The first step in designing a binary multiplier is to create circuitry that
can compute the product on individual bits. Example 12.20 shows the
design of a single-bit multiplier.
Example 12.20Design of a single-bit multiplier
We can create all of the partial products in one level of logic by placing
an AND gate between each bit pairing in the two input numbers. This will
require n2 AND gates. The next step involves creating adders that can
perform the sum of the columns of bits within the partial products. This step

--- Page 635 ---
is not as straightforward. Notice that in our 4-bit example in Example 12.19
that the number of input bits in the column addition can reach up to 6 (in
position 3). It would be desirable to reuse the full adders previously created;
however, the existing full adders could only accommodate 3 inputs (A, B,
Cin). We can take advantage of the associative property of addition to form
the final sum incrementally. Example 12.21 shows the architecture of this
multiplier. This approach implements a shift and add process to compute
the product and is known as a combinational multiplier because it is
implemented using only combinational logic. Note that this multiplier only
handles unsigned numbers.
Example 12.21Design of a 4-bit unsigned multiplier
This multiplier can have a significant delay, which is caused by the
cascaded full adders. Example 12.22 shows the timing analysis of the

--- Page 636 ---
combinational multiplier highlighting the worst case path through the
circuit.
Example 12.22Timing analysis of a 4-bit unsigned multiplier
12.3.2 A Simple Circuit to Multiply by Powers of
Two
In digital systems, a common operation is to multiply numbers by powers of
two. For unsigned numbers, multiplying by two can be accomplished by
performing a logical shift left. In this operation, all bits are moved to the
next higher position (i.e., left) by one position and filling the 0th position
with a zero. This has the effect of doubling the value of the number. This
can be repeated to achieve higher powers of two. This process works as
long as the resulting product fits within the number of bits available.
Example 12.23 shows this procedure.

--- Page 637 ---
Example 12.23Multiplying an unsigned binary number by two using a logical shift left
12.3.3 Signed Multiplication
When performing multiplication on signed numbers, it is desirable to reuse
the unsigned multiplier in Example 12.21. Let’s examine if this is possible.
Recall in decimal multiplication that the inputs are multiplied together
independent of their sign. The sign of the product is handled separately
following these rules:
A positive number times a positive number produces a positive
number.
A negative number times a negative number produces a positive
number.
A positive number times a negative number produces a negative
number.
This process does not work properly in binary due to the way that
negative numbers are represented with two’s complement. Example 12.24
illustrates how an unsigned multiplier incorrectly handles signed numbers.

--- Page 638 ---
Example 12.24Illustrating how an unsigned multiplier incorrectly handles signed numbers
Instead of building a dedicated multiplier for signed numbers, we can
add functionality to the unsigned multiplier previously presented to handle
negative numbers. The process involves first identifying any negative
numbers. If a negative number is present, the two’s complement is taken on
it to produce its equivalent magnitude, positive representation. The
multiplication is then performed on the positive values. The final step is to
apply the correct sign to the product. If the product should be negative due
to one of the inputs being negative, the sign is applied by taking the two’s
complement on the final result. This creates a number that is now in 2 ⋅ n
two’s complement format. Example 12.25 shows an illustration of the
process to correctly handle signed numbers using an unsigned multiplier.

--- Page 639 ---
Example 12.25Process to correctly handle signed numbers using an unsigned multiplier

--- Page 640 ---
12.4 Division
12.4.1 Unsigned Division
There are a variety of methods to perform division, each with trade-offs
between area, delay, and accuracy. To understand the general approach to
building a divider circuit, let’s focus on how a simple iterative divider can
be built. Basic division yields a quotient and a remainder. The process
begins by checking whether the divisor goes into the highest position digit
in the dividend. The number of times this dividend digit can be divided is
recorded as the highest position value of the quotient. Note that when
performing division by hand, we typically skip over the condition when the
result of these initial operations are zero, but when breaking down the
process into steps that can be built with logic circuits, each step needs to be
highlighted. The first quotient digit is then multiplied with the divisor and
recorded below the original dividend. The next lower position digit of the
dividend is brought down and joined with the product from the prior
multiplication. This forms a new number to be divided by the divisor to
create the next quotient value. This process is repeated until each of the
quotient digits have been created. Any value that remains after the last
subtraction is recorded as the remainder. Example 12.26 shows the long
division process on decimal numbers highlight each incremental step.

--- Page 641 ---
Example 12.26Performing long division on decimal numbers
Long division in binary follows this same process. Example 12.27
shows the long division process on two 4-bit, unsigned numbers. This
division results in a 4-bit quotient and a 4-bit remainder.

--- Page 642 ---
Example 12.27Performing long multiplication on binary numbers
When building a divider circuit using combinational logic, we can
accomplish the computation using a series of iterative subtractors.
Performing division is equivalent to subtracting the divisor from the interim
dividend. If the subtraction is positive, then the divisor went into the
dividend and the quotient is a 1. If the subtraction yields a negative number,
then the divisor did not go into the interim dividend and the quotient is 0.
We can use the borrow out of a subtraction chain to provide the quotient.
This has the advantage that the difference has already been calculated for
the next subtraction. A multiplexer is used to select whether the difference
is used in the next subtraction (Q = 0), or if the interim divisor is simply
brought down (Q = 1). This inherently provides the functionality of the
multiplication step in long division. Example 12.28 shows the architecture

--- Page 643 ---
of a 4-bit, unsigned divider based on the iterative subtraction approach.
Notice that when the borrow out of the 4-bit subtractor chain is a 0, it
indicates that the subtraction yielded a positive number. This means that the
divisor went into the interim dividend once. In this case, the quotient for
this position is a 1. An inverter is required to produce the correct polarity of
the quotient. The borrow out is also fed into the multiplexer stage as the
select line to pass the difference to the next stage of subtractors. If the
borrow out of the 4-bit subtractor chain is a 1, it indicates that the
subtraction yielded a negative number. In this case, the quotient is a 0. This
also means that the difference calculated is garbage and should not be used.
The multiplexer stage instead selects the interim dividend as the input to the
next stage of subtractors.

--- Page 644 ---
Example 12.28Design of a 4-bit unsigned divider using a series of iterative subtractors

--- Page 645 ---
To illustrate how this architecture works, Example 12.29 walks through
each step in the process where 11112 (1510) is divided by 01112 (710). In this
example, the calculations propagate through the logic stages from top to
bottom in the diagram.

--- Page 646 ---
Example 12.29Dividing 11112 (1510) by 01112 (710) using the iterative subtraction architecture

--- Page 647 ---
12.4.2 A Simple Circuit to Divide by Powers of Two
For unsigned numbers, dividing by two can be accomplished by performing
a logical shift right. In this operation, all bits are moved to the next lower
position (i.e., right) by one position and then filling the highest position
with a zero. This has the effect of halving the value of the number. This can
be repeated to achieve higher powers of two. This process works until no
more ones exist in the number and the result is simply all zeros. Example
12.30 shows this process.
Example 12.30Dividing an unsigned binary numbers by two using a logical shift right
12.4.3 Signed Division
When performing division on signed numbers, a similar strategy as in
signed multiplication is used. The process involves first identifying any
negative numbers. If a negative number is present, the two’s complement is
taken on it to produce its equivalent magnitude, positive representation. The
division is then performed on the positive values. The final step is to apply
the correct sign to the divisor and quotient. This is accomplished by taking
the two’s complement if a negative number is required. The rules governing
the polarities of the quotient and remainders are:
The quotient will be negative if the input signs are different (i.e.,
pos/neg or neg/pos).
The remainder has the same sign as the dividend.

--- Page 648 ---
Summary
Binary arithmetic is accomplished using combinational logic circuitry.
These circuits tend to be the largest circuits in a system and have the
longest delay. Arithmetic circuits are often broken up into interim
calculations in order to reduce the overall delay of the computation.
A ripple carry adder performs addition by reusing lower-level
components that each performs a small part of the computation. A full
adder is made from two half adders and a ripple carry adder is made
from a chain of full adders. This approach simplifies the design of the
adder but leads to long delay times since the carry from each sum must
ripple to the next higher position’s addition before it can complete.
A carry look ahead adder attempts to eliminate the linear dependence
of delay on the number of bits that exists in a ripple carry adder. The
carry look ahead adder contains dedicated circuitry that calculates the
carry bits for each position of the addition. This leads to a more
constant delay as the width of the adder increases.
A binary multiplier can be created in a similar manner to the way
multiplication is accomplished by hand using the shift and add
approach. The partial products of the multiplication can be performed
using 2-input AND gates. The sum of the partial products can have
more inputs than the typical ripple carry adder can accommodate. To
handle this, the additions are performed two bits at a time using a
series of adders.
Division can be accomplished using an iterative subtractor
architecture.

--- Page 649 ---
Exercise Problems
Section 12.1: Addition
12.1.1Give the total delay of the full adder shown in Fig. 12.2 if all gates
have a delay of 1 ns.
Fig. 12.2Full Adder Timing Exercise
 
12.1.2Give the total delay of the full adder shown in Fig. 12.2 if the XOR
gates have delays of 5 ns while the AND and OR gates have delays
of 1 ns.
 
12.1.3Give the total delay of the 4-bit ripple carry adder shown in
Fig. 12.3 if all gates have a delay of 2 ns.
Fig. 12.34-Bit RCA Timing Exercise
 
12.1.4Give the total delay of the 4-bit ripple carry adder shown in
Fig. 12.3 if the XOR gates have delays of 10 ns while the AND
and OR gates have delays of 2 ns.
 
12.1.5Design a VHDL model for an 8-bit Ripple Carry Adder (RCA)
using a structural design approach. This involves creating a half
adder (half_adder.vhd), full adder (full_adder.vhd), and then finally
 

--- Page 650 ---
( ) ( ) y
a top-level adder (rca.vhd) by instantiating eight full adder
components. Model the ripple delay by inserting 1ns of gate delay
for the XOR, AND, and OR operators using a delayed signal
assignment. The general topology and entity definition for the
design are shown in Fig. 12.4. Create a test bench to exhaustively
verify this design under all input conditions. The test bench should
drive in different values every 30 ns in order to give sufficient time
for the signals to ripple through the adder.
Fig. 12.44-Bit RCA Entity
12.1.6Give the total delay of the 4-bit carry look ahead adder shown in
Fig. 12.5 if all gates have a delay of 2 ns.
Fig. 12.54-Bit CLA Timing Exercise
 
12.1.7Give the total delay of the 4-bit carry look ahead adder shown in
Fig. 12.5 if the XOR gates have delays of 10ns while the AND and
OR gates have delays of 2 ns.
 
12.1.8Design a VHDL model for an 8-bit Carry Look Ahead Adder
( l hd)Th d l h ldi i i h difidf ll dd

--- Page 651 ---
(cla.vhd). The model should instantiate eight modified full adders
(mod_full_adder.vhd). The carry look ahead logic should be
implemented using concurrent signal assignments with logical
operators. Model each level of gate delay as 1ns using delayed
signal assignments. The general topology and entity definition for
the design are shown in Fig. 12.6. Create a test bench to
exhaustively verify this design under all input conditions. The test
bench should drive in different values every 30 ns in order to give
sufficient time for the signals to propagate through the adder.
Fig. 12.64-Bit CLA Entity
 
Section 12.2: Subtraction
12.2.1How is the programmable adder/subtractor architecture shown in
Fig. 12.7 analogous to 2’s complement arithmetic?
Fig. 12.7Programmable Adder/Subtractor Block Diagram
 
12.2.2Will the programmable adder/subtractor architecture shown in
Fig. 12.7 work for negative numbers encoded using signed
magnitude or 1’s complement?
 
Whencalculatingthedelayoftheprogrammableadder/subtractor

--- Page 652 ---
12.2.3When calculating the delay of the programmable adder/subtractor
architecture shown in Fig. 12.7 does the delay of the XOR gate that
acts as the programmable inverter need to be considered? 
12.2.4Design a VHDL model for an 8-bit, programmable
adder/subtractor. The design will have an input called
“ADDn_SUB” that will control whether the system behaves as an
adder (0) or as a subtractor (1). The design should operate on two’s
complement signed numbers. The result of the operation(s) will
appear on the port called “Sum_Diff”. The model should assert the
output “Cout” when an addition creates a carry or when a
subtraction creates a borrow. The circuit will also assert the output
Vout when either operation results in two’s complement overflow.
The entity definition and block diagram for the system is shown in
Fig. 12.8. Create a test bench to exhaustively verify this design
under all input conditions.
Fig. 12.8Programmable Adder/Subtractor Entity
 
Section 12.3: Multiplication
12.3.1Give the total delay of the 4-bit unsigned multiplier shown in
Fig. 12.9 if all gates have a delay of 1ns. The addition is
performed using a ripple carry adder.
 

--- Page 653 ---
Fig. 12.94-Bit Unsigned Multiplier Block Diagram
12.3.2For the 4-bit unsigned multiplier shown in Fig. 12.9, how many
levels of logic does it take to compute all of the partial products?
 
12.3.3For the 4-bit unsigned multiplier shown in Fig. 12.9, how many
AND gates are needed to compute the partial products?
 
12.3.4For the 4-bit unsigned multiplier shown in Fig. 12.9, how many
total AND gates are used if the additions are implemented using
full adders made of half adders?
 
12.3.5Based on the architecture of a unsigned multiplier in Fig. 12.9,
how many AND gates are needed to compute the partial products
if the inputs are increased to 8-bits?
 
12.3.6For an 8-bit multiplier, how many bits are needed to represent the
product?
 
12.3.7For an 8-bit unsigned multiplier, what is the largest value that the
product can ever take on? Give your answer in decimal.
 
12.3.8For an 8-bit signed multiplier, what is the largest value that the
product can ever take on? Give your answer in decimal.
 
12.3.9For an 8-bit signed multiplier, what is the smallest value that the
 d k ?Gi i d i l

--- Page 654 ---
product can ever take on? Give your answer in decimal. 
12.3.10What is the maximum number of times that a 4-bit unsigned
multiplicand can be multiplied by two using the logical shift left
approach before the product is too large to be represented by an
8-bit-product? Hint: The maximum number of times this
operation can be performed corresponds to when the multiplicand
starts at its lowest possible nonzero value (i.e., 1).
 
12.3.11 Design a VHDL model for an 8-bit unsigned multiplier using
whatever modeling approach you wish. Create a test bench to
exhaustively verify this design under all input conditions. The
entity definition for this multiplier is given in Fig. 12.10. Hint:
Consider converting the inputs into type integers and then
performing the multiplication using the “*” operation. The result
of this operation will need to be an internal signal also of type
interger. The integer product can then be converted back to a 16-
bit std_logic_vector. Make sure to apply a range to your internal
integers
Fig. 12.108-Bit Unsigned Multiplier Entity
.
 
12.3.12Design a VHDL model for an 8-bit signed multiplier using
whatever modeling approach you wish. Create a test bench to
exhaustively verify this design under all input conditions. The
entity definition for this multiplier is given in Fig. 12.11. Hint:
Consider converting the inputs into type integers and then
performing the multiplication using the “*” operation. The result
of this operation will need to be an internal signal also of type
interger. The integer product can then be converted back to a 16-
bit std_logic_vector. Make sure to apply a range to your internal
integers.
 

--- Page 655 ---
Fig. 12.11 8-Bit Signed Multiplier Entity
Section 12.4: Division
12.4.1For a 4-bit divider, how many bits are needed for the quotient? 
12.4.2For a 4-bit divider, how many bits are needed for the remainder? 
12.4.3Explain the basic concept of the iterative-subtractor approach to
division.
 
12.4.4For the 4-bit divider shown in Example 12.28, estimate the total
delay assuming all gates have a delay of 1 ns.
 

--- Page 656 ---
(1)
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2017
Brock J. LaMeres, Introduction to Logic Circuits & Logic Design with VHDL , DOI 10.1007/978-3-
319-34195-8_13
13. Computer System Design
Brock J. LaMeres1 
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Montana State
University, Bozeman, MT, USA
 
One of the most common digital systems in use today is the computer. A
computer accomplishes tasks through an architecture that uses both
hardware and software. The hardware in a computer consists of many of the
elements that we have covered so far. These include registers, arithmetic
and logic circuits, finite-state machines, and memory. What makes a
computer so useful is that the hardware is designed to accomplish a
predetermined set of instructions. These instructions are relatively simple,
such as moving data between memory and a register or performing
arithmetic on two numbers. The instructions are comprised of binary codes
that are stored in a memory device and represent the sequence of operations
that the hardware will perform to accomplish a task. This sequence of
instructions is called a computer program. What makes this architecture so
useful is that the preexisting hardware can be programmed to perform an
almost unlimited number of tasks by simply defining the sequence of
instructions to be executed. The process of designing the sequence of
instructions, or program, is called software development or software
engineering.
The idea of a general-purpose computing machine dates back to the
nineteenth century. The first computing machines were implemented with
mechanical systems and were typically analog in nature. As technology
advanced, computer hardware evolved from electromechanical switches to
vacuum tubes and ultimately to integrated circuits. These newer

--- Page 657 ---
technologies enabled switching circuits and provided the capability to build
binary computers. Today’s computers are built exclusively with
semiconductor materials and integrated circuit technology. The term
microcomputer is used to describe a computer that has its processing
hardware implemented with integrated circuitry. Nearly all modern
computers are binary. Binary computers are designed to operate on a fixed
set of bits. For example, an 8-bit computer would perform operations on 8
bits at a time. This means it moves data between registers and memory and
performs arithmetic and logic operations in groups of 8 bits.
This chapter covers the basics of a simple computer system and presents
the design of an 8-bit system to illustrate the details of instruction
execution. The goal of this chapter is to provide an understanding of the
basic principles of computer systems.
Learning Outcomes—After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
13.1Describe the basic components and operation of computer hardware. 
13.2Describe the basic components and operation of computer software. 
13.3Design a fully operational computer system using VHDL. 
13.4Describe the difference between the Von Neumann and Harvard
computer architectures.
 
13.1 Computer Hardware
Computer hardware refers to all of the physical components within the
system. This hardware includes all circuit components in a computer such
as the memory devices, registers, and finite-state machines. Figure 13.1
shows a block diagram of the basic hardware components in a computer.

--- Page 658 ---
Fig. 13.1Hardware components of a computer system
13.1.1 Program Memory
The instructions that are executed by a computer are held in program
memory. Program memory is treated as read-only memory during execution
in order to prevent the instructions from being overwritten by the computer.
Some computer systems will implement the program memory on a true
ROM device (MROM or PROM), while others will use an EEPROM that
can be read from during normal operation but can only be written to using a
dedicated write procedure. Programs are typically held in nonvolatile
memory so that the computer system does not lose its program when power
is removed. Modern computers will often copy a program from nonvolatile
memory (e.g., a hard disk drive) to volatile memory after start-up in order
to speed up instruction execution. In this case, care must be taken that the
program does not overwrite itself.
13.1.2 Data Memory
Computers also require data memory, which can be written to and read
from during normal operation. This memory is used to hold temporary

--- Page 659 ---
variables that are created by the software program. This memory expands
the capability of the computer system by allowing large amounts of
information to be created and stored by the program. Additionally,
computations can be performed that are larger than the width of the
computer system by holding interim portions of the calculation (e.g.,
performing a 128-bit addition on a 32-bit computer). Data memory is
implemented with R/W memory, most often SRAM or DRAM.
13.1.3 Input/Output Ports
The term port is used to describe the mechanism to get information from
the output world into or out of the computer. Ports can be input, output, or
bidirectional. I/O ports can be designed to pass information in a serial or
parallel format.
13.1.4 Central Processing Unit
The central processing unit (CPU) is considered the brains of the computer.
The CPU handles reading instructions from memory, decoding them to
understand which instruction is being performed, and executing the
necessary steps to complete the instruction. The CPU also contains a set of
registers that are used for general-purpose data storage, operational
information, and system status. Finally, the CPU contains circuitry to
perform arithmetic and logic operations on data.
13.1.4.1 Control Unit
The control unit is a finite-state machine that controls the operation of the
computer. This FSM has states that perform fetching the instruction (i.e.,
reading it from program memory), decoding the instruction, and executing
the appropriate steps to accomplish the instruction. This process is known
as fetch, decode, and execute and is repeated each time an instruction is
performed by the CPU. As the control unit state machine traverses through
its states, it asserts control signals that move and manipulate data in order to
achieve the desired functionality of the instruction.
13.1.4.2 Data Path: Registers

--- Page 660 ---
The CPU groups its registers and ALU into a subsystem called the data
path. The data path refers to the fast storage and data manipulations within
the CPU. All of these operations are initiated and managed by the control
unit state machine. The CPU contains a variety of registers that are
necessary to execute instructions and hold status information about the
system. Basic computers have the following registers in their CPU:
Instruction Register (IR)—The instruction register holds the current
binary code of the instruction being executed. This code is read from
program memory as the first part of instruction execution. The IR is
used by the control unit to decide which states in its FSM to traverse in
order to execute the instruction.
Memory Address Register (MAR)—The MAR is used to hold the
current address being used to access memory. The MAR can be loaded
with addresses in order to fetch instructions from program memory or
with addresses to access data memory and/or I/O ports.
Program Counter (PC)—The program counter holds the address of
the current instruction being executed in program memory. The
program counter will increment sequentially through the program
memory reading instructions until a dedicated instruction is used to set
it to a new location.
General-Purpose Registers—These registers are available for
temporary storage by the program. Instructions exist to move
information from memory into these registers and to move information
from these registers into memory. Instructions also exist to perform
arithmetic and logic operations on the information held in these
registers.
Condition Code Register (CCR)—The CCR holds status flags that
provide information about the arithmetic and logic operations
performed in the CPU. The most common flags are negative (N), zero
(Z), two’s complement overflow (V), and carry (C). This register can
also contain flags that indicate the status of the computer, such as if an
interrupt has occurred or if the computer has been put into a low-
power mode.

--- Page 661 ---
13.1.4.3 Data Path: Arithmetic Logic Unit
The arithmetic logic unit (ALU) is the system that performs all
mathematical (i.e., addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division) and
logic operations (i.e., and, or, not, shifts). This system operates on data
being held in CPU registers. The ALU has a unique symbol associated with
it to distinguish it from other functional units in the CPU.
Figure 13.2 shows the typical organization of a CPU. The registers and
ALU are grouped into the data path. In this example, the computer system
has two general-purpose registers called A and B. This CPU organization
will be used throughout this chapter to illustrate the detailed execution of
instructions.
Fig. 13.2Typical CPU organization
13.1.5 A Memory Mapped System

--- Page 662 ---
A common way to simplify moving data in or out of the CPU is to assign a
unique address to all hardware components in the memory system. Each
input/output port and each location in both program and data memory are
assigned a unique address. This allows the CPU to access everything in the
memory system with a dedicated address. This reduces the number of lines
that must pass into the CPU. A bus system facilitates transferring
information within the computer system. An address bus is driven by the
CPU to identify which location in the memory system is being accessed. A
data bus is used to transfer information to/from the CPU and the memory
system. Finally, a control bus is used to provide other required information
about the transactions such as read or write lines. Figure 13.3 shows the
computer hardware in a memory mapped architecture.
Fig. 13.3Computer hardware in a memory mapped configuration

--- Page 663 ---
To help visualize how the memory addresses are assigned, a memory
map is used. This is a graphical depiction of the memory system. In the
memory map, the ranges of addresses are provided for each of the main
subsections of memory. This gives the programmer a quick overview of the
available resources in the computer system. Example 13.1 shows a
representative memory map for a computer system with an address bus with
a width of 8 bits. This address bus can provide 256 unique locations. For
this example, the memory system is also 8 bits wide; thus the entire
memory system is 256x8 in size. In this example 128 bytes are allocated for
program memory; 96 bytes are allocated for data memory; 16 bytes are
allocated for output ports; and 16 bytes are allocated for input ports.


--- Page 664 ---
Example 13.1Memory map for a 256 × 8 memory system
13.2 Computer Software
Computer software refers to the instructions that the computer can execute
and how they are designed to accomplish various tasks. The specific group
of instructions that a computer can execute is known as its instruction set.
The instruction set of a computer needs to be defined first before the
computer hardware can be implemented. Some computer systems have a
very small number of instructions in order to reduce the physical size of the
circuitry needed in the CPU. This allows the CPU to execute the
instructions very quickly, but requires a large number of operations to
accomplish a given task. This architectural approach is called a reduced
instruction set computer (RISC). The alternative to this approach is to
make an instruction set with a large number of dedicated instructions that
can accomplish a given task in fewer CPU operations. The drawback of this
approach is that the physical size of the CPU must be larger in order to

--- Page 665 ---
accommodate the various instructions. This architectural approach is called
a complex instruction set computer (CISC).
13.2.1 Opcodes and Operands
A computer instruction consists of two fields, an opcode and an operand.
The opcode is a unique binary code given to each instruction in the set. The
CPU decodes the opcode in order to know which instruction is being
executed and then takes the appropriate steps to complete the instruction.
Each opcode is assigned a mnemonic, which is a descriptive name for the
opcode that can be used when discussing the instruction functionally. An
operand is additional information for the instruction that may be required.
An instruction may have any number of operands including zero.
Figure 13.4 shows an example of how the instruction opcodes and operands
are placed into program memory.
Fig. 13.4Anatomy of a computer instruction
13.2.2 Addressing Modes

--- Page 666 ---
An addressing mode describes the way in which the operand of an
instruction is used. While modern computer systems may contain numerous
addressing modes with varying complexities, we will focus on just a subset
of basic addressing modes. These modes are immediate, direct, inherent,
and indexed.
13.2.2.1 Immediate Addressing (IMM)
Immediate addressing is when the operand of an instruction is the
information to be used by the instruction. For example, if an instruction
existed to put a constant into a register within the CPU using immediate
addressing, the operand would be the constant. When the CPU reads the
operand, it simply inserts the contents into the CPU register and the
instruction is complete.
13.2.2.2 Direct Addressing (DIR)
Direct addressing is when the operand of an instruction contains the
address of where the information to be used is located. For example, if an
instruction existed to put a constant into a register within the CPU using
direct addressing, the operand would contain the address of where the
constant was located in memory. When the CPU reads the operand, it puts
this value out on the address bus and performs an additional read to retrieve
the contents located at that address. The value read is then put into the CPU
register and the instruction is complete.
13.2.2.3 Inherent Addressing (INH)
Inherent addressing refers to an instruction that does not require an operand
because the opcode itself contains all of the necessary information for the
instruction to complete. This type of addressing is used on instructions that
perform manipulations on data held in CPU registers without the need to
access the memory system. For example, if an instruction existed to
increment the contents of a register (A), then once the opcode is read by the
CPU, it knows everything it needs to know in order to accomplish the task.
The CPU simply asserts a series of control signals in order to increment the
contents of A and then the instruction is complete. Notice that no operand is

--- Page 667 ---
needed for this task. Instead, the location of the register to be manipulated
(i.e., A) is inherent within the opcode.
13.2.2.4 Indexed Addressing (IND)
Indexed addressing refers to instructions that will access information at an
address in memory to complete the instruction, but the address to be
accessed is held in another CPU register. In this type of addressing, the
operand of the instruction is used as an offset that can be applied to the
address located in the CPU register. For example, let’s say an instruction
existed to put a constant into a register (A) within the CPU using indexed
addressing. Let’s also say that the instruction was designed to use the
contents of another register (B) as part of the address of where the constant
was located. When the CPU reads the opcode, it understands what the
instruction is and that B holds part of the address to be accessed. It also
knows that the operand is applied to B to form the actual address to be
accessed. When the CPU reads the operand, it adds the value to the contents
of B and then puts this new value out on the address bus and performs an
additional read. The value read is then put into the CPU register A and the
instruction is complete.
13.2.3 Classes of Instructions
There are three general classes of instructions: (1) loads and stores; (2) data
manipulations; and (3) branches. To illustrate how these instructions are
executed, examples will be given based on the computer architecture shown
in Fig. 13.3.
13.2.3.1 Loads and Stores
This class of instructions accomplishes moving information between the
CPU and memory. A load is an instruction that moves information from
memory into a CPU register. When a load instruction uses immediate
addressing, the operand of the instruction is the data to be loaded into the
CPU register. As an example, let’s look at an instruction to load the general-
purpose register A using immediate addressing. Let’s say that the opcode of
the instruction is x”86,” has a mnemonic LDA_IMM, and is inserted into

--- Page 668 ---
program memory starting at x”00.” Example 13.2 shows the steps involved
in executing the LDA_IMM instruction.
Example 13.2Execution of an instruction to “Load Register A Using Immediate Addressing”
Now let’s look at a load instruction using direct addressing. In direct
addressing, the operand of the instruction is the address of where the data to

--- Page 669 ---
be loaded resides. As an example, let’s look at an instruction to load the
general-purpose register A. Let’s say that the opcode of the instruction is
x”87,” has a mnemonic LDA_DIR, and is inserted into program memory
starting at x”08.” The value to be loaded into A resides at address x”80,”
which has already been initialized with x”AA” before this instruction.
Example 13.3 shows the steps involved in executing the LDA_DIR
instruction.

--- Page 670 ---
Example 13.3Execution of an instruction to “Load Register A Using Direct Addressing”
A store is an instruction that moves information from a CPU register
into memory. The operand of a store instruction indicates the address of
where the contents of the CPU register will be written. As an example, let’s

--- Page 671 ---
look at an instruction to store the general-purpose register A into memory
address x”E0.” Let’s say that the opcode of the instruction is x”96,” has a
mnemonic STA_DIR, and is inserted into program memory starting at
x”04.” The initial value of A is x”CC” before the instruction is executed.
Example 13.4 shows the steps involved in executing the STA_DIR
instruction.

--- Page 672 ---
Example 13.4Execution of an instruction to “Store Register A Using Direct Addressing”
13.2.3.2 Data Manipulations

--- Page 673 ---
This class of instructions refers to ALU operations. These operations take
action on data that resides in the CPU registers. These instructions include
arithmetic, logic operators, shifts and rotates, and tests and compares. Data
manipulation instructions typically use inherent addressing because the
operations are conducted on the contents of CPU registers and don’t require
additional memory access. As an example, let’s look at an instruction to
perform addition on registers A and B. The sum will be placed back in A.
Let’s say that the opcode of the instruction is x”42,” has a mnemonic
ADD_AB, and is inserted into program memory starting at x”04.” Example
13.5 shows the steps involved in executing the ADD_AB instruction.

--- Page 674 ---
Example 13.5Execution of an instruction to “Add Registers A and B”
13.2.3.3 Branches

--- Page 675 ---
In the previous examples the program counter was always incremented to
point to the address of the next instruction in program memory. This
behavior only supports a linear execution of instructions. To provide the
ability to specifically set the value of the program counter, instructions
called branches are used. There are two types of branches: unconditional
and conditional. In an unconditional branch, the program counter is always
loaded with the value provided in the operand. As an example, let’s look at
an instruction to branch always to a specific address. This allows the
program to perform loops. Let’s say that the opcode of the instruction is
x”20,” has a mnemonic BRA, and is inserted into program memory starting
at x”06.” Example 13.6 shows the steps involved in executing the BRA
instruction.

--- Page 676 ---
Example 13.6Execution of an instruction to “Branch Always”
In a conditional branch, the program counter is only updated if a
particular condition is true. The conditions come from the status flags in the
CCR (NZVC). This allows a program to selectively execute instructions
based on the result of a prior operation. Let’s look at an example instruction
that will branch only if the Z flag is asserted. This instruction is called a
branch if equal to zero. Let’s say that the opcode of the instruction is x”23,”

--- Page 677 ---
has a mnemonic BEQ, and is inserted into program memory starting at
x”05.” Example 13.7 shows the steps involved in executing the BEQ
instruction.
Example 13.7Execution of an instruction to “Branch if Equal to Zero”

--- Page 678 ---
Conditional branches allow computer programs to make decisions about
which instructions to execute based on the results of previous instructions.
This gives computers the ability to react to input signals or take action
based on the results of arithmetic or logic operations. Computer instruction
sets typically contain conditional branches based on the NZVC flags in the
CCR. The following instructions are based on the values of the NZVC
flags:
BMI—Branch if minus (N = 1)
BPL—Branch if plus (N = 0)
BEQ—Branch if equal to zero (Z = 1)
BNE—Branch if not equal to Zero (Z = 0)
BVS—Branch if two’s complement overflow occurred, or V is set (V 
= 1)
BVC—Branch if two’s complement overflow did not occur, or V is
clear (V = 0)
BCS—Branch if a carry occurred, or C is set (C = 1)
BCC—Branch if a carry did not occur, or C is clear (C = 0)
Combinations of these flags can be used to create more conditional
branches.
BHI—Branch if higher (C = 1 and Z = 0)
BLS—Branch if lower or the same (C = 0 and Z = 1)
BGE—Branch if greater than or equal ((N = 0 and V = 0) or (N = 1 and
V = 1)), only valid for signed numbers
BLT—Branch if less than ((N = 1 and V = 0) or (N = 0 and V = 1)),
only valid for signed numbers
BGT—Branch if greater than ((N = 0 and V = 0 and Z = 0) or (N = 1
and V = 1 and Z = 0)), only valid for signed numbers
BLE—Branch if less than or equal ((N = 1 and V = 0) or (N = 0 and V 
= 1) or (Z = 1)), only valid for signed numbers

--- Page 679 ---
13.3 Computer Implementation: An 8-Bit Computer
Example
13.3.1 Top-Level Block Diagram
Let’s now look at the detailed implementation and instruction execution of a
computer system. In order to illustrate the detailed operation, we will use a
simple 8-bit computer system design. Example 13.8 shows the block
diagram for the 8-bit computer system. This block diagram also contains
the VHDL file and entity names, which will be used when the behavioral
model is implemented.

--- Page 680 ---
Example 13.8Top-level block diagram for the 8-bit computer system
We will use the memory map shown in Example 13.1 for our example
computer system. This mapping provides 128 bytes of program memory, 96
bytes of data memory, 16× output ports, and 16× input ports. To simplify
the operation of this example computer, the address bus is limited to 8 bits.
This only provides 256 locations of memory access, but allows an entire
address to be loaded into the CPU as a single operand of an instruction.

--- Page 681 ---
13.3.2 Instruction Set Design
Example 13.9 shows a basic instruction set for our example computer
system. This set provides a variety of loads and stores, data manipulations,
and branch instructions that will allow the computer to be programmed to
perform more complex tasks through software development. These
instructions are sufficient to provide a baseline of functionality in order to
get the computer system operational. Additional instructions can be added
as desired to increase the complexity of the system.


--- Page 682 ---
Example 13.9Instruction set for the 8-bit computer system
13.3.3 Memory System Implementation
Let’s now look at the memory system details. The memory system contains
program memory, data memory, and input/output ports. Example 13.10
shows the block diagram of the memory system. The program and data
memory will be implemented using lower level components
(rom_128x8_sync.vhd and rw_96x8_sync.vhd), while the input and output
ports can be modeled using a combination of RTL processes and
combinational logic. The program and data memory components contain
dedicated circuitry to handle their addressing ranges. Each output port also
contains dedicated circuitry to handle its unique address. A multiplexer is
used to handle the signal routing back to the CPU based on the address
provided.


--- Page 683 ---
Example 13.10Memory system block diagram for the 8-bit computer system
13.3.3.1 Program Memory Implementation in VHDL
The program memory can be implemented in VHDL using the modeling
techniques presented in Chap. 12. To make the VHDL more readable, the
instruction mnemonics can be declared as constants. This allows the
mnemonic to be used when populating the program memory array. The
following VHDL shows how the mnemonics for our basic instruction set
can be defined as constants:
constant LDA_IMM : std_logic_vector (7 downto 0)
:= x"86";
constant LDA_DIR : std_logic_vector (7 downto 0)
:= x"87";
constant LDB_IMM : std_logic_vector (7 downto 0)
:= x"88";
constant LDB_DIR : std_logic_vector (7 downto 0)
:= x"89";
constant STA_DIR : std_logic_vector (7 downto 0)
:= x"96";
constant STB_DIR : std_logic_vector (7 downto 0)
:= x"97";
constant ADD_AB : std_logic_vector (7 downto 0) :=
x"42";
constant SUB_AB : std_logic_vector (7 downto 0) :=
x"43";
constant AND_AB : std_logic_vector (7 downto 0) :=
x"44";
constant OR_AB : std_logic_vector (7 downto 0) :=
x"45";
constant INCA : std_logic_vector (7 downto 0) :=
x"46";
constant INCB : std_logic_vector (7 downto 0) :=
x"47";
constant DECA : std_logic_vector (7 downto 0) :=
x"48";

--- Page 684 ---
constant DECB : std_logic_vector (7 downto 0) :=
x"49";
constant BRA : std_logic_vector (7 downto 0) :=
x"20";
constant BMI : std_logic_vector (7 downto 0) :=
x"21";
constant BPL : std_logic_vector (7 downto 0) :=
x"22";
constant BEQ : std_logic_vector (7 downto 0) :=
x"23";
constant BNE : std_logic_vector (7 downto 0) :=
x"24";
constant BVS : std_logic_vector (7 downto 0) :=
x"25";
constant BVC : std_logic_vector (7 downto 0) :=
x"26";
constant BCS : std_logic_vector (7 downto 0) :=
x"27";
constant BCC : std_logic_vector (7 downto 0) :=
x"28";
Now the program memory can be declared as an array type with initial
values to define the program. The following VHDL shows how to declare
the program memory and an example program to perform a load, store, and
a branch always. This program will continually write x”AA” to
port_out_00:
type rom_type is array (0 to 127) of
std_logic_vector(7 downto 0);
constant ROM : rom_type := (0 => LDA_IMM,
1 => x"AA",
2 => STA_DIR,
3 => x"E0",
4 => BRA,
5 => x"00",
others => x"00");

--- Page 685 ---
The address mapping for the program memory is handled in two ways.
First, notice that the array type defined above uses indices from 0 to 127.
This provides the appropriate addresses for each location in the memory.
The second step is to create an internal enable line that will only allow
assignments from ROM to data_out when a valid address is entered.
Consider the following VHDL to create an internal enable (EN) that will
only be asserted when the address falls within the valid program memory
range of 0–127:
enable : process (address)
begin
if ((to_integer(unsigned(address)) >= 0) and
(to_integer(unsigned(address)) <= 127)) then
EN <= '1';
else
EN <= '0';
end if;
end process;
If this enable signal is not created, the simulation and synthesis will fail
because data_out assignments will be attempted for addresses outside of the
defined range of the ROM array. This enable line can now be used in the
behavioral model for the ROM process as follows:
memory : process (clock)
begin
if (clock'event and clock='1') then
if (EN='1') then
data_out <= ROM(to_integer(unsigned(address)));
end if;
end if;
end process;
13.3.3.2 Data Memory Implementation in VHDL
The data memory is created using a similar strategy as the program
memory. An array signal is declared with an address range corresponding to
the memory map for the computer system (i.e., 128–223). An internal

--- Page 686 ---
enable is again created that will prevent data_out assignments for addresses
outside of this valid range. The following is the VHDL to declare the R/W
memory array:
type rw_type is array (128 to 223) of
std_logic_vector(7 downto 0);
signal RW : rw_type;
The following is the VHDL to model the local enable and signal
assignments for the R/W memory:
enable : process (address)
begin
if ( (to_integer(unsigned(address)) >= 128) and
(to_integer(unsigned(address)) <= 223)) then
EN <= '1';
else
EN <= '0';
end if;
end process;
memory : process (clock)
begin
if (clock'event and clock='1') then
if (EN='1' and write='1') then
RW(to_integer(unsigned(address))) <= data_in;
elsif (EN='1' and write='0') then
data_out <= RW(to_integer(unsigned(address)));
end if;
end if;
end process;
13.3.3.3 Implementation of Output Ports in VHDL
Each output port in the computer system is assigned a unique address. Each
output port also contains storage capability. This allows the CPU to update
an output port by writing to its specific address. Once the CPU is done
storing to the output port address and moves to the next instruction in the

--- Page 687 ---
program, the output port holds its information until it is written to again.
This behavior can be modeled using an RTL process that uses the address
bus and the write signal to create a synchronous enable condition. Each port
is modeled with its own process. The following VHDL shows how the
output ports at x”E0” and x”E1” are modeled using address-specific
processes:
-- : ADDRESS x"E0" U3 : process (clock, reset)
begin
if (reset = '0') then
port_out_00 <= x"00";
elsif (clock'event and clock='1') then
if (address = x"E0" and write = '1') then
port_out_00 <= data_in;
end if;
end if;
end process;
-- port_out_01 description : ADDRESS x"E1"
U4 : process (clock, reset)
begin
if (reset = '0') then
port_out_01 <= x"00";
elsif (clock'event and clock='1') then
if (address = x"E1" and write = '1') then
port_out_01 <= data_in;
end if;
end if;
end process;:
    “the rest of the output port models go here…”
                :
13.3.3.4 Implementation of Input Ports in VHDL
The input ports do not contain storage, but do require a mechanism to
selectively route their information to the data_out port of the memory
system. This is accomplished using the multiplexer shown in Example

--- Page 688 ---
13.10. The only functionality that is required for the input ports is
connecting their ports to the multiplexer.
13.3.3.5 Memory data_out Bus Implementation in
VHDL
Now that all of the memory functionality has been designed, the final step
is to implement the multiplexer that handles routing the appropriate
information to the CPU on the data_out bus based on the incoming address.
The following VHDL provides a model for this behavior. Recall that a
multiplexer is combinational logic, so if the behavior is to be modeled using
a process, all inputs must be listed in the sensitivity list. These inputs
include the outputs from the program and data memory in addition to all of
the input ports. The sensitivity list must also include the address bus as it
acts as the select input to the multiplexer. Within the process, an if/then
statement is used to determine which subsystem drives data_out. Program
memory will drive data_out when the incoming address is in the range of 0–
127 (x”00” to x”7F”). Data memory will drive data_out when the address is
in the range of 128–223 (x”80” to x”DF”). An input port will drive data_out
when the address is in the range of 240–255 (x”F0” to x”FF”). Each input
port has a unique address, so the specific addresses are listed as elsif
clauses:
MUX1 : process (address, rom_data_out,
rw_data_out,
port_in_00, port_in_01, port_in_02, port_in_03,
port_in_04, port_in_05, port_in_06, port_in_07,
port_in_08, port_in_09, port_in_10, port_in_11,
port_in_12, port_in_13, port_in_14, port_in_15)
begin
if ( (to_integer(unsigned(address)) >= 0) and
(to_integer(unsigned(address)) <= 127)) then
data_out <= rom_data_out;
elsif ( (to_integer(unsigned(address)) >= 128) and
(to_integer(unsigned(address)) <= 223)) then

--- Page 689 ---
data_out <= rw_data_out;
elsif (address = x"F0") then data_out <=
port_in_00;
elsif (address = x"F1") then data_out <=
port_in_01;
elsif (address = x"F2") then data_out <=
port_in_02;
elsif (address = x"F3") then data_out <=
port_in_03;
elsif (address = x"F4") then data_out <=
port_in_04;
elsif (address = x"F5") then data_out <=
port_in_05;
elsif (address = x"F6") then data_out <=
port_in_06;
elsif (address = x"F7") then data_out <=
port_in_07;
elsif (address = x"F8") then data_out <=
port_in_08;
elsif (address = x"F9") then data_out <=
port_in_09;
elsif (address = x"FA") then data_out <=
port_in_10;
elsif (address = x"FB") then data_out <=
port_in_11;
elsif (address = x"FC") then data_out <=
port_in_12;
elsif (address = x"FD") then data_out <=
port_in_13;
elsif (address = x"FE") then data_out <=
port_in_14;
elsif (address = x"FF") then data_out <=
port_in_15;
else data_out <= x"00";

--- Page 690 ---
end if;
end process;
13.3.4 CPU Implementation
Let’s now look at the CPU details. The CPU contains two components, the
control unit (control_unit.vhd) and the data path (data_path.vhd). The data
path contains all of the registers and the ALU. The ALU is implemented as
a sub-component within the data path (alu.vhd). The data path also contains
a bus system in order to facilitate data movement between the registers and
memory. The bus system is implemented with two multiplexers that are
controlled by the control unit. The control unit contains the finite-state
machine that generates all control signals for the data path as it performs the
fetch-decode-execute steps of each instruction. Example 13.11 shows the
block diagram of the CPU in our 8-bit microcomputer example.

--- Page 691 ---
Example 13.11 CPU block diagram for the 8-bit computer system
13.3.4.1 Data Path Implementation in VHDL
Let’s first look at the data path bus system that handles internal signal
routing. The system consists of two 8-bit busses (Bus1 and Bus2) and two
multiplexers. Bus1 is used as the destination of the PC, A, and B register

--- Page 692 ---
outputs, while Bus2 is used as the input to the IR, MAR, PC, A, and B
registers. Bus1 is connected directly to the to_memory port of the CPU to
allow registers to write data to the memory system. Bus2 can be driven by
the from_memory port of the CPU to allow the memory system to provide
data for the CPU registers. The two multiplexers handle all signal routing
and have their select lines (Bus1_Sel and Bus2_Sel) driven by the control
unit. The following VHDL shows how the multiplexers are implemented.
Again, a multiplexer is combinational logic, so all inputs must be listed in
the sensitivity list of its process. Two concurrent signal assignments are also
required to connect the MAR to the address port and to connect Bus1 to the
to_memory port:
MUX_BUS1 : process (Bus1_Sel, PC, A, B)
begin
case (Bus1_Sel) is
when "00" => Bus1 <= PC;
when "01" => Bus1 <= A;
when "10" => Bus1 <= B;
when others => Bus1 <= x"00";
end case;
end process;
MUX_BUS2 : process (Bus2_Sel, ALU_Result, Bus1,
from_memory)
begin
case (Bus2_Sel) is
when "00" => Bus2 <= ALU_Result;
when "01" => Bus2 <= Bus1;
when "10" => Bus2 <= from_memory;
when others => Bus2 <= x"00";
end case;
end process;
address <= MAR;
to_memory <= Bus1;
Next, let’s look at implementing the registers in the data path. Each
register is implemented using a dedicated process that is sensitive to clock

--- Page 693 ---
and reset. This models the behavior of synchronous latches, or registers.
Each register has a synchronous enable line that dictates when the register
is updated. The register output is only updated when the enable line is
asserted and a rising edge of the clock is detected. The following VHDL
shows how to model the instruction register (IR). Notice that the signal IR
is only updated if IR_Load is asserted and there is a rising edge of the
clock. In this case, IR is loaded with the value that resides on Bus2:
INSTRUCTION_REGISTER : process (Clock, Reset)
begin
if (Reset = '0') then
IR <= x"00";
elsif (Clock'event and Clock = '1') then
if (IR_Load = '1') then
IR <= Bus2;
end if;
end if;
end process;
A nearly identical process is used to model the memory address register.
A unique signal is declared called MAR in order to make the VHDL more
readable. MAR is always assigned to address in this system:
MEMORY_ADDRESS_REGISTER : process (Clock, Reset)
begin
if (Reset = '0') then
MAR <= x"00";
elsif (Clock'event and Clock = '1') then
if (MAR_Load = '1') then
MAR <= Bus2;
end if;
end if;
end process;
Now let’s look at the program counter process. This register contains
additional functionality beyond simply latching in the value of Bus2. The
program counter also has an increment feature. In order to use the “+”
operator, we can declare a temporary unsigned vector called PC_uns. The

--- Page 694 ---
PC process can model the appropriate behavior using PC_uns and then type
cast it back to the original PC signal:
PROGRAM_COUNTER : process (Clock, Reset)
begin
if (Reset = '0') then
PC_uns <= x"00";
elsif (Clock'event and Clock = '1') then
if (PC_Load = '1') then
PC_uns <= unsigned(Bus2);
elsif (PC_Inc = '1') then
PC_uns <= PC_uns + 1;
end if;
end if;
end process;
PC <= std_logic_vector(PC_uns);
The two general-purpose registers A and B are modeled using
individual processes as follows:
A_REGISTER : process (Clock, Reset)
begin
if (Reset = '0') then
A <= x"00";
elsif (Clock'event and Clock = '1') then
if (A_Load = '1') then
A <= Bus2;
end if;
end if;
end process;
B_REGISTER : process (Clock, Reset)
begin
if (Reset = '0') then
B <= x"00";
elsif (Clock'event and Clock = '1') then
if (B_Load = '1') then

--- Page 695 ---
B <= Bus2;
end if;
end if;
end process;
The condition code register latches in the status flags from the ALU
(NZVC) when the CCR_Load line is asserted. This behavior is modeled
using a similar approach as follows:
CONDITION_CODE_REGISTER : process (Clock, Reset)
begin
if (Reset = '0') then
CCR_Result <= x"0";
elsif (Clock'event and Clock = '1') then
if (CCR_Load = '1') then
CCR_Result <= NZVC;
end if;
end if;
end process;
13.3.4.2 ALU Implementation in VHDL
The ALU is a set of combinational logic circuitry that performs arithmetic
and logic operations. The output of the ALU operation is called Result. The
ALU also outputs four status flags as a 4-bit bus called NZVC. The ALU
behavior can be modeled using if/then/elsif statements that decide which
operation to perform based on the input control signal ALU_Sel. The
following VHDL shows an example of how to implement the ALU addition
functionality. In order to be able to use numerical operators (i.e., +, −), the
numeric_std package is included. Variables can be used within the process
to facilitate using the numerical operators. Recall that variables are updated
instantaneously so an assignment can be made to the variable and its result
is available immediately. Note that in the following VHDL, each operation
also updates the NZVC flags. Each of these flags is updated individually.
The N flag can be simply driven with position 7 of the ALU result since this
bit is the sign bit for signed numbers. The Z flag can be driven using an
if/then condition that checks whether the result was x”00.” The V flag is
updated based on the type of the operation. For the addition operation, the

--- Page 696 ---
V flag will be asserted if a POS+POS=NEG or a NEG+NEG=POS. These
conditions can be checked by looking at the sign bits of the inputs and the
sign bit of the result. Finally, the C flag can be directly driven with position
8 of the Sum_uns variable:
ALU_PROCESS : process (A, B, ALU_Sel)
variable Sum_uns : unsigned(8 downto 0);
begin
if (ALU_Sel = "000") then – ADDITION
--- Sum Calculation ------------------------------
-----
Sum_uns := unsigned('0' & A) + unsigned('0' & B);
Result <= std_logic_vector(Sum_uns(7 downto 0));
     --- Negative Flag (N) -----------------------
--------
NZVC(3) <= Sum_uns(7);                  
     --- Zero Flag (Z) ---------------------------
--------
if (Sum_uns(7 downto 0) = x"00") then          
NZVC(2) <= '1';
else
NZVC(2) <= '0';
end if;
     --- Overflow Flag (V) -----------------------
--------
if ((A(7)='0' and B(7)='0' and Sum_uns(7)='1') or
(A(7)='1' and B(7)='1' and Sum_uns(7)='0')) then
NZVC(1) <= '1';
else
NZVC(1) <= '0';
end if;

--- Page 697 ---
         --- Carry Flag (C) ----------------------
--------------
NZVC(0) <= Sum_uns(8);
elsif (ALU_Sel = …
             :     “other ALU functionality goes
here”
end if;
end process;
13.3.4.3 Control Unit Implementation in VHDL
Let’s now look at how to implement the control unit state machine. We’ll
first look at the formation of the VHDL to model the FSM and then turn to
the detailed state transitions in order to accomplish a variety of the most
common instructions. The control unit sends signals to the data path in
order to move data in and out of registers and into the ALU to perform data
manipulations. The finite-state machine is implemented with the behavioral
modeling techniques presented in Chapter 9. The model contains three
processes in order to implement the state memory, next state logic, and
output logic of the FSM. User-defined types are created for each of the
states defined in the state diagram of the FSM. The states associated with
fetching (S_FETCH_0, S_FETCH_1, S_FETCH_2) and decoding the
opcode (S_DECODE_3) are performed each time an instruction is
executed. A unique path is then added after the decode state to perform the
steps associated with executing each individual instruction. The FSM can
be created one instruction at a time by adding additional state paths after the
decode state. The following VHDL code shows how the user-defined state
names are created for six basic instructions (LDA_IMM, LDA_DIR,
STA_DIR, ADD_AB, BRA and BEQ):
type state_type is
            (S_FETCH_0, S_FETCH_1, S_FETCH_2,
            S_DECODE_3,
              S_LDA_IMM_4, S_LDA_IMM_5,
S_LDA_IMM_6,

--- Page 698 ---
              S_LDA_DIR_4, S_LDA_DIR_5,
S_LDA_DIR_6, S_LDA_DIR_7,
              S_STA_DIR_4, S_STA_DIR_5,
S_STA_DIR_6, S_STA_DIR_7, S_STA_DIR_8,
              S_ADD_AB_4,
              S_BRA_4, S_BRA_5, S_BRA_6,
              S_BEQ_4, S_BEQ_5, S_BEQ_6, S_BEQ_7);
signal current_state, next_state : state_type;
Within the architecture of the control unit model, the state memory is
implemented as a separate process that will update the current state with the
next state on each rising edge of the clock. The reset state will be the first
fetch state in the FSM (i.e., S_FETCH_0). The following VHDL shows
how the state memory in the control unit can be modeled:
STATE_MEMORY : process (Clock, Reset)
begin
if (Reset = '0') then
current_state <= S_FETCH_0;
elsif (clock'event and clock = '1') then
current_state <= next_state;
end if;
end process;
The next state logic is also implemented as a separate process. The next
state logic depends on the current state, instruction register, and the CCR
(CCR_Result). The following VHDL gives a portion of the next state logic
process showing how the state transitions can be modeled:
NEXT_STATE_LOGIC : process (current_state, IR,
CCR_Result)
begin
if (current_state = S_FETCH_0) then
next_state <= S_FETCH_1;
elsif (current_state = S_FETCH_1) then
next_state <= S_FETCH_2;
elsif (current_state = S_FETCH_2) then

--- Page 699 ---
next_state <= S_DECODE_3;
elsif (current_state = S_DECODE_3) then
-- select execution path
if (IR = LDA_IMM) then -- Load A Immediate
            next_state <= S_LDA_IMM_4;
elsif (IR = LDA_DIR) then -- Load A Direct
next_state <= S_LDA_DIR_4;
elsif (IR = STA_DIR) then -- Store A Direct
next_state <= S_STA_DIR_4;
elsif (IR = ADD_AB) then -- Add A and B
next_state <= S_ADD_AB_4;
elsif (IR = BRA) then -- Branch Always
next_state <= S_BRA_4;
elsif (IR=BEQ and CCR_Result(2)='1') then -- BEQ
and Z=1
next_state <= S_BEQ_4;
elsif (IR=BEQ and CCR_Result(2)='0') then -- BEQ
and Z=0
next_state <= S_BEQ_7;
         else
next_state <= S_FETCH_0;
end if;
    elsif…                  :      “paths for
each instruction go here…”                 :
end if;
end process;
Finally, the output logic is modeled as a third, separate process. It is
useful to explicitly state the outputs of the control unit for each state in the
machine to allow easy debugging and avoid synthesizing latches. Our
example computer system has Moore-type outputs, so the process only
depends on the current state. The following VHDL shows a portion of the
output logic process:
OUTPUT_LOGIC : process (current_state)
begin

--- Page 700 ---
case(current_state) is
when S_FETCH_0 => -- Put PC onto MAR to read
Opcode
IR_Load <= '0';
MAR_Load <= '1';
PC_Load <= '0';
PC_Inc <= '0';
A_Load <= '0';
B_Load <= '0';
ALU_Sel <= "000";
CCR_Load <= '0';
Bus1_Sel <= "00"; -- "00"=PC, "01"=A, "10"=B
Bus2_Sel <= "01"; -- "00"=ALU_Result, "01"=Bus1,
"10"=from_memory
write <= '0';
when S_FETCH_1 => -- Increment PC
IR_Load <= '0';
MAR_Load <= '0';
PC_Load <= '0';
PC_Inc <= '1';
A_Load <= '0';
B_Load <= '0';
ALU_Sel <= "000";
CCR_Load <= '0';
Bus1_Sel <= "00"; -- "00"=PC, "01"=A, "10"=B
Bus2_Sel <= "00"; -- "00"=ALU, "01"=Bus1,
"10"=from_memory
write <= '0';
                :      “output assignments for
all other states go here…”                 :
end case;
end process;
13.3.4.3.1 Detailed Execution of LDA_IMM
Now let’s look at the details of the state transitions and output signals in the
control unit FSM when executing a few of the most common instructions.

--- Page 701 ---
Let’s begin with the instruction to load register A using immediate
addressing (LDA_IMM). Example 13.12 shows the state diagram for this
instruction. The first three states (S_FETCH_0, S_FETCH_1, S_FETCH_2)
handle fetching the opcode. The purpose of these states is to read the
opcode from the address being held by the program counter and put it into
the instruction register. Multiple states are needed to handle putting PC into
MAR to provide the address of the opcode, waiting for the memory system
to provide the opcode, latching the opcode into IR, and incrementing PC to
the next location in program memory. Another state is used to decode the
opcode (S_DECODE_3) in order to decide which path to take in the state
diagram based on the instruction being executed. After the decode state, a
series of three more states are needed (S_LDA_IMM_4, S_LDA_IMM_5,
S_LDA_IMM_6) to execute the instruction. The purpose of these states is
to read the operand from the address being held by the program counter and
put it into A. Multiple states are needed to handle putting PC into MAR to
provide the address of the operand, waiting for the memory system to
provide the operand, latching the operand into A, and incrementing PC to
the next location in program memory. When the instruction completes, the
value of the operand resides in A and PC is pointing to the next location in
program memory, which is the opcode of the next instruction to be
executed.

--- Page 702 ---
Example 13.12State diagram for LDA_IMM

--- Page 703 ---
Example 13.13 shows the simulation waveform for executing
LDA_IMM. In this example, register A is loaded with the operand of the
instruction, which holds the value x”AA.”
Example 13.13Simulation waveform for LDA_IMM
13.3.4.3.2 Detailed Execution of LDA_DIR

--- Page 704 ---
Now let’s look at the details of the instruction to load register A using direct
addressing (LDA_DIR). Example 13.14 shows the state diagram for this
instruction. The first four states to fetch and decode the opcode are the same
states as in the previous instruction and are performed each time a new
instruction is executed. Once the opcode is decoded, the state machine
traverses five new states to execute the instruction (S_LDA_DIR_4,
S_LDA_DIR_5, S_LDA_DIR_6, S_LDA_DIR_7, S_LDA_DIR_8). The
purpose of these states is to read the operand and then use it as the address
of where to read the contents to put into A.

--- Page 705 ---
Example 13.14State diagram for LDA_DIR

--- Page 706 ---
Example 13.15 shows the simulation waveform for executing
LDA_DIR. In this example, register A is loaded with the contents located at
address x”80,” which has already been initialized to x”AA.”
Example 13.15Simulation waveform for LDA_DIR
13.3.4.3.3 Detailed Execution of STA_DIR

--- Page 707 ---
Now let’s look at the details of the instruction to store register A to memory
using direct addressing (STA_DIR). Example 13.16 shows the state
diagram for this instruction. The first four states are again the same as prior
instructions in order to fetch and decode the opcode. Once the opcode is
decoded, the state machine traverses four new states to execute the
instruction (S_STA_DIR_4, S_STA_DIR_5, S_STA_DIR_6,
S_STA_DIR_7). The purpose of these states is to read the operand and then
use it as the address of where to write the contents of A to.

--- Page 708 ---
Example 13.16State diagram for STA_DIR

--- Page 709 ---
Example 13.17 shows the simulation waveform for executing
STA_DIR. In this example, register A already contains the value x”CC” and
will be stored to address x”E0.” The address x”E0” is an output port
(port_out_00) in our example computer system.
Example 13.17Simulation waveform for STA_DIR

--- Page 710 ---
13.3.4.3.4 Detailed Execution of ADD_AB
Now let’s look at the details of the instruction to add A to B and store the
sum back in A (ADD_AB). Example 13.18 shows the state diagram for this
instruction. The first four states are again the same as prior instructions in
order to fetch and decode the opcode. Once the opcode is decoded, the state
machine only requires one more state to complete the operation
(S_ADD_AB_4). The ALU is combinational logic, so it will begin to
compute the sum immediately as soon as the inputs are updated. The inputs
to the ALU are Bus1 and register B. Since B is directly connected to the
ALU, all that is required to start the addition is to put A onto Bus1. The
output of the ALU is put on Bus2 so that it can be latched into A on the
next clock edge. The ALU also outputs the status flags NZVC, which are
directly connected to the CCR. A_Load and CCR_Load are asserted in this
state. A and CCR_Result will be updated in the next state (i.e.,
S_FETCH_0).

--- Page 711 ---
Example 13.18State diagram for ADD_AB

--- Page 712 ---
Example 13.19 shows the simulation waveform for executing
ADD_AB. In this example, two load immediate instructions were used to
initialize the general-purpose registers to A=x”FF” and B=x”01” prior to
the addition. The addition of these values will result in a sum of x”00” and
assert the carry (C) and zero (Z) flags in the CCR.
Example 13.19Simulation waveform for ADD_AB

--- Page 713 ---
13.3.4.3.5 Detailed Execution of BRA
Now let’s look at the details of the instruction to branch always (BRA).
Example 13.20 shows the state diagram for this instruction. The first four
states are again the same as prior instructions in order to fetch and decode
the opcode. Once the opcode is decoded, the state machine traverses four
new states to execute the instruction (S_BRA_4, S_BRA_5, S_BRA_6).
The purpose of these states is to read the operand and put its value into PC
to set the new location in program memory to execute instructions.

--- Page 714 ---
Example 13.20State diagram for BRA

--- Page 715 ---
Example 13.21 shows the simulation waveform for executing BRA. In
this example, PC is set back to address x”00.”
Example 13.21Simulation waveform for BRA
13.3.4.3.6 Detailed Execution of BEQ

--- Page 716 ---
Now let’s look at the branch if equal to zero (BEQ) instruction. Example
13.22 shows the state diagram for this instruction. Notice that in this
conditional branch, the path that is taken through the FSM depends on both
IR and CCR. In the case that Z=1, the branch is taken, meaning that the
operand is loaded into PC. In the case that Z = 0, the branch is not taken,
meaning that PC is simply incremented to bypass the operand and point to
the beginning of the next instruction in program memory.

--- Page 717 ---
Example 13.22State diagram for BEQ

--- Page 718 ---
Example 13.23 shows the simulation waveform for executing BEQ
when the branch is taken. Prior to this instruction, an addition was
performed on x”FF” and x”01.” This resulted in a sum of x”00,” which
asserted the Z and C flags in the CCR. Since Z = 1 when BEQ is executed,
the branch is taken.


--- Page 719 ---
Example 13.23Simulation waveform for BEQ when taking the branch (Z = 1)
Example 13.24 shows the simulation waveform for executing BEQ
when the branch is not taken. Prior to this instruction, an addition was
performed on x”FE” and x”01.” This resulted in a sum of x”FF,” which did
not assert the Z flag. Since Z = 0 when BEQ is executed, the branch is not
taken. When not taking the branch, PC must be incremented again in order
to bypass the operand and point to the next location in program memory.

--- Page 720 ---
Example 13.24Simulation waveform for BEQ when the branch is not taken (Z = 0)

--- Page 721 ---
13.4 Architecture Considerations
13.4.1 Von Neumann Architecture
The computer system just presented represents a very simple architecture in
which all memory devices (i.e., program, data, and I/O) are grouped into a
single memory map. This approach is known as the Von Neumann
architecture, named after the nineteenth-century mathematician that first
described this structure in 1945. The advantage of this approach is in the
simplicity of the CPU interface. The CPU can be constructed based on a
single bus system that executes everything in a linear progression of states,
regardless of whether memory is being accessed for an instruction or a
variable. One of the drawbacks of this approach is that an instruction and
variable data cannot be read at the same time. This creates a latency in data
manipulation since the system needed to be constantly switching between
reading instructions and accessing data. This latency became known as the
Von Neumann bottleneck.
13.4.2 Harvard Architecture
As computer systems evolved and larger data sets in memory were being
manipulated, it became apparent that it was advantageous to be able to
access data in parallel with reading the next instruction. The Harvard
architecture was proposed to address the Von Neumann bottleneck by

--- Page 722 ---
separating the program and data memory and using two distinct bus systems
for the CPU interface. This approach allows data and program information
to be accessed in parallel and leads to performance improvement when
large numbers of data manipulations in memory need to be performed.
Figure 13.5 shows a comparison between the two architectures
Fig. 13.5Von Neumann vs. Harvard Architecture

--- Page 723 ---
Summary
A computer is a collection of hardware components that are
constructed to perform a specific set of instructions to process and
store data. The main hardware components of a computer are the CPU,
program memory, data memory, and input/output ports.
The CPU consists of registers for fast storage, an ALU for data
manipulation, and a control state machine that directs all activity to
execute an instruction.
A CPU is typically organized into a data path and a control unit. The
data path contains all circuitry used to store and process information.
The data path includes the registers and the ALU. The control unit is a
large state machine that sends control signals to the data path in order
to facilitate instruction execution.
The control unit continuously performs a fetch-decode-execute cycle in
order to complete instructions.
The instructions that a computer is designed to execute are called its
instruction set.
Instructions are inserted into program memory in a sequence that when
executed will accomplish a particular task. This sequence of
instructions is called a computer program.
An instruction consists of an opcode and a potential operand. The
opcode is the unique binary code that tells the control state machine
which instruction is being executed. An operand is additional
information that may be needed for the instruction.

--- Page 724 ---
An addressing mode refers to the way that the operand is treated. In
immediate addressing the operand is the actual data to be used. In
direct addressing the operand is the address of where the data is to be
retrieved or stored. In inherent addressing all of the information
needed to complete the instruction is contained within the opcode, so
no operand is needed.
A computer also contains data memory to hold temporary variables
during run time.
A computer also contains input and output ports to interface with the
outside world.
A memory mapped system is one in which the program memory, data
memory, and I/O ports are all assigned a unique address. This allows
the CPU to simply process information as data and addresses and
allows the program to handle where the information is being sent to. A
memory map is a graphical representation of what address ranges
various components are mapped to.
There are three primary classes of instructions. These are loads and
stores, data manipulations, and branches.
Load instructions move information from memory into a CPU register.
A load instruction takes multiple read cycles. Store instructions move
information from a CPU register into memory. A store instruction
takes multiple read cycles and at least one write cycle.
Data manipulation instructions operate on information being held in
CPU registers. Data manipulation instructions often use inherent
addressing.
Branch instructions alter the flow of instruction execution.
Unconditional branches always change the location in memory of
where the CPU is executing instructions. Conditional branches only
change the location of instruction execution if a status flag is asserted.
Status flags are held in the CCR and are updated by certain
instructions. The most commonly used flags are the negative flag (N),
zero flag (Z), two’s complement overflow flag (V), and carry flag (C).
Exercise Problems

--- Page 725 ---
Section 13.1: Computer Hardware
13.1.1What computer hardware subsystem holds the temporary variables
used by the program?
 
13.1.2What computer hardware subsystem contains fast storage for
holding and/or manipulating data and addresses?
 
13.1.3What computer hardware subsystem allows the computer to
interface to the outside world?
 
13.1.4What computer hardware subsystem contains the state machine
that orchestrates the fetch-decode-execute process?
 
13.1.5What computer hardware subsystem contains the circuitry that
performs mathematical and logic operations?
 
13.1.6What computer hardware subsystem holds the instructions being
executed?
 
Section 13.2: Computer Software
13.2.1In computer software, what are the names of the most basic
operations that a computer can perform?
 
13.2.2Which element of computer software is the binary code that tells
the CPU which instruction is being executed?
 
13.2.3Which element of computer software is a collection of instructions
that perform a desired task?
 
13.2.4Which element of computer software is the supplementary
information required by an instruction such as constants or which
registers to use?
 
13.2.5Which class of instructions handles moving information between

--- Page 726 ---
memory and CPU registers?  
13.2.6Which class of instructions alters the flow of program execution?
 
13.2.7Which class of instructions alters data using either arithmetic or
logical operations?
 
Section 13.3: Computer Implementation—An 8-Bit Computer
Example
13.3.1Design the example 8-bit computer system presented in this
chapter in VHDL with the ability to execute the three instructions
LDA_IMM, STA_DIR, and BRA. Simulate your computer system
using the following program that will continually write the patterns
x”AA” and x”BB” to output ports port_out_00 and port_out_01:
constant ROM : rom_type := (
    0 => LDA_IMM,
    1 => x"AA",
    2 => STA_DIR,
    3 => x"E0",
    4 => STA_DIR,
    5 => x"E1",
    6 => LDA_IMM,
    7 => x"BB",
    8 => STA_DIR,
    9 => x"E0",
    10 => STA_DIR,
    11 => x"E1",
    12 => BRA,
    13 => x"00",
    others => x"00");
 
13.3.2Add the functionality to the computer model from 13.3.1 the
ability to perform the LDA_DIR instruction. Simulate your 

--- Page 727 ---
computer system using the following program that will continually
read from port_in_00 and write its contents to port_out_00:
constant ROM : rom_type := (
    0 => LDA_DIR,
    1 => x"F0",
    2 => STA_DIR,
    3 => x"E0",
    4 => BRA,
    5 => x"00",
    others => x"00");
13.3.3Add the functionality to the computer model from 13.3.2 the
ability to perform the instructions LDB_IMM, LDB_DIR, and
STB_DIR. Modify the example programs given in exercises 13.3.1
and 13.3.2 to use register B in order to simulate your
implementation.
 
13.3.4Add the functionality to the computer model from 13.3.3 the
ability to perform the addition instruction ADD_AB. Test your
addition instruction by simulating the following program. The first
addition instruction will perform x”FE” + x”01” = x”FF” and
assert the negative (N) flag. The second addition instruction will
perform x”FF” + x”01” = x”00” and assert the carry (C) and zero
(Z) flags. The third addition instruction will perform x”7F” +
x”7F” = x”FE” and assert the two’s complement overflow (V) and
negative (N) flags:
constant ROM : rom_type := (
    0 => LDA_IMM, -- A=x”FE”
    1 => x"FE",
    2 => LDB_IMM, -- B=x”01”
    3 => x"01",
    4 => ADD_AB, -- A=A+B
    5 => LDA_IMM, -- A=x”FF”
    6 => x"FF",
    7 => LDB_IMM, -- B=x”01”
 

--- Page 728 ---
,
    8 => x"01",
    9 => ADD_AB, -- A=A+B
    10 => LDA_IMM, -- A=x”7F”
    11 => x"7F",
    12 => LDB_IMM, -- B=x”7F”
    13 => x"7F",
    14 => ADD_AB, -- A=A+B
    15 => BRA,
    16 => x"00",
    others => x"00");
13.3.5Add the functionality to the computer model from 13.3.4 the
ability to perform the branch if equal to zero instruction BEQ.
Simulate your implementation using the following program. The
first addition in this program will perform x”FE” + x”01” = x”FF”
(Z=0). The subsequent BEQ instruction should NOT take the
branch. The second addition in this program will perform x”FF” +
x”01” = x”00” (Z=1) and SHOULD take the branch. The final
instruction in this program is a BRA that is inserted for safety. In
the event that the BEQ is not operating properly, the BRA will set
the program counter back to x”00” and prevent the program from
running away:
constant ROM : rom_type := (
   0 => LDA_IMM,
    1 => x"FE",
    2 => LDB_IMM,
    3 => x"01",
    4 => ADD_AB,
    5 => BEQ,
       6 => x”00”, -- should not
            -- branch
     7 => LDA_IMM,
      8 => x"FF",
     9 => LDB_IMM,
    10 => x"01",
 11 >ADDAB
 

--- Page 729 ---
    11 => ADD_AB,
     12 => BEQ,
    13 => x”00”, -- should
             -- branch
    14 => BRA,
    15 => x"00",
    others => x"00");
13.3.6Add the functionality to the computer model from 13.3.4 all of the
remaining instructions in the set shown in Example 13.9. You will
need to create test programs to verify the execution of each
instruction.
 
Section 13.4: Architectural Considerations
13.4.1Would the instruction set need to be different between a Von
Neumann versus a Harvard architecture? Why or why not?
 
13.4.2Which of the three classes of computer instructions (loads/stores,
data manipulations, and branches) are sped up by moving from the
Von Neumann architecture to the Harvard architecture.
 
13.4.3In a memory mapped, Harvard architecture, would the I/O system
be placed in the program memory or data memory block?
 
13.4.4A Harvard architecture requires two memory address registers to
handle two separate memory systems. Does it also require two
instruction registers? Why or why not?
 
13.4.5A Harvard architecture requires two memory address registers to
handle two separate memory systems. Does it also require two
program counters? Why or why not?
 

--- Page 730 ---
Appendix A: List of Worked Examples
E XAMPLE  2.1. C ONVERTING  D ECIMAL  TO  D ECIMAL 12
E XAMPLE  2.2. C ONVERTING  B INARY  TO  D ECIMAL 13
E XAMPLE  2.3. C ONVERTING  O CTAL  TO  D ECIMAL 13
E XAMPLE  2.4. C ONVERTING  H EXADECIMAL  TO  D ECIMAL 14
E XAMPLE  2.5. C ONVERTING  D ECIMAL  TO  B INARY 15
E XAMPLE  2.6. C ONVERTING  D ECIMAL  TO  O CTAL 16
E XAMPLE  2.7. C ONVERTING  D ECIMAL  TO  H EXADECIMAL 17
E XAMPLE  2.8. C ONVERTING  B INARY  TO  O CTAL 18
E XAMPLE  2.9. C ONVERTING  B INARY  TO  H EXADECIMAL 18
E XAMPLE  2.10. C ONVERTING  O CTAL  TO  B INARY 19
E XAMPLE  2.11. C ONVERTING  H EXADECIMAL  TO  B INARY 19
E XAMPLE  2.12. C ONVERTING  O CTAL  TO  H EXADECIMAL 20
E XAMPLE  2.13. C ONVERTING  H EXADECIMAL  TO  O CTAL 20
E XAMPLE  2.14. S INGLE -B IT  B INARY  A DDITION 21
E XAMPLE  2.15. M ULTIPLE -B IT  B INARY  A DDITION 21
E XAMPLE  2.16. S INGLE -B IT  B INARY  S UBTRACTION 22
E XAMPLE  2.17. M ULTIPLE -B IT  B INARY  S UBTRACTION 22
E XAMPLE  2.18. F INDING  THE  R ANGE  OF  AN  U NSIGNED  N UMBER 24
E XAMPLE  2.19. D ECIMAL  V ALUES  T HAT  A  4-B IT , S IGNED  M AGNITUDE  C ODE  C AN  R EPRESENT 25
E XAMPLE  2.20. F INDING  THE  R ANGE  OF  A  S IGNED  M AGNITUDE  N UMBER 26
E XAMPLE  2.21. F INDING  THE  D ECIMAL  V ALUE  OF  A  S IGNED  M AGNITUDE  N UMBER 26
E XAMPLE  2.22. D ECIMAL  V ALUES  T HAT  A  4-B IT , O NE ’ S  C OMPLEMENT  C ODE  C AN  R EPRESENT 27
E XAMPLE  2.23. F INDING  THE  R ANGE  OF  A  1’ S  C OMPLEMENT  N UMBER 28
E XAMPLE  2.24. F INDING  THE  D ECIMAL  V ALUE  OF  A  1’ S  C OMPLEMENT  N UMBER 28
E XAMPLE  2.25. D ECIMAL  V ALUES  T HAT  A  4-B IT , T WO ’ S  C OMPLEMENT  C ODE  C AN  R EPRESENT 29
E XAMPLE  2.26. F INDING  THE  R ANGE  OF  A  T WO ’ S  C OMPLEMENT  N UMBER 30
E XAMPLE  2.27. F INDING  THE  D ECIMAL  V ALUE  OF  A  T WO ’ S  C OMPLEMENT  N UMBER 30
E XAMPLE  2.28. F INDING  THE  T WO ’ S  C OMPLEMENT  C ODE  OF  A  D ECIMAL  N UMBER 31
E XAMPLE  2.29. T WO ’ S  C OMPLEMENT  A DDITION 32
E XAMPLE  3.1. C ALCULATING  I CC AND  I GND W HEN  S OURCING  M ULTIPLE  L OADS 49
E XAMPLE  3.2. C ALCULATING  I CC AND  I GND W HEN  B OTH  S OURCING  AND  S INKING  L OADS 50
E XAMPLE  3.3. D ETERMINING  IF  S PECIFICATIONS  A RE  V IOLATED  W HEN  D RIVING  A NOTHER  G ATE  AS
A  L OAD
72
E XAMPLE  3.4. D ETERMINING  THE  O UTPUT  C URRENT  W HEN  D RIVING  M ULTIPLE  G ATES  AS  THE  L OAD73

--- Page 731 ---
E XAMPLE  3.5. D ETERMINING  THE  O UTPUT  C URRENT  W HEN  D RIVING  A  P ULL -U P  R ESISTOR  AS  THE
L OAD
74
E XAMPLE  3.6. D ETERMINING  THE  O UTPUT  C URRENT  W HEN  D RIVING  A  P ULL -D OWN  R ESISTOR  AS
THE  L OAD
75
E XAMPLE  3.7. D ETERMINING  THE  O UTPUT  C URRENT  W HEN  D RIVING  AN  LED W HERE  HIGH = ON76
E XAMPLE  3.8. D ETERMINING  THE  O UTPUT  C URRENT  W HEN  D RIVING  AN  LED W HERE  HIGH = OFF77
E XAMPLE  4.1. P ROVING  D E M ORGAN ’ S  T HEOREM  OF  D UALITY  U SING  P ROOF  BY  E XHAUSTION 84
E XAMPLE  4.2. C ONVERTING  B ETWEEN  P OSITIVE  AND  N EGATIVE  L OGIC  U SING  D UALITY 85
E XAMPLE  4.3. U SING  THE  C OMMUTATIVE  P ROPERTY  TO  U NTANGLE  C ROSSED  W IRES 89
E XAMPLE  4.4. U SING  THE  A SSOCIATIVE  P ROPERTY  TO  A DDRESS  F AN -I N  L IMITATIONS 90
E XAMPLE  4.5. U SING  THE  D ISTRIBUTIVE  P ROPERTY  TO  R EDUCE  THE  N UMBER  OF  L OGIC  G ATES  IN  A
C IRCUIT
91
E XAMPLE  4.6. P ROVING  THE  A BSORPTION  T HEOREM  U SING  P ROOF  BY  E XHAUSTION 92
E XAMPLE  4.7. P ROVING  OF  THE  U NITING  T HEOREM 93
E XAMPLE  4.8. C ONVERTING  A  S UM  OF  P RODUCTS  F ORM  INTO  O NE  T HAT  U SES  O NLY  NAND G ATES 95
E XAMPLE  4.9. C ONVERTING  A  P RODUCT  OF  S UMS  F ORM  INTO  O NE  T HAT  U SES  O NLY  NOR G ATES 96
E XAMPLE  4.10. U SING  D E M ORGAN ’ S  T HEOREM  IN  A LGEBRAIC  F ORM  (1) 97
E XAMPLE  4.11. U SING  D E M ORGAN ’ S  T HEOREM  IN  A LGEBRAIC  F ORM  (2) 97
E XAMPLE  4.12. D ETERMINING  THE  L OGIC  E XPRESSION  FROM  A  L OGIC  D IAGRAM 100
E XAMPLE  4.13. D ETERMINING  THE  T RUTH  T ABLE  FROM  A  L OGIC  D IAGRAM 101
E XAMPLE  4.14. D ETERMINING  THE  D ELAY  OF  A  C OMBINATIONAL  L OGIC  C IRCUIT 102
E XAMPLE  4.15. C REATING  A  C ANONICAL  S UM  OF  P RODUCTS  L OGIC  C IRCUIT  U SING  M INTERMS 104
E XAMPLE  4.16. C REATING  A  M INTERM  L IST  FROM  A  T RUTH  T ABLE 105
E XAMPLE  4.17. C REATING  E QUIVALENT  F UNCTIONAL  R EPRESENTATIONS  FROM  A  M INTERM  L IST 106
E XAMPLE  4.18. C REATING  A  P RODUCT  OF  S UMS  L OGIC  C IRCUIT  U SING  M AXTERMS 108
E XAMPLE  4.19. C REATING  A  M AXTERM  L IST  FROM  A  T RUTH  T ABLE 109
E XAMPLE  4.20. C REATING  E QUIVALENT  F UNCTIONAL  R EPRESENTATIONS  FROM  A  M AXTERM  L IST 110
E XAMPLE  4.21. C REATING  E QUIVALENT  F ORMS  TO  R EPRESENT  L OGIC  F UNCTIONALITY 111
E XAMPLE  4.22. M INIMIZING  A  L OGIC  E XPRESSION  A LGEBRAICALLY 113
E XAMPLE  4.23. U SING  A  K- MAP  TO  FIND  A  M INIMIZED  S UM  OF  P RODUCTS  E XPRESSION  (2-I NPUT ) 118
E XAMPLE  4.24. U SING  A  K- MAP  TO  FIND  A  M INIMIZED  S UM  OF  P RODUCTS  E XPRESSION  (3-I NPUT ) 119
E XAMPLE  4.25. U SING  A  K- MAP  TO  FIND  A  M INIMIZED  S UM  OF  P RODUCTS  E XPRESSION  (4-I NPUT ) 120
E XAMPLE  4.26. U SING  A  K- MAP  TO  FIND  A  M INIMIZED  P RODUCT  OF  S UMS  E XPRESSION  (2-I NPUT ) 121
E XAMPLE  4.27. U SING  A  K- MAP  TO  FIND  A  M INIMIZED  P RODUCT  OF  S UMS  E XPRESSION  (3-I NPUT ) 122
E XAMPLE  4.28. U SING  A  K- MAP  TO  FIND  A  M INIMIZED  P RODUCT  OF  S UMS  E XPRESSION  (4- INPUT ) 123
E XAMPLE  4.29. D ERIVING  THE  M INIMAL  S UM  F ROM  A  K- MAP 125
E XAMPLE  4.30. U SING  D ON ’ T  C ARES  TO  P RODUCE  A  M INIMAL  SOP L OGIC  E XPRESSION 126
E XAMPLE  4.31. E LIMINATING  A  T IMING  H AZARD  BY  I NCLUDING  N ONESSENTIAL  P RODUCT  T ERMS 131

--- Page 732 ---
E XAMPLE  5.1. D EFINING  VHDL E NTITIES 153
E XAMPLE  5.2. M ODELING  L OGIC  U SING  C ONCURRENT  S IGNAL  A SSIGNMENTS  AND  L OGICAL
O PERATORS
159
E XAMPLE  5.3. M ODELING  L OGIC  U SING  C ONDITIONAL  S IGNAL  A SSIGNMENTS 161
E XAMPLE  5.4. M ODELING  L OGIC  U SING  S ELECTED  S IGNAL  A SSIGNMENTS 163
E XAMPLE  5.5. M ODELING  L OGIC  U SING  D ELAYED  S IGNAL  A SSIGNMENTS  (I NERTIAL  D ELAY  M ODEL ) 164
E XAMPLE  5.6. M ODELING  L OGIC  U SING  D ELAYED  S IGNAL  A SSIGNMENTS  (T RANSPORT  D ELAY
M ODEL )
166
E XAMPLE  5.7. M ODELING  L OGIC  U SING  S TRUCTURAL  VHDL (E XPLICIT  P ORT  M APPING ) 167
E XAMPLE  5.8. M ODELING  L OGIC  U SING  S TRUCTURAL  VHDL (P OSITIONAL  P ORT  M APPING ) 168
E XAMPLE  6.1. 2- TO -4 O NE -H OT  D ECODER —L OGIC  S YNTHESIS  BY  H AND 176
E XAMPLE  6.2. 3- TO -8 O NE -H OT  D ECODER —VHDL M ODELING  U SING  L OGICAL  O PERATORS 177
E XAMPLE  6.3. 3- TO -8 O NE -H OT  D ECODER —VHDL M ODELING  U SING  C ONDITIONAL  AND  S ELECT
S IGNAL  A SSIGNMENTS
178
E XAMPLE  6.4. 7-S EGMENT  D ISPLAY  D ECODER —T RUTH  T ABLE 179
E XAMPLE  6.5. 7-S EGMENT  D ISPLAY  D ECODER —L OGIC  S YNTHESIS  BY  H AND 180
E XAMPLE  6.6. 7-S EGMENT  D ISPLAY  D ECODER —M ODELING  U SING  L OGICAL  O PERATORS 181
E XAMPLE  6.7. 7-S EGMENT  D ISPLAY  D ECODER —M ODELING  U SING  C ONDITIONAL  AND  S ELECTED
S IGNAL  A SSIGNMENTS
182
E XAMPLE  6.8. 4- TO -2 B INARY  E NCODER —L OGIC  S YNTHESIS  BY  H AND 183
E XAMPLE  6.9. 4- TO -2 B INARY  E NCODER —VHDL M ODELING 184
E XAMPLE  6.10. 2- TO -1 M ULTIPLEXER —L OGIC  S YNTHESIS  BY  H AND 185
E XAMPLE  6.11. 4- TO -1 M ULTIPLEXER —VHDL M ODELING 186
E XAMPLE  6.12. 1- TO -2 D EMULTIPLEXER —L OGIC  S YNTHESIS  BY  H AND 187
E XAMPLE  6.13. 1- TO -4 D EMULTIPLEXER —VHDL M ODELING 188
E XAMPLE  7.1. P USH -B UTTON  W INDOW  C ONTROLLER —W ORD  D ESCRIPTION 219
E XAMPLE  7.2. P USH -B UTTON  W INDOW  C ONTROLLER —S TATE  D IAGRAM 220
E XAMPLE  7.3. P USH -B UTTON  W INDOW  C ONTROLLER —S TATE  T RANSITION  T ABLE 221
E XAMPLE  7.4. S OLVING  F OR  THE  N UMBER  OF  B ITS  N EEDED  FOR  B INARY  S TATE  E NCODING 223
E XAMPLE  7.5. P USH -B UTTON  W INDOW  C ONTROLLER —S TATE  E NCODING 225
E XAMPLE  7.6. P USH -B UTTON  W INDOW  C ONTROLLER —N EXT  S TATE  L OGIC 226
E XAMPLE  7.7. P USH -B UTTON  W INDOW  C ONTROLLER —O UTPUT  L OGIC 227
E XAMPLE  7.8. P USH -B UTTON  W INDOW  C ONTROLLER —L OGIC  D IAGRAM 228
E XAMPLE  7.9. S ERIAL  B IT  S EQUENCE  D ETECTOR  (P ART  1) 229
E XAMPLE  7.10. S ERIAL  B IT  S EQUENCE  D ETECTOR  (P ART  2) 230
E XAMPLE  7.11. S ERIAL  B IT  S EQUENCE  D ETECTOR  (P ART  3) 231
E XAMPLE  7.12. V ENDING  M ACHINE  C ONTROLLER  (P ART  1) 232
E XAMPLE  7.13. V ENDING  M ACHINE  C ONTROLLER  (P ART  2) 233

--- Page 733 ---
E XAMPLE  7.14. V ENDING  M ACHINE  C ONTROLLER  (P ART  3) 234
E XAMPLE  7.15. 2-B IT  B INARY  U P  C OUNTER  (P ART  1) 236
E XAMPLE  7.16. 2-B IT  B INARY  U P  C OUNTER  (P ART  2) 237
E XAMPLE  7.17. 2-B IT  B INARY  U P /D OWN  C OUNTER  (P ART  1) 238
E XAMPLE  7.18. 2-B IT  B INARY  U P /D OWN  C OUNTER  (P ART  2) 239
E XAMPLE  7.19. 2-B IT  G RAY  C ODE  U P  C OUNTER  (P ART  1) 240
E XAMPLE  7.20. 2-B IT  G RAY  C ODE  U P  C OUNTER  (P ART  2) 241
E XAMPLE  7.21. 2-B IT  G RAY  C ODE  U P /D OWN  C OUNTER  (P ART  1) 242
E XAMPLE  7.22. 2-B IT  G RAY  C ODE  U P /D OWN  C OUNTER  (P ART  2) 243
E XAMPLE  7.23. 3-B IT  O NE -H OT  U P  C OUNTER  (P ART  1) 244
E XAMPLE  7.24. 3-B IT  O NE -H OT  U P  C OUNTER  (P ART  2) 245
E XAMPLE  7.25. 3-B IT  O NE -H OT  U P /D OWN  C OUNTER  (P ART  1) 246
E XAMPLE  7.26. 3-B IT  O NE -H OT  U P /D OWN  C OUNTER  (P ART  2) 247
E XAMPLE  7.27. 3-B IT  O NE -H OT  U P /D OWN  C OUNTER  (P ART  3) 248
E XAMPLE  7.28. D ETERMINING  THE  N EXT  S TATE  L OGIC  AND  O UTPUT  L OGIC  E XPRESSION  OF  AN  FSM251
E XAMPLE  7.29. D ETERMINING  THE  S TATE  T RANSITION  T ABLE  OF  AN  FSM 252
E XAMPLE  7.30. D ETERMINING  THE  S TATE  D IAGRAM  OF  AN  FSM 253
E XAMPLE  7.31. D ETERMINING  THE  M AXIMUM  C LOCK  F REQUENCY  OF  AN  FSM 256
E XAMPLE  8.1. B EHAVIOR  OF  S EQUENTIAL  S IGNAL  A SSIGNMENTS  WITHIN  A  P ROCESS 268
E XAMPLE  8.2. B EHAVIOR  OF  C ONCURRENT  S IGNAL  A SSIGNMENTS  OUTSIDE  A  P ROCESS 268
E XAMPLE  8.3. V ARIABLE  A SSIGNMENT  B EHAVIOR 269
E XAMPLE  8.4. U SING  I F /T HEN  S TATEMENTS  TO  M ODEL  C OMBINATIONAL  L OGIC 271
E XAMPLE  8.5. U SING  C ASE  S TATEMENTS  TO  M ODEL  C OMBINATIONAL  L OGIC 273
E XAMPLE  8.6. B EHAVIORAL  M ODELING  OF  A  R ISING  E DGE  T RIGGERED  D-F LIP -F LOP  U SING
A TTRIBUTES
277
E XAMPLE  8.7. C REATING  A  VHDL T EST  B ENCH 279
E XAMPLE  8.8. U SING  R EPORT  S TATEMENTS  IN  A  VHDL T EST  B ENCH 280
E XAMPLE  8.9. U SING  A SSERT  S TATEMENTS  IN  A  VHDL T EST  B ENCH 281
E XAMPLE  8.10. B EHAVIORAL  M ODELING  OF  A  D-F LIP -F LOP  U SING  THE  RISING _ EDGE () F UNCTION 285
E XAMPLE  8.11. W RITING  TO  AN  E XTERNAL  F ILE  FROM  A  T EST  B ENCH  (P ART  1) 294
E XAMPLE  8.12. W RITING  TO  AN  E XTERNAL  F ILE  FROM  A  T EST  B ENCH  (P ART  2) 295
E XAMPLE  8.13. W RITING  TO  AN  E XTERNAL  F ILE  FROM  A  T EST  B ENCH  (P ART  3) 296
E XAMPLE  8.14. W RITING  TO  STD_OUT FROM  A  T EST  B ENCH  (P ART  1) 297
E XAMPLE  8.15. W RITING  TO  STD_OUT FROM  A  T EST  B ENCH  (P ART  2) 298
E XAMPLE  8.16. R EADING  F ROM  AN  E XTERNAL  F ILE  IN  A  T EST  B ENCH  (P ART  1) 298
E XAMPLE  8.17. R EADING  F ROM  AN  E XTERNAL  F ILE  IN  A  T EST  B ENCH  (P ART  2) 299
E XAMPLE  8.18. R EADING  F ROM  AN  E XTERNAL  F ILE  IN  A  T EST  B ENCH  (P ART  3) 300
E XAMPLE  8.19. R EADING  S PACE -D ELIMITED  D ATA  FROM  AN  E XTERNAL  F ILE  IN  A  T EST  B ENCH 300

--- Page 734 ---
(P ART  1)
E XAMPLE  8.20. R EADING  S PACE -D ELIMITED  D ATA  FROM  AN  E XTERNAL  F ILE  IN  A  T EST  B ENCH
(P ART  2)
301
E XAMPLE  8.21. R EADING  S PACE -D ELIMITED  D ATA  FROM  AN  E XTERNAL  F ILE  IN  A  T EST  B ENCH
(P ART  3)
302
E XAMPLE  9.1. B EHAVIORAL  M ODEL  OF  A  D-L ATCH  IN  VHDL 309
E XAMPLE  9.2. B EHAVIORAL  M ODEL  OF  A  D-F LIP -F LOP  IN  VHDL 310
E XAMPLE  9.3. B EHAVIORAL  M ODEL  OF  A  D-F LIP -F LOP  WITH  A SYNCHRONOUS  R ESET  IN  VHDL 311
E XAMPLE  9.4. B EHAVIORAL  M ODEL  OF  A  D-F LIP -F LOP  WITH  A SYNCHRONOUS  R ESET  AND  P RESET  IN
VHDL
312
E XAMPLE  9.5. B EHAVIORAL  M ODEL  OF  A  D-F LIP -F LOP  WITH  S YNCHRONOUS  E NABLE  IN  VHDL 313
E XAMPLE  9.6. P USH -B UTTON  W INDOW  C ONTROLLER  IN  VHDL—D ESIGN  D ESCRIPTION 314
E XAMPLE  9.7. P USH -B UTTON  W INDOW  C ONTROLLER  IN  VHDL—E NTITY  D EFINITION 314
E XAMPLE  9.8. P USH -B UTTON  W INDOW  C ONTROLLER  IN  VHDL—A RCHITECTURE 317
E XAMPLE  9.9. P USH -B UTTON  W INDOW  C ONTROLLER  IN  VHDL—S IMULATION  W AVEFORM 318
E XAMPLE  9.10. P USH -B UTTON  W INDOW  C ONTROLLER  IN  VHDL—E XPLICIT  S TATE  C ODES 318
E XAMPLE  9.11. S ERIAL  B IT  S EQUENCE  D ETECTOR  IN  VHDL—D ESIGN  D ESCRIPTION  AND  E NTITY
D EFINITION
319
E XAMPLE  9.12. S ERIAL  B IT  S EQUENCE  D ETECTOR  IN  VHDL—A RCHITECTURE 320
E XAMPLE  9.13. S ERIAL  B IT  S EQUENCE  D ETECTOR  IN  VHDL—S IMULATION  W AVEFORM 320
E XAMPLE  9.14. V ENDING  M ACHINE  C ONTROLLER  IN  VHDL—D ESIGN  D ESCRIPTION  AND  E NTITY
D EFINITION
321
E XAMPLE  9.15. V ENDING  M ACHINE  C ONTROLLER  IN  VHDL—A RCHITECTURE 322
E XAMPLE  9.16. V ENDING  M ACHINE  C ONTROLLER  IN  VHDL—S IMULATION  W AVEFORM 323
E XAMPLE  9.17. 2-B IT  B INARY  U P /D OWN  C OUNTER  IN  VHDL—D ESIGN  D ESCRIPTION  AND  E NTITY
D EFINITION
323
E XAMPLE  9.18. 2-B IT  B INARY  U P /D OWN  C OUNTER  IN  VHDL—A RCHITECTURE  (T HREE  P ROCESS
M ODEL )
324
E XAMPLE  9.19. 2-B IT  B INARY  U P /D OWN  C OUNTER  IN  VHDL – S IMULATION  W AVEFORM 325
E XAMPLE  9.20. 4-B IT  B INARY  U P  C OUNTER  IN  VHDL U SING  THE  T YPE  UNSIGNED 326
E XAMPLE  9.21. 4-B IT  B INARY  U P  C OUNTER  IN  VHDL U SING  THE  T YPE  INTEGER 327
E XAMPLE  9.22. 4-B IT  B INARY  U P  C OUNTER  IN  VHDL U SING  THE  T YPE  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR
(1)
328
E XAMPLE  9.23. 4-B IT  B INARY  U P  C OUNTER  IN  VHDL U SING  THE  T YPE  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR
(2)
329
E XAMPLE  9.24. 4-B IT  B INARY  U P  C OUNTER  WITH  E NABLE  IN  VHDL 330
E XAMPLE  9.25. 4-B IT  B INARY  U P  C OUNTER  WITH  L OAD  IN  VHDL 331
E XAMPLE  9.26. RTL M ODEL  OF  AN  8-B IT  R EGISTER  IN  VHDL 332
E XAMPLE  9.27. RTL M ODEL  OF  A  4-S TAGE , 8-B IT  S HIFT  R EGISTER  IN  VHDL 333
E XAMPLE  9.28. R EGISTERS  AS  A GENTS  ON  A  D ATA  B US —S YSTEM  T OPOLOGY 334

--- Page 735 ---
E XAMPLE  9.29. R EGISTERS  AS  A GENTS  ON  A  D ATA  B US —RTL M ODEL  IN  VHDL 335
E XAMPLE  9.30. R EGISTERS  AS  A GENTS  ON  A  D ATA  B US —S IMULATION  W AVEFORM 336
E XAMPLE  10.1. C ALCULATING  THE  F INAL  D IGIT  L INE  V OLTAGE  IN  A  DRAM B ASED  ON  C HARGE
S HARING
338
E XAMPLE  10.2. B EHAVIORAL  M ODEL  OF  A  4 X 4 A SYNCHRONOUS  R EAD -O NLY  M EMORY  IN  VHDL 363
E XAMPLE  10.3. B EHAVIORAL  M ODEL  OF  A  4 X 4 S YNCHRONOUS  R EAD -O NLY  M EMORY  IN  VHDL 364
E XAMPLE  10.4. B EHAVIORAL  M ODEL  OF  A  4 X 4 A SYNCHRONOUS  R EAD /W RITE  M EMORY  IN  VHDL 366
E XAMPLE  10.5. B EHAVIORAL  M ODEL  OF  A  4 X 4 S YNCHRONOUS  R EAD /W RITE  M EMORY  IN  VHDL 367
E XAMPLE  12.1. D ESIGN  OF  A  H ALF  A DDER 386
E XAMPLE  12.2. D ESIGN  OF  A  F ULL  A DDER 386
E XAMPLE  12.3. D ESIGN  OF  A  F ULL  A DDER  O UT  OF  H ALF  A DDERS 388
E XAMPLE  12.4. D ESIGN  OF  A  4-B IT  R IPPLE  C ARRY  A DDER  (RCA) 389
E XAMPLE  12.5. T IMING  A NALYSIS  OF  A  4-B IT  R IPPLE  C ARRY  A DDER 390
E XAMPLE  12.6. D ESIGN  OF  A  4-B IT  C ARRY  L OOK  A HEAD  A DDER  (CLA)—O VERVIEW 391
E XAMPLE  12.7. D ESIGN  OF  A  4-B IT  C ARRY  L OOK  A HEAD  A DDER  (CLA)—A LGEBRAIC  F ORMATION 392
E XAMPLE  12.8. T IMING  A NALYSIS  OF  A  4-B IT  C ARRY  L OOK  A HEAD  A DDER 393
E XAMPLE  12.9. S TRUCTURAL  M ODEL  OF  A  F ULL  A DDER  IN  VHDL U SING  T WO  H ALF  A DDERS 394
E XAMPLE  12.10. S TRUCTURAL  M ODEL  OF  A  4-B IT  R IPPLE  C ARRY  A DDER  IN  VHDL 395
E XAMPLE  12.11. VHDL T EST  B ENCH  FOR  A  4-B IT  R IPPLE  C ARRY  A DDER  U SING  N ESTED  F OR
L OOPS
396
E XAMPLE  12.12. S TRUCTURAL  M ODEL  OF  A  4-B IT  C ARRY  L OOK  A HEAD  A DDER  IN  VHDL 397
E XAMPLE  12.13. 4-B IT  C ARRY  L OOK  A HEAD  A DDER —S IMULATION  W AVEFORM 398
E XAMPLE  12.14. B EHAVIORAL  M ODEL  OF  A  4-B IT  A DDER  IN  VHDL 399
E XAMPLE  12.15. D ESIGN  OF  A  4-B IT  S UBTRACTOR  U SING  F ULL  A DDERS 400
E XAMPLE  12.16. C REATING  A  P ROGRAMMABLE  I NVERTER  U SING  AN  XOR G ATE 400
E XAMPLE  12.17. D ESIGN  OF  A  4-B IT  P ROGRAMMABLE  A DDER /S UBTRACTOR 401
E XAMPLE  12.18. P ERFORMING  L ONG  M ULTIPLICATION  ON  D ECIMAL  N UMBERS 402
E XAMPLE  12.19. P ERFORMING  L ONG  M ULTIPLICATION  ON  B INARY  N UMBERS 403
E XAMPLE  12.20. D ESIGN  OF  A  S INGLE -B IT  M ULTIPLIER 403
E XAMPLE  12.21. D ESIGN  OF  A  4-B IT  U NSIGNED  M ULTIPLIER 404
E XAMPLE  12.22. T IMING  A NALYSIS  OF  A  4-B IT  U NSIGNED  M ULTIPLIER 404
E XAMPLE  12.23. M ULTIPLYING  AN  U NSIGNED  B INARY  N UMBERS  BY  T WO  U SING  A  L OGICAL  S HIFT
L EFT
405
E XAMPLE  12.24. I LLUSTRATING  H OW  AN  U NSIGNED  M ULTIPLIER  I NCORRECTLY  H ANDLES  S IGNED
N UMBERS
406
E XAMPLE  12.25. P ROCESS  TO  C ORRECTLY  H ANDLE  S IGNED  N UMBERS  U SING  AN  U NSIGNED
M ULTIPLIER
407
E XAMPLE  12.26. P ERFORMING  L ONG  D IVISION  ON  D ECIMAL  N UMBERS 408
E XAMPLE  12.27. P ERFORMING  L ONG  M ULTIPLICATION  ON  B INARY  N UMBERS 409

--- Page 736 ---
E XAMPLE  12.28. D ESIGN  OF  A  4-B IT  U NSIGNED  D IVIDER  U SING  A  S ERIES  OF  I TERATIVE
S UBTRACTORS
410
E XAMPLE  12.29. D IVIDING  1111 2 (15 10 ) BY  0111 2 (7 10 ) U SING  THE  I TERATIVE  S UBTRACTION
A RCHITECTURE
411
E XAMPLE  12.30. D IVIDING  AN  U NSIGNED  B INARY  N UMBERS  BY  T WO  U SING  A  L OGICAL  S HIFT
R IGHT
412
E XAMPLE  13.1. M EMORY  M AP  FOR  A  256 X 8 M EMORY  S YSTEM 422
E XAMPLE  13.2. E XECUTION  OF  AN  I NSTRUCTION  TO  “L OAD  R EGISTER  A U SING  I MMEDIATE
A DDRESSING ”
425
E XAMPLE  13.3. E XECUTION  OF  AN  I NSTRUCTION  TO  “L OAD  R EGISTER  A U SING  D IRECT
A DDRESSING ”
426
E XAMPLE  13.4. E XECUTION  OF  AN  I NSTRUCTION  TO  “S TORE  R EGISTER  A U SING  D IRECT
A DDRESSING ”
427
E XAMPLE  13.5. E XECUTION  OF  AN  I NSTRUCTION  TO  “A DD  R EGISTERS  A AND  B” 428
E XAMPLE  13.6. E XECUTION  OF  AN  I NSTRUCTION  TO  “B RANCH  A LWAYS ” 429
E XAMPLE  13.7. E XECUTION  OF  AN  I NSTRUCTION  TO  “B RANCH  IF  E QUAL  TO  Z ERO ” 430
E XAMPLE  13.8. T OP  L EVEL  B LOCK  D IAGRAM  FOR  THE  8-B IT  C OMPUTER  S YSTEM 432
E XAMPLE  13.9. I NSTRUCTION  S ET  FOR  THE  8-B IT  C OMPUTER  S YSTEM 433
E XAMPLE  13.10. M EMORY  S YSTEM  B LOCK  D IAGRAM  FOR  THE  8-B IT  C OMPUTER  S YSTEM 434
E XAMPLE  13.11. CPU B LOCK  D IAGRAM  FOR  THE  8-B IT  C OMPUTER  S YSTEM 438
E XAMPLE  13.12. S TATE  D IAGRAM  FOR  LDA_IMM 444
E XAMPLE  13.13. S IMULATION  W AVEFORM  FOR  LDA_IMM 445
E XAMPLE  13.14. S TATE  D IAGRAM  FOR  LDA_DIR 446
E XAMPLE  13.15. S IMULATION  W AVEFORM  FOR  LDA_DIR 447
E XAMPLE  13.16. S TATE  D IAGRAM  FOR  STA_DIR 448
E XAMPLE  13.17. S IMULATION  W AVEFORM  FOR  STA_DIR 449
E XAMPLE  13.18. S TATE  D IAGRAM  FOR  ADD_AB 450
E XAMPLE  13.19. S IMULATION  W AVEFORM  FOR  ADD_AB 451
E XAMPLE  13.20. S TATE  D IAGRAM  FOR  BRA 452
E XAMPLE  13.21. S IMULATION  W AVEFORM  FOR  BRA 453
E XAMPLE  13.22. S TATE  D IAGRAM  FOR  BEQ 454
E XAMPLE  13.23. S IMULATION  W AVEFORM  FOR  BEQ W HEN  T AKING  THE  B RANCH  (Z = 1) 455
E XAMPLE  13.24. S IMULATION  W AVEFORM  FOR  BEQ W HEN  THE  B RANCH  I S  N OT  T AKEN  (Z = 0) 456
Suggested Readings
1. Wakerly JF (2006) Digital design: principles and practice, 4th edn. Pearson Education, Upper
Saddle River, NJ

--- Page 737 ---
2. Kang S, Leblebici Y, Kim C (2015) “Combinational MOS logic circuits” in CMOS digital
integrated circuits: analysis and design, 4th edn. McGraw-Hill Education, New York, NY
3. Cady FM (2007) Software and hardware engineering. Oxford University Press, Upper Saddle
River, NJ
4. Ciletti MD (2003) Modeling, synthesis, and rapid prototyping with Verilog HDL. Prentice Hall,
Upper Saddle River, NJ
5. Mano MM, Ciletti MD (2012) Digital design – with an introduction to the Verilog HDL, 5th edn.
Pearson, Upper Saddle River, NJ
6. Yalamanchili S (1997) VHDL starter’s guide. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ
7. IEEE Standard VHDL Language Reference Manual (2009) in IEEE Std 1076-2008 (Revision of
IEEE Std 1076-2002), Jan. 26 2009
Index
A
Absorption
Abstraction
AC specifications
SeeSwitching characteristics
Adder/subtractor circuit
Adders
in VHDL
Addition
AND gate
Anti-fuse
Associative property
Asynchronous memory
Axioms
logical negation
logical precedence
logical product
logical sum
logical values

--- Page 738 ---
B
Base
Base conversions
binary to decimal
binary to hexadecimal
binary to octal
decimal to binary
decimal to decimal
decimal to hexadecimal
decimal to octal
hexadecimal to binary
hexadecimal to decimal
hexadecimal to octal
octal to binary
octal to decimal
octal to hexadecimal
Binary addition
SeeAddition
Binary number system
Binary subtraction
SeeSubtraction
Bipolar junction transistor (BJT)
Bistable
Boolean algebra
Boolean algebra theorems
Borrows
Break-before-make switch behavior
Buffer
Byte
C
Canonical product of sums
Canonical sum of products
Capacity
Carry
Carry look ahead adders (CLA)

--- Page 739 ---
Charge sharing
Classical digital design flow
CMOS
SeeComplementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS)
CMOS gates
inverter
NAND gate
NOR gate
Combinational logic analysis
Combining
Commutative property
Complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS)
operation
Complements
Complete sum
Complex programmable logic device (CPLD)
Computer system design
addressing modes
arithmetic logic unit (ALU)
central processing unit
condition code register
control unit
data memory
data path
direct addressing
example 8-bit system
control unit
CPU
data path
detailed instruction execution
instruction set
memory system
general purpose registers
hardware
immediate addressing
indexed addressing
inherent addressing

--- Page 740 ---
input output ports
instruction register
instructions
branches
data manipulations
loads and stores
memory address register
memory map
memory mapped system
opcodes
operands
program
counter
memory
registers
software
Configurable logic block (CLB)
Conjunction ( ∧ )
Converting between bases
SeeBase conversions
Converting between positive and negative logic
Counters
designing by hand
modeling in VHDL
Covering
Cross-coupled inverter pair
D
Data sheet
7400 DC operating conditions
DC specifications
I IH-max
I IL-max
I I-max
I OH-max
I OL-max

--- Page 741 ---
I O-max
I q (quiescent current)
NM H
NM L
V IH-max
V IH-min
V IL-max
V IL-min
V OH-max
V OH-min
V OL-max
V OL-min
Decimal number system
Decoders
DeMorgan’s Theorem
DeMorgan's Theorem of Duality
Demultiplexer design by hand
Demultiplexer modeling in VHDL
Demultiplexers
Design abstraction
Design domains
behavioral
physical
structural
Design levels
algorithmic
circuit
gate
register transfer
system
Design simplicity
D-flip-flop
Digit
Digit notation
Digital design flow

--- Page 742 ---
Diodes
7400 DIP pinout
Discrete components
Disjunction ( ∨ )
Distinguished one cells
Distributive property
Division
by powers of 2
signed
unsigned
using iterative subtractions
D latch
Don’t cares (X)
Double pole, double throw (DPDT) switch
Double pole, single throw (DPST) switch
Driving loads
Driving resistive loads
Dual in-line package (DIP)
Duality
Dynamic hazard
Dynamic random access memory (DRAM)
E
Electrical signaling
Electrically erasable programmable read only memory (EEPROM)
Encoders
Erasable programmable read only memory (EPROM)
Essential prime implicant
F
Field programmable gate array (FPGA)
Finite state machines (FSM)
behavioral modeling in VHDL
binary state encoding
design examples by hand
design process

--- Page 743 ---
final logic diagram
gray code state encoding
introduction
next state logic
one-hot state encoding
output logic
reset condition
state diagram
state memory
state transition table
state variables
synthesis by hand
FLASH memory
NAND-FLASH
NOR-FLASH
Floating-gate transistor
Forward current (I F )
Forward voltage (V F )
Full adders
Functionally complete sets
Fuse
G
Gajski and Kuhn’s Y-chart
Gates
Generic array logic (GAL)
Glitches
H
Half adders
Hard array logic (HAL)
Hazards
Hexadecimal number system
History of HDLs

--- Page 744 ---
I
Idempotent
Identity theorem
Input/output blocks (IOBs)
Integrated circuit
Inverter
Involution
K
Karnaugh map (K-map)
L
Large scale integrated circuit (LSI) logic
Leading zero
Least significant bit (LSB)
Light emitting diodes (LEDs)
Logic block (LE)
Logic expression
Logic families
Logic function
Logic HIGH
Logic levels
Logic LOW
Logic minimization
Logic symbol
Logic synthesis
Logic value
Logic waveform
Look-up table (LUT)
M
Mask read-only memory (MROM)
Maxterm list (Π)
Maxterms
Mealy machine

--- Page 745 ---
Medium scale integrated circuit (MSI) logic
Memory map model
Metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistor (MOSFET)
Metastability
Minimal sum
Minimization
of logic algebraically
of logic using K-maps
Minterm list (∑)
Minterms
Modern digital design flow
Moore machine
MOSFET
SeeMetal oxide semiconductor field effect transistor (MOSFET)
Most significant bit (MSB)
Multiplexer design by hand
Multiplexer modeling in VHDL
Multiplexers
Multiplication
by powers of 2
combinational multiplier
shift and add approach
signed
unsigned
N
NAND-debounce circuit
NAND gate
Negation (¬)
Negative logic
Nibble
NMOS
Noise
Noise margin HIGH (MN H )
Noise margin LOW (MN L )
Non-volatile memory

--- Page 746 ---
NOR gate
NPN
Null element
Numerals
O
Octal number system
Ohm’s law
One-hot binary encoder design by hand
One-hot binary encoder modeling in VHDL
One-hot decoder design by hand
One-hot decoder modeling in VHDL
One’s complement numbers
OR gate
Output DC specifications
SeeDC specifications
Output logic macrocell (OLMC)
P
7400 Part numbering scheme
Place and route
PMOS
PNP
Positional number system
Positional weight
Positive logic
Postulates
Power consumption
Power supplies
I CC
I GND
V CC
Prime implicant
Product of sums (POS) form
Programmable array logic (PAL)

--- Page 747 ---
Programmable interconnect points (PIPs)
Programmable logic array (PLA)
Programmable read only memory (PROM)
Proof by exhaustion
Q
Quiescent current (I q )
R
Radix
Radix point
Random access memory (RAM)
Range
one’s complement numbers
signed magnitude numbers
two’s complement numbers
unsigned numbers
Read cycle
Read only memory (ROM)
Read/write (RW) memory
Ripple carry adders (RCA)
Ripple counter
S
7-Segment decoder design by hand
7-Segment decoder modeling in VHDL
Semiconductor memory
7400 Series logic families
Sequential access memory
Sequential logic analysis
Sequential logic timing
Shift register
Signaling
Signed magnitude numbers
Signed numbers

--- Page 748 ---
Simple programmable logic device (SPLD)
Single pole, double throw (SPDT) switch
Single pole, single throw (SPST) switch
Sinking current
Small scale integrated circuit (SSI) logic
Sourcing and sinking multiple loads
Sourcing current
Sourcing multiple loads
SR latch
SR latch with enable
Static 0 hazard
Static 1 hazard
Static random access memory (SRAM)
Subtraction
Sum of products (SOP) form
Switch debouncing
Switching characteristics
t f (fall time)
t PHL (propagation delay HIGH to LOW)
t PLH (propagation delay LOW to HIGH)
t r (rise time)
t t (transition time)
Synchronous memory
T
Technology mapping
Timing hazards
Toggle flop (T-flop)
Trailing zero
Transistor-transistor logic (TTL)
Transmitter/receiver circuit
Truth table formation
TTL operation
Two’s complement arithmetic
Two’s complement numbers

--- Page 749 ---
U
Uniting
Unsigned numbers
V
Verification
Verilog HDL
Very large scale integrated circuit (VLSI) logic
VHDL
VHDL behavioral modeling techniques
adders
counters
using type INTEGER
using type STD_LOGIC_VECTOR
using type UNSIGNED
with enables
with loads
D-flip-flops
D-latches
finite state machines
design examples
explicit state encoding using subtypes
three process model
user-enumerated state encoding
modeling agents on a bus
modeling memory
modeling registers
modeling shift registers
RTL modeling
VHDL constructs
architecture
assignment operator (<=)
attributes
case statements
component declaration
concatenation operator

--- Page 750 ---
concurrent signal assignments
concurrent signal assignments with logical operators
conditional signal assignments
constant declaration
data types
delayed signal assignments
inertial
transport
entity
entity definition
for loops
if/then statements
libraries and packages
logical operators
loop statements
numerical operators
operators
packages
process
sensitivity list
wait statement
relational operators
selected signal assignments
sequential signal assignments
shift operators
signal declaration
structural design
component declaration
component instantiation
explicit port mapping
port mapping
positional port mapping
test benches
assert statements
reading/writing external files
report statements
variables

--- Page 751 ---
while loops
VHDL data types
array
bit
bit_vector
boolean
character
integer
natural
positive
real
std_logic
std_logic_vector
std_ulogic
std_ulogic_vector
string
time
user-defined enumerated
VHDL packages
MATH_COMPLEX
MATH_REAL
NUMERIC_BIT
NUMERIC_BIT_UNSIGNED
NUMERIC_STD
conversion functions
type casting
NUMERIC_STD_UNSIGNED
standard
STD_LOGIC_1164
resolution function
type conversions
STD_LOGIC_ARITH
STD_LOGIC_SIGNED
STD_LOGIC_TEXTIO
STD_LOGIC_UNSIGNED
TEXTIO
Volatile memory

--- Page 752 ---
W
Weight
Word
Write cycle
X
X-don’t cares
XNOR gate
XOR gate
XOR/XNOR gates in K-maps
Y
Y-chart