--- Page 2 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 3 ---
Creating iOS Apps
Develop and Design
Second Edition
Richard Warren
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 4 ---
Creating iOS Apps: Develop and Design, Second Edition
Richard Warren
Peachpit Press
www.peachpit.com
To report errors, please send a note to errata@peachpit.com
Peachpit Press is a division of Pearson Education.
Copyright 2014 by Richard Warren
Editor: Kim Wimpsett
Production editor: Katerina Malone
Proofreader: Darren Meiss
Technical editors: Seulgi Kim and Aaron Daub
Compositor: Danielle Foster
Indexer: Valerie Haynes Perry
Cover design: Aren Straiger
Interior design: Mimi Heft
Notice of Rights
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted
in any form by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording,
or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher. For
information on getting permission for reprints and excerpts, contact
permissions@peachpit.com.
Notice of Liability
The information in this book is distributed on an “As Is” basis, without
warranty. While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of the
book, neither the authors nor Peachpit shall have any liability to any person
or entity with respect to any loss or damage caused or alleged to be caused
directly or indirectly by the instructions contained in this book or by the
computer software and hardware products described in it.
Trademarks
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish
their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear

--- Page 5 ---
in this book, and Peachpit was aware of a trademark claim, the designations
appear as requested by the owner of the trademark. All other product names
and services identified throughout this book are used in editorial fashion
only and for the benefit of such companies with no intention of
infringement of the trademark. No such use, or the use of any trade name, is
intended to convey endorsement or other affiliation with this book.
ISBN-13: 978-0-321-93413-0
ISBN-10:        0-321-93413-X
Printed and bound in the United States of America
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 6 ---
To my wife, Mika; my daughter, Haruko; and my son, Kai.
Thank you for your understanding and patience.
I owe each of you more than I could possibly express.
You’ve put up with a lot of extremely long hours and
general grumpiness over the last few months.
I really appreciate everything you’ve done to support me.
I couldn’t have made it without you.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 7 ---
Acknowledgements
I’d like to start by thanking all the students who have taken my classes and
all the people who have visited my web site and posted questions or
comments about the first edition of this book. You’ve given me a lot to
think about, and a lot of the changes that I’ve made have come from your
suggestions.
I would also like to thank the developers and Apple engineers on the
Apple Developer forums. When working with new technologies, we often
don’t have an established set of best practices to fall back on. Having such
an active group of people to discuss ideas and share notes with makes a
huge difference.
Additionally, the book would not have been possible without the editors
and production people at Peachpit. You’ve helped clarify my intentions and
made the meaning behind my words come through clear. The layout and
design of the new book look stunning, and I’m sure there are a thousand
other things you’ve done that I know nothing about.
Mostly, I’d like to thank everyone who read and enjoyed the first edition.
You made the second edition possible.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 8 ---
About the Author
Richard splits his time between software development, teaching, and
technical writing. He has a strong background in artificial intelligence
research (machine learning and probabilistic decision making) and software
engineering. Richard previously worked as a scientist for a small R&D
company, developing Java software focused on computer vision and data
analysis. Since escaping the Java world, Richard has spent the last three
years focusing on hands-on, freelance consulting work for the iOS platform.
During that time, he has developed a broad range of iOS apps with an
emphasis on casual gaming. Richard is also the author of Creating iOS 5
Apps: Develop and Design (December, 2011, Peachpit Press) and
Objective-C Boot Camp: Foundation and Patterns for iOS Development
(July 2011, Peachpit Press). Additionally, he has written articles for
MacTech magazine over the last seven years. Finally, Richard is one of the
senior iOS and Objective-C instructors for About Objects.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 9 ---
Contents
Welcome to Creating iOS 7 Apps
CHAPTER 1 HELLO, iOS
An Introduction to iOS
Getting Started with iOS
Exploring Xcode
Surveying the Project
Modifying the Template
Wrapping Up
Other Resources
CHAPTER 2 OUR APPLICATION’S ARCHITECTURE
Starting with the Basic Building Blocks
Kicking Off the Health Beat Project
Building the Model
Laying Out the Storyboard
Connecting the Model
Wrapping Up
Other Resources
CHAPTER 3 DEVELOPING VIEWS AND VIEW CONTROLLERS
Initial Housekeeping
Rotations, Resizing, and Redrawing
Updating Health Beat
Wrapping Up
Other Resources
CHAPTER 4 CUSTOM VIEWS AND CUSTOM TRANSITIONS
Custom Drawing

--- Page 10 ---
Custom Transitions
Wrapping Up
Other Resources
CHAPTER 5 LOADING AND SAVING DATA
The iOS File System
Managing User Preferences
Saving the Weight History Document
Wrapping Up
Other Resources
CHAPTER 6 iCLOUD SYNCING
What Is iCloud Syncing?
iCloud APIs
Adding Key-Value Syncing to Health Beat
Adding Document Syncing to Health Beat
Debugging iCloud Document Storage
Wrapping Up
Other Resources
CHAPTER 7 CORE DATA
Introducing Core Data
Architecture Overview
Core Data Performance
iCloud Support
Converting Health Beat
Wrapping Up
Other Resources
CHAPTER 8 ADVANCED USER INTERFACES
Creating Motion Effects
Creating Physically Real Animations

--- Page 11 ---
Wrapping Up
Other Resources
CHAPTER 9 THE LAST MILE
The Final Touches
Building for Distribution
Wrapping Up
Other Resources
Index
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 12 ---
Welcome to Creating iOS 7 Apps
This book serves two goals: introducing new developers to iOS
development and educating experienced developers about the changes in
iOS 7. We will examine a wide range of subjects—some new and some old
—covering everything from building an initial iOS project to submitting
your app to the iTunes App Store. For more information, including bonus
chapters, sample code, and FAQs, check out
www.freelancemadscience.com/books.
iOS 7 Technologies and Tools
Over the course of this book, we will discuss the key technologies and
development tools you will need to create high-quality iOS applications.
Let’s take a look at the most important of these.

--- Page 13 ---
Storyboards
Storyboards allow us to rapidly design the relationships and
segues between different scenes in our application. This lets
us sketch out and edit our entire application’s workflow very
early in the design process. We can also show the storyboard
to our clients, getting approval and feedback before we invest
a significant amount of time in writing code.
Auto Layout
Creating a user interface that can automatically adapt to
changes in size has become increasingly important. Whether
you’re responding to rotation events, trying to design an
interface that works on both 3.5- and 4-inch phones or
adjusting the user interface because of changes from
Dynamic Type, Auto Layout makes creating truly adaptive

--- Page 14 ---
interfaces possible. Furthermore, iOS 7 and Xcode 5 offer
significantly better support for Auto Layout. If you haven’t
tried Auto Layout lately, you should look at it again.
Animation
While visually stunning animations have always been part of
the iOS experience, iOS 7’s new user interface places a much
greater emphasis on attractive, functional animations. The
new, “flatter” look de-emphasizes visual ornamentation but
replaces it with custom transitions and interactive
animations. Furthermore, new technologies like
UIMotionEffects and UIKit Dynamics help give our
applications depth.
Xcode


--- Page 15 ---
Xcode provides an integrated development environment,
giving us a wide range of tools to both create and manage our
projects. It handles everything from running and debugging
our code to designing our UI and data models. As iOS
developers, we will spend most of our time in Xcode. Having
a well-grounded understanding of its features is essential to
our success.
iOS Simulator
The iOS Simulator application lets us run, debug, test, and
profile our code directly on a Mac. While the simulator will
never replace testing on an actual device, it has a number of
advantages. For example, developers can begin using the
simulator before they join the iOS Developer Program. It’s
also easier and faster to run quick tests in the simulator,
letting us perform rapid develop/test/iterate cycles as we add
new features to our applications. The simulator also lets us
trigger system events, such as memory warnings, that
wouldn’t be possible when testing on a device.

--- Page 16 ---
Instruments
Apple’s premier profiling tool, Instruments lets us
dynamically trace and analyze code running either in the
simulator or directly on an iOS device. It lets us track and
record everything from object allocations and timer-based
samples to file access and energy use. It also provides the
tools necessary for sifting through and analyzing the data that
it generates. In experienced hands, Instruments can help us to
fix bugs and polish our code.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 17 ---
Chapter 1. Hello, iOS
Before you can master any skill, you must first become comfortable with
the tools. In this chapter, we will gain hands-on experience using some of
these tools.
We will start with Xcode, the primary development tool for iOS
applications. We will use Xcode to create a new project and then examine
the files created by the project template. In particular, we will study how the
different pieces of an iOS application fit together.
Once we are familiar with the project template, we will expand upon it,
using Xcode’s graphical interface editor to add controls and to draw
connections between these controls and their actions. Together these
exercises will provide a solid foundation for working on more complex
projects in later chapters.
An Introduction to iOS
If this is your first exposure to iOS development, welcome to an exciting
new world. The iOS lineup provides a number of great devices for you to
explore. The iPhone, in particular, brings together a wide range of exciting
technologies, including always-on Internet, location awareness, device
motion tracking, a responsive multi-touch interface, a high-resolution
display, and high-performance graphics acceleration. In the not so distant
past, developers had to either build custom hardware or pay tens of
thousands of dollars just to experiment with many of these technologies.
Now you can fit the entire package in your pocket and carry it with you
wherever you go.
The iPhone’s hardware opens up previously unimaginable opportunities.
Over the last few years, iOS has quietly grown into a surprisingly robust
gaming platform. From casual games like Angry Birds to AAA titles like
XCOM: Enemy Unknown, we’re seeing a growing depth and breadth of
games. And, with iOS 7’s support for game controllers and other expanded
game-based technologies, this trend will undoubtedly accelerate.
Meanwhile, revolutionary new social networking and location-aware
apps continue to become a growing part of our digital lifestyle. There’s still
no sign that this flurry of innovation is slowing. In the first edition of this

--- Page 18 ---
book, I claimed we had just begun to scratch the surface of what these
devices can do. I still feel that way. The best ideas are yet to come.
Apple has also created a rich and vibrant marketplace for our apps. At the
2013 World Wide Developer’s Conference, Apple CEO Tim Cook
announced that Apple has more than 575 million accounts linked to the App
Store, each only one click away. These customers have downloaded more
than 50 billion apps, resulting in more than $10 billion paid to developers—
$5 billion of that in the last year alone. This makes the App Store one of the
biggest marketplaces on the Internet, and its growth continues to accelerate.
This provides exciting opportunities for both large and small
development teams. For larger corporations, it opens a specialized, focused
channel for interacting with your customers. A well-built, tightly focused
application not only enhances your customers’ experiences, it becomes a
powerful public relations tool. Your app will help build brand loyalty with
existing customers, while improving brand awareness among potential
customers.
On the other end of the spectrum, the App Store makes it possible for
one- or two-person development teams to get their products in front of
millions of customers. You don’t have to build and maintain your own
online store. You don’t need to collect money or process credit card
transactions. Apple handles those details for you. You can focus on the part
you love—building great applications.
Of course, the size of the App Store also brings challenges. With more
than 900,000 apps in the store, the competition has become fierce. Just
having a good idea isn’t enough. You must back it with rock-solid and high-
performance code, an intuitive and responsive user interface, and visually
appealing layout and design.
So, the App Store is the 800-pound gorilla in the room, but you don’t
necessarily have to let it distract you. It’s not always about producing
commercial software. A growing number of developers use iOS devices as
platforms for any number of personal or educational projects. You can find
iOS-based experiments in everything from middle-school science fairs to
robotics labs. And with iPhone’s low-power Bluetooth 4.0 and Wi-Fi
connections, we can easily interface our apps with other objects out in the
real world.

--- Page 19 ---
Finally, Apple has given us a set of high-quality development tools.
Xcode 5 continues to improve and refine the development environment,
providing a wide range of utilities for testing, analyzing, and debugging
code.
Apple also provides a top-notch programming language with an excellent
set of frameworks. I know, I know...a lot of new iOS programmers balk at
learning Objective-C, and I admit that the learning curve can feel quite
steep, especially when you’re struggling to get started. Still, once you
become comfortable with the language, you will quickly begin to appreciate
its power and elegance. Besides, learning a new programming language
helps stretch your brain in interesting new ways. Objective-C will make you
a better developer, even if you never use it for production code.
Objective-C is a dynamic, incredibly flexible programming language. It
provides a number of features that will (if used properly) help overcome
many difficult programming challenges. Likewise, the iOS software
development kit (SDK) provides a wide range of excellent frameworks that
let us rapidly build our apps.
Frameworks are one of the most difficult pieces of software to design.
Ideally, they should make it simple for developers to perform common
tasks, while still giving us enough freedom to strike out into uncharted
territory. By those metrics, Cocoa Touch is one of the best frameworks that
I have ever used. Indeed, if you find yourself writing a lot of code to do a
common task, you are almost certainly doing something wrong.
I hope that this book will provide a gentle introduction to the world of
iOS development. While it’s not possible to cover every aspect or explore
every framework, this book should give you a strong foundation to build on
and the tools and skills to continue exploring on your own.
Additionally, while most of the book focuses on developing for the
iPhone, the concepts and techniques apply to any iOS device: iPod touch,
iPod, iPad Mini, and iWhateverMayCome. There are very few differences
between devices. The iPad, for example, has a couple of unique user
interface elements—but outside of those, everything else is the same.
While the exact differences between iPhone and iPad development is
beyond the scope of this book, detailed information can be found in the
bonus chapter “From iPhone to iPad” at

--- Page 20 ---
www.freelancemadscience.com/creating-ios-7-apps-
bonus-chap/.
For now, let’s jump right in to our first project. Let’s begin by building a
simple utility application that displays a one-line message. Don’t worry if
you don’t understand the code the first time through. The “Objective-C”
bonus chapter, also at
www.freelancemadscience.com/creating-ios-7-apps-
bonus-chap/, covers the programming language in more depth. For
now, use this as an opportunity to settle into the development environment.
Getting Started with iOS
Ask any craftsperson—if you want to succeed, you must have the right
tools for the job. For iOS development, this means having a Macintosh
running OS X 10.8.4 or newer and a copy of Xcode 5. If you want to run
your programs on an actual iOS device, you will also need a compatible
device running iOS 7 (iPhone 4, fifth-generation iPod touch, iPad 2, iPad
Mini or newer) and the appropriate developer/provisioning profiles.
We’ll talk more about provisioning profiles in Chapter 2. For now, begin
by downloading the latest version of Xcode from the Mac App Store. This
is a free application, and downloading it through the App Store makes
keeping all your development tools up-to-date very easy.
If you want to test your code on actual iOS devices or want to submit
your application to the iTunes App Store, you will need to join the iOS
Developer Program. This costs $99 a year for individuals or organizations.
Students at universities can often get free access as part of their coursework,
and large organizations may look into getting an enterprise license, letting
them develop and distribute proprietary, in-house applications.
However, we can begin using Xcode for free—simply building and
testing our apps in the simulator. While we wouldn’t want to rely on the
simulator for serious testing of production code, it is an easy way to start
out.
Xcode is an integrated development environment (IDE) specifically
designed for programming both Mac OS X and iOS. As the name suggests,
an IDE is more than just a text editor. It is an interconnected suite of tools
that helps you organize, edit, debug, manage, and otherwise herd all the
resources into your final program. Through Xcode you can manage your

--- Page 21 ---
assets, visually lay out the user interface, test run your program in an iOS
simulator, step through your code one command at a time, analyze your
application’s performance, and more.
 Note
All the projects in this book were developed and tested using
Xcode 5 and iOS SDK 7.0. If the past is any indication,
Apple loves to make small (and sometimes not so small)
changes even in minor releases. This means later versions
will undoubtedly differ from what you see here. Menu
options and the details of project templates will probably
change. More rarely, updates to the SDK can affect how
projects compile and run. Be aware, if you are using a newer
version of either Xcode or the SDK, you may have to do
some exploring and possibly even some debugging on your
own. As always, if you run into problems and need help,
check the errata or forums on the book’s website:
www.freelancemadscience.com/books/.
Once you have downloaded and installed Xcode (at almost 2GB, this
may require a bit of patience), launch it, and let’s get started.
Creating the Workspace
We will start by creating a new workspace. In Xcode, a workspace is a
virtual box for organizing related projects. The workspace contains schemes
for building and launching those projects, along with other related data.
Xcode will allow you to search through all files in the workspace, and it
will support workspace-wide indexing of those files. This allows features
such as code completion, Jump to Definition, Open Quickly, and refactoring
to operate smoothly across the entire workspace.
Workspaces simply let us organize our projects. They do not define
where or how the individual projects are stored. Each workspace can have
any number of projects, and each project can exist in any number of
workspaces. This gives developers a lot of flexibility in organizing their
work. You can even create specialized workspaces that focus on one

--- Page 22 ---
particular task. For example, you may create one workspace for unit tests,
another for debugging, and yet another for performance testing.
You don’t need to create a workspace; you could simply start with a
freestanding project. Nevertheless, it’s a nice way to keep everything tidy.
Let’s build a workspace that will contain all the projects in this book. In
Xcode, select the File > New > New Workspace menu item. Name the
workspace iOS 7 Development, choose a location for it, and click Save.
Xcode will then open a window that shows your empty workspace: no files,
no editor, and no scheme (Figure 1.1).
FIGURE 1.1 Our empty workspace
Creating the Project
With the workspace open, create a new project. In Xcode, select File > New
> Project.... This will open the project template sheet (Figure 1.2). Xcode
provides a wide range of templates for new projects. In the left column,
select iOS > Application. Then, select the icon for Utility Application and
click Next.

--- Page 23 ---
FIGURE 1.2 Selecting the iOS Utility Application template
We’re now ready to choose the options for our project. Enter Hello
World in the Product Name field. The Organization Name field should be
either your name or the name of your company.
The Company Identifier field must be a string that uniquely identifies the
organization (or you). In most cases, you will use reverse-DNS for the
company identifier. This is the domain name of your main website with the
levels reversed. Start with the top-level domain and work toward the
second- and third-level domains. For example, I would use the reversed
domain name from my blog: com.freelancemadscience.
Xcode combines the company identifier and the product name to
generate a Bundle Identifier for your app. This is a unique key that Apple
will use to refer to your application once you submit it to the App Store.
Next, we have the Class Prefix field. Xcode will automatically add this
prefix to all the class names generated by the template. It will also insert the
prefix at the beginning of the Class field, whenever we create a new class.
This makes it easy to consistently use the same prefix across an entire
project.

--- Page 24 ---
But, why do we need these prefixes? Well, we can blame them on
Objective-C. Unfortunately, unlike many modern languages, Objective-C
does not support namespaces. This means each class in our project must
have a unique name. That’s not a serious restriction when working within a
single, isolated project—but once we start to use third-party libraries, we
could quickly find ourselves drowning in conflicts.
To prevent naming conflicts, Objective-C developers have adopted the
convention of adding prefixes to their class names. Apple, for example, uses
a number of prefixes for its classes. Most commonly Apple uses NS and UI,
though other frameworks have their own prefixes. Properly designed third-
party libraries will also prefix all their classes.
For our classes, we can use any prefix we like. Just try to pick something
unique. We’d definitely want to avoid NS or UI, since Apple has already
claimed them. Actually, Apple is rapidly using up all the good two-letter
combinations, so I recommend picking a three-letter prefix.
We can even leave it blank and not add any prefixes to our classes. When
developing a self-contained application, as long as everyone else plays by
the rules, this works fine. Personally, for application code, I prefer to leave
off the prefixes. Having simple, clean class names makes the project easier
to read and navigate. So, that’s the approach I’ll take throughout this book.
However, if you’re working on a larger project or with a sizeable team, you
may find that adding prefixes greatly simplifies the management and
coordination of your code.

--- Page 25 ---
 Note
You should always prefix shared code. This is especially true
when developing libraries, whether for internal use or to
distribute publically. Prefixing your code lets other
developers use your code without worrying about possible
naming conflicts. It also makes it easier to identify where a
class comes from. For example, all classes starting with RGS
come from my ReallyGreatStuff library. Most importantly, if
you don’t prefix your classes and I find out, you can expect a
sternly worded email! You have been warned.
So, let’s leave the Class Prefix field blank. Also, make sure that iPhone is
selected in the Devices pop-up menu and that the Use Core Data checkbox
is unselected. Our settings should now match those shown in Figure 1.3.
FIGURE 1.3 Selecting the project options
This brings up the Save sheet. Select a location for the project. I usually
put it in the same folder as the primary workspace. By default, Xcode will

--- Page 26 ---
create a new folder using the project’s name.
You can also create a Git repository for this project. In general, source
control is a very good idea and should be included in all your projects. We
will begin using source control in Chapter 2, but we won’t go into detail
about it in this book. If you want more information, I have additional
resources at www.freelancemadscience.com/books/.
For now, make sure the Source Control: checkbox is unselected.
Finally, we want to add this project to our workspace. Click the Add to:
pop-up and select our iOS 7 Development workspace. The settings should
now match Figure 1.4.
FIGURE 1.4 Selecting the project’s location
That’s it. Click Create, and Xcode will set up our project.

--- Page 27 ---
Exploring Xcode
Now that we have a project open, we can explore Xcode. Broadly speaking,
we can divide the interface into five main pieces: toolbar, Navigator,
Utilities, Debug area, and the Editor (Figure 1.5). Of these, we can hide
everything except the Editor.
FIGURE 1.5 Xcode overview
Toolbar
The toolbar presents commonly used tools and notifications. From left to
right, it contains Run, Stop, Active Scheme, Destination, Status window,
Standard Editor, Assistant Editor, Version Editor, Navigator, Debug area,
and Utilities area (Figure 1.6).
FIGURE 1.6 Toolbar

--- Page 28 ---
The Run button will build the application using the currently selected
scheme and then upload and run it on the currently selected device.
The Stop button will kill the current application.
 Note
When you click the Stop button, the application is
immediately killed. It does not go through the normal
shutdown procedure. This distinction will become important
when we start saving and loading data. Not surprisingly, we
will revisit it in Chapter 5, “Loading and Saving Data.”
The next two buttons control the active scheme. In Xcode, schemes are
used to define both the configuration and device to use when building and
running the app. The first button sets the active scheme. You can also use it
to create new schemes or edit existing schemes.
The second sets the destination. In our case, this will include the iPhone
and iPad simulators, as well as any test devices that are currently attached
to the computer. Just pick the location where you want the app to run.
Xcode uses the Status window to display messages as it builds and runs
our application. More importantly, it displays errors or warning icons if our
code currently has any issues. We can click the error and warning icons in
the Status window to navigate directly to the first issue of that type.
 Note
If you haven’t set up your developer’s certificate and
provisioning profiles yet, you will probably see one or two
warnings. It’s OK to ignore these for now. The project will
still build and run on the simulator.
The Standard Editor, Assistant Editor, and Version Editor buttons let us
select the type of editor to we want to use. The Standard editor simply
displays a single editor, appropriate to the currently selected file. For code,
this will be a text editor. For storyboards, this will be a graphical user

--- Page 29 ---
interface editor (often referred to as Interface Builder). We will see other
editors as we progress through the book.
The Assistant editor displays two editor windows either stacked vertically
or side-by-side. Use the View > Assistant Editor menu items to modify how
the views are arranged. The main window will show the currently selected
file, while the assistant window shows a related file.
The Version editor works with our project’s source control management
software and lets us view two different versions of the same file, with the
differences highlighted. For this project, it won’t be very useful, since we
did not create a Git repository.
The last three buttons are toggles. They hide or display the Navigator,
Debug area, and Utilities, respectively. If the button is blue, the
corresponding area will be shown onscreen. If it’s grayed out, the area will
be hidden.
Finally, we can hide and show the toolbar using the View > Hide Toolbar
and View > Show Toolbar menu items.
Navigator
The Navigator lets us navigate through various aspects of our project. The
Navigator has eight tabs, each showing a different view into our project.
The Project navigator displays all the files, frameworks, and other
resources included in our project. Select a file to open it in the editor.
Most of the time, we will use the Project navigator to move around
our project.
The Symbol navigator shows all the symbols in our project: the
classes, methods, protocols, and so on.
The Find navigator lets us search through our workspace. Use 
F
when searching within a single file. Use the File navigator to search
across multiple files.

--- Page 30 ---
The Issue navigator displays our project’s warnings and errors. We
can click an issue in the Issue navigator, and it will take us to the
problem in our code.
The Test navigator displays our unit tests. We can see the results of
our tests, as well as rerunning individual tests.
The Debug navigator displays the stack trace for each thread when
debugging. We can use this to move back up the stack trace.
The Breakpoint navigator displays all the breakpoints in our project.
We can edit and delete breakpoints here. We can also create symbolic
or exception breakpoints.
The Log navigator shows both the console logs and the build logs.
While Xcode is open, it will save these logs each time you build and
run the application. When you close and reopen Xcode, it will clear
all but the most recent set of logs.
Most of the Navigator tabs have controls on the bottom to let us filter its
content. This can be handy as the number of files in your project begins to
grow.

--- Page 31 ---
 Note
You don’t need to use the Navigator to open files. The File >
Open Quickly... menu item (or 
O) will open a pop-up
window. Type in the name of a symbol or file, and it will
display a list of suggestions. Just select the one you want to
open it. The Open Quickly window does a great job of
intelligently guessing likely matches. If you have a fairly
good idea of what you’re looking for, Open Quickly will be
faster than searching the Navigator.
Utilities
The Utilities area consists of two parts: inspectors and libraries (Figure
1.7).

--- Page 33 ---
FIGURE 1.7 Inspectors and libraries
Inspectors let us observe and configure the item we are currently editing.
Each type of editor has its own set of inspectors. For example, the text
editor has only two inspectors: File and Quick Help. Interface Builder has
six: File, Quick Help, Identity, Attributes, Size, and Connections. You can
find these by clicking on Main.storyboard.
The File inspector provides information about the file itself: where it
is saved, which targets it is included in, and so on.
The Quick Help inspector provides a summary of the currently
selected object (or, for text, the symbol at the cursor’s current
location). Quick Help usually includes links to an appropriate header
file, to Apple’s documentation, and to any appropriate sample
projects.
The Identity inspector is primarily used to change the class of an
object to a custom subclass when graphically designing user
interfaces. The accessibility settings are also located here. We can
even set an Xcode-specific label for the object or use Key-Value
Coding to set properties not exposed through the Attributes inspector.
Don’t worry if this doesn’t make a lot of sense. We’ll see it in action
later.
The Attributes inspector is where we will spend most of our time,
especially when designing user interfaces. This inspector lets us
modify and configure the selected object. Each type of object has a
custom set of attributes that we can modify. For example, views have
a background color attribute (among many others).


--- Page 34 ---
The Size inspector is also commonly used when designing user
interfaces. This inspector displays the current position and size of the
selected object. We can also view and modify the auto layout
constraints for that object.
The Connections inspector displays all the connections for the
currently selected object. We will get some hands-on experience
drawing connections later in this chapter.
The libraries provide elements that we can drag out and add to our
project. Each library works in its own way. There are four tabs, letting us
select the four different libraries.
The File Template library, as the name suggests, is a library of file
templates. To add a new file to our project, you can simply drag an
item from the library and drop it into the Project navigator.
The Code Snippet library lists the commonly used code snippets. This
is a great place to look if you cannot remember how to write a proper
init method, fast enumeration, or a dispatch once block. Just drag
an item out into the text editor and then modify it as needed.
The Object library is honestly the library I use 90 percent of the time.
This is strictly used for interface development. This library contains
all the controls, controllers, and containers we will use to design our
user interface. Simply drag them out into Interface Builder, resize
them, and draw the connections. We’ll get some hands-on experience
using this library later in this chapter.
The Media library displays all the media files added to your project.
You can drag and drop these directly onto the user interface; however,

--- Page 35 ---
in practice I never do this. I typically either programmatically load the
media file or I set them using a control’s attribute. The Attributes
inspector will automatically list all the appropriate media files for a
given setting—so there’s usually no need to come down here.
Debug Area
The Debug area consists of two parts: Console and Variables. As our
application runs, anything printed to the standard output will appear in the
Console window. If we stop at a breakpoint, we will get additional
information about local variables in the Variables window. Additionally, our
Console window becomes an active control. We can type debugger
commands directly into the console. For example, we can use the po
command to print an Objective-C object, or the p command to print C-data.
Click here to view code image
po self.label
<UILabel: 0x8e828e0; frame = (20 225; 280 29); text = 'Hello
World'; clipsToBounds = YES; opaque = NO; autoresize = RM+BM;
userInteractionEnabled = NO; layer = <CALayer: 0x8e829e0>>
We will look at this in more depth once we have some code to run.
Editor
This is where the rubber hits the road. We will spend most of our time in the
Editor, modifying the content of our files. Different file types have their
own editors. We’ll get a chance to use both the text editor and Interface
Builder in this chapter. We will also see other editors in later chapters.
Preferences
One last thing to look at in our whirlwind tour is how to set preferences.
Xcode gives us a lot of flexibility when it comes to configuring our work
environment, so it’s worth spending some time exploring and tweaking the
settings to make sure Xcode is working the way you (or your team) want.
We can access the preferences using the Xcode > Preferences... menu.
This brings up the preferences window. The window has ten tabs: General,
Accounts, Behaviors, Navigation, Fonts & Colors, Text Editing, Key
Bindings, Source Control, Downloads, and Locations (Figure 1.8).

--- Page 36 ---
FIGURE 1.8 Xcode preferences window
 General: This tab has relatively few settings, most of which
(honestly) aren’t very interesting. Show live issues is enabled by
default. This tells Xcode to analyze your code as you write and to
display warnings and errors as they occur. This can be annoying, but
in general turning it off is worse. You can also set the number of lines
displayed in the Find and Issue Navigator—if you want to see more or
less detail.
 Accounts: This is where you manage your developer accounts.
Notice that you can connect to more than one developer account—and
each developer account can belong to more than one team. Highlight
a team name and hit the View Details button to see the signing
identity and provisioning profiles associated with that account. This
tab is also used to manage source control repositories.
 Behaviors: This page allows you to set up events (left pane) that
trigger actions (right pane). For example, look at the default behaviors
for Build > Generates new issues. Whenever the build system
generates a new issue, Xcode will show the issue in the Issue
navigator. We could modify this to have it also play a sound, display a
notification, or even run a script. While behaviors have a lot of
potential, I often find that either the events or the actions are too
coarse-grained to really do what I want.
 Navigation: The Navigation tab lets you set how the navigators
respond to clicks, double-clicks, and Option-clicks.

--- Page 37 ---
 Note
I highly recommend setting Double Click Navigation: to
Uses Separate Tabs. By default, Xcode opens the file in a
separate window with the Toolbar, Navigator, Debug area,
and Utilities area all hidden. If you lose track of this window
and it happens to be the only window left open when Xcode
closes, Xcode will assume you want this format for all future
windows. This can be very frustrating, especially if you don’t
know how to fix it. Hint: Go to the View menu and turn the
toolbar back on.
 Fonts & Colors: This tab sets the font, font size, and coloring scheme
used by the text editor. There are several predefined color settings.
You can also manually modify the setting for each category of text
(e.g., strings, comments, class names).
 Text Editing: This is where you configure how the text editor works
and how it indents your code. Developers have been known to argue
bitterly over what the “correct” setting should be. Therefore, I will
simply present the settings without further comment—OK, only one
comment. I typically turn line numbers on.
 Key Bindings: This is where you can view and modify all the
keyboard shortcuts used by Xcode. While you can use it to set up new
shortcuts, it’s almost more useful as a reference. Want to know how to
run unit tests from the keyboard? Open this tab and do a quick search
for “test” (the answer is 
U).
 Source Control: This has a few, high-level commands for controlling
how source control behaves. To add a repository, you need to go back
to the Accounts tab.
 Downloads: This is where you select which simulators and which
document sets are installed. You can also use this tab to check for
updates. I typically install all the available simulators, but only install
the most recent doc sets.

--- Page 38 ---
 Locations: Finally, this tab lets you customize where different
byproducts will be saved. This includes the snapshots and archives
you might make of your project, as well as any derived data generated
during compilation.
Surveying the Project
Now that we have a basic understanding of Xcode, let’s start exploring our
new project. Utility applications should provide easy access to a single
screen of information, with a backside view for setting and modifying the
preferences. The iPhone’s Weather app is a good example. The main screen
shows simple weather forecasts for the next week and even lets you page
through multiple cities. The flipside view allows you to edit the list of
cities, as well as change the temperature display between Fahrenheit and
Celsius.
The Utility Application template creates a basic skeleton for this type of
application. All of Apple’s templates are, by themselves, fully functional
apps. They may not do anything particularly interesting, but they will all
build and run. In fact, you can often learn a lot about how different
technologies can be linked together just by exploring the template code.
With that in mind, let’s look at all the things Apple gives us for free.
Running the Application
Before we can run the app, we need to tell Xcode to use the simulator. Click
the destination in the toolbar and select iPhone Retina (3.5-inch) (Figure
1.9). Then click the Run button. Xcode will save all of our files, build the
project, and launch it in the simulator.

--- Page 39 ---
FIGURE 1.9 Setting the destination
As you can see, the application has a dark gray main view with an info
button in the lower-right corner (Figure 1.10). If you touch the info button,
the screen flips over to show the flipside view with a title bar and a blue
Done button (Figure 1.11). Tap the Done button, and you flip back to the
main view.

--- Page 41 ---
FIGURE 1.10 The main view

--- Page 43 ---
FIGURE 1.11 The flipside view
Examining the Files
Now let’s look at the files. The Project navigator should be visible by
default. If not, make sure the Navigator button is enabled in the toolbar and
then select the Project navigator (the 
 icon). Alternatively, you can just
select the View > Navigators > Show Project Navigator menu item.
The Project navigator will show several groups of resources. The Hello
World group contains the header (.h) and implementation (.m) files for all
our Objective-C classes. This is where we will do most of our actual
coding. It also contains two resource files: Main.storyboard and
Images.xassets.
Main.storyboard defines the scenes in our application and the
segues between them. Image.xassets manages our image files, keeping
track of the different versions needed to support different devices and
screen resolutions. We will look at both of these files in more depth in later
chapters.
The Supporting Files subgroup contains a variety of secondary files.
Initially, this group contains the application’s Hello World-
Info.plist, InfoPlist.strings, main.m, and Prefix.pch
files.
The Hello World-Info.plist file contains a number of key-value
pairs used to configure our application. If any of the values are strings that
will be displayed to the user, they may need to be localized. This is where
the InfoPlist.strings file comes in. When loading a string value,
the system will look for a language-specific version first. If this cannot be
found, it will use the value from Hello World-Info.plist. We will
talk about localization in more detail in Chapter 9, “The Last Mile.”
The main.m file contains the main() function. Objective-C, just like
C, always begins with main(). This is the first function that is executed
when your application launches. It is responsible for setting up and running
everything else.
Finally, the Prefix.pch file is the application’s precompiled header.
To help large projects compile faster, Xcode allows us to create a
precompiled prefix header file containing a number of #import,

--- Page 44 ---
#include, and #define directives common across much of our code.
For example, in a typical iOS project, most classes need to access the UIKit
and Foundation frameworks. By including the #import statements for
these frameworks in our prefix header, Xcode knows to preprocess those
files and include the results in all of our source files. This prevents the
compiler from processing common files multiple times during each build.
Having said that, Xcode 5 introduces a better technology called modules.
Modules are an optimized database for system header files. This provides
many of the same benefits as Prefix.pch but provides greater
performance and removes the need to manually manage the Prefix.pch
file.
For the most part, modules are automatic. You simply #import the file,
and Xcode looks up the module. In addition, whenever you #import a
module, Xcode will automatically link its framework to the project. This is
especially good for beginning iOS developers, since link errors can appear
somewhat mysterious and confusing when you first encounter them.
Unfortunately, modules support only the system frameworks and libraries
provided by Apple. If you want to use a third-party library, you will still
need to manually link it to the project, and if it’s used across a large portion
of your project, you may want to include it in the Prefix.pch file.
This may not make a lot of sense right now, and that’s OK. Using the
Prefix.pch is an advanced topic. We won’t be touching it in this project.
And, honestly, for most iOS projects, the compile time is relatively fast
compared to the amount of time it takes to upload the app to the simulator
or device. So, unless you’re working on a very large, enterprise-scale
project, modifying the Prefix.pch file is probably a waste of your time.
Finally, the Frameworks group contains all the frameworks explicitly
linked to this project (but does not include any modules that are
automatically linked in from modules). Meanwhile, the Products group
contains the end results—in our case, the compiled application. Again, we
won’t be touching any of these in this project.

--- Page 45 ---
 Note
Much like Xcode’s workspaces, the navigator’s groups
represent a virtual organization—they exist only within
Xcode. These groups do not necessarily have any
relationship with how or where the actual resources are
stored, or even with what type of files they contain. You are
free to place any resource in any group and to add or remove
groups or subgroups as needed. Use them to organize the
files in your Project navigator as you see fit.
Walking Through the Project
When I first started writing Cocoa applications, I did not understand how all
the pieces fit together. Sure, I understood each individual part. I had a view
and a view controller. They worked together to manage the user interface.
However, many of these objects seemed to magically appear at runtime. I
had no idea where they came from.
Let me reassure you that there is nothing supernatural going on here.
Trust me, I’ve checked. Still, it’s worth taking a few minutes to walk
through all the connections, just to understand what is happening. Don’t
worry about memorizing all the details. Instead, focus on how we trace the
connections from one object to the next. That way, you will be able to trace
through your own applications later.
Let’s start exactly where our application starts. Click main.m in the
Project navigator (you may need to expand the Hello World and Supporting
Files groups if they aren’t already visible). This file is actually very short. It
imports the UIKit and our application delegate, and then it defines the
main() function.
Click here to view code image
#import <UIKit/UIKit.h>
#import "AppDelegate.h"
int main(int argc, char * argv[])
{
    @autoreleasepool {
        return UIApplicationMain(argc, argv, nil,

--- Page 46 ---
NSStringFromClass ([AppDelegate class]));
    }
}
Basically, main() creates an autorelease block. Inside the block, we
launch our Objective-C application. You can find a complete discussion on
memory management in the “Objective-C” bonus chapter at
www.freelancemadscience.com/creating-ios-7-apps-
bonus-chap/.
The real work happens in the UIApplicationMain() function. This
function performs four vital tasks:
1. It creates our application object.
2. It creates our application delegate and links it to the application.
3. It starts the application’s run loop.
4. Once everything is set up, it calls our delegate’s
application:didFinishLaunchingWithOptions:
method. This is typically our first opportunity to run our own code.
UIApplicationMain() takes four arguments. The first two handle
our application’s command-line arguments: argc gives the number of
arguments, while argv contains the actual arguments as an array of C-style
strings. These arguments are largely a holdover from Unix command-line
applications. In iOS, our apps typically have only a single argument, the
name of our application’s executable file. We almost never use these
arguments directly.
The next two arguments define our application and our application
delegate, respectively. Each takes a string that corresponds to the desired
class name. If the third argument is nil, we will use the default
UIApplication class. If the fourth argument is nil, the system will
load our UIApplicationDelegate from a nib file.
Loading the delegate from a nib file is an older design pattern. You will
typically see this if you look at projects designed for iOS 4.0 and earlier.
For iOS 7.0, all the application templates use storyboards (except for the
empty template, which—as the name suggests—is largely empty). This
means we need to manually set our application delegate’s name.
We could hard-code in the name as @”AppDelegate”. While this
saves us a little typing, it has one major limitation. If we refactor our code

--- Page 47 ---
and change the AppDelegate class’s name, Xcode won’t know to change
this string.
In software engineering, the solution to difficult problems often involves
adding a layer of indirection. In this case,
NSStringFromClass([AppDelegate class]) indirectly
determines the name of our AppDelegate class. This gives us a lot of
flexibility. In theory, we could override the +[AppDelegate class]
method to dynamically return our delegate’s class, possibly returning a
different delegate for the iPad and the iPhones. Most of the time, however,
it simply guarantees that when we refactor our delegate’s name, main()
will automatically find and use the new name.
Most applications will follow this pattern. Instead of subclassing the
UIApplication, we typically use a standard UIApplication object.
Instead, we provide a custom application delegate.
 Note
You will rarely change anything in main.m. In fact, unless
you are doing something very unusual, you should never
touch it. Even if you’re convinced you really need to make a
change or two, please take a step back and think things
through one final time. There is almost always a better
solution.
Examining the Storyboard
So far so good. The main() function calls UIApplicationMain().
This function instantiates the application and our custom AppDelegate
class. Then it sets up the main event loop and begins processing events. It
will then call our delegate’s
application:didFinishLaunchingWithOptions: method.
This may kick off some of our own code.
But what about the user interface? In applications that use a storyboard,
the application’s root view controller is created by the storyboard. But, what
is a storyboard?

--- Page 48 ---
Storyboards allow us to graphically design our scenes and draw the
segues that connect them. This represents the latest step in Xcode’s
interface development technologies.
Previous versions of Xcode used Interface Builder to graphically design
our user interface. Interface Builder saved our designs as binary nib files.
Xcode could then include the nibs in our application, loading them at
runtime.
In Xcode 4, the Interface Builder application was brought inside Xcode
itself. This allows a much tighter integration between the user interface and
our code. We can even edit the interface and its related code side by side.
With storyboards, Xcode expands this, letting us encapsulate a number of
nibs, giving us the power to graphically define multiple scenes and the
ability to draw the transitions between them.
As you will soon see, our storyboards contain a lot more than just views,
buttons, and text fields. They also contain controller objects, as well as the
connections between the various interface objects, views, and controllers.
We will get some experience drawing these connections as we expand our
Hello World app in the “Modifying the Template” section, later this chapter.
Additionally, we will discuss nibs, the underlying technology behind
storyboards, in more detail in the Chapter 2 sidebar “The Secret Life of
Nibs.”

--- Page 49 ---
 Note
Originally, Interface Builder saved nib archives as binary
files, with a .nib extension. As of Xcode 3.0, Interface
Builder allowed storing the nib files in an intermediate XML
format with a .xib extension. This allowed greater
compatibility with source control and other development
tools. The .xib files are then compiled into binary .nib
files when the application is built. For simplicity’s sake, both
versions are typically referred to as “nib files.” In Xcode 4.2,
storyboards are also stored as XML files with a
.storyboard extension. The system automatically
compiles the storyboard into one or more nib files and then
loads these nibs as needed at runtime.
So, how does UIApplicationMain() know which storyboard file to
open? Simple. It looks in the project’s info.plist. If you click Hello
World-Info.plist, you will find a key called “Main storyboard file
base name” with the value Main. This tells UIApplicationMain() to
load the Main.storyboard file.
While we can modify the info.plist directly, there is a simpler (and
safer) way. In the Project navigator, click the blue, Hello World project
icon. This will open the project settings editor. Make sure the General tab is
selected, and scroll down until you see the Main Interface selection.
Clicking this brings up a pop-up menu containing all the storyboard files in
our application (right now, we have only one) (Figure 1.12). We can simply
select the storyboard we want to use.

--- Page 50 ---
FIGURE 1.12 Setting the main storyboard
Let’s open the storyboard file. Click Main.storyboard in the Project
navigator. This will open the storyboard file in Xcode’s Editor. You will
probably want to close the navigator to give the Editor as much space as
possible. You will also want to make sure the Utilities area is open along the
right side of the screen. If it’s not visible, you can either click the Utilities
button or select View > Utilities > Show Utilities.
The Storyboard editor consists of two regions. On the left side is the
Document Outline. This sidebar shows all the scenes in our storyboard, as
well as every object within each scene.
On the right, we have Interface Builder. This is the graphical editor we
use to view and design the actual user interface for our scenes, as well as
drawing flow of control among the scenes (Figure 1.13).

--- Page 51 ---
FIGURE 1.13 Interface Builder
 Note
The Document Outline will probably be hidden by default.
We can hide and show the Document Outline by clicking the
Document Outline button in the bottom-left corner of
Interface Builder.
Our project starts out with two scenes. If you look at the Document
Outline, you will see that each scene has at least three top-level objects: the
First Responder, the scene’s view controller, and an Exit. Let’s start with the
First Responder. This is, in many ways, a very unusual object. Or rather, it’s
not an object at all—it’s a proxy. The system never creates an instance of
the First Responder. Instead, the system will dynamically assign the First
Responder at runtime.
Basically, the First Responder represents the first object in our
application’s responder chain. It can act as a target for any actions that must
be sent to the responder chain. For example, a copy action should target the
currently selected text, regardless of which control that text may be in. We
don’t want to hardwire the action to a particular control; instead, we want to

--- Page 52 ---
route the action to the currently active control. By targeting the first
responder, our message is automatically passed to the correct control at
runtime. Having said that, we rarely need to interact with the First
Responder directly in iOS.
Next, look at the view controller. Each scene has its own view controller
—an instance of UIViewController or (more likely) one of its
subclasses. You can find a complete description of the Model-View-
Controller pattern in the “Objective-C” bonus chapter at
www.freelancemadscience.com/creating-ios-7-apps-
bonus-chap/. For now, just think of the controller as the link between
the scene and the rest of our code.
Expand the view controller. Each view controller contains a top and
bottom layout guideline and a view. The view may, in turn, contain any
number of subviews and controls (which may contain their own subviews
and controls). We often refer to the entire graph of views and subviews as
the view hierarchy. Xcode lets us examine and manipulate both the view
hierarchy and the view’s actual appearance. The Document Outline shows
us the hierarchy, while the Interface Builder shows us the layout.
Finally, we have the Exit. This is even less of an object than the First
Responder. At least the First Responder may refer to an object at runtime.
Exit is simply a placeholder for segue unwinding actions. We will look at
these actions in more depth in Chapter 3, “Developing Views and View
Controllers,” but won’t use them in this project.
Our scenes may also have other top-level objects. For example, the main
view controller scene has a model segue—the transition between the main
view and the flipside view. Scenes may also include gesture recognizers,
views, or even data objects as top-level objects.
All of the top-level objects (except the segues) also appear in the scene’s
dock in Interface Builder. This makes it easier to draw connections between
the scene’s interface and the top-level objects, especially when the list of
scenes begins to grow. Segues, on the other hand, appear between the views
they connect. Like the dock, this helps keep them close at hand. Even more
importantly, it graphically displays the flow of control through our
application, giving us a feel for how everything connects.
Each storyboard designates a single scene as its initial scene. In our case,
this is the scene that UIApplicationMain() loads when the

--- Page 53 ---
application first launches.
The initial scene appears in the Interface Builder area with an incoming
arrow pointing at it. Unlike segues and other relationships, this arrow
doesn’t have a scene on the other end. By default, the incoming arrow starts
at the left edge of Interface Builder. The initial scene is the first scene, with
additional scenes branching out as we move to the right.
We can change the initial scene by selecting a different view controller
and selecting its “is Initial View Controller” attribute. Only one view
controller can have this attribute enabled at a time. If you enable it in a new
view controller, Interface Builder will automatically disable it for the old
controller.
In our case, the main view controller scene is our initial scene. This is
exactly what we want. Make sure we are zoomed in on the main scene.
Double-clicking the background will toggle the zoom between an overview
of the entire storyboard and the actual-size view.
Let’s start by clicking each object in the main scene and examining their
classes. Make sure the Identity inspector is selected (the 
 tab). Open the
Document Outline, and expand all the items in both scenes. Then click the
Main View Controller icon. Not surprisingly, our view controller is an
instance of the MainViewController class (Figure 1.14).
FIGURE 1.14 Checking the class

--- Page 54 ---
 Note
To select a view controller, you must click its icon, either in
the Document Outline or in the scene’s dock. When a view
controller is selected, the entire scene will be outlined in
blue.
Next, look at the top and bottom layout guides. These guides make it
easier to define auto layout constraints. We will look at constraints in detail
in Chapter 3. For now, you just need to know that the auto layout system
uses constraints to resize and reposition our content when the containing
view’s size changes. Most of the time this happens when the user rotates the
device into landscape or portrait orientation.
Basically, we can connect constraints to either the top or bottom layout
guidelines instead of connecting directly to the containing view. This is
important, since the guides will automatically adjust their position
depending on whether or not our view has a navigation, tool bar, status bar
or tab bar.
If you select the guides, you will see that they are simple NSObjects.
However, we will never really interact with these guides, except as
reference items in our constraints.
Next, we have the view. It’s a simple UIView with no additional features
or abilities. Inside the view, we have a UIButton (the info button at the
lower-right corner). Below the button are our view’s constraints. While we
cannot select the Constraints icon, we can select the individual constraints
beneath it. Each one is an instance of NSLayoutConstraint.
The First Responder, Exit, and segue don’t correspond to actual objects.
As a result, none of them has a class. In fact, the Exit and the segue don’t
have any Identity settings at all.
Moving on to the flipside view controller scene, we have a
FlipsideViewController. Inside this, we have another UIView;
however, at the top of this view we have a UINavigation bar, with a
UINavigationItem. Inside that, we have our Done button—a
UIBarButtonItem.

--- Page 55 ---
Now switch to the Connections inspector (the 
 tab). This lets us view
and edit the connections between objects. While it can appear somewhat
complex, this inspector shows only five connection types: outlets, actions,
events, segues, and relationships.
The first three are used to define connections within a single scene.
Outlets are properties that can store a pointer to an object. They define the
relationships between objects in our graph, letting the code inside one
object refer to another object in the same scene.
Actions, on the other hand, are methods that we can connect to events.
When an event occurs, the system automatically calls its corresponding
action. Controls define a set of common events that occur when the user
interacts with the control. This includes a variety of touch events, value
changes, and editing events.
Next, segues and relationships define the connections between scenes.
Segues act as transitions. When the application triggers a segue, it
transitions to the next scene using the specified animation.
Relationships look a lot like segues, but they are used to show ownership.
Container controllers (like tab view controllers) will use relationships to
connect to the views they manage.
If we look at the main view controller, we can see that it has a view
outlet pointing to the contained view object. If you hover the mouse over
this connection, both the controller and the view will be highlighted (Figure
1.15). This connection means that we can refer to our view object in our
view controller’s code.

--- Page 56 ---
FIGURE 1.15 Displaying the connection
There’s only one other connection in this scene. Select the info button. It
has a modal triggered segue to the flipside view controller (Figure 1.16). If
the user taps the button, they will trigger this segue, moving the application
to the flipside view controller scene.

--- Page 57 ---
FIGURE 1.16 Info button’s connections
Now let’s look at the flipside view controller (Figure 1.17). Like the
main view controller, it has an outlet connecting it to its view. As you can
probably guess, this is a general pattern. All view controllers have an outlet
connecting to their view.

--- Page 58 ---
FIGURE 1.17 Flipside view controller’s connections
The flipside view controller also has two incoming connections. One is
the presenting segue from the main view controller’s info button. This
simply refers back to the triggered segue we have already seen.
The other connection represents an incoming action. Just by looking, we
cannot tell which user interface control is triggering the action; however,
mouse over the connection and the Done button is highlighted. We’ll look at
the other side of this connection in a moment.
There are only two other connections in this scene. The navigator item’s
leftBarButtonItem outlet refers to the Done button (Figure 1.18). This
positions the bar button correctly in the navigation bar. Additionally, we see
the action connection from the Done button to the flipside view controller’s

--- Page 59 ---
done: method (Figure 1.19). This method will be called whenever the
Done button is pressed.
FIGURE 1.18 Navigation item’s connections
FIGURE 1.19 Done button’s connections
Next, let’s look at the constraints. Reading constraints takes a bit of
practice, so we’ll just touch on the basics here. Don’t worry if it doesn’t
make a lot of sense, we’ll get real hands-on experience in Chapter 3.
First, switch to the Attributes inspector (the 
 icon). Then, in the
Document Outline, select the Main View Controller Scene’s Horizontal
Space constraint. Notice how the blue I-bar connecting the info button to
the right edge of the view is highlighted (Figure 1.20). This indicates a
constraint between the button and its containing view.

--- Page 60 ---
FIGURE 1.20 Selected constraints are highlighted
Now look at the attributes (Figure 1.21). There are three key pieces of
information here. First, the Relationship type is set to Equal. Next, the
Standard checkbox is checked. Finally Direction is set to Leading to
Trailing. That means we are setting the distance between our button and the
view equal to the standard spacing (in this case, 20 points). The Leading to
Trailing setting is a bit misleading in this context. Technically we are
connecting the button’s trailing edge to the view’s trailing edge. What it
really means is that instead of hard-coding in specific sides (connecting the
button’s right side to the view’s right side), we’re going to base the
connection on the currently selected language’s reading order. In a left-to-
right language (like English), the button will appear on the bottom-right
corner of the screen. In a right-to-left language (like Arabic), auto layout
will automatically reposition it to the bottom-left corner.
FIGURE 1.21 Constraint attributes
If you look at Main View Controller’s second constraint, you will see that
it is also set equal to the standard spacing; however, there is no direction

--- Page 61 ---
setting for vertical constraints.
Looking at the flipside scene, it has three constraints, but they are all a bit
harder to decipher. Selecting them doesn’t reveal the I-bar. Instead, we get a
bar across either the entire length or width of the screen. From the
attributes, we can see that the spacing is set equal to 0 points—but it doesn’t
tell us which items are being constrained.
To get the rest of the picture, switch to the Size inspector (the 
 icon)
and select the Navigation bar in the Document Outline. All three constraints
should show up (Figure 1.22). Note, however, that we can hide any section
in any of our inspectors. If the Size inspector is empty except for the word
“view,” then click “view” to display the view settings. We have the leading
space to the superview, the top space to the superview, and the trailing
space to the superview—all set to zero points.
FIGURE 1.22 List of navigation bar constraints
So, what does this mean? Well, for the main scene, our info button will
be held a fixed distance from the bottom-right corner, no matter how tall or
wide the containing view is. For the flipside view, the navigation bar will be
held flush against the top and stretched from edge to edge—again, no
matter how wide or tall the view is. We can see this, as we rotate the device
from portrait to landscape (
 or 
  in the simulator). Auto layout
repositions our info button and resizes our navigation bar for us
automatically (Figures 1.23 and 1.24). It even animates the changes for us.

--- Page 62 ---
FIGURE 1.23 Main view landscape orientation
FIGURE 1.24 Flipside view landscape orientation
Finally, let’s take a closer look at the segue. Select the Attributes
inspector (the 
 icon), and select the segue between our views. This
shows our segue’s details (Figure 1.25). The Identifier field contains a
string we can use to identify this segue in our code. The Style pop-up menu
lets us define the segue’s type: push, modal, or custom. The Transition pop-
up and the Animates checkbox let us control how (and whether) the system
animates this transition.

--- Page 63 ---
FIGURE 1.25 The segue attributes
In our case, the segue is named showAlternate. We will present our
new scene as a modal view. Animations are enabled, so we will show our
main view flipping over horizontally to reveal the flipside view on its back.
In most graphical user interfaces, a modal view is a view that must be
dismissed (usually by clicking an OK or Cancel button) before the user can
perform any other actions in the application. This forces the user to focus on
whatever is inside the modal view—they must finish dealing with it before
they can move on. On desktop applications, we generally use modal view to
display things like Save or Print dialogs. On the iPhone, modal views cover
the entire screen (though the iPad has a few additional options), but their
use and meaning are largely the same. We are presenting information and
controls that the user must actively dismiss once they are done.
So, what does this all mean? Well, we’ve gone on a few short tangents,
but we’re still trying to trace through how all the objects in our application
get created.

--- Page 64 ---
Advanced Topic: Bootstrapping Your App
There are eight tasks that must be completed to properly set up
an iOS application. Every application must perform all of these
steps.
1. Create App Object: Instantiate UIApplication or one of
its subclasses.
2. Create App Delegate: Instantiate a custom subclass of
UIResponder that also adopts the
UIApplicationDelegate protocol.
3. Link the App and Delegate: Set the App’s delegate
property to the delegate object.
4. Create Window: Instantiate a UIWindow object.
5. Link the Delegate and Window: Set the
UIApplicationDelegate’s window property to the
window object.
6. Create Root View Controller: Instantiate a custom
UIViewController subclass. This view controller is
responsible for displaying our app’s initial view.
7. Link Root View Controller and Window: Set the
UIWindow’s rootViewController property to our view
controller object.
8. Setup the Window: Call -[UIWindow makeKeyAndVisible]
to make our window the key window, and make it visible.
While our application must either explicitly or implicitly perform
all of these steps, the exact procedure can vary considerably from
app to app. There are, however, three main approaches:
programmatically bootstrapping the app, using a main nib file, or
using a storyboard.
Programmatic Bootstrapping
1. When calling UIApplicationMain(), pass nil as the
third argument and the name of our
UIApplicationDelegate as the fourth.

--- Page 65 ---
2. In
application:didFinishLaunchingWithOptions:
we must instantiate the window and the root view controller.
We must link the delegate and the window and then link the
window and the root view controller. Finally, we must call
makeKeyAndVisible.
Using a Main Nib File
1. When calling UIApplicationMain(), pass nil as both
the third and fourth arguments. This tells
UIApplicationMain() that we will be instantiating and
configuring our delegate object inside the main nib file.
2. Create a nib file. This nib file must instantiate our delegate
object and connect it to the File’s Owner’s delegate outlet. It
must create a window and connect it to the delegate’s window
outlet. Finally, we must create our root view controller and
connect it to the window. Note that the root view controller’s
view hierarchy is often defined in a separate nib file, causing
us to chain one nib file to another.
3. Set the nib file as our application’s main interface in the
info.plist. UIApplicationMain() will
automatically call makeKeyAndVisible for us.
Using Storyboards
1. When calling UIApplicationMain(), pass nil as the
third argument and the name of our
UIApplicationDelegate as the fourth.
2. Create a storyboard file with at least one scene. The
storyboard’s initial scene will become our root view controller.
3. Set the nib file as our application’s main interface in the
info.plist. That’s it. UIApplicationMain() will
automatically handle the rest. Specifically, it will instantiate
and link up all the objects for us, and then call
makeKeyAndVisible.
In Xcode 5.0, almost all of Apple’s project templates use
storyboards to bootstrap the iOS apps. This is largely an

--- Page 66 ---
automated process, automatically handling many details that
must be manually performed in the other two approaches.
Throughout this book, we will follow Apple’s lead and use
storyboards. However, I wanted to at least mention the other
approaches, since you may encounter them in older projects,
books, and tutorials.
Remember, the UIApplicationMain() method creates an instance
of the UIApplication and of our AppDelegate class. If the
application uses a storyboard, the UIApplicationMain() looks up the
main storyboard in our application’s info.plist file. It creates our
application’s window and then loads the storyboard’s initial scene, setting
this as our window’s root view controller. Finally, it calls our delegate’s
application:didFinishLaunchingWithOptions: method.
Once this method returns, the view is displayed, and our app is ready for
user input.
If the user touches the info button, our segue launches. This loads the
flipside view controller and displays it as a modal view. When the user
presses the Done button, it calls flipside view controller’s done: action.
We know this dismisses the flipside view, but we don’t yet know how this
works. To discover more, we have to look at the code.
Examining the Code
While the storyboard gives us a good overview of our application, to really
understand it we will need to dig into the code. If you are having trouble
following the code, please check out the “Objective-C” bonus chapter at
www.freelancemadscience.com/creating-ios-7-apps-
bonus-chap/. For now, just get a feel for where things are and what they
do.
Let’s start with AppDelegate.h. Select this file in the Project
navigator (or use 
O to search for it). This is the header file for the
AppDelegate class. It declares the class’s public interface.
You won’t find anything terribly surprising here. AppDelegate is a
subclass of UIResponder. This means it can respond to input events:
touches, shakes, and remote control events. It also adopts the

--- Page 67 ---
UIApplicationDelegate protocol, which allows it to act as an
application delegate.
A delegate is an object that acts on behalf of, or in coordination with,
another object. The delegate typically acts as an assistant to the main (or
“delegating”) object. The main object will call predefined methods on the
delegate in response to specified events. The delegate then uses those
methods to monitor and control the main object. This lets the delegate alter
the main object’s behavior without modifying the main object itself.
AppDelegate also declares a window property. As
UIApplicationMain() loads our storyboard, it also instantiates a
window object and assigns it to this property. Usually, iOS applications
have a single window that fills the entire screen. This window acts as the
root for our view hierarchy. It both creates a space where other views can be
displayed and distributes events to the proper views or subviews.
Click here to view code image
#import <UIKit/UIKit.h>
@interface AppDelegate : UIResponder <UIApplicationDelegate>
@property (strong, nonatomic) UIWindow *window;
@end
The UIApplicationDelegate protocol defines a wide range of
optional methods that we can implement to observe and modify our
application’s behavior. These include methods that respond to changes to
the application’s state, as well as local, remote, and system notifications.
You can find a complete list of these methods in the developer
documentation.
In the editor, hold down the option key (
) and move the mouse so that
it’s hovering over the word UIApplicationDelegate. When the mouse
pointer turns into a question mark, click the highlighted word.
This brings up the help pop-up (Figure 1.26). The pop-up provides a
brief description of the selected symbol. It’s not complete, but it does let us
get a quick overview of most classes, methods, or functions. Additionally,
the pop-up contains hyperlinks to additional resources. We can open the
system header file or bring up Apple’s full documentation from here.

--- Page 68 ---
FIGURE 1.26 UIApplicationDelegate pop-up help
Click the “UIApplicationDelegate Protocol Reference” link to bring up
the full documentation. This opens the Documentation viewer in a separate
window. Scroll down until you see the Tasks section. This lists all the
methods we can implement. If we want to receive one of these notifications
from the application, we simply need to implement the corresponding
method.
Now, open the AppDelegate.m file (select it in the Project Manager
or search for it using 
O). You can see that the template has already
implemented several of these methods—but none of them do anything.
Right now, they are simply method stubs—placeholders, waiting for us to
fill in the details.
Click here to view code image
#import "AppDelegate.h"
@implementation AppDelegate
- (BOOL)application:(UIApplication *)application
didFinishLaunchingWithOptions: (NSDictionary *)launchOptions
{
    // Override point for customization after application
launch.
    return YES;
}
- (void)applicationWillResignActive:(UIApplication *)application
{
    // Sent when the application is about to move from active to
inactive state. This can occur for certain types of temporary
interruptions (such as an incoming phone call or SMS message) or
when the user quits the application and it begins the transition

--- Page 69 ---
to the background state.
    // Use this method to pause ongoing tasks, disable timers,
and throttle down OpenGL ES frame rates. Games should use this
method to pause the game.
}
- (void)applicationDidEnterBackground:(UIApplication
*)application
{
    // Use this method to release shared resources, save user
data, invalidate timers, and store enough application state
information to restore your application to its current state in
case it is terminated later.
    // If your application supports background execution, this
method is called instead of applicationWillTerminate: when the
user quits.
}
- (void)applicationWillEnterForeground:(UIApplication
*)application
{
    // Called as part of the transition from the background to
the inactive state; here you can undo many of the changes made
on entering the background.
}
- (void)applicationDidBecomeActive:(UIApplication *)application
{
    // Restart any tasks that were paused (or not yet started)
while the application was inactive. If the application was
previously in the background, optionally refresh the user
interface.
}
- (void)applicationWillTerminate:(UIApplication *)application
{
    // Called when the application is about to terminate. Save
data if appropriate. See also applicationDidEnterBackground:.
}
@end
These methods respond to changes in our application’s state. They are
called when our application first loads, when it becomes active or inactive,
when it goes into or out of the background, or when it prepares to terminate.
We will discuss these (and other) methods in more detail in the Chapter 2
sidebar “Common Tasks Every Application Should Perform.” For now, read

--- Page 70 ---
the comments in these method stubs. They should give you a good
overview of their intended use.
Next, look at MainViewController.h. This is even simpler than the
app delegate’s interface declaration. We define our class as a subclass of
UIViewController. It also adopts a custom protocol,
FlipsideViewControllerDelegate. That’s it.
Click here to view code image
#import "FlipsideViewController.h"
@interface MainViewController : UIViewController
<FlipsideViewControllerDelegate>
@end
 Note
FlipsideViewControllerDelegate is not a protocol provided
by Apple. Therefore, Option-clicking
FlipsideViewControllerDelegate only brings up a pop-up
with a single link to FlipsideViewController.h.
This is where the protocol is defined in our project. We can
use this link to quickly move about inside our code.
Alternatively, we could Control-click
FlipsideViewControllerDelegate and select Jump to
Definition from the pop-up menu.
Now let’s look at the implementation. Select
MainViewController.m. Much like the app delegate, the
UIViewController class has a number of methods that we can override
to monitor our view. In particular, this includes any methods with will or
did in their name. The will methods are called just before the event takes
place. The did methods are called just after. Look up
UIViewController in the developer documentation to see the complete
list. Option-click the symbol and then click the link to the full
documentation.

--- Page 71 ---
 Note
Option- and Control-clicking symbols can be frustratingly
difficult. When Option-clicking, it’s easiest if you hold down
the Option button, then maneuver the mouse over the
symbol. When the cursor changes to a question mark and the
symbol turns blue, click on it. When Control-clicking, it’s
easiest to double-click the symbol first, selecting it. Once the
correct symbol is selected, Control-click it.
If you scan through our file, you will see that it includes a few of these as
method stubs. Again, the implementation doesn’t do anything; it just calls
the superclass’s implementation.
There are only two methods containing functional code:
flipsideViewControllerDidFinish: and
prepareForSegue:sender:.
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Flipside View
- (void)flipsideViewControllerDidFinish:
(FlipsideViewController *)controller
{
    [self dismissViewControllerAnimated:YES completion:nil];
}
- (void)prepareForSegue:(UIStoryboardSegue *)segue sender:
(id)sender
{
    if ([[segue identifier] isEqualToString:@"showAlternate"]) {
        [[segue destinationViewController] setDelegate:self];
    }
}
Let’s take these in order. The
flipsideViewControllerDidFinish: method is a delegate
method for our flipside view controller. As you might guess from the name,
the flipside view controller will call this method when it is finished. Our
current implementation simply dismisses the current modal view. You
probably remember, when we examined the segue, we saw that it displayed

--- Page 72 ---
our flipside view controller as a modal view. Therefore, this method simply
removes our flipside view, using the same transition (horizontal flipping) to
return to the main view.
Next, prepareForSegue:sender: is called whenever a segue is
triggered from the current scene. Although the implementation looks a little
complex, it simply checks to make sure our segue’s id matches the
expected value, showAlternate. If it does, we assign our main view
controller as the destination’s delegate.
It’s always a good idea to check the segue’s identifier before doing
anything in the prepareForSegue:sender: method. Right now it’s
not strictly necessary. We have only one segue, so we know the identifier
will always match. However, checking the identifier helps future-proof our
code. We won’t suddenly have odd bugs or crashes just because we added a
new segue.
The destinationViewController is simply the controller that the
segue is creating and presenting for us. Unfortunately, there is no way to
know what this controller will be, just by looking at the code. We need to
examine the storyboard to understand the full picture. If you remember, in
the storyboard the showAlternate segue connects our main view
controller scene with our flipside view controller scene. This means the
destinationViewController will be our
FlipsideViewController.
So, the user presses the info button, triggering our segue. The system
instantiates a copy of our FlipsideViewController and then calls
the MainViewController’s prepareForSegue:sender:. Here,
MainViewController assigns itself as
FlipsideViewController’s delegate. The transition occurs, and our
view flips over horizontally, revealing the flipside view. When the flipside
view is finished (which we will see in a minute), the flipside view controller
calls flipsideViewControllerDidFinish: on its delegate,
MainViewController. MainViewController then dismisses the
flipside view controller and our views flip back over, revealing the main
view again.
It’s important to realize that this pattern demonstrates the preferred
technique for passing data from one scene to another across a segue. When

--- Page 73 ---
passing data from the originating view controller to the destination view
controller, we override the originating view controller’s
prepareForSegue:sender: method and pass the data along.
Passing data back gets more complicated. In this project, we make the
originating view a delegate of the destination view and then call the
appropriate delegate methods. In Chapter 3, we will see a simpler approach
using segue unwinding. But, for now, let’s look at what’s going on inside
FlipsideViewController.
Open FlipsideViewController.h. Here, we start by declaring
our FlipsideViewControllerDelegate protocol. This has only a
single method, which we have already seen,
flipsideViewControllerDidFinish:. Next, we declare the
FlipsideViewController class. This is also simple, containing only
two items: the delegate outlet property and the done: action.
We’ve seen both of these before. We just discussed the delegate
property in relationship to our MainViewController, and we saw the
done: action back when we were exploring our storyboard. It is connected
to the Done button in the navigation bar. Pressing that button will trigger
this method.
Click here to view code image
#import <UIKit/UIKit.h>
@class FlipsideViewController;
@protocol FlipsideViewControllerDelegate
- (void)flipsideViewControllerDidFinish: (FlipsideViewController
*)controller;
@end
@interface FlipsideViewController : UIViewController
@property (weak, nonatomic) id <FlipsideViewControllerDelegate>
delegate;
- (IBAction)done:(id)sender;
@end
Now open FlipsideViewController.m. Much like
MainViewController.m, this largely contains method stubs. However,

--- Page 74 ---
at the bottom we have the implementation for our done: action.
Click here to view code image
- (IBAction)done:(id)sender
{
    [self.delegate flipsideViewControllerDidFinish:self];
}
This simply calls the delegate’s
flipsideViewControllerDidFinish: method. And that brings
everything around full circle. When the user presses the Done button, the
event triggers the done: action. This then calls
MainViewController’s
flipsideViewControllerDidFinish:, which dismisses the
flipside view controller scene.
Everything in our application is now connected (Figures 1.27 and 1.28).

--- Page 75 ---
FIGURE 1.27 The Hello World object graph

--- Page 76 ---
FIGURE 1.28 MainViewController and FlipsideViewController
interactions
Again, there is nothing magical going on here. If you ever feel lost in a
new project, start with the main storyboard file (as defined in the project’s
info.plist file) and walk your way through. You should be able to trace
a series of connections from UIApplication object to any object in
your project. Some may be defined in code and some in the storyboard, but
with a little patience, you will be able to track everything down.

--- Page 77 ---
Modifying the Template
OK, enough chatter. Let’s build something new. We’re going to add a label
to the main view that will display a short message. We will also add a text
box to the flipside view, letting the user change this message. So, let’s get
started.
Modifying the Main View
Open Main.storyboard and zoom in on the main view controller
scene. The background is a little too dark for my taste. Select the View
object, and then switch to the Attributes inspector. Change the Background
attribute to Light Gray Color (Figure 1.29).
FIGURE 1.29 Setting the background color
Now we need to add a label. Xcode makes it easy to add common user
interface objects. In the bottom half of the Utilities, select the Object library
(the 
  icon). Scroll down until you find the label (if you are having
trouble, use the filter bar at the bottom of the library). Click the label and
drag it from the library pane onto Main View Controller Scene’s view. The
mouse pointer should have a green plus symbol. This indicates that we can
add the object to this location.

--- Page 78 ---
Xcode will help you correctly place the control. As you drag the label
across the Editor area, it highlights and labels the current view. It also adds
blue guidelines to help properly position your objects. Drag the label until it
is centered vertically and aligned with the view’s left margin, as shown in
Figure 1.30.

--- Page 80 ---
FIGURE 1.30 Properly aligning the label
When you release the label, it will appear surrounded by eight white
squares. You can click and drag these anchor points to resize the label. Grab
the right side and stretch it until you hit the right-margin guide.
This gives us a label that is centered vertically and that is stretched to fill
the screen from margin to margin. The problem is, it won’t stay that way.
Build and run the app. Depending on your settings, you may immediately
notice a problem. If you designed the storyboard for the 4-inch iPhone but
run it on the 3.5-inch simulator, it will appear too low on the screen. Even
worse, rotate the simulator into the landscape orientation. No matter what
your settings, now things definitely look wrong (Figure 1.31).
FIGURE 1.31 The label is no longer centered vertically.
The problem is, by default all user interface elements are kept a fixed
distance from the upper-left corner of their containing view. If we want our
layout to adapt to different screen sizes and different orientations, we need
to add a few Auto Layout constraints.
I’ll cover the details of Auto Layout in Chapter 3. For now, let’s just use
enough to make things work. Make sure the label is selected, and then
Control-click the label and drag to the left. A blue line should stretch from
the point where you Control-clicked to the mouse. Let go of the mouse
when you are between the edge of the label and the edge of its view. In the
pop-up window, select Center Vertically in Container (Figure 1.32).

--- Page 81 ---
FIGURE 1.32 Adding a center vertically constraint
Repeat the gesture. This time select Leading Space to Container. Next,
Control-click and drag off the right edge and select Trailing Space to
Container. We should now have a blue I-bar on each side of the label, a blue
line running through the middle of the label (Figure 1.33). Build and run
the app again. The label will be vertically centered, no matter which
simulator or which orientation you choose.
FIGURE 1.33 The label and its constraints
Make sure the label is still selected, and open the Attributes inspector. In
the Alignment attribute, click the button for centered text (the 
 button).
Next, we want to change the font. Click the 
 icon inside the Font
attribute’s text field. This brings up the font pop-up window. Here, change
the font to System Bold and the size to 24 points (Figure 1.34).

--- Page 82 ---
FIGURE 1.34 Setting the font
Next, let’s change the text. Double-click the label. It should be
highlighted in blue. Type in Hello World and hit Return. Notice that
Interface Builder automatically resizes the label after we edit its text.
If you modify the label’s text by double-clicking on the label and editing
it directly, it will automatically resize. If you select the label and modify its
text attribute in the Attributes inspector, it won’t. As a result you will have a
“Misplaced Views” warning. The label will appear with an orange and a
dashed-red box around it. You can always force Auto Layout to update a
frame to match its current constraints by selecting the interface element.
Next, click the “Resolve Auto Layout Issues” tool (the 
 button on the
bottom-right edge of Interface Builder), and select Update Frames from the
pop-up menu. We will go over this technique and other methods for
managing Auto Layout in Chapter 3.

--- Page 83 ---
Run the application. Our new label should appear centered in the screen
both vertically and horizontally. Rotate the app, and it remains centered.
Adding an Outlet
If we want to change the label’s text during runtime, we need a way to
access it in our code. The easiest way is to add an outlet to the view’s
controller. In the pre–Xcode 4.0 days, this meant jumping back and forth
between Xcode and Interface Builder as we modified our code by hand.
Now there’s a much simpler way.
First, we should probably collapse the Document Outline. Click the
Document Outline button (the 
 button in the lower-left corner of the
Editor area). Next, switch to the Assistant editor (the 
 icon on the
toolbar).
This will display two Editor areas side by side. The leftmost area
contains the selected file, while the rightmost contains a closely related file.
For example, if you select the MainViewController.h header file, the
right editor should display the MainViewController.m
implementation file. In our case, the left editor shows the storyboard, while
the right editor shows the selected controller’s implementation file.
There is actually one small change that I want to make. I prefer to have
my editors stacked vertically. Select the View > Assistant Editor > Assistant
Editors on Bottom menu item. Then click inside the main view. Your
interface should look like Figure 1.35.

--- Page 84 ---
FIGURE 1.35 Stacked Assistant editor

--- Page 85 ---
 Note
Although Xcode generally does a great job auto-selecting the
correct companion file, there may be times when it does not
work properly or when you want to select a different file
instead. You can do this in the jump bar. Selecting the leaf
item will let you choose an alternate file based on the same
general selection rules. Selecting the root item will allow you
to choose different selection rules. Xcode provides a number
of different, context-specific selection rules. You can also
choose to manually select the companion file, if necessary.
Control-click the label and drag it down into the
MainViewController.m file. Again, a blue line will stretch from the
point where you clicked to your mouse. When you move it between the
@interface and the @end directives, you should see a blue line marking
the insertion point, with a pop-up menu offering to Insert Outlet or Outlet
Connection (Figure 1.36). Once you see this, release the mouse.

--- Page 86 ---
FIGURE 1.36 Adding an outlet
A pop-up dialog will now allow you to configure the outlet. Make sure
the Connection setting is set to Outlet. In the Name field, enter label. The
type should be UILabel, and the storage should be Weak (Figure 1.37).
Click Connect to continue.

--- Page 87 ---
FIGURE 1.37 Configuring the outlet
Xcode will make the following change to MainViewController.m
(in pink):
Click here to view code image
@interface MainViewController ()
@property (weak, nonatomic) IBOutlet UILabel *label;
@end
This defines an outlet that we can connect to in Interface Builder.
In the storyboard file, Xcode has already connected the label to our
newly created outlet. You can view this using the Connections inspector.
Alternatively, Control-click the Main View Controller icon in either the
Document Outline or the scene’s dock to bring up a Connections HUD
(Figure 1.38).

--- Page 88 ---
FIGURE 1.38 Main view controller Connections HUD
Fixing the Navigation Bar
If you run the application and tap on the info button, you can see that our
navigation bar and our status bar overlap. In previous versions of iOS, the
status bar was typically an opaque strip across the top of the screen. The top
of our user interface would start just below the status bar. In iOS 7, the
status bar is transparent, and we must stretch our interface to the very top of
the screen.
Apparently, the Utility Application template still uses an old-style
navigation bar. We could make the navigation bar 20 points taller so that it
fit nicely under the status bar, but the easiest fix is to just hide the status bar
in this scene.
Unfortunately, this requires a tiny bit of code. Open
FlipsideViewController.m and find the

--- Page 89 ---
didReceiveMemoryWarning method. Add the following code right
after didReceiveMemoryWarning:
Click here to view code image
- (BOOL)prefersStatusBarHidden
{
    return YES;
}
That’s it. Now when you run the app, and navigate to the flipside view,
the status bar is gone, and the navigation bar is properly aligned across the
top.
Adding the Text Field
The first few steps are very similar to what we did for the main view. We
will be adding a Text Field control instead of a Label, and we will place it
just below the navigation bar (so it is out of the way when the keyboard
appears, even in landscape orientation). But, otherwise the steps are the
same.
Switch back to the Standard Editor, and make sure Main.storyboard
is open. Zoom in on the Flipside View Controller Scene. Now, drag a Text
Field control from the Object library. Position it a bit below the navigation
bar, and resize it so that it fills the view from margin to margin.
Control-click and drag to the left of the text field. Again, release the
mouse between the edge of the text field and the edge of the view. This time
select Leading Space to Container. Next, Control-drag to the right and
select Trailing Space to Container. Remember, Xcode tries to be helpful and
uses the direction you drag to determine which constraints you may be
looking for. If you drag in the wrong direction, you won’t find the
constraints you’re looking for.
Next, we want to create a constraint between the text field and the
navigation bar. Unfortunately, if we Control-drag from the text field to the
navigation bar, we will either get the navigation item or the top layout
guide. Instead, make sure the Document Outline is expanded, and Control-
drag from the Round Style Text Field to the Navigation Bar, and select
Vertical Spacing in the pop-up.
We can always use the Document Outline to draw our constraints,
outlets, or actions. This can be handy whenever we cannot draw the

--- Page 90 ---
connection in the interface builder.
Again, we want to be able to access the value of the text field in our
code. That means we need an outlet. Open the Assistant editor again. Make
sure the bottom editor is showing FlipsideViewController.m.
Control-drag from the text field to between the @interface and @end
directives. Connection should be Outlet. Name the outlet textField.
Type should be UITextField, and Storage should be Weak. When you
click Connect, it should make the following change to
FlipsideViewController.m:
Click here to view code image
@interface FlipsideViewController ()
@property (weak, nonatomic) IBOutlet UITextField *textField;
@end
Whenever we want to change the label’s text, we just need to get the
value from our textField outlet and copy it into our label outlet.
However, there’s a slight problem. We created our outlets inside their
respective .m files. This means they are private, implementation details of
their respective classes. We cannot access the label outlet from outside
our MainViewController class. Likewise, we cannot access the
textField outlet from outside the FlipsideViewController
class.
While this may seem like a problem, it is actually a very good thing.
Each class has a clearly defined, separate set of responsibilities.
MainViewController is responsible for managing everything in its
view hierarchy. FlipsideViewController is responsible for
managing everything in its view hierarchy. Neither class should be reaching
inside the other’s view hierarchy. This is covered in more depth in the
“Objective-C” bonus chapter at
www.freelancemadscience.com/creating-ios-7-apps-
bonus-chap/.
This means we need to create a public property to act as the bridge
between these two classes. Switch back to the Standard editor, and open
FlipsideViewController.h. We just need to add a single line of
code, as shown here:

--- Page 91 ---
Click here to view code image
@interface FlipsideViewController : UIViewController
@property (weak, nonatomic) id <FlipsideViewControllerDelegate>
delegate;
@property (strong, nonatomic) NSString *text;
- (IBAction)done:(id)sender;
@end
This creates a public property to hold our text. Now, when the user
dismisses the flipside view, we need to copy the value from our
textField outlet to our text property. Switch to
FlipsideViewController.m (you can use ^
 or ^
  to switch
between corresponding .h and .m files). We need to find the done:
method. Currently our files are not very long, so you can probably spot it
right away. Still, it is often easiest to use the editor’s jump bar to move to a
specific method (Figure 1.39).
FIGURE 1.39 The jump bar
The bar across the top of the Editor area shows you the item you are
editing. Click the rightmost item and select the done: method (Figure
1.40). The editor will select the method and (if necessary) scroll so that it is
visible.
FIGURE 1.40 Navigating to the done: method.
Modify the done: method as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (IBAction)done:(id)sender
{
    self.text = self.textField.text;

--- Page 92 ---
    [self.delegate flipsideViewControllerDidFinish:self];
}
This line simply copies the current value from the private textField
outlet to the public text property, before calling our delegate’s
flipsideViewControllerDidFinish: method.
Now we need to use this text property. Open
MainViewController.m and navigate to the
flipsideViewControllerDidFinish: method. Modify the
method as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (void)flipsideViewControllerDidFinish:
(FlipsideViewController *)controller
{
    self.label.text = controller.text;
    [self dismissViewControllerAnimated:YES completion:nil];
}
The new line simply copies the text from our flipside controller and
assigns it to our label.
That’s it. Run the application again. It should display the default “Hello
World” message when it launches. Click the info button, and type new text
into the text field. Click the Done button. The label should now show your
new text.
Refining the Interface
Functionally, everything is OK, but it’s not the most polished (or, for that
matter, useful) app in the world. Let’s make it a little bit better. When the
flipside view appears, let’s fill the text field with the label’s current value.
Additionally, let’s go ahead and dismiss the flipside view when the user taps
the Return key.
Let’s start by passing the text from our main view’s label to our flipside
controller. Just like the flipside controller’s delegate property, we will
assign this value in our prepareForSegue:sender: method.
Navigate to MainViewController’s
prepareForSegue:sender: method and add the highlighted line:

--- Page 93 ---
Click here to view code image
- (void)prepareForSegue:(UIStoryboardSegue *)segue sender:
(id)sender
{
    if ([[segue identifier] isEqualToString:@"showAlternate"]) {
        [[segue destinationViewController] setDelegate:self];
        [[segue destinationViewController]
setText:self.label.text];
    }
}
And, again, we need to use this value. Switch back to
FlipsideViewController.m. This time we’re going to add an
entirely new method. Insert the following code after the viewDidLoad:
Click here to view code image
- (void)viewDidAppear:(BOOL)animated
{
    [super viewDidAppear:animated];
    self.textField.text = self.text;
}
This method is called every time the flipside view appears. Here, we’re
just assigning the value stored in our text property to the text field.
Now let’s dismiss the flipside view when the user hits the Return key.
Open Main.storyboard, and zoom in on the Flipside View Controller
Scene. Control-click the text field to bring up the Connections HUD. At the
top of the Sent Events section, there should be an event named “Did End on
Exit.” Click and drag from the event’s circle to the view controller icon in
the dock (the HUD will automatically fade to get out of the way, if
necessary) (Figure 1.41).

--- Page 95 ---
FIGURE 1.41 Connecting the Return key to the done: method
When you release the mouse, a second, smaller HUD will appear. This
has only one option showing, the done: method. Fortunately, that’s
exactly what we want. Click it.
There are several other equally valid ways to draw this connection. We
could Control-click the FlipsideViewController icon in the scene’s
dock and then drag from the done: action to the text field. Xcode will then
prompt us for the correct event. We could also use the Connections
inspector in the Utilities area, instead of using the pop-up dialogs. Most of
these approaches are equivalent. Feel free to experiment with the different
approaches and see which one works best for you.
Be aware, however, that for text field events, the system will often try to
automatically select the “Editing did End” event. This is not what we want.
This limits our options somewhat. We need to use an approach that
explicitly lets us select the “Did End on Exit” event.
 Note
Each event can be connected to more than one action, and a
single action can connect to multiple events. In this case, we
have both the text field and the Done button connected to the
done: action.
While we’re at it, let’s change the appearance of the keyboard’s Return
key. Select the text field and open the Attributes inspector. Set the Return
Key attribute to Done. While this doesn’t change the keyboard’s
functionality, it helps communicate our intent.
You may also want to set the Clear Button attribute to “Appears while
editing.” After all, using the Backspace key to delete large amounts of text
gets tedious very quickly.
That’s it. Run the application. It should appear as shown in Figure 1.42.
Touch the info icon to switch to the flipside view. The text field should
display the current message. Touch the text field, and the keyboard and
clear buttons should appear (Figure 1.43).

--- Page 97 ---
FIGURE 1.42 Final app main view

--- Page 99 ---
FIGURE 1.43 Final app flipside view
If you tap and hold on the text, the magnifying glass will appear. Let go
and a pop-up menu appears. If you tap Select, the menu changes. We have
the option to cut, copy, replace, or define the current word. Tap Define and
the system’s dictionary opens to the selected word (note: on the simulator,
no definition will be found). Tap Done to dismiss the dictionary. Modify the
text, and then shake the device (^ 
Z in the simulator). An alert message
will ask if we want to undo our typing.
That’s quite a bit of functionality, and we get it all for free—just because
we are using one of the system’s text fields. Dismiss the alert, change the
text, and press either Return or Done. The main screen’s text should change
to match.
Wrapping Up
And that’s it for our Hello World app. In this chapter, we’ve examined how
iOS applications are pieced together. We’ve built and modified our own
(albeit incredibly simple) application, and we’ve gotten some hands-on
experience using the development tools. This should give you a good
jumping-off point for the rest of the book.
In Chapter 2, we will take everything we’ve learned so far and start
building a more complex, real-world application. We will continue to work
with this application throughout the rest of the book, expanding it and
enhancing it as we go along.
Other Resources
For more information, check out the following resources:
 Xcode User Guide
iOS Developer’s Library
An excellent and thorough guide to using Xcode. This goes into
considerable detail, covering every aspect of the IDE.
 iOS App Programming Guide
iOS Developer’s Library
This is a somewhat eclectic collection of topics relating to app
development. It would be worth looking at some of the more general

--- Page 100 ---
topics—but much of the information probably won’t be useful quite
yet.
 View Controller Programming Guide for iOS
iOS Developer’s Library
An exhaustive look at view controllers and their role in iOS. This
includes some details about storyboards and segues that would be
relevant to this chapter. Again, much of this guide will be more useful
once we get a few more chapters under our belts.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 101 ---
Chapter 2. Our Application’s Architecture
Much of the rest of this book will focus on developing a single application.
Chapter by chapter, we will cover the major steps required to build and test
this application, from creating the initial project to prepping it for sale.
In this chapter, we will focus on our application’s overall architecture.
We will define the user’s flow through the application, connecting our basic
views and the transitions between them. We will also build our application’s
model and link it to our view controllers. Finally, we will touch on a
number of smaller topics: enabling compiler warnings to produce cleaner
code, implementing several key methods that every app must have, running
our application on iOS devices, and even exploring the inner workings of
nib files.
Starting with the Basic Building Blocks
We can divide our application into three major modules: the model, our
view hierarchies, and our view controllers.
The model handles our application’s data. It is also responsible for
persisting the data—saving it to and reading it from disk. We have a lot of
flexibility when it comes to building our model layer. It may consist entirely
of custom classes that we create, it could be built entirely using Apple’s
Core Data framework, or it could use some hybrid approach.
The view interacts directly with the users. It displays information and
responds to touches, taps, and swipes. Typically, we don’t do a lot of coding
for our views. Until we start making custom views (see Chapter 4, “Custom
Views and Custom Transitions”), we will largely lay out our view layer in
Interface Builder using standard UIKit controls.
Finally, the view controllers are the peanut butter that holds this
sandwich together. It’s important to note that there are two main categories
of view controllers: content controllers and container controllers. These
play very different roles in our application.
Content controllers are views that manage roughly a screen’s worth of
information. As we saw in Chapter 1, “Hello, iOS,” there is a separate view
controller for each scene in our storyboard. These controllers act as the

--- Page 102 ---
content controllers for their scenes. They are responsible for coordinating
between the scene’s views and the application’s model. They request data
from the model, passing that data to the views to be displayed. Similarly,
they respond to any user interaction: button presses, slider changes, text
edits, and so on. Finally, the controller passes these changes back to the
model, when appropriate.
Container controllers act somewhat differently. Typically, they have a
very limited user interface, perhaps just a bar across the top or the bottom.
They are primarily responsible for managing and displaying other view
controllers. This includes managing the transition between view controllers.
In this way, the container controllers largely define our application’s
workflow.
Originally, as developers we could only create our own content
controllers. Apple provided a limited set of container view controllers (e.g.,
the navigation controller or tab controller), and we had to use those to
manage our application’s flow.
However, with iOS 5, Apple formalized the relationship between content
and container view controllers, opening up the API and letting us create our
own content controllers as well.
As we start designing an application, we need to think about how the user
will move through the application. Often this is driven by the data our
application uses. Look at the Music app, for example. It manages our music
library—however, this isn’t simply a flat list of songs. Our music library
has a hierarchical structure to it. Songs are organized into albums, which are
further organized into artists and genres. The users need a way to move
through these layers of complexity. We manage this using a combination of
container and content view controllers.
The iOS SDK provides five tools for organizing the application:
UITabBarController, UINavigationController,
UITableViewController, UICollectionViewController,
and presented controllers. You may not need all of these, but they are the
basic building blocks of most applications.
The UITabBarController lets the user switch between different
tasks or different groups of data. For example, the Clock application lets the
user choose between the different time-related tasks: World Clock, Alarm,
Stopwatch, and Timer. The Music app, on the other hand, allows the user to

--- Page 103 ---
select different views of their data: Albums, Artists, Genres, Songs, and
Playlists, among others The App Store mixes both approaches, displaying
three data groups (Features, Top Charts, and Near Me) and two tasks
(Search and Updates).
The tab bar can support any number of tab items. However, it can show
only five tabs at a time. UITabBarController automatically manages
any extra tab items by providing a More button and letting the user
customize the items that appear on the tab bar. Note that if you have more
than five tabs, the tab bar will display only four of them, since the More
button takes up the fifth space.
Next, the UINavigationController lets users move from scene to
scene. This controller maintains a stack of views. When a new view is
added to the top of the stack, that view slides in from the right while the old
view slides off to the left. When the top view is popped from the top of the
stack, the animation is reversed. This provides an intuitive interface for
moving through a hierarchy of views.
With iOS 7, Apple has introduced a new transition when moving back
down the stack. As before, we can still just tap the back button, and the
system will animate our return to the previous scene. However, we can also
drag our finger across the screen from the left edge. This is an example of
an interactive transition. The transition’s pace matches that of our finger,
and we can cancel the transition at any point. If we stop dragging too early,
it will simply slide back to the top view. After a certain point, it will
continue to animate the transition, even without our control. We will look at
interactive transitions, including creating our own interactive transitions, in
more detail in Chapter 4.
Both UITabBarController and UINavigationController
are examples of container controllers. They define how we move from
scene to scene in our application. UITableViewController and
UICollectionViewController, on the other hand, are content
controllers. While they appear quite differently, their role and operations are
largely identical. These controllers present a number of items onscreen,
letting the user select one or more of these items.
The table view controller simply displays its data as a single column with
any number of rows. Individually, each row could be quite complex,
combining images, icons, and formatted text. In general, a single row type

--- Page 104 ---
is used throughout the table. Each row represents a different entry from a
list of similar items.
The user can scroll up and down through the rows, selecting any item
they want. Tables are often used to present lists, such as the list of email
accounts, the list of mailboxes within a single account, or even the list of
messages within a single mailbox.

--- Page 105 ---
Nesting Containers
While each of the basic view controllers is a powerful tool by
itself, we can combine them to create even more sophisticated
view hierarchies. However, we need to take some care when
nesting containers inside other containers, especially since many
container controllers expect to manage a fixed-size view. Trying
to place one fixed size view inside another will undoubtedly
result in odd layout issues.
Apple recommends always maintaining the following order
(from parent to child):
1. Split View Controller (iPad only)
2. Tab Bar Controller
3. Navigation Controller
4. Content view controllers and container view controllers that
have flexible bounds (e.g., the Page View Controller).
Modal views act as a release valve of sorts. Since they take up
the whole screen, we can usually place any container controller
inside a modal view. The same basic logic applies to pop-up view
controllers on the iPad.
This means we can place a UINavigationController
inside a UITabBarController, but we cannot place a
UITabBarController inside a
UINavigationController. For iPhone apps, typically
either UITabBarControllers are the window’s root view
controller or they are displayed modally.
Apple’s documentation strongly recommends having a single tab
bar, making it your application’s root view, and having it visible
and accessible in every scene. If this does not fit your
application’s needs, then perhaps you should rethink your user
interface. For example, a table view controller, collection view
controller, or even a custom view controller might better fit your
needs.

--- Page 106 ---
UITableView has a common secondary use as well. We can create a
static table to organize a fixed set of heterogeneous pieces of data. In this
case, the entire table is typically used to represent a single entry. Each row
has its own unique formatting, displaying some aspect of this entry. As we
change entries, the number and type of rows remain the same; only the data
changes. We often use static tables to create forms that the user will fill in
or to display detailed information about a selected leaf object in our data
hierarchy.
The collection view controller has considerably more flexibility. We can
customize both how the individual items are displayed and how the
collection is organized. However, at their most basic, we can use collection
view controllers to display a grid of items. Again, the user can scroll
through the grid, selecting any item they want. This lets us easily display a
set of images or icons. More generally, we will use collection views
whenever we need something a little more complex than what a table view
can handle.
Finally, any view controller can present another view controller. By
default, these are presented as modal view controllers. The incoming scene
will fill the full screen, covering the current view controller, and it will
remain until dismissed. While we should avoid layering multiple presented
view controllers on top of each other—they are useful for quickly popping
up forms or controls that the user must interact with or cancel before
proceeding.
Most applications combine some or all of these tools into a user interface
that naturally matches the application’s data. In general,
UITabBarController provides the coarsest organization, defining our
broadest groups. Within each group, UINavigationController lets
the user move through the data’s hierarchy from general to specific, while
UITableViewControllers or
UICollectionViewControllers displays the information available
at each level of detail.
Kicking Off the Health Beat Project
If you’re like me, you spend most of your day sitting in front of a computer.
This has led to an ongoing battle to lose weight. To help in this fight, let’s
build an application that will let us track our weight over time.

--- Page 107 ---
Health Beat will have three main tasks: Users can enter new weights,
they can view a graph showing how their weight changes over time, and
they can view the complete history showing all their weight entries. We will
use a tab view to navigate between the weight history data and the graph. In
addition, we will use a table view/navigation controller combination to
manage our history view. The table view will show all the weights in our
history. If you tap a weight, the navigation controller will bring up a detail
view for that entry. Finally, we will present a modal view to enter new
weights.
This chapter will focus on the overall architecture of this application; on
building a storyboard that connects our tab bar, table view, and navigation
controllers; and on building and attaching our application’s model. We will
flesh out this design and cover additional topics, such as saving and loading
the data and drawing custom views, in later chapters.
Creating the Project
Open the workspace we created in Chapter 1. Look for “iOS 7
Development” in Xcode’s list of recent projects, or just find and double-
click the iOS 7 Development.xcworkspace file. The workspace
should contain our Hello World project. Add a new project by selecting File
> New > Project... from the menu. Then select iOS > Application > Tabbed
Application and click the Next button (Figure 2.1).

--- Page 108 ---
FIGURE 2.1 Creating a tabbed application
In the “Choose options for your new project” panel, name the project
Health Beat. Fill in the Organization Name and Company Identifier fields.
Leave Class Prefix blank, and set Devices to iPhone. Then click Next
(Figure 2.2).

--- Page 109 ---
FIGURE 2.2 Setting the project options
In the final panel, select the location for the project. Make sure the
“Create git repository on” checkbox is selected. Unless you have a build
server set up, it should create the repository locally on My Mac.
Make sure the “Add to” drop-down is set to iOS 7 Development. The
group should also be set to iOS 7 Development, creating a new top-level
project in our workspace (Figure 2.3).

--- Page 110 ---
FIGURE 2.3 Saving the project
This creates a basic tabbed application. In Xcode’s toolbar, change the
scheme to Health Beat > iPhone Retina (3.5 inch) (Figure 2.4) and run the
application.
FIGURE 2.4 Setting the scheme
As you can see, the application template gives us a simple two-tab
application (Figure 2.5). You can press the tab buttons to switch between
the first and second views.

--- Page 112 ---
FIGURE 2.5 Running the template
Looking at the files in the Project navigator, our template created an app
delegate (AppDelegate), two view controllers
(FirstViewController and SecondViewController), and the
storyboard (MainStoryboard.storyboard). Our assets catalog
(Images.xcassets) contains the icons for our first and second tab bar.
We also have support files and a new group for our unit tests.
Cleaning House
Before we start building our application, let’s tidy things up. First, while we
could modify the existing controllers and storyboard elements, it will be
easier to just create our own from scratch. So, let’s delete them. Delete
FirstViewController.h, FirstViewController.m,
SecondViewController.h, and SecondViewController.m.
Open Images.xcassets and delete the first and second icons. You
can simply select “first” from the list of assets and hit the Delete key. Then
repeat for the second icons.
Next, open the storyboard and delete the first and second view
controllers. There are a couple of ways to do this—but let’s look at the
simplest approach. The trick to removing scenes from a storyboard is to
select and delete the view controller itself.
Make sure the Document Outline is visible, and then expand the First
View Controller – First Scene. Inside that scene, select the First View
Controller – First line (Figure 2.6). This is the view controller object.

--- Page 113 ---
FIGURE 2.6 Deleting controllers from the storyboard
In the editor area, the view should appear with a blue line around it. Just
hit the Delete key, and the entire scene will disappear from the storyboard.
Repeat for the second view controller. This should just leave the Tab Bar
Controller Scene.
Now, let’s add some organization. We want to add four groups to our
Project navigator: Model, Views, and Controllers. In the Project navigator,
right-click the Health Beat group, select New Group, and then give it an
appropriate name. When you’re done, move the groups around so they
match Figure 2.7.

--- Page 114 ---
FIGURE 2.7 Adding the groups
Setting Additional Warnings
Xcode can perform sophisticated analysis and provide quite a bit of
feedback on your code, helping to avoid a great number of common
programming errors. Unfortunately, many of these settings are turned off by
default. Let’s fix that.
Click the Health Beat project icon (blue icon at the top). This allows us to
edit numerous project and target settings. Make sure the Health Beat target
is selected and click the Build Settings tab. Verify that the All and
Combined buttons are pressed, and then type analyzer in the search bar.
This will bring up the Static Analyzer setting. Change “Analyze During
‘Build’” to Yes. Also change “Mode of Analysis for ‘Build’” to Deep. This
will force the compiler to run the static analyzer every time you build your
application.
While we’re at it, scroll down to the Static Analyzer—Issues—Security
settings. Some of these checks are turned off by default. They won’t really

--- Page 115 ---
have any effect on the current application, but we may as well turn them on.
Change “Floating Point Value used as Loop Counter,” “Use of ‘rand’
Functions,” and “Use of ‘strcpy’ and ‘strcat’” to Yes.
Running the static analyzer on every build provides a great sanity check;
however, it can significantly slow down compile time. You may find that
you need to turn it off when working on very large projects or when
developing on slower computers. In my experience, however, it takes such a
long time to upload a new copy of the application onto the device (or even
onto the simulator) that a little extra compile time is hardly noticeable. Still,
your mileage may vary.
Next, clear the search bar, and scroll until you find the section labeled
Apple LLVM 5.0 - Warning Policies. This section, along with the other
Warning sections that follow, contains settings that let us configure the
warnings and errors that the compiler will generate.
Let’s start by changing “Treat Warnings as Errors” to Yes. If you don’t
change anything else, at least change this. Treating warnings as errors
forces you to clean up your code and get rid of all your warnings. This is a
very important habit. As frustrating as it may be, you really want to clear
out all warnings on every single build. Otherwise, sooner or later, you will
overlook something truly important.
Trust me, nothing is worse than compiling someone else’s code and
watching a steady stream of warnings scroll by. You get that sinking feeling
in the pit of your stomach. Are these serious issues that need to be resolved,
or are they trivial matters that you can simply ignore? Do everyone a favor
and get rid of all your warnings.
However, it shouldn’t end there. Here is the complete list of warnings
that I recommend turning on. Some will be turned on by default, but I am
listing them for completeness (and in case Apple changes the defaults in
future Xcode releases).
 Treat Warnings as Errors
 Check Switch Statements (on by default)
 Deprecated Functions (on by default)
 Direct usage of ‘isa’ (on by default)
 Documentation Comments

--- Page 116 ---
 Hidden Local Variables
 Implicit Boolean Conversions (on by default)
 Implicit Constant Conversions (on by default)
 Implicit Conversion to 32 Bit Type (on by default)
 Implicit Enum Conversions (on by default)
 Implicit Integer to Pointer Conversions (on by default)
 Implicit Signedness Conversion
 Initializer Not Fully Bracketed
 Mismatched Return Type (on by default)
 Missing Braces and Parentheses (on by default)
 Missing Fields in Structure Initializers
 Missing Function Prototypes
 Missing Newline At End Of File
 Pointer Sign Comparison (on by default)
 Sign Comparison
 Suspicious Implicit Conversions
 Typecheck Calls to printf/scanf (on by default)
 Uninitialized Variables (on by default)
 Unknown Pragma
 Unused Functions (on by default)
 Unused Labels
 Unused Values (on by default)
 Unused Variables (on by default)
 Implicit Atomic Objective-C Properties
 Incomplete Objective-C Protocols (on by default)
 Overriding Deprecated Objective-C Methods
 Strict Selector Matching
 Undeclared Selector (on by default)

--- Page 117 ---
 Unintentional Root Class (on by default)
 Implicit ownership types on out parameters
 Implicit retain of ‘self’ within blocks
 Using __bridge Casts Outside of ARC (on by default)
Now, I’m not going to lie to you. In the short run, turning these warnings
on may force you to do some extra typing—sometimes a lot of extra typing.
You will occasionally have to add unnecessary steps to your methods just to
keep the compiler happy. Some developers prefer to turn these warnings off
when focusing on rapid build-test-modify cycles and then turn them back
on when polishing the code. Of course, there’s a risk you might never have
time to come back and fix things. I recommend leaving them on as much as
possible. One of these days they will save you from an embarrassing bug
and you will thank me.
Of course, not all developers will follow this advice. You will find that
some third-party libraries may trigger hundreds or thousands of warnings.
As always, it’s better to be pragmatic and finish a project than to be
dogmatic and proud of yourself. If you have to turn off some of the
warnings to move forward, then just turn off the warning.
Adding Images
We will need icons for our tab buttons, and I’ll admit, these images are a
little odd. They need to be 30 by 30 PNG files (60 by 60 @2x.png files for
phones with the Retina display). The actual color of the image does not
matter; the tab-bar icons just use their alpha level. In iOS 7, these are called
template images. Their color is based on the tintColor of the containing
UI element.
Since the color doesn’t matter, I find it easiest to draw the icons in black
on a transparent background. If I want shading, I change the opacity of the
black ink. That way, the image I see is at least close to what I get when my
app displays the template image.
Feel free to create your own icons. Alternatively, you can just download
the source code from
www.freelancemadscience.com/ios7_source/ and copy over
the artwork. Select Images.xcassets in the Project navigator. The
editor should show a list of assets on the left and the image editor on the

--- Page 118 ---
right. There should be only two assets currently, AppIcon and
LaunchImage.
Drag graph.png into the list. This should create a new asset named
graph. Select that asset, and you should see the placeholders for the 1x and
2x images. Currently, only the 1x is filled.
Drag graph@2x.png into the 2x placeholder. This should set both
image resolutions (Figure 2.8). We can now simply load the graph image at
runtime, and the system will automatically select the correct resolution for
our device.
FIGURE 2.8 Adding the graph tab icon
Repeat this procedure for graph_selected.png and
graph_selected@2x.png. We should now have four assets in our
Images.xcassets folder.
As the name suggests, the graph icon will be used for our graph view tab.
We will use a built-in icon for the history view tab and our add button, so
they don’t need any additional artwork.

--- Page 119 ---
Running and Testing on iOS Devices
If you are running Mountain Lion or Mavericks, you can
download Xcode 5.0 from the App Store for free. This gives you
full access to the iOS SDK and the simulator. However, if you
want to build and run your applications on actual iOS devices,
then you need to join the iOS Developer Program. You can
register as either an individual or a company team for $99 a year.
There are also a few less-common options. The iOS Developer
University Program is free for qualifying academic institutes,
allowing universities to offer iOS development classes as part of
their curriculum. At the higher end, the iOS Developer Enterprise
Program allows larger companies to produce and deploy
proprietary, in-house applications. Still, most of us will probably
either purchase an individual membership or find ourselves
added to an existing company team.
Once you have an iOS Developer membership, you must set up
the proper developer certificates and provisioning profiles before
you can build and test on your devices. Originally, this was a
tedious and somewhat error-prone process. The Certificates,
Identifiers & Profiles page has detailed information covering all
the necessary steps
(https://developer.apple.com/ios/manage/over
view/index.action).
However, I have some good news. Apple has worked hard to
automate and simplify these procedures over the years. Most of
the time, Xcode can set everything up for you automatically.
If you are getting error messages about your signing entities or
provisioning profiles, make sure everything is set up properly.
First, in the Project navigator, select the project icon. Make sure
the correct build target is selected and click the General tab.
Scroll through this page and look for any warnings. If there are
any warnings, you should also see a button you can click to fix
the issue. If you don’t find anything there, try checking the
Capabilities tab.

--- Page 120 ---
If you still cannot run your app on a physical device, check your
preferences. Select the Xcode > Preferences... menu. In the
preference sheet, select the Accounts tab. On the right side, select
your account and click the View Details button.... From here,
make sure you have a valid signing identity. You should also
refresh your provisioning profiles.
If all else fails, go to Apple’s Certificates, Identifiers & Profiles
page
(https://developer.apple.com/ios/manage/over
view/index.action). This gives you a complete set of tools
for managing your certificates, App IDs, and profiles. This is
definitely the last resort. You don’t get all the nice, automated
tools—but you should be able to go in, find the problem, and fix
it.
Building the Model
We are now ready to start building. Let’s begin with the model, since we
will need a minimally functional model before our view controllers will do
any real work.
One of our goals in designing the model is to make it as modular as
possible. This means creating a well-defined interface through which we
will communicate with the rest of our application. For Health Beat, this will
be our WeightHistoryDocument class. We will also create a
WeightEntry class. This will hold the data for an individual entry.
Finally, we will create WeightUnits.h and WeightUnits.m files.
WeightUnits won’t be a class, but it will be an enum and related
functions that we want to use in various places throughout our application.
Giving them their own header and implementation file makes it easy to
import them wherever we need them.
Creating Our Files
Let’s start by adding the WeightHistoryDocument class to the project,
Control-click the Model group, and select New File... from the pop-up
menu. This will bring up the “Choose a template...” page. Make sure to
select an iOS > Cocoa Touch > Objective-C Class and click Next.

--- Page 121 ---
On the “Choose options...” page, make sure the “Subclass of” setting is
set to NSObject, and then name the class WeightHistoryDocument. I
always set the superclass before the name, since some superclasses will
automatically modify the name. For example, UIViewController adds
ViewController to the end of the current class name. After accidentally
creating a number of MyViewControllerViewControllers, I
decided it was best to just set the superclass first. Once the name and
superclass are set, click Next.
The final page lets us choose where to save our class. We can use the
default location, but make sure you look at the options at the bottom. The
Group should be set to Model, and the Health Beat target should be
selected. If everything looks OK, click Create.
Xcode will add the class to our project and will open the .m file in the
editor. I typically start by modifying the .h file. Fortunately, we can switch
between the .h and .m files by pressing ^ 
 or ^ 
 .
Repeat the procedure for WeightEntry. Control-click the Model group
and select New File.... Set the superclass to NSObject and the name to
WeightEntry, and make sure the files are added to the correct group and
target.
For the enum and utility functions, we could create a header file and a C
file from the iOS > C and C++ templates. However, this won’t actually
work for us. C implementation files end with a .c. Objective-C
implementation files end with an .m. The compiler will compile our code as
Objective-C only if it has an .m extension.
Now, we’re not creating a class—but we still want to be able to use
Objective-C classes in our functions, so we need our code to be compiled as
Objective-C. The easiest way to get an .h and .m pair is actually to create
an Objective-C object and then delete the object declaration. Let’s do that.
Again, Control-click the Model group and select New File.... Name the
class WeightUnits. This will determine the .h and .m names. The
superclass doesn’t matter; leave it set to the current default. Then make the
following two changes:
 In WeightUnits.m, delete everything after #import
“WeightUnits.h”.

--- Page 122 ---
 Switch to WeightUnits.h and delete everything after #import
<Foundation/Foundation.h>.
This gives us an empty .h and .m pair.
If you did everything correctly, you should have added six files to the
Model group: WeightHistoryDocument.h,
WeightHistoryDocument.m, WeightEntry.h,
WeightEntry.m, WeightUnits.h, and WeightUnits.m. Make
sure you have all six files before proceeding to the next step.
Implementing WeightUnit
Let’s start with WeightUnit, since it’s the simplest. Open
WeightUnits.h, and add the following code:
Click here to view code image
#import <Foundation/Foundation.h>
 
typedef enum {
    LBS,
    KG
} WeightUnit;
WeightUnit getDefaultUnits(void);
Here, we’re simply declaring our WeightUnit enum. Notice that we
are combining the declaration and the typedef into a single expression. Feel
free to separate it into two steps, if you prefer.
Initially, we will use only two different weight units, LBS and KG.
However, since we are defining our units as an enum, it will be relatively
easy to add additional units later—for example if we wanted to add STONE,
OZ, or even TON.
We are also declaring a single function, getDefaultUnits().
Initially, this will simply return LBS. However, we will add the ability to
change the default units in Chapter 5, “Loading and Saving Data.”
Now, switch to WeightUnits.m. We simply need to define our
getDefaultUnits() method.
Click here to view code image
#import "WeightUnits.h"

--- Page 123 ---
WeightUnit getDefaultUnits(void)
{
    return LBS;
}
That’s it. WeightUnit is done (for now).
Implementing WeightEntry
The WeightEntry class is only slightly more complicated than
WeightUnit. Let’s start by opening WeightEntry.h and replacing all
the existing code with the code shown here:
Click here to view code image
#import <Foundation/Foundation.h>
#import "WeightUnits.h"
/**
 * The WeightEntry class holds the weight and date data for a
single entry.
 */
@interface WeightEntry : NSObject
/// Stores the weight for this entry in US pounds
@property (assign, nonatomic, readonly) float weightInLbs;
/// Stores the date for this entry
@property (strong, nonatomic, readonly) NSDate* date;
/**
 * Convenience method for instantiating new WeightEntry objects
 *
 * @param weight Weight for this entry
 * @param unit Unit type for the weight parameter
 * @param date Date for this entry
 * @return A newly instantiated WeightEntry object
 */
+ (instancetype)entryWithWeight:(float)weight
                     usingUnits:(WeightUnit)unit
                        forDate:(NSDate *)date;
/**
 * Class method for converting from US pounds to kilograms
 *
 * @param lbs The weight in pounds
 * @return The weight in kilograms
 */
+ (float)convertLbsToKg:(float)lbs;

--- Page 124 ---
/**
 * Class method for converting from kilograms to US pounds
 *
 * @param kg The weight in kilograms
 * @return The weight in pounds
 */
+ (float)convertKgToLbs:(float)kg;
@end
We start by importing our WeightUnits declarations. Then we add
two properties to our WeightEntry class: weightInLbs and date.
Each WeightEntry will store a single entry. For Health Beat, this means
storing the weight and the date on which the weight was taken.
Notice that these properties are read-only. This means our
WeightEntry objects will be immutable. Once we create one, we cannot
change its values. If we want to modify a WeightEntry, we must create a
new object with the correct values and delete the old ones.
While this may seem a little inconvenient, immutable data objects can
greatly simplify our code. For example, we don’t need to worry about some
other part of our application changing their values while we are using them.
Also, for simplicity’s sake, we will always store the weight in pounds.
We can then convert it into whatever format the user wants when we
display the weights.
Additionally, we are specifically using float instead of double for
our weight. We want to use the same data type in both 32- and 64-bit
applications, to make saving and loading our data easier. Using 64-bit data
would both require more memory and slow down our 32-bit versions. And,
since our weight values will never need the additional range or accuracy of
a double, it would just be wasted effort.
Next, we declare a convenience method to let us easily instantiate new
WeightEntry objects. This is a class method that takes three arguments:
the weight, the units for the weight, and the date.
Then, since we will be converting our weights, we add methods to
manage the conversion from pounds to kilograms and back. These methods
do not use any of the WeightEntry object’s internal data, so we will
make them class methods.

--- Page 125 ---
Finally, notice that I’ve added Doxygen-formatted documentation
comments to this header file. Documentation comments are primarily used
to create docsets for your classes. You can then add these docsets to your
~/Library/Developer/Shared/Documentation/DocSets
folder, allowing Xcode to access them through its Documentation viewer.
However, creating docsets is most useful when you are creating shared
libraries—particularly when publicly distributing those libraries or when
sharing them with other members of your team. For most small to medium
applications, docsets are probably overkill.
However, the documentation comments are still useful, even within a
small project. Xcode is smart enough to pick up on these documentation
comments and use them when presenting the quick help pop-up for these
symbols. With these comments in place, I can Option-click either the class,
property, or method names to bring up this information (Figure 2.9). All of
this happens automatically once I create the comments; I don’t need to do
any additional work.
FIGURE 2.9 Displaying the documentation comments in a quick help
pop-up
Unfortunately, because of the space they require, I won’t be including
documentation comments in the rest of the book. However, I strongly
recommend adding them to all of your .h files. It is especially useful when
maintaining code that may be months or years old.
OK, we still have more work to do. Let’s switch to WeightEntry.m.
First, we need to implement our creating methods. We will need three

--- Page 126 ---
creation methods. We want to create a private, custom init method. We
want to override the superclass’s init method, and we want to implement
our convenience method.
Add the following code inside WeightEntry’s @implementation
block (between the @implementation line and the @end directive):
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Init Methods
// Designated initializer.
- (id) initWithWeight:(float)weight
           usingUnits:(WeightUnit)unit
              forDate:(NSDate*)date
{
    self = [super init];
    if (self)
    {
        if (unit == LBS) {
            _weightInLbs = weight;
        }
        else {
            _weightInLbs = [WeightEntry convertKgToLbs:weight];
        }
        _date = date;
    }
    return self;
}
// Must override the superclass's designated initializer.
- (id)init
{
    NSDate* referenceDate = [NSDate
dateWithTimeIntervalSince1970:0.0f];
    
    return [self initWithWeight:0.0f
                     usingUnits:LBS
                        forDate:referenceDate];
}
+(instancetype)entryWithWeight:(float)weight
                    usingUnits:(WeightUnit)unit
                       forDate:(NSDate *)date
{
    return [[self alloc] initWithWeight:weight usingUnits:unit
forDate:date];
}

--- Page 127 ---
The initWithWeight:usingUnits:forDate: method is our
designated initializer. It sets our weightInLbs property—converting the
weight from kilograms to pounds, if necessary. It is also a private method,
which means it should not be called from outside the class. Here, we are
trying to force people to instantiate our WeightEntry class through our
public convenience method—which we will define in a minute.
For completeness, we need to override the superclass’s designated
initializer. Our class’s superclass is NSObject, which means we simply
need to override init. In this case, our init method simply calls
initWithWeight:usingUnits:forDate: creating a weight entry
of 0.0 lbs., dated on January 1, 1970, GMT.
Finally, the convenience method simply allocs and inits a
WeightEntry object using our new designated initializer. It passes along
all of its arguments to the designated initializer and returns the result.
This is a pretty standard set of initialization methods. If you are having
trouble understanding them, please review the “Writing Initialization
Methods” and “Convenience Methods” sections of the “Objective-C” bonus
chapter (www.freelancemadscience.com/creating-ios-7-
apps-bonus-chap/).
We still need to implement our conversion methods. However, before we
can do that, we need to declare a constant to represent the conversion rate
between pounds and kilograms.
At the top of WeightEntry.m, add the following line:
Click here to view code image
#import "WeightEntry.h"
static const float LBS_PER_KG = 2.20462262f;
@implementation WeightEntry
This simply declares a constant floating-point value that we can use for
our calculations. Now, at the bottom of the @implementation block,
right before the @end directive, add the following two methods:
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Conversion Methods
+ (float)convertLbsToKg:(float)lbs
{

--- Page 128 ---
    return lbs / LBS_PER_KG;
}
+ (float)convertKgToLbs:(float)kg
{
    return kg * LBS_PER_KG;
}
These simply convert from pounds to kilograms, using the constant we
just defined.
Finally, let’s modify the class’s description. Every object has a
description method that it inherits from NSObject. This method
creates a string representation for our class. By default, it simply creates a
pair of angled brackets with the class name and the pointer value inside.
Unfortunately, this isn’t useful when you are trying to debug your code.
We won’t be using the description directly in our production code—but it
will be quite helpful during our initial testing and development. Add the
following code to the bottom of the file, before the @end directive:
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - NSObject Methods
-(NSString *)description
{
    NSString *date = [NSDateFormatter
                      localizedStringFromDate:self.date
                      dateStyle:NSDateFormatterMediumStyle
                      timeStyle:NSDateFormatterShortStyle];
    
    return [NSString stringWithFormat:
    @"%0.2f lbs entry from %@", self.weightInLbs, date];
}
Here, we are using the NSDateFormatter to create a properly
localized string for our date. This will take into account both the device’s
language and its region.
We really should do something similar for the weight—and later, we will
build helper functions to help us better display our weight. For now, we’re
just going to display it as a number out to two decimal places.
This isn’t ideal, but it’s good enough for our current testing needs.

--- Page 129 ---
Implementing WeightHistoryDocument
By far, the WeightHistoryDocument will be the most complex piece
of our model. And this isn’t even the full WeightHistoryDocument
implementation. We won’t be worrying about saving and loading our data.
Nor will we be syncing our data using iCloud. Those features will be added
in future chapters. Instead, this is the simplest, most basic implementation
that will still let us test our user interface.
Still, there are a lot of tasks that it must perform. It must store all of our
weight entries and give us a way to access that data. It must also notify
other parts of our application when the underlying data has changed.
Specifically, it needs to post notifications when changes begin, when an
entry has been added to our history, when an entry has been deleted from
our history, and when the changes end.
Let’s start by declaring string constants for the notification names. There
are also a few other things we need to set up before we get started. Open
WeightHistoryDocument.h. Between the line importing the
foundation framework and the beginning of the @interface block, add
the following code:
Click here to view code image
#import "WeightUnits.h"
@class WeightEntry;
typedef void (^EntryEnumeratorBlock) (WeightEntry *entry);
// Use to register for update notifications
extern NSString * const
WeightHistoryDocumentBeginChangesNotification;
extern NSString * const
WeightHistoryDocumentInsertWeightEntryNotification;
extern NSString * const
WeightHistoryDocumentDeleteWeightEntryNotification;
extern NSString * const
WeightHistoryDocumentChangesCompleteNotification;
// Use to access data in the notifications
extern NSString * const
WeightHistoryDocumentNotificationIndexPathKey;

--- Page 130 ---
The first line imports our weight unit enum and functions. Next we have
a forward declaration for the WeightEntry class. Typically we want to
keep all #import directives out of the .h files. #import is a lot smarter
than it’s C cousin, #include. #import will include each file only once.
So, we don’t have to worry too much about creating infinite loops. Still,
having header files that import other header files, which import still other
header files, can bog down the build system.
We couldn’t do anything about WeightUnits.h’s enum or function—
but we can use forward declarations to handle both protocols and classes.
Basically, the @class line tells the compiler that the WeightEntry class
exists, and that the compiler doesn’t need to worry about the details right
now. We promise to provide all the necessary information before it becomes
important.
This works because all classes are pointers—which mean they are all the
same size. As long as the code in our file only passes the pointer around or
saves it (e.g., passing the object as arguments or return values or saving it in
instance variables or properties), the compiler doesn’t need to know
anything else. We only need to import the header file when we want to
access the object’s public properties or methods. Most of the time this
means we use a forward declaration in the .h file and import the header file
in the .m file.
After the forward declaration, we’re creating a typedef for a block type.
The syntax is...well, let’s be generous and say it’s a little bit hard to follow,
in the same way that Swedish death metal is a little bit loud. Basically,
we’re creating a data type named EntryEnumeratorBlock, which is
an alias for a block that takes a single WeightEntry argument and has no
return value. We’ll use this block type to create a block-based interface for
our collection of WeightEntrys.
If you’re using blocks as arguments, return types, or properties, typedefs
like this help keep your code manageable. As ugly as the previous line is,
it’s a lot nicer than just shoving this whole mess into your method
prototype.
Finally we declare five string constants. The first four are the names for
our notifications. The fifth one is a key that we can use to get and set the
index path in the notification’s user info dictionary.

--- Page 131 ---
That’s a lot of work, and we still haven’t modified the
WeightHistoryDocument class itself yet. Let’s declare our properties
and methods. Add the following code inside the @interface block:
Click here to view code image
@property (nonatomic, readonly) NSUInteger count;
- (WeightEntry *)entryAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath;
- (NSIndexPath *)indexPathForEntry:(WeightEntry *)weightEntry;
- (void)addEntry:(WeightEntry *)weightEntry;
- (void)deleteEntryAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath;
- (void)enumerateEntriesAscending:(BOOL)ascending
                        withBlock:(EntryEnumeratorBlock)block;
This class has only one public property, count. Actually, count will be
a virtual property. We won’t use an instance variable to store the number of
items in our history. Instead, we will calculate this value whenever the
accessor is called.
Admittedly, we could have just declared count as a method—however,
by declaring it as a virtual property, we can use dot notation to access it.
This streamlines our code, but it comes at a slight cost. If we declare it as a
property, we should really make sure it’s KVC and KVO compliant. As you
will soon see, we will spend a little extra time and effort setting up the
property in order to simplify its use later on.
After the property, we declare a number of methods. The
entryAtIndexPath: method lets us access the entry for a given index
path. Table views (among others) use index paths to refer to items by their
section and their row numbers. Since we will primarily be displaying the
entries in a table, we will match that indexing here.
The indexPathForEntry: method searches through the weight
history for a matching entry. If it finds one, it returns the entry’s index path.
The addEntry: method simply adds another entry to our history, while
deleteEntryAtIndexPath: deletes the corresponding entry.
Finally, the enumerateEntriesAscending:withBlock:
method will let us iterate over all the entries in our history. We can choose
to iterate in ascending order (going forward in time from the earliest date to
the most recent date) or in descending order (going backward in time). For

--- Page 132 ---
each entry in our history, this method will call the provided
EntryEnumeratorBlock, passing in the current entry.
These methods let us manipulate our entry history without exposing the
history itself. While this is generally a cleaner way to code, since other parts
of our application cannot modify our history without going through these
methods. The real benefit comes from hiding the underlying
implementation. As you will see in Chapter 7, “Core Data,” when we move
from custom objects to Core Data, WeightHistoryDocument’s
interface will remain unchanged. We may gut and rewrite the underlying
implementation, but the rest of our application won’t even notice the
difference.
And, speaking of the implementation, let’s open
WeightHistoryDocument.m and begin defining our methods. Much
like the .h file, we will start by importing files and declaring our constants.
Add the following code under the WeightHistoryDocument.h
import, before the beginning of the @interface block:
Click here to view code image
#import "WeightEntry.h"
// Use to register for update notifications
NSString * const WeightHistoryDocumentBeginChangesNotification =
@"WeightHistoryDocumentBeginChangesNotification";
NSString * const
WeightHistoryDocumentInsertWeightEntryNotification =
@"WeightHistoryDocumentInsertWeightEntryNotification";
NSString * const
WeightHistoryDocumentDeleteWeightEntryNotification =
@"WeightHistoryDocumentDeleteWeightEntryNotification";
NSString * const
WeightHistoryDocumentChangesCompleteNotification =
@"WeightHistoryDocumentChangesCompleteNotification";
// Use to access data in the notifications
NSString * const WeightHistoryDocumentNotificationIndexPathKey =
@"WeightHistoryDocumentNotificationIndexPathKey";
Here we import the WeightEntry class—following up on the promise
we made with our forward declaration. We are also defining our string
constants. It doesn’t really matter what value these strings have, as long as

--- Page 133 ---
they’re unique within our application. When I’m using string constants as
keys or notification names, I typically use the constant’s name for the
string’s content.
Next, we’re going to add an extension to the class. Place the following
code after our constant definitions but before the @implementation
block:
Click here to view code image
@interface WeightHistoryDocument()
@property (strong, nonatomic)NSMutableArray *weightHistory;
@end
Extensions are typically used to add private properties to a class. In this
case, we will store our history in a mutable array—however, this is purely
an internal implementation detail and should not be exposed outside our
class.
Next, we need a custom init method. Since we are simply overriding
the superclass’s designated initializer, we need only one init method in
this class. Put the following code inside WeightHistoryDocument’s
@implementation block:
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Initialization Methods
- (id)init
{
    self = [super init];
    if (self) {
        _weightHistory = [NSMutableArray array];
    }
    return self;
}
This is a standard designated initializer. Most of the method is
boilerplate. The only real work is the line in the middle, where we create a
new, empty array for our weightHistory property.
Next, we need to implement the getter for count. This has two effects.
First, it lets us dynamically calculate the count, rather than storing and
retrieving the value. More importantly, since the complier isn’t creating any
accessors for this property, it won’t create the _count instance variable
either. Add the following code beneath our init method but before @end:

--- Page 134 ---
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Accessor Methods
-(NSUInteger)count
{
    return [self.weightHistory count];
}
+ (NSSet *)keyPathsForValuesAffectingCount
{
    return [NSSet setWithObjects:@"weightHistory", nil];
}
Here, our count method simply calls our mutable array’s count
method and returns the result. The
keyPathsForValuesAffectingCount method is used by the
system to determine when our count property has change. If you are using
Key-Value Observing to monitor the count property, you will receive an
update notification every time our weightHistory changes.
This, however, isn’t quite enough to make count KVO compliant. It
turns out that making collections Key-Value Coding compliant (which is a
prerequisite for KVO compliance) is more difficult than it seems. Basically,
we must implement and use KVC-compliant getters and setters for the
elements in our array. There are a couple of different ways to do this, but for
this project, we will add the following methods to
WeightHistoryDocument:
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - KVO Accessors
- (void)insertObject:(WeightEntry *)object
inWeightHistoryAtIndex:(NSUInteger)index
{
    [self.weightHistory insertObject:object atIndex:index];
}
- (void)removeObjectFromWeightHistoryAtIndex:(NSUInteger)index
{
    [self.weightHistory removeObjectAtIndex:index];
}
This is where Objective-C’s dynamic underpinnings really begin to shine.
The system will dynamically look for these methods based on our

--- Page 135 ---
property’s name. If it finds both of these methods, it will enable Key-Value
Observing using these methods. Any calls to these methods will generate
change notifications.
However, we must implement both of these methods. Just implementing
one will not make the class KVC compliant—and Key-Value Observing
won’t register any changes. Optionally, we could add a third method
replaceObjectInWeightHistoryAtIndex:withObject:;
however, that won’t be necessary for this project.
With these methods in place, our count property will be properly KVO
compliant—provided, of course, we modify the underlying data only using
insertObject:inWeightHistoryAtIndex: and
removeObjectFromWeightHistoryAtIndex:. That’s a bit
annoying, but it’s not too hard to guarantee. Fortunately,
weightHistory is a private property, so it cannot be modified from
outside our class. As long as our WeightHistoryDocument class is
correct, everything will work as expected. It’s yet another win for
encapsulation!
Now, let’s look at the accessor methods. The first two are easy.
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Public Methods
- (WeightEntry *)entryAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath
{
    return self.weightHistory[(NSUInteger)indexPath.row];
}
- (NSIndexPath *)indexPathForEntry:(WeightEntry *)weightEntry
{
    NSUInteger row = [self.weightHistory
indexOfObject:weightEntry];
    return [NSIndexPath indexPathForRow:(NSInteger)row
inSection:0];
}
Here, we’re simply converting between the array index and an
NSIndexPath. When working with tables, NSIndexPath has two
components, a row and a section. In our application, we will have only a
single section. So, all the items will be placed in section 0. The entry’s row
is just equal to its index in the array.

--- Page 136 ---
So, for entryAtIndexPath, we extract the row number from the
indexPath argument. Then we use Objective-C’s new subscript notation
to look up the object at that index.
There is, unfortunately, one smallish hitch in the process.
NSIndexPath uses signed integers, while the subscript notation uses
unsigned integers. Assuming you enabled all the warnings I recommended
earlier in this chapter, you will need to cast from the signed to the unsigned
variant to get rid of the warning. As I said, the extra typing can be annoying
—but it will help you prevent a potentially embarrassing mistake one day.
indexPathForEntry: is the reverse. We get the index number for
the desired weight entry. Then we use that number to create a new
NSIndexPath (casting to a signed integer, when necessary).
Next, let’s add the addEntry: method.
Click here to view code image
- (void)addEntry:(WeightEntry *)weightEntry
{
    NSUInteger index = [self
insertionPointForDate:weightEntry.date];
    NSIndexPath *indexPath =
    [NSIndexPath indexPathForRow:(NSInteger)index inSection:0];
    
    NSNotificationCenter *center = [NSNotificationCenter
defaultCenter];
    
    [center
     postNotificationName:WeightHistoryDocumentBeginChangesNotif
ication
     object:self];
    
    [self insertObject:weightEntry
inWeightHistoryAtIndex:index];
    
    [center
     postNotificationName:
     WeightHistoryDocumentInsertWeightEntryNotification
     object:self
     userInfo:@{WeightHistoryDocumentNotificationIndexPathKey:in
dexPath}];
    
    [center
     postNotificationName:WeightHistoryDocumentChangesCompleteNo
tification

--- Page 137 ---
     object:self];
}
This method is starting to get a bit more complex. Here we start by
determining the insertion point for our entry. We want our WeightEntry
elements to remain in chronological order, and it’s faster to just insert each
new element into its proper position—rather than sorting the entire array
after each change.
If you’re not familiar with WeightHistoryDocument’s
insertionPointForDate: method, that’s because we haven’t written
it yet. We will add this as a private method soon. For now, let’s just assume
it works as advertised.
Next, we convert the index to an index path. Then we get a reference to
the default notification center. We then send a notification, stating that our
document is about to change. We add the entry using our KVO-compliant
accessor method. Then we send a second notification stating that we’ve
inserted an object into our history and a third notification stating that the
changes are done.
Of these notifications, the
WeightHistoryDocumentInsertWeightEntryNotification
is the most complex. Here, we don’t just send it; we also pass in an
NSDictionary containing information about the change. Specifically,
we include the index path of the newly inserted object. Notice that we are
using Objective-C’s new literal dictionary syntax to create our dictionary
inline.
Destruction is often easier than creation, and Health Beat is no exception,
as you will see. Add the deleteEntryAtIndexPath: method as
shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (void)deleteEntryAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath
{
    NSNotificationCenter *center = [NSNotificationCenter
defaultCenter];
    
    [center
     postNotificationName:WeightHistoryDocumentBeginChangesNotif
ication
     object:self];
    

--- Page 138 ---
    [self removeObjectFromWeightHistoryAtIndex:
(NSUInteger)indexPath.row];
    
    [center
     postNotificationName:
     WeightHistoryDocumentDeleteWeightEntryNotification
     object:self
     userInfo:@{WeightHistoryDocumentNotificationIndexPathKey:in
dexPath}];
    
    [center
     postNotificationName:WeightHistoryDocumentChangesCompleteNo
tification
     object:self];
}
In many ways, this is very similar to addEntry:. We grab a reference
to the default notification center. We then use that reference to send the
begin changes notification. We remove the WeightEntry object using
our KVO-compliant accessor. Then we send two additional notifications.
First the weight entry deleted notification, and then the changes completed
notification.
Now let’s look at the block enumeration method. Despite the scary
technology involved, this is actually one of the easier methods.
Click here to view code image
- (void)enumerateEntriesAscending:(BOOL)ascending
                        withBlock:(EntryEnumeratorBlock)block
{
    NSUInteger options = 0;
    if (ascending)
    {
        options = NSEnumerationReverse;
    }
    
    [self.weightHistory
     enumerateObjectsWithOptions:options
     usingBlock:^(id obj, NSUInteger idx, BOOL *stop) {
        block(obj);
    }];
}
Here, we start by creating an options local variable and setting this to
0 (no options). Next we check to see whether we are enumerating our
entries in ascending order. If we are, we set our options to
NSEnumerationReverse. This will cause our enumeration code to start

--- Page 139 ---
at the tail end of the array and work toward the first object. Of course, this
assumes our weightHistory array is kept in descending order. We will
take care of that in a minute.
Then we just call
enumerateObjectsWithOptions:usingBlock:. We pass in our
options variable for the first argument. For the second argument we
create a block that simply calls our block, passing in the current entry as an
argument.
Yes, we have a block inside a block. Yes, that may seem odd, and we
could have simply changed our EntryEnumeratorBlock definition so
that it matched the blocks required by
enumerateObjectsWithOptions.... That way, we could just pass
our block directly to enumerateObjectsWithOptions....
However, we are interested only in the current entry—we don’t need the
index or the stop output argument. In fact, we really shouldn’t expose those
details to the outside. Calling our block inside their block lets us simplify,
focus, and clean up the interface.
Finally, we need to implement our private
insertionPointForDate: method. I typically place private methods
at the bottom of the file, just before the @end directive.
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Private Methods
- (NSUInteger)insertionPointForDate:(NSDate *)date
{
    NSUInteger index = 0;
    for (WeightEntry *entry in self.weightHistory)
    {
        if ([date compare:entry.date] == NSOrderedDescending)
        {
            return index;
        }
        index++;
    }
    return index;
}
We want our weightHistory array to be kept in descending order. To
do this, we start with an index of 0. Then we iterate over our current array.
For each entry in the array, we check to see whether its date is after the date

--- Page 140 ---
of our new entry. If it is, we’ve found the correct position. We simply return
the current index. If it’s not, we increment the index and check the next
item. If we reach the end of the array, we simply return the length of the
array, effectively inserting our object at the end.
This algorithm works as long as the array is already in descending order.
Fortunately, if we start with an empty array and we always use this
algorithm to add new items, it can never get out of order. This is also the
reason we don’t allow replacing or modifying entries. If we did, we would
have to check any time a change was made and reorder our array, if
necessary. That gets messy fast.
As written, if you want to replace an entry, you must delete the old entry
and insert a new entry. Of course, when you add the new entry, our code
will automatically insert it in the proper position, based on its new date. So,
everything stays properly ordered.
There’s one last step. We should probably override the description
method to provide more useful information during testing. Add the
following method. I usually add overridden methods near the bottom of the
class, just before the private methods.
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - NSObject Methods
-(NSString *)description
{
    return [NSString stringWithFormat:
            @"WeightHistoryDocument: count = %@, history = %@",
            @(self.count), self.weightHistory];
}
Here, we need to make sure our formatting string works for both 32-bit
and 64-bit. The problem is, self.count returns an NSUInteger, and
NSUInteger’s size changes between 32- and 64-bit. This means its
placeholder must also change. In 32-bit, it requires a %d, in 64-bit it
requires a %ld. We solve this problem by using an object placeholder, %@,
and converting our integer to an NSNumber using the literal syntax.
That’s it for now. We’ll add a few bells and whistles in later chapters, but
this is enough to let us build and test our user interface. And speaking of
user interfaces....

--- Page 141 ---
Laying Out the Storyboard
It’s time to start building our application’s workflow. We already have a tab
bar controller—but it doesn’t currently have any tabs. If you run the
application now, you’ll see. It doesn’t do a whole lot.
We want to add two tabs: one for our history view and one for our graph
view. We do this by adding two view controllers to our storyboard and
connecting them as relationships to the tab bar controller.
Open Main.storyboard. Working with storyboards requires a lot of
screen space (or you need to get very good at zooming in and zooming out).
So, you probably want to hide the Navigator and the Debug area to give
yourself as much room as possible. We will often use the Document Outline
and Utilities area, so I leave them on the screen. At this point, our
storyboard should just have a single tab bar controller (Figure 2.10).
FIGURE 2.10 Our mostly empty storyboard

--- Page 142 ---
Let’s start by adding our history view controller. This will be a table view
controller, so in the Object library, find the Table View Controller icon (it
should be near the top of the list), and drop it to the right of the tab view
controller. Double-clicking the background will zoom in and out. You may
want to zoom out to more easily adjust the table view controller’s position.
Now, our history view should be inside a navigation controller, letting us
easily bring up a detailed view for each entry. We could find a navigation
controller in the Object library, and drag it out and link everything by hand,
but there’s a quicker way.
Select the table view controller. Again, selecting the controller can be a
bit tricky. If you’re zoomed out, you can just click anywhere inside the
scene. If you’re zoomed in, you need to actually select the view controller
icon either in the scene’s dock or in the document outline. Clicking the
scene will usually select the view, not the view controller. You can tell that
the view controller is selected, because the entire scene will be surrounded
by a blue line (Figure 2.11).

--- Page 143 ---
FIGURE 2.11 Selecting the view controller

--- Page 144 ---
With the table view controller highlighted, select the Editor > Embed In
> Navigation Controller menu item. This will automatically add a
navigation controller to our storyboard, setting our table view controller as
the navigation controller’s root view controller.
Now, we need to connect the navigation controller to our tab bar
controller. Control-click the tab bar controller and drag to navigation
controller (Figure 2.12). When you let go of the mouse, a pop-up menu will
appear. It lists four options. Three manual segues (push, modal, and custom)
and a single relationship segue (view controllers). Select “view controllers.”
This will add our history view as our tab bar controller’s first tab.
FIGURE 2.12 Connecting the controllers
Next, we need our graph view. This will be somewhat simpler. Drag a
View Controller out from the Object library, and place it in the storyboard

--- Page 145 ---
below the navigation controller. Then Control-drag from the tab bar
controller to our new view controller. Again, select “view controllers” from
the pop-up menu.
Two more scenes to go. We want a scene to display the detailed
information about each weight entry. One of the easiest ways to do this is to
use a static table. So, let’s drag out another Table View Controller from the
Object library. Place it to the right of our current table view.
Now let’s configure it as a static table. Zoom in on our new table view
controller, and select the table view. You should be able to just click the
middle of the scene. In the Attributes inspector, change the Contents from
Dynamic Prototypes to Static Cells. We also want to change the Style from
Plain to Grouped. That’s it for now; we will lay out the content in the next
chapter.
We still need to connect this scene to our history view scene. Basically,
whenever the user taps a row in the history view, we want to push our detail
view on to the navigation stack. This is easy to set up. Control-click the
table view cell in our original table view and drag over to our second table
view (Figure 2.13). When you release the mouse, select the push segue.
This will connect the view controllers, add the navigation bar to our detail
table, and add the gray disclosure indicator to our original table view cell.

--- Page 146 ---
FIGURE 2.13 Connecting our history view’s cell to the detail scene
We still need a scene to let us add new weight entries. For this, we need
to add a button to the history table’s navigation bar. Then we will connect a
modal view to this button.
Zoom in on our original table view controller (the one attached to the
navigation controller). In the Object library, scroll down until you find a
Bar Button Item. Drag this out and place it on the right side of the table
view’s navigation bar (Figure 2.14).

--- Page 147 ---
FIGURE 2.14 Adding a navigation bar button
Now select the button, and in the Attributes inspector, change the
Identifier to Add. The button should now appear as a plus sign.
Drag out another View Controller and place it above our table view
controller. Now, Control-click the add button and drag up to our new view
controller. This time, select the modal segue.
 Note
We are using three different navigation techniques in our
application. The tab bar controller lets us switch between the
history view and our graph view. The navigation controller
lets us slide easily between the history view and the detailed
views for any particular entry. The history view also displays
our add entry scene as a modal view, temporarily covering
the entire user interface until the add entry scene is explicitly
dismissed (until the new entry is saved or canceled).
So far, the storyboard gives us the basic framework for our application.
Zoom out and reposition the scenes so they match Figure 2.15.

--- Page 148 ---
FIGURE 2.15 The complete scene layout

--- Page 149 ---
Adding Custom View Controllers
Currently, our storyboard will use default UIKit view controllers for all of
our scenes: UIViewController, UITabBarController,
UINavigationController, or UITableViewController.
However, we want to provide a custom subclass for each of these, letting us
customize their behavior.
This is a two-step process. First, we need to create the custom classes.
Second, we need to tell the storyboard to use our new classes.
Let’s start by adding a custom tab bar controller. If you previously hid the
Navigator, you will have to show it again. Then, in the Project navigator,
right-click the Controllers group, and select New File.... We want to create a
new Objective-C Class. The class name should be RootTabBarController.
It should be a subclass of UITabBarController. Make sure the Targeted for
iPad and “With XIB for user interface” boxes are not checked. Finally,
make sure it’s added to the Controllers group and the Health Beat target.
Repeat this procedure for the other controllers. Their names and
subclasses are listed in Table 2.1.
TABLE 2.1 Storyboard’s UIViewController Subclasses
Once we’re done, we should have added six classes (12 different files) to
our Controllers group. Except for the table view controller subclasses, these
are primarily empty. They just have stubs for
initWithNibName:bundle:, viewDidLoad, and
didReceiveMemoryWarning:. We could delete these to clean up our
classes, but they won’t hurt anything. Besides, we will use many of the
viewDidLoad methods later, so let’s leave them alone for now.

--- Page 150 ---
The table view controller subclasses have a number of additional stubs to
support loading and displaying the table data. These stubs can be useful
when setting up a table view—they serve as reminders for all the tasks we
need to perform to get the table up and running. However, we won’t end up
using most of them for our detail scene, since it is a static table. Its content
won’t be dynamically loaded at runtime. Instead, we will design its
interface in Interface Builder.
So, let’s clear it out. Open the EntryDetailViewController.m
file. Delete everything between @implementation and @end. That is it,
our custom controllers are ready to use.
Open Main.storyboard again. With the storyboard zoomed out,
click the tab bar scene. Switch to the Identity inspector. It should show that
our view controller’s class is currently a UITabBarController.
Change the class setting to RootTabBarController. This should be
one of the options listed in the drop-down menu. Notice that the controller’s
name changes both in the scene and in the Document Outline.
We will repeat this for all of our controllers. Change the Navigation
Controller’s class to HistoryNavigationController. The view
controller attached to the RootTabBarController should be our
GraphViewController. The first table view controller is our
HistoryTableViewController. The second is our
EntryDetailViewController. Finally, the view controller attached
to HistoryTableViewController’s add button is our
AddEntryViewController.
With this step complete, when the scenes load, they will use our custom
classes.
Navigation Items, Tab Bar Items, and Segues
There are a few, minor settings we should set. First, we want to set the titles
on our navigation bars. With the storyboard open, zoom in on our history
table view controller. Double-click the center of the navigation bar, and type
History in the text box. This sets the navigation title for that scene.
Do the same thing for the Entry Detail View Controller, but type Weight
Entry instead.

--- Page 151 ---
 Note
If you’re having trouble editing the navigation bar titles, you
can always select the scene’s Navigation Item in the
Document Outline, and modify its title in the Attributes
inspector.
Similarly, we will want to set the titles and images of our tabs. The tab
bar item is part of the scene that is being displayed—this means both our
History Navigation Controller and our Graph View Controller scenes have
tab bar items that we can modify.
Zoom in on the History Navigation Controller first. Click the tab bar icon
to select it. It should be a square with the word item underneath. In the
Attributes inspector, change the Identifier to History. This will
automatically change both the image and the title.
As you can see, iOS provides a number of built-in tab identifiers. These
will handle many of the common tasks, and we should use them wherever
appropriate. Users will already recognize these icons and should have a
rough understanding of what they will do.
Unfortunately, there isn’t an appropriate identifier for our graph view. So,
we’ll have to provide both a custom image and a title. Zoom in on the
Graph View Controller scene. Again, select the tab icon. In the Attributes
inspector, change the Title to Graph. Then change the Image to Graph. If
you click the drop-down arrow, it should be the only option listed.
This sets up the unselected image. We would like to be able to use a
slightly bolder, selected image as well. Unfortunately, we need to set this up
in code. Open GraphViewController.m and add the following line to
its viewDidLoad: method:
Click here to view code image
self.tabBarItem.selectedImage = [UIImage
imageNamed:@"graph_selected"];

--- Page 152 ---
The Secret Life of Nibs
Nibs are the underlying technology behind storyboards. The
compiler will break the storyboard into a number of nib files,
loading them as necessary. Therefore, to understand what
happens when a storyboard loads a scene, we really need to
understand the life cycle of the underlying nibs. I give a brief
summary here, but for the full blow-by-blow details, check out
Apple’s Resource Programming Guide.
Nibs can be thought of as freeze-dried view hierarchies. When
we create a nib, we are simply saving everything inside the nib to
disk. This uses the same basic technology we will use in Chapter
5.
When a nib loads, memory is set aside for all the objects and
resources stored inside that nib. Then the entire object graph is
instantiated. Objects that conform to the NSCoding protocol
will be instantiated by calling initWithCoder:. All other
objects are instantiated by calling init.
The system then connects all the outlets by calling the
setValue:forKey: method. It connects all the actions using
addTarget:action:forControlEvents:. Once the
entire object graph is linked together, UIKit calls
awakeFromNib on each of the objects created by the nib. You
can implement an object’s awakeFromNib method to perform
any additional configuration steps after all the outlets and actions
have been properly configured.
Note: UIViewController subclasses should do their
additional configuration in viewDidLoad instead. We often
create the view controllers in one nib and create their contents in
another. As a result, the awakenFromNib method may be
called before the view has loaded, and any outlets connecting the
controller to user interface elements in the view’s nib will not be
set up yet.
After the nib has finished loading, any objects that are not stored
in a strong reference will be deallocated. Most of the time, we

--- Page 153 ---
won’t need to worry about this. Unless we’re programmatically
loading the scene ourselves, the system will automatically store a
reference to the view controller in our view controller hierarchy.
The main view is stored in the view controller, and any other user
interface elements and gesture recognizers are automatically
stored in their containing view.
However, if we add any new top-level objects (data objects or
views not yet placed into the view hierarchy), we will need to
store a reference to them somewhere. Typically, this means
creating an outlet in our view controller and connecting the
object to that outlet.
There are a few key points worth emphasizing:
1. Many of the details of how nibs are loaded are different on
Mac OS X and iOS. If you are moving back and forth between
desktop and mobile development, be sure to double-check the
documentation.
2. Any object that conforms to NSCoding will be loaded using
initWithCoder:. Unlike other init methods, this does
not end up calling your designated initializer. If you are
loading custom objects (including UIViewController
subclasses) in your nibs, be sure to perform all additional
initialization steps in the awakeFromNib method (or
viewDidLoad for UIViewController subclasses). If
you do custom setup in your designated initializer, you will
need to duplicate this in initWithCoder: (or, better yet,
have both methods call a private method that handles the
configuration and setup).
3. If you add a top-level object, be sure to add an outlet for it in
your view controller. We need a strong reference to the top-
level object; otherwise, it will disappear after the nib loads.
4. A new destination UIViewController is created every
time your app performs a segue. This means some of our nibs
may be loaded multiple times during the application’s lifetime.
You cannot assume that a nib will be loaded only once.

--- Page 154 ---
5. Xib files are a newer, XML-formatted nib file. Xib files were
added to better support source control software. In theory, they
are human readable. That means we can look at the difference
between two xibs and perhaps make changes by hand to merge
conflicts. However, in practice the XML gets rather opaque,
and merging nibs (or storyboards) is difficult if not impossible.
When we build our project, the compiler will compile xib files
into binary nib files. The nib files are then added to the
application bundle. So, we are still loading binary nib files at
runtime. The documentation often refers to xibs and nibs
interchangeably. For historical reasons (and reasons of
consistency) I will use “nib” throughout this book, unless I’m
explicitly talking about the word xib.
This will automatically load the correct resolution image from
Images.xcassets and assign it as our selected image. Now, whenever
the graph tab is selected, the area under the line will also be filled in with a
solid color—similar to the way the clock face is filled in when the history
tab is selected.
The navigation titles and tab icons are now set properly. We just need to
set up our segues. Switch back to Main.storyboard. If you look at the
storyboard, you will see a number of connections between our scenes.
Three of these are relationships. These show the connection between the tab
bar controller and the view controllers it manages or between the navigation
controller and its root view controller. The container controllers need these
relationships to operate properly, but they aren’t really something we can
modify.
There are, however, two segues: a push segue between History Table
View Controller and Entry Detail View Controller and a modal segue
between History Table View Controller and the Add Entry View Controller.
Select the push segue, either by selecting it in the Document Outline or
by clicking on the segue icon in the storyboard. In the Attributes inspector,
set its Identifier to Entry Detail Segue. Next, select the modal segue, and set
its identifier to Add Entry Segue. We will use these to identify our segues in
code.

--- Page 155 ---
That’s it. The basic workflow is done (Figure 2.16). We still need to
build the actual interfaces for each scene, of course. But, we’ll handle that
in the next chapter. For now, let’s connect our model to our view controllers
and verify that our data gets passed along as we navigate from one scene to
the next.
FIGURE 2.16 Final application workflow

--- Page 156 ---
Connecting the Model
Now we need to connect our model objects to our controllers. This often
causes some confusion—after all, the controllers are created by our
storyboard. How do we get our data objects to them?
In theory, we could add our model objects to the storyboard and let it
create them as well. This isn’t a bad approach; however, we lose some
control over when and how our objects are loaded. Any objects in the
storyboard will be created when the scene is loaded. If our data object is
loaded as part of our initial scene, it could cause a delay when launching
our application—especially when loading a particularly large file or loading
resources from the network. If it’s part of a different scene, it would get
loaded each time we segue to that scene. This means it might be loaded
multiple times during the application’s lifetime.
More importantly, we cannot connect the outlets in one scene to objects
in another. If we could add our model to our initial scene and then connect
it to outlets in all our other scenes, I would be strongly tempted to add
objects to storyboards. As it is, there are better solutions.
A second, common approach involves creating a singleton class for our
model or storing our model in the app delegate (which effectively does the
same thing). Personally, I find the app delegate approach a little sloppy, and
I try to avoid the dark temptation of singleton classes whenever possible.
Instead, let’s use lazy initialization to create our model in our initial
scene’s controller and then pass the data to our new scenes when they are
loaded. This is often referred to as the baton passing approach. It also
means that we need to add a property to our RootTabBarController
to hold a reference to our model.
Open RootTabBarController.h. Modify it as shown here:
Click here to view code image
@class WeightHistoryDocument;
@interface RootTabBarController ()
@property (strong, nonatomic) WeightHistoryDocument
*weightHistoryDocument;
@end

--- Page 157 ---
There should be no surprises here. First, we have to create a forward
declaration for our WeightHistoryDocument class. Then we declare a
property to hold our weight history inside our @interface block.
Switch to RootTabBarController.m. We need to import our
WeightHistoryDocument class. At the top of the file, just under the
line to import RootTabBarController.h, add the following line:
Click here to view code image
#import "WeightHistoryDocument.h"
Now, scroll down to viewDidLoad. Modify the code as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (void)viewDidLoad
{
    [super viewDidLoad];
    self.weightHistoryDocument = [[WeightHistoryDocument alloc]
init];
    [self documentReady];
}
Here, we’re just instantiating a new WeightHistoryDocument
object and assigning it to our property. Then we call the documentReady
method. Again, you may not recognize this method. That’s because we
haven’t written it yet.
The documentReady method will pass the document to all of the tabs.
We will do this dynamically. If, in the future, we decide to add additional
tabs, they can automatically take advantage of this code.
Add the following code to the bottom of the file, before the @end
directive:
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Private Methods
- (void)documentReady
{
    // automatically passes the weight history document
    // on to any of the controlled view controllers.
    for (id controller in self.viewControllers) {
        if ([controller respondsToSelector:
             @selector(setWeightHistoryDocument:)])
        {
            [controller setWeightHistoryDocument:

--- Page 158 ---
             self.weightHistoryDocument];
        }
    }
}
We start by iterating over all the controllers in the tab view controller’s
viewControllers property. Notice that we are using the id dynamic
type, instead of statically typing each controller as a
UIViewController.
Next, we check to see whether the controller responds to the
setWeightHistoryDocument: method. If it does, we call that
method, passing in our document. We have to use id for controller, since
UIViewController doesn’t declare a
setWeightHistoryDocument: method. The compiler has, however,
seen a setWeightHistoryDocument: before (it was implicitly
declared as part of our weightHistoryDocument property), so it
freely lets us call that method on any id types. It just assumes we know
what we’re doing. Fortunately, since we check this method before calling it,
this is perfectly safe.
The upshot is, if either our HistoryNavigationController or
GraphViewController want access to the document, all they need to
do is declare their own weightHistoryDocument property, and the
model will automatically get passed along to them. If we add another tab, it
can also gain access to our document by simply implementing
weightHistoryDocument.
So, let’s do that. Open GraphViewController.h. Add the forward
declaration and property, just like we did in
RootTabBarController.h.
Click here to view code image
#import <UIKit/UIKit.h>
@class WeightHistoryDocument;
@interface GraphViewController : UIViewController
@property (strong, nonatomic) WeightHistoryDocument
*weightHistoryDocument;
@end
Repeat this process in the HistoryNavigationController.h
and HistoryTableViewController.h.

--- Page 159 ---
We need a little more work to pass the document from the navigation
controller to the history table controller. Remember, our
HistoryTableViewController is the root view of our navigation
controller. It was never directly added to the tab bar. As a result, it won’t
automatically get our document.
The easiest way to chain the document along is to override
HistoryNavigationController’s
setWeightHistoryDocument: method. This method would normally
be automatically generated by the property—but, if we provide our own
implementation, the system will use our version instead.
Open HistoryNavigationController.m and add the following
code before the @end directive:
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Accessor Methods
-(void)setWeightHistoryDocument:
(WeightHistoryDocument *)weightHistoryDocument
{
    _weightHistoryDocument = weightHistoryDocument;
    
    id rootViewController = self.viewControllers[0];
    if ([rootViewController respondsToSelector:
         @selector(setWeightHistoryDocument:)])
    {
        [rootViewController setWeightHistoryDocument:
         weightHistoryDocument];
    }
}
Here, we start by assigning our incoming value to the property’s instance
variable. Then we get a dynamic reference to the navigation controller’s
root view controller. Just like in the tab bar controller, we check to see
whether the root view controller responds to the
setWeightHistoryDocument: method. If it does, we call that
method, passing our document along.
There are only two scenes left. We actually don’t want to pass the
document to either of them. Our AddEntryViewController will
simply let the user select a weight and date. If the user then clicks Save, the
displaying controller will grab those values and create a new entry, adding it
to our document.

--- Page 160 ---
Similarly, the EntryDetailViewController doesn’t need access
to the entire document. It just needs the currently selected entry. We’ll
actually add some additional information to provide richer, statistical data in
the next chapter. But, for now, let’s just add a WeightEntry property.
Open EntryDetailViewController.h. Add a forward
declaration for the WeightEntry class. Then add a property to hold our
weight entry, as shown here:
Click here to view code image
#import <UIKit/UIKit.h>
@class WeightEntry;
@interface EntryDetailViewController : UITableViewController
@property (strong, nonatomic) WeightEntry *entry;
@end
Setting Up HistoryTableViewController
We still need to pass the entry from our history table view to the entry detail
view. However, before we can do that, we need to set up our table view.
Table view controllers use both a delegate and a data source to configure
their contents. Both of these protocols declare a number of methods that we
can use to modify the content and their appearance of our table view at
runtime. They also let us respond to row selections and other user
interactions. You can see the complete list of methods in the
UITableViewDelegate and UITableViewDatasource protocol
references.
It’s a little inconvenient. You have to look at both protocols to see the full
range of methods we can implement. In general, the data source methods
are used to gather information about the data that will fill our table, while
the delegate handles the table’s appearance, user interactions, and other
miscellaneous things. However, I could pick some nits over the exact
division of labor.
Fortunately, when we create a table view controller, the controller is
automatically set as both the delegate and the data source. It also
automatically adopts both protocols. This means we just need to implement
a few methods, and our table is ready to go.
There are really only two required data source methods:
tableView:numberOfRowsInSection: and

--- Page 161 ---
tableView:cellForRowAtIndexPath:. We will also go ahead and
implement the numberOfSectionsInTableView: method, since the
template has already provided a stub for us.
Whenever the table needs to reload its data, it will first call
numberOfSectionsInTableView: to determine the number of
sections. Then, for each section, it will call
tableView:numberOfRowsInSection: to determine the number of
rows. Finally, for each row currently on screen, it will call
tableView:cellForRowAtIndexPath:. This last call is where we
configure our cell, displaying the correct information for that row.
Open HistoryTableViewController.m. At the top of the file,
import our EntryDetailViewController,
WeightHistoryDocument, and WeightEntry classes.
Click here to view code image
#import "EntryDetailViewController.h"
#import "WeightHistoryDocument.h"
#import "WeightEntry.h"
Next, all view controller subclass templates automatically include a class
extension. Often, we will use this as a place to hold private properties that
refer to user interface elements. However, currently, we need a different sort
of private property. We want to observe all of the document’s change
notifications. Whenever we register for a notification, we need to make sure
we unregister as well. Otherwise, we may leave dangling pointers behind in
the notification center.
Since we will be using the block-based notification API, we will need to
store opaque observer objects so that we can unregister them when we are
done. We don’t actually know the observer object’s type—and it really
doesn’t matter. We can just save them as ids.
Inside the class extension, declare the following properties:
Click here to view code image
@interface HistoryTableViewController ()
@property (strong, nonatomic) id documentBeganObserver;
@property (strong, nonatomic) id documentInsertedObserver;
@property (strong, nonatomic) id documentDeletedObserver;
@property (strong, nonatomic) id documentChangeCompleteObserver;
@end

--- Page 162 ---
Next, navigate down to the numberOfSectionsInTableView:
method. Our table view will always have just a single section. We could
delete this method, since it defaults to 1; however, I usually like to leave it,
just in case I want to add sections later.
Modify the method as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (NSInteger)numberOfSectionsInTableView:(UITableView
*)tableView
{
    return 1;
}
After that, scroll down to the
tableView:numberOfRowsInSection: method. Here, we need to
return the number of entries in our history. Fortunately, we created our
count property, making this easy to do. Modify the method as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (NSInteger)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView
 numberOfRowsInSection:(NSInteger)section
{
    return (NSInteger)self.weightHistoryDocument.count;
}
Again, our count property is an unsigned integer, and this method
returns a signed integer. Since we turned on the more extreme warnings, we
need to cast our count value into a signed value before we can return it.
Next, we need to modify
tableView:cellForRowAtIndexPath:, but, before we do this, we
need to discuss how table view cells are used.
Whenever we create a table view (or really, any scrolling view), we need
to make sure it is as high-performance as possible. We want to avoid any
hesitation or stuttering in the animation. The system should respond as if
the user were actually moving the images behind the glass.
Obviously, if we created new cells for each row, we would be wasting a
lot of time and effort. We only need enough cells to cover the whole screen.
As they scroll off the top, they can be reused on the bottom.
To help support the recycling of cells, the system doesn’t dispose of cells
when they are removed from the table. Instead, it puts them in a pool to be

--- Page 163 ---
reused. We can request these cells with one of two methods:
dequeueReusableCellWithIdentifier: or
dequeueReusableCellWithIdentifier:forIndexPath:.
The first is an older method. It will look for a cell in the pool with a
matching identifier. If it cannot find one, it will return nil. To use this
method, we must check the return value and create a new cell whenever it
returns nil.
The second version is more advanced. It will always return a cell—
automatically creating a new cell if there aren’t any in the pool.
Unfortunately, this means we also need to tell the system what type of cell
to create for each identifier. We can do this automatically in our storyboard,
or we could programmatically register our cells using
registerNib:forCellReuseIdentifier: or
registerClass:forCellReuseIdentifier:.
Each unique cell layout needs its own identifier. Typically a table has
only one type of cell, so we need only a single, unique identifier per table.
However, we could use multiple cell styles inside a single table. In that
case, each one must have its own, unique identifier.
Let’s open Main.storyboard and set the cell type and identifier.
Zoom in on the History Table View Controller, and select the Table View
Cell.
Next chapter, we will learn how to create a custom cell for our table. For
now, let’s just use one of the standard cells. In the Attributes inspector,
change the cell’s Style to Basic. Then, in the Identifier text field, type
History Cell.
Now, let’s go back to HistoryTableViewController.m. Replace
the existing tableView:cellForRowAtIndexPath: method with
the implementation listed here:
Click here to view code image
- (UITableViewCell *)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView
         cellForRowAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath
{
    static NSString *CellIdentifier = @"History Cell";
    
    UITableViewCell *cell =
    [tableView dequeueReusableCellWithIdentifier:CellIdentifier
                                    forIndexPath:indexPath];

--- Page 164 ---
    
    WeightEntry *entry = [self.weightHistoryDocument
                          entryAtIndexPath:indexPath];
    
    cell.textLabel.text = [entry description];
    
    return cell;
}
We start by creating a cell identifier that matches the identifier we set in
the storyboard. Next, we call
dequeueReusableCellWithIdentifier:forIndexPath:.
Since we’re using the newer API, we do not need to check the return value.
It will always return a valid cell—even if it has to create one for us. Finally,
we use the entryAtIndexPath: method we created earlier to get the
entry for this index path. We then set the cell’s text to our entry’s
description.
As you can see, the work we did in WeightHistoryDocument is
already starting to pay off. There’s a very natural interface between our
model and our history table view.
Passing Data Across Segues
We have already set up the storyboard to create and display a new
EntryDetailViewController whenever the user selects a row.
However, we still need some way of passing our WeightEntry to the
incoming view controller.
We do this using the prepareForSegue:sender: method. This
method will be called after the incoming view controller is instantiated but
before it is added to the view hierarchy. This means the controller has not
yet loaded its view, so none of its outlets or actions are set yet.
Typically we use prepareForSegue:sender: to pass data over to
the incoming view controller. The incoming view controller will then use
this data to fill in its own views during its viewWillAppear: method.
In HistoryTableViewController.m, scroll down to the bottom
and uncomment the prepareForSegue:sender: stub. Then modify
the stub as shown here:

--- Page 165 ---
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Navigation
- (void)prepareForSegue:(UIStoryboardSegue *)segue sender:
(id)sender
{
    if ([segue.identifier isEqualToString:@"Entry Detail
Segue"])
    {
        EntryDetailViewController *controller =
        segue.destinationViewController;
        NSIndexPath *indexPath = [self.tableView
indexPathForSelectedRow];
        controller.entry =
        [self.weightHistoryDocument entryAtIndexPath:indexPath];
    }
}
We start by checking to see which segue we are traversing. Our
HistoryTableViewController has two separate segues—so we
need to make sure it’s the Entry Detail Segue, not the Add Entry Segue. It’s
probably obvious, but the segue’s identifier property will match the
identifiers we set in the storyboard.
Then we grab a reference to the destination view controller. Here we’re
using a common Objective-C trick. Since the destination view controller is
an id type, we can freely assign it to any static object variable. The
compiler will simply assume we know what we’re doing. This is
conceptually identical to casting the destination to a specific type; however,
it looks a lot cleaner.
Next, we get the index path for the selected row and then use the index
path to get the correct entry. We then pass this entry to the destination view
controller.

--- Page 166 ---
 Note
We should always perform some sort of check before
working with the destination view controller—even if we
have only a single segue from our view controller. This is a
nice sanity check, and it prevents us from accidentally
introducing errors later, when we add additional segues
without modifying our code.
 Note
Often, we will pass the same data to multiple segues.
Sometimes it’s easier to check and see whether the
destination view controller has a given setter and then call
the setter whenever it’s available. This is conceptually similar
to the way the tab bar controller passes the document to all
its children. When used properly, this technique can keep our
prepareForSegue:sender: method from getting too
repetitive.
Listening for Notifications
One last task is left to set up. We need to update our table whenever our
data changes. To do this, we will listen for the notifications sent by our
WeightHistoryDocument object.
Using notifications is a little bit complicated. In many cases, we could
achieve the same effect with less work using delegates, callback blocks, or
other techniques. However, notifications have one huge advantage over all
other technologies. Any number of observers can register for a single
notification. This means we could have any number of views or controllers
listening and updating whenever there is a change to the underlying
document. This is important, since we’re going to have at least two views
that need to be updated: the History Table View and the Graph View.
Let’s start by creating two methods: one to register for notifications and
one to unregister. Let’s start with the remove method, since it is easier.

--- Page 167 ---
Place this method in HistoryTableViewController.m, after
prepareForSegue:sender: and before @end.
Click here to view code image
- (void)removeNotifications
{
    NSNotificationCenter *center = [NSNotificationCenter
defaultCenter];
    
    if (self.documentBeganObserver)
    {
        [center removeObserver:self.documentBeganObserver];
        self.documentBeganObserver = nil;
    }
    
    if (self.documentInsertedObserver)
    {
        [center removeObserver:self.documentInsertedObserver];
        self.documentInsertedObserver = nil;
    }
    
    if (self.documentDeletedObserver)
    {
        [center removeObserver:self.documentDeletedObserver];
        self.documentDeletedObserver = nil;
    }
    
    if (self.documentChangeCompleteObserver)
    {
        [center
removeObserver:self.documentChangeCompleteObserver];
        self.documentChangeCompleteObserver = nil;
    }
}
While this looks big, it’s really just the same step repeated over and over
again. First, we grab a reference to the default notification center. Then, we
check each of our observer properties. If the property has a valid value, we
remove it from the notification center and set it to nil. This last step is a
safety check, since removing the same observer twice will create errors.
Now, let’s set up the notifications.
Click here to view code image
- (void)setupNotifications
{
    NSNotificationCenter *center = [NSNotificationCenter
defaultCenter];

--- Page 168 ---
    NSOperationQueue *mainQueue = [NSOperationQueue mainQueue];
    WeightHistoryDocument *doc = self.weightHistoryDocument;
    __weak HistoryTableViewController *_self = self;
    
    self.documentBeganObserver =
    [center
     addObserverForName:WeightHistoryDocumentBeginChangesNotific
ation
     object:doc
     queue:mainQueue
     usingBlock:^(NSNotification *note) {
         if ([_self isViewLoaded])
         {
             [_self.tableView beginUpdates];
         }
     }];
    
    self.documentInsertedObserver =
    [center
     addObserverForName:WeightHistoryDocumentInsertWeightEntryNo
tification
     object:doc
     queue:mainQueue
     usingBlock:^(NSNotification *note) {
         NSIndexPath *indexPath =
         note.userInfo[WeightHistoryDocumentNotificationIndexPat
hKey];
         NSAssert(indexPath != nil,
                  @"We should have an index path in the "
                  @"notification"s user info dictionary");
         
         if ([_self isViewLoaded])
         {
             [_self.tableView
              insertRowsAtIndexPaths:@[indexPath]
              withRowAnimation:UITableViewRowAnimationAutomatic]
;
         }
     }];
    
    self.documentDeletedObserver =
    [center
     addObserverForName:WeightHistoryDocumentDeleteWeightEntryNo
tification
     object:doc
     queue:mainQueue
     usingBlock:^(NSNotification *note) {
         NSIndexPath *indexPath =
         note.userInfo[WeightHistoryDocumentNotificationIndexPat
hKey];

--- Page 169 ---
         NSAssert(indexPath != nil,
                  @"We should have an index path in the "
                  @"notification's user info dictionary");
         
         if ([_self isViewLoaded])
         {
             [_self.tableView
              deleteRowsAtIndexPaths:@[indexPath]
              withRowAnimation:UITableViewRowAnimationAutomatic]
;
         }
     }];
    
    self.documentChangeCompleteObserver =
    [center
     addObserverForName:WeightHistoryDocumentChangesCompleteNoti
fication
     object:doc
     queue:mainQueue
     usingBlock:^(NSNotification *note) {
         [_self.tableView endUpdates];
     }];
}
Again, this looks like a wall of code, but it’s basically just minor
variations on a theme. We start by grabbing references to all the data we
will need: the notification center, the main queue, our document, and a
weak reference to self. We shouldn’t let our blocks capture self, since
this can introduce retain cycles. In fact, it actually does create retain cycles
in this case. Worse yet, the compiler and the static analyzer aren’t smart
enough to catch them.
With our data prepared, we register for the four notifications, passing a
block that will get called whenever we receive that notification. The
WeightHistoryDocumentBeginChangesNotification and
WeightHistoryDocumentChangesCompleteNotification are
the simplest. They just check to see whether the view has been loaded. If it
has, they call beginUpdates and endUpdates, respectively. The table
view will group all the changes that occur between the beginUpdates
and endUpdates call into a single animation.
For
WeightHistoryDocumentInsertWeightEntryNotification,
we extract the index path from the notification’s userInfo dictionary.
The NSAssert() function ensures that we actually received a valid index

--- Page 170 ---
path. If we don’t, it throws an exception. Finally, we check to see whether
the view is loaded. If it is, we insert a row at the given index path. By
specifying UITableViewRowAnimationAutomatic, we tell the table
view to pick the best animation given the current state. It will then select an
animation based on the row’s position on the screen and the number of rows
in the table.
WeightHistoryDocumentDeleteWeightEntryNotificatio
n is virtually identical to
WeightHistoryDocumentInsertWeightEntryNotification,
except we are deleting the row at the index path. Everything else is the
same.
With these notifications in place, our table view will automatically adjust
its contents to any changes in the underlying document.
Now, we just need to call setupNotification and
removeNotification. We will start by setting up the notifications
whenever our weightHistoryDocument property is set. This means
we need to implement a custom setter.
Add the following method to HistoryTableViewController.m:
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Accessor Methods
- (void)setWeightHistoryDocument:(WeightHistoryDocument
*)weightHistoryDocument
{
    if (_weightHistoryDocument)
    {
        [self removeNotifications];
    }
    
    _weightHistoryDocument = weightHistoryDocument;
    [self setupNotifications];
}
First, we check to see whether we already have a weight history
document. If we do, we need to clear all our current notifications. Then we
assign the incoming document to our property’s instance variable. Finally
we set up the notifications for the new document.
We also need to make sure we clear all the notifications when our class is
deallocated. This means we must add a dealloc method, as shown here. I

--- Page 171 ---
typically place the dealloc method at the top of the file, right after the
init methods.
Click here to view code image
- (void)dealloc
{
    [self removeNotifications];
}
That’s it. The basic features are in place. We’ll expand on it more next
chapter, as we add the ability to insert and delete WeightEntries.
However, this is enough to do some rudimentary testing and make sure our
document data is getting passed from scene to scene correctly.
Testing Our Architecture
Right now we can run our application. It doesn’t do much. We have our
history with no entries. We can switch to the graph, which is completely
blank. Going back to the history, we can tap the plus button to bring up the
add entry scene—however, since we haven’t added any way to dismiss this
scene, we’re now stuck.
Let’s make sure the data is at least getting passed to our leaf views. As a
quick check, add the following code to
HistoryTableViewController.m,
EntryDetailViewController.m,
AddEntryViewController.m, and GraphViewController.m:
Click here to view code image
// TODO: Delete This After Testing!
- (void)viewDidAppear:(BOOL)animated
{
    [super viewDidAppear:animated];
    NSLog(@"%@ appeared", [self class]);
}
Now when we run the application and cycle through the views, we
should get the following data printed to the console:
Click here to view code image
2013-08-21 22:04:40.852 Health Beat[11784:70b]
HistoryTableViewController appeared
2013-08-21 22:04:42.512 Health Beat[11784:70b]
GraphViewController appeared

--- Page 172 ---
2013-08-21 22:04:43.645 Health Beat[11784:70b]
HistoryTableViewController appeared
2013-08-21 22:04:45.554 Health Beat[11784:70b]
AddEntryViewController appeared
So far, so good. But, let’s expand this to make sure our data is actually
getting across. Modify the NSLog statement in
HistoryTableViewController.m and
GraphViewController.m to print out our document as well.
Click here to view code image
NSLog(@"%@ appeared, document = %@",
      [self class], self.weightHistoryDocument);
In EntryDetailViewController, we don’t have a document, but
we do have a weight entry. Modify the log message to print out the entry
instead.
Click here to view code image
NSLog(@"%@ appeared, entry = %@",
      [self class], self.entry);
Now, run the application and cycle through the views. We should get the
following printout:
Click here to view code image
2013-08-21 22:18:25.372 Health Beat[11994:70b]
HistoryTableViewController appeared, document =
WeightHistoryDocument: count = 0, history = (
)
2013-08-21 22:18:40.172 Health Beat[11994:70b]
GraphViewController appeared, document = WeightHistoryDocument:
count = 0, history = (
)
2013-08-21 22:18:41.298 Health Beat[11994:70b]
HistoryTableViewController appeared, document =
WeightHistoryDocument: count = 0, history = (
)
2013-08-21 22:18:42.867 Health Beat[11994:70b]
AddEntryViewController appeared

--- Page 173 ---
Common Tasks Every Application Should Perform
The iOS SDK has a handful of methods that are commonly used
to perform vital tasks. We don’t necessarily need to implement
each of these in every application; however, we should at least
give each one some thought. In addition, most of these methods
have a corresponding notification that we could use to monitor
these events in other parts of our code.
App Opening
These methods are called when the application first launches or
when it returns from the background state. We will often use
these methods to load the application’s state and to perform other
one-time configuration activities.
application:didFinishLaunchingWithOptions:
UIKit calls this UIApplicationDelegate method when the
application first launches. We typically use it to perform one-
time configuration tasks. Note, however, that the application will
not appear onscreen until after this method returns. Therefore, we
should avoid doing any potentially time-consuming activities
during this method.
In particular, try to avoid tasks such as accessing remote servers.
These may work fine in testing but fail when deployed to actual
users (especially when people start using their phone in areas
with poor reception). This could cause the application to freeze
until the network connection times out, creating an unacceptably
long delay when launching.
Basically, if we’re going to read any data from disk or perform
any network operations, we should launch it as an asynchronous
task on a background thread. That way, our application will
launch quickly and will remain responsive.
applicationWillEnterForeground:
UIKit calls this UIApplicationDelegate method when the
application returns from the background state. This may be called
multiple times as the user closes and opens the app.

--- Page 174 ---
applicationDidBecomeActive:
This UIApplicationDelegate method is called whenever
the application becomes active. This includes both when the
application first launches and after it returns from the
background—however, it will also be called in a number of other
situations, such as if the user ignores an incoming phone call or
SMS message.
viewDidLoad
UIKit calls this UIViewController method once the
controller’s view has fully loaded. This method is called
regardless of how the view was created—it could be loaded from
a nib or programmatically built using the loadView method.
Note that views are lazily loaded. A view controller will wait to
load its view until someone accesses its view property. Before
this point, if the controller has any properties that refer to items
in the view hierarchy, they will still be set to nil. However, by
the time viewDidLoad is called, those properties will contain
their correct values. This often makes viewDidLoad a
convenient and safe place to perform additional setup or
configuration.
In previous versions of iOS, views could be loaded and unloaded
multiple times because of memory pressure. Unfortunately, the
multiple loading/unloading tended to cause bugs when not
handled properly. With iOS 6 and newer, the view will be loaded
only once. If the system memory starts to run low, it may simply
dispose of the graphics bitmap that stores the view’s appearance
—provided the view is not currently being displayed. This may
cause the view to be redrawn, but it will not load or unload the
view itself. This still gives us most of the memory savings we
used to get by unloading the whole view, while avoiding most of
the bugs.
Of course, you may still see references to viewDidUnload in
older tutorials or code, but that method is now deprecated and
will never get called.
App Closing

--- Page 175 ---
These methods are called when the application is closing or when
it is moving to the background. You will often use these methods
to save the application’s state or to perform any cleanup activities
before the application closes. In general,
applicationWillTerminate: will be called only on
applications that continue performing background tasks when the
user switches to another application. Most applications will
simply receive an applicationDidEnterBackground:
as they go to the background. Once in the background, the
system may silently kill them to free up more memory. As a
result, we often need to perform identical cleanup operations in
both methods.
applicationWillTerminate:
UIKit calls this UIApplicationDelegate method just
before an application terminates. Somewhat surprisingly, modern
iOS applications rarely receive this notification. The application
must be executing in the background when it needs to terminate
suddenly—usually in response to a low memory warning. More
typically, when the user taps the home button, your application
will move first to the background and will then become
suspended. The application’s current state is frozen in memory,
but it’s not actually running. If the system needs more memory, it
will begin killing suspended applications, reusing their memory.
In this case, the app dies silently without any additional
notifications.
The applicationWillTerminate: method has
approximately five seconds to perform any cleanup activities and
return. If it takes longer than five seconds, the system watchdog
will kill the application.
applicationDidEnterBackground:
This UIApplicationDelegate method is called before the
application is sent to the background. We should perform any
cleanup activities here, since our application may be terminated
while in the background. As mentioned earlier,
applicationWillTerminate: is not called when our

--- Page 176 ---
application is suspended, so this method is often our last chance
to clean up the application before it dies.
Like applicationWillTerminate:, we have
approximately five seconds to complete any actions. However,
we can request additional time by calling
beginBackgroundTaskWithExpirationHandler:.
Low Memory Warnings
These methods are called whenever our application receives a
low memory warning. We should implement these methods to
free up any unneeded resources. If the low memory condition
persists, our app may crash. Remember, memory shortages are
the most common source of iOS application crashes.
applicationDidReceiveMemoryWarning:
This UIApplicationDelegate method is called when the
application receives a low memory warning. We can use it to free
up any unneeded memory (for example, any cache memory our
app may be holding onto) at the application level.
didReceiveMemoryWarning
This UIViewController method is called when the
application receives a low memory warning. By default, if the
controller’s view is not currently in the view hierarchy (so it is
not currently being displayed onscreen), the system will mark the
graphical bitmap used by its view as available for reuse. If the
system ends up using some of this memory, it will need to redraw
the view the next time it is used. If the system does not end up
using this memory, it will simply reclaim the memory and
continue as if nothing had happened.
Most of the time, the default implementation is sufficient. We can
override this method and perform any additional actions to free
up memory here, but we must call the super method before we
are done.
That’s pretty good, but we don’t actually have any entries, so we cannot
test our EntryDetailViewController. Let’s add some mock data

--- Page 177 ---
whenever our application first launches. This will also be helpful when
designing our user interfaces in Chapter 3, “Developing Views and View
Controllers.”
Open RootTabBarController.m. At the top of the file, import our
WeightEntry class.
#import "WeightEntry.h"
Now, in the private method section, add the addMockData method.
Click here to view code image
- (void)addMockData
{
    NSTimeInterval twentyFourHours = 60.0 * 60.0 * 24.0;
    NSDate *now = [NSDate date];
    
    NSDate *yesterday =
    [now dateByAddingTimeInterval:-twentyFourHours];
    
    NSDate *twoDaysAgo =
    [yesterday dateByAddingTimeInterval:-twentyFourHours];
    
    WeightEntry *entry1 =
    [WeightEntry entryWithWeight:150.0 usingUnits:LBS
forDate:twoDaysAgo];
    
    WeightEntry *entry2 =
    [WeightEntry entryWithWeight:152.0 usingUnits:LBS
forDate:yesterday];
    
    WeightEntry *entry3 =
    [WeightEntry entryWithWeight:148.5 usingUnits:LBS
forDate:now];
    
    [self.weightHistoryDocument addEntry:entry1];
    
    [self.weightHistoryDocument
performSelector:@selector(addEntry:)
                                     withObject:entry2
                                     afterDelay:2.0];
    
    [self.weightHistoryDocument
performSelector:@selector(addEntry:)
                                     withObject:entry3
                                     afterDelay:4.0];
}

--- Page 178 ---
There’s some complicated stuff going on here, so let’s take it slowly. At
the top, we’re simply creating four dates. One is the current date and time.
One is 24 hours ago. The last is 48 hours ago.
We then use these dates to generate three different WeightEntry
objects. We add the first one immediately. Then we use
performSelector:withObject:afterDelay: to add the second
weight entry in two seconds, and the third in four seconds. If you just want
to run code after a slight delay,
performSelector:withObject:afterDelay: is a very easy way
to set it up. There are other options (NSTimer or Grand Central Dispatch’s
dispatch_after()), but these are all more complicated than we need.
Then, modify viewDidLoad: to call this method as shown:
Click here to view code image
- (void)viewDidLoad
{
    [super viewDidLoad];
    self.weightHistoryDocument = [[WeightHistoryDocument alloc]
init];
    [self addMockData];
    [self documentReady];
}
The end result is that our document will start with a single entry. A
second entry will be added two seconds later. The third entry two seconds
after that. If you run the app now and let it sit on the history scene, you can
watch the animation as each entry is added (Figure 2.17). Good news! Not
only is our communication working, but our notifications and updates are
working as well.

--- Page 180 ---
FIGURE 2.17 Displaying the mock data
Now, select one of the rows. The app should transition to the Weight
Entry scene. It won’t display anything interesting on the screen, but you
should see something similar appear in the console:
Click here to view code image
2013-08-21 22:48:19.453 Health Beat[12400:70b]
EntryDetailViewController
appeared, entry = 148.50 lbs entry from Aug 21, 2013, 10:46 PM
That’s it. If the data is getting all the way out to our detail view, then
we’re done. If not, try to identify where the system breaks down, and go
back and double-check those instructions. If it still doesn’t work, download
the source code for this chapter
(http://www.freelancemadscience.com/ios7_source/)
and make sure my code still works properly—sometimes updates to the OS
can cause things to break. If the sample code works, compare it to your
code and see whether you can find the problems.
Wrapping Up
Our app builds and launches. We can switch between our tabs and our detail
view and even bring up the modal view. Yes, it’s just a skeleton—but the
next few chapters will put some meat on these bones. In Chapter 3, we will
flesh out the AddEntryViewController and continue to add features
to HistoryTableViewController. In Chapter 4, we will look at
drawing custom views with the GraphViewController, and in
Chapter 5, we will save both the application data and set up the user
defaults. In Chapter 6, we will add iCloud syncing. Finally, in Chapter 7,
we will replace Health Beat’s current model with Core Data.
There’s one last step before we go. Let’s commit our changes to the git
repository. It’s best to get into the habit of committing changes early and
often. That way we can compare our current files with any of the previously
committed versions, and if we have to roll back our changes, we can
minimize the amount of work we’re undoing. It’s always better to have a
large number of small, incremental steps than to have a few giant strides.
To commit all our changes, select Source Control > Commit. Enter
Chapter 2 as the commit message, and click Commit. That’s it. Xcode
should take care of the rest.

--- Page 181 ---
As we go through the book, try to commit your changes after we finish
adding each feature to the application. That should give you several
commits per chapter. Unfortunately, I don’t have space to talk about Git
further in this book; I will cover it in more detail in the “Other Tools of the
Trade” bonus chapter, which can be found at
www.freelancemadscience.com/creating-ios-7-apps-
bonus-chap/.
Other Resources
For more information, check out the following resources:
 Peter Hosey’s Warnings I turn on, and why
http://boredzo.org/blog/archives/2009-11-07/warnings
This is the original source on enabling high-octane warnings in
Xcode.
 Freelance Mad Science: Advanced Storyboard Techniques
www.freelancemadscience.com/fmslabs_blog/2012/9/24/advanced-
storyboard-techniques.html
This is a blog post I wrote that contains quite a bit of useful, advanced
information about storyboards, including detailed information about
timing and advice on chaining storyboards, nibs, and
programmatically loaded views together.
 Key-Value Coding Programming Guide and Key-Value
Observing Programming Guide
iOS Developer’s Library
These are the go-to resources for all information about KVC and
KVO. KVC can be a surprisingly complex, especially when it comes
to collections. So, this is well worth a read.
 View Controllers Programming Guide for iOS
iOS Developer’s Library
This is an extensive discussion on view controllers. In many ways,
view controllers are the backbones of our applications. The more you
know about them, the better off you will be.
 Resource Programming Guide

--- Page 182 ---
iOS Developer’s Library
This has all the squirrely details about nibs, storyboards, and much,
much more.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 183 ---
Chapter 3. Developing Views and View
Controllers
In this chapter, we will flesh out Health Beat’s History, Entry Detail, and
Add Entry scenes. As we proceed, we will gain more experience graphically
laying out views and linking user interface elements to their view
controllers. We will also build adaptive user interfaces using Auto Layout,
add the ability to insert and delete weight entries, and adjust our font sizes
using Dynamic Type. Through it all, you should get a better understanding
of the role that views and view controllers play in a typical iOS app.
Initial Housekeeping
If you haven’t done so already, we should delete the log messages we added
in the previous chapter. If you followed my example and added the //
TODO: comments in the previous chapters, these will be easy to find.
Comments that start with // TODO: show up in the jump bar when
editing the file. This can act a great reminder, constantly nagging us to
come back and fix unresolved issues—but it helps you find code only when
you already know where to look. Fortunately, we can also search for todo
and find all of these references.
Switch to the Find navigator and type todo in the search field. Make sure
In Workspace and Ignore Case are selected. This should find all four
locations (Figure 3.1). If you didn’t add the comment, you can also search
for NSLog. The project is currently small enough that this won’t return too
many references. You can then sort through them by hand.

--- Page 184 ---
FIGURE 3.1 Searching our workspace
Using the search as our guide, remove the viewDidAppear: method
from AddEntryViewController.m,
EntryDetailViewController.m, GraphViewController.m,
and HistoryTableViewController.m.
 Note
You can click the search result to open the code.
We’re going to leave the mock data in place for now. It will be useful
when developing and testing our user interfaces.

--- Page 185 ---
Rotations, Resizing, and Redrawing
Before we modify the user interface, let’s launch the application and look at
what we’ve built so far. Right now, the only interesting view is the History
view, so we’ll focus our attention there. Try rotating the device (
 and
 in the simulator). Notice that we can rotate into the normal portrait
orientation, to either the landscape-left or landscape-right orientation, but
we cannot rotate it upside down.
This is the default behavior for an iPhone app. In general, we want to let
the user decide how they want to hold their device. For iPad apps, this
means letting them rotate it into all four orientations. On the iPhone, we
generally prohibit turning the phone upside down. Why? Because it’s a
phone. If a call comes in, we don’t want the user accidentally talking into
the speaker and listening at the microphone (yes, not only do Apple
engineers think about these things, but they write them into their HIG
guidelines).
The default rotations are managed (in part) by the target settings. Click
the blue Health Beat icon in the Project navigator. Make sure the Health
Beat target and the General tab are selected. In the Deployment Info
settings, you should see Device Orientation settings. Portrait, Landscape
Left, and Landscape Right are selected.
Deselect everything but Portrait, and run the app again. Now, when you
rotate the device, the screen does not change. It remains locked in the
portrait orientation.
Try checking all four orientations. Run the app again. You’ll notice that
despite checking Upside Down, we can still rotate only into the default
three orientations. That’s because these settings are only half of the story.
The system will also call the
supportedInterfaceOrientations method to calculate which
rotation orientations are allowed. This is a UIViewController method
—but the system doesn’t call this on every view controller. It simply calls it
on our application’s root view controller—or on the topmost presented view
controller that fills the entire screen. This means only our
RootTabBarController and our AddEntryViewController
(when displayed) have any say in the matter.

--- Page 186 ---
 Note
supportedInterfaceOrientations was introduced
with iOS 6. Before then, many of the container view
controllers would first ask their child controllers before
allowing rotation. This often meant every view controller
contributed to rotation decisions. If you didn’t correctly
implement the rotation methods in one controller, you could
disable rotations throughout the entire app. By putting
control in the hands of a single controller at a time,
supportedInterfaceOrientations significantly
simplifies our rotation logic.
Open RootTabBarController.m and add the following method:
Click here to view code image
- (NSUInteger)supportedInterfaceOrientations
{
    return UIInterfaceOrientationMaskAll;
}
Now run the app. The screen should freely rotate into all four
orientations.
supportedInterfaceOrientations simply returns a bitmask of
the orientations. The UIInterfaceOrientationMask enum defines
the four basic orientations, plus a few useful combinations. Here, we’re
using UIInterfaceOrientationMaskAll to enable all four
orientations. There’s also
UIInterfaceOrientationMaskLandscape for just the left and
right landscape orientations, and there’s
UIInterfaceOrientationMaskAllButUpsideDown for the
default iPhone behavior.
The system takes the intersection of the orientations specified in
supportedInterfaceOrientations and the target settings when
determining whether an orientation is allowed. An orientation must be
enabled in both places before the rotation will occur. By default,
supportedInterfaceOrientations returns

--- Page 187 ---
UIInterfaceOrientationMaskAllButUpsideDown on the
iPhone and UIInterfaceOrientationMaskAll on the iPad. With
very few exceptions—such as games that must be played in a landscape
orientation—we probably shouldn’t change these settings.
We actually want the default behavior for our app, so delete the
supportedInterfaceOrientations method and uncheck Health
Beat’s Upside Down setting.
However, we’re not quite done with rotations. Launch the app again and
rotate into the three supported orientations. Notice how the table
automatically resizes to take advantage of the wider screen. Now try
launching the app using a different sized simulator—for example, iPhone
Retina (4-inch). Again, the History table view automatically adapts to the
longer screen.
The size of our application’s user interface can change for a number of
reasons. Rotations and screen sizes are the two most obvious examples—
but they are not the only ones. We will also lose 20 points off the top of our
screen if the user is currently on a phone call or recording audio.
Regardless, our interface needs to adapt to these changes in size. There
are three main approaches: programmatically laying out the UI,
autoresizing masks, and Auto Layout.

--- Page 188 ---
 Note
Spoiler alert: Auto Layout is the newest, most powerful, and
most complicated solution to this problem. It is also
essentially required if we want to take advantage of Dynamic
Type. We’ll discuss this in greater depth in the “Auto
Layout” section.
Programmatically Laying Out the UI
The first option is to programmatically define the location of all our user
interface elements. We can then update their position and size on demand.
As you can probably guess, this is a tedious and error-prone process. So, we
probably want to use one of the automated APIs whenever possible. There
are, however, two good reasons for learning to lay things out
programmatically.
 We need to understand how the system lays out views if we want to
be able to use autoresizing masks or Auto Layout effectively.
 Sometimes we just can’t get the automated systems to do what we
want. In those cases, we have no choice but to modify part of the
layout in code. Note: this mostly occurs when using autoresizing
masks. Unless you are radically changing the view’s layout between
orientations, there are few situations that Auto Layout cannot handle.
Before we look at methods for laying out our views, we need to know a
bit about the view hierarchy and view geometry.
The View Hierarchy
The view hierarchy defines our application’s user interface. This is a
collection of nested UIView and UIView subclasses. The hierarchy starts
with our application’s window. The window typically contains a single
view, our application’s root view. The root view then contains any number
of subviews, controls, and other user interface elements. If we want
something to appear on the screen, we must add it to the view hierarchy.
The inverse is also true. Everything that appears on the screen is a
UIView or a subclass of UIView. The UIView class manages a

--- Page 189 ---
rectangular region onscreen. As we will see, each view is defined in terms
of its upper-left corner, its width, and its height.
UIView defines a number of properties that let us specify its position,
size, and appearance. These include frame, backgroundColor,
tintColor, alpha, and clipsToBounds. Many of these can also be
set in the Attributes inspector in Interface Builder. As we will see in Chapter
4, “Custom Views and Custom Transitions,” some of these properties are
also animatable. See the UIView Class Reference for a complete
description of the UIView class and all its properties.
Each view also has its own coordinate system. By default, the origin is in
the upper-left corner—though this can be modified by adding affine
transforms to rotate, translate, or scale the coordinate system.
View Geometry
Positions in the coordinate system are given using a wide range of Core
Graphics data types. Their definitions are shown in Table 3.1.
TABLE 3.1 Core Graphics Data Types
These are all defined in the CGGeometry reference. CGGeometry also
defines a number of functions to help create, compare, and manipulate these
values. We will get some experience using these functions in both this and
the next chapter.

--- Page 190 ---
Each view’s size and location are defined by three interrelated properties:
frame, bounds, and center.
 Frame: The frame is a CGRect that defines our view’s size and
position in its superview’s coordinate system.
 Bounds: The bounds is a CGRect that defines our view’s size and
position in its own coordinate system. Most of the time, the bounds’
size will be equal to the frame’s size, and the bounds’ origin will
be set to {0, 0}. This may change; however, if you’re deliberately
offsetting the view’s content or if you apply a rotation, scale, or
translation transformation to the view.
 Center: The center is a CGPoint that defines the position of our
view’s center in the superview’s coordinate system. We often use the
center to move or align views.
Changing any of these will affect the others. Specifically, when you
modify the frame, the system will automatically recalculate the bounds
and center. When you modify the bounds, the center remains fixed,
but the system recalculates the frame. Finally, when you modify the
center, the bounds remain unchanged, but the frame is modified.
 Note
Our application’s main screen and window will always have
their origins in the upper-left corner in the device’s portrait
orientation. This does not change as you rotate the device.
Our root view, however, may rotate, giving it a different
coordinate system. The difference between the
screen/window coordinate system and the rest of the view
hierarchy can easily cause layout bugs if not handled
properly.
Pragmatically this means if we want to resize a view around its center,
we can change its bounds. If we want to resize it relative to the upper-left
corner, we can change its frame. If we just want to move it around, we can
modify the center.

--- Page 191 ---
We also need to think about the coordinate system when using these
values. If possible, we want to grab the coordinates in the correct coordinate
system. This is probably easier to show than to describe. Consider the
following code:
Click here to view code image
CGSize size = superview.bounds.size;
CGFloat width = size.width / (CGFloat)2.0;
leftView.frame = CGRectMake(0.0, 0.0, width, size.height);
rightView.frame = CGRectMake(width, 0.0, width, size.height);
We are going to lay out our left and right views inside our superview,
so we start by grabbing our superview’s bounds. Specifically, we grab
the size from our superview’s bounds.
As I said earlier, the size will often be the same in both the frame and
the bounds. So, why do we specifically grab the bounds’ size? Well, if
we add a scale or rotation transformation to this view, the frame and
bounds sizes will no longer match. So, while using the frame may work
(at least initially), it’s always safest to grab the correct value.

--- Page 192 ---
Differences Between the OS X and iOS Coordinate Systems
OS X and iOS use different coordinate systems. OS X places the
origin in the bottom-left corner, while iOS uses the top left. Most
of the time, we can ignore these differences, unless we’re porting
code between the desktop and our mobile devices.
However, some of the low-level frameworks will default to the
OS X coordinate system. If you’re doing low-level graphics or
text manipulation, you may find that your results are upside
down and backward. If this happens, the solution is easy. We just
need to modify the coordinate system before drawing.
For example, we could transform the graphic context, translating
the y-axis by the view’s height and then setting the y-scale to
-1.0. Sample code is shown here:
Click here to view code image
CGContextTranslateCTM(context, 0,
self.bounds.size.height);
CGContextScaleCTM(context, 1.0, -1.0);
We then use the size to calculate the sizes and positions of our
leftView and rightView. Note that we specify their position and size
by setting each view’s frame. The subview’s frame and the superview’s
bounds use the same coordinate system. So, everything here works as
expected.
Unfortunately, we cannot always get the values in the coordinate system
we want. Fortunately, UIView defines a number of methods to help us
convert from one coordinate system to another. These methods include
convertPoint:fromView:, convertPoint:toView:,
convertRect:fromView:, and convertRect:toView:.
For example, we often want to center a view in its superview. It may,
therefore, be tempting to set our subview’s center equal to our superview’s.
Click here to view code image
subview.center = view.center;

--- Page 193 ---
This, however, may not work as expected. The problem is, we want the
view’s center in its own coordinate system, but view.center returns the
value in its superview’s coordinate system. These values could be
considerably different—especially if the view is our application’s root view
and our device is rotated. Remember, the application’s window does not
rotate; it is always in portrait orientation.
We can solve the problem by converting the center to our view’s
coordinate system before using it.
Click here to view code image
CGPoint center = [view convertPoint:view.center
fromView:view.superview];
subview.center = center;
There’s one last point that’s worth mentioning. If you use a transform to
rotate a view to an arbitrary angle, its frame becomes its bounding box in
the superview’s coordinate system. This means there is no longer a direct
relationship between the frame property and our view’s upper-left corner
or size. If you’re rotating views, you typically need to use center and
bounds to perform your calculations, not frame.
Adding, Removing, and Reordering Views
Each view maintains an array of its subviews. When the screen is drawn,
the view is drawn first; then its subviews are drawn in order. This proceeds,
depth-first, down the entire view hierarchy. UIView defines a number of
methods to let us add, remove, and reorder our subviews. The most
common methods, and a brief description, are listed here:
 addSubview: Adds the provided view as a subview.
 bringSubviewToFront: Moves the specified subview to the end
of the subview array. This means it will appear on top of its siblings.
 sendSubviewToBack: Moves the specified subview to the
beginning of the subview array. This means it will appear below its
siblings.
 removeFromSuperview Removes the target from its superview.
Notice that adding and removing are asymmetrical. We call
addSubview: on the superview, but we call
removeFromSuperview on the subview.

--- Page 194 ---
 insertSubview:atIndex: Adds the provided subview at the
specified index in the subviews array.
 insertSubview:aboveSubview: This method takes two view
arguments. It adds the first view as a subview but positions it
immediately after the second view in the subview array. This means it
will appear just above the second view, when drawn.
 insertSubview:belowSubview: This method takes two view
arguments. It adds the first view as a subview but positions it
immediately before the second view in the subview array. This means
it will appear just below the second view, when drawn.
 exchangeSubviewAtIndex:withSubviewAtIndex: This
method swaps the two views in the subview array, changing the
drawing order.
As we will see in Chapter 4, there are also transition animations to let us
animate adding, removing, and exchanging our views.
Responding to Change in Size
A view’s size and position are determined by its frame property. This
means all views have a fixed height and width. Their location is also
defined as a fixed distance from the top and a fixed distance from the left
edge of their superview.
While this lets us easily specify an unambiguous layout for our controls,
it doesn’t give us any flexibility. If the view’s size changes, we must re-
layout everything, cycling through all our interface elements and
repositioning and resizing each one.
Fortunately, this is fairly easy (albeit tedious to the extreme). We can
reposition a view by modifying either its center or frame property. We
can also resize it by modifying either the frame or bounds properties. Of
course, the calculations required to properly resize and reposition our view
may be arbitrarily complex, but the act of resizing and repositioning it is
easy enough.
If we want to programmatically lay out our views, we typically modify
these properties in our view controller’s viewWillLayoutSubview or
viewDidLayoutSubview methods. These methods are called when our
view is first created and whenever our view’s bounds change. We can also

--- Page 195 ---
implement the UIView layoutSubviews method to similarly fine-
tune the layout of a custom view’s subviews.
UIViewController also defines a few methods for specifically
dealing with rotations.
willRotateToInterfaceOrientation:duration: is called just
before the rotation occurs. We might override it to stop expensive drawing
or updating operations during rotation. Additionally, if we want to use
completely different user interfaces in the landscape and portrait
orientations, we can use this method to swap our views.
didRotateFromInterfaceOrientation: is called just after the
rotation completes. We usually use this to reenable anything we disabled in
willRotateToInterfaceOrientation:duration:. Finally,
willAnimateRotationToInterfaceOrientation:duration
: is called from within the rotation’s animation block. We can override this
to add animations that should occur as part of the rotation.
Notice that we don’t typically use these methods to lay out our subviews
as a result of the rotation. The viewWillLayoutSubview or
viewDidLayoutSubview methods should automatically handle that for
us. Remember, the rotation will change our bounds—and changing the
bounds will trigger the layout methods.
Autoresizing Masks
While programmatically repositioning one or two subviews isn’t hard, the
task quickly becomes unwieldy for even moderately complex user
interfaces. Ideally, we would like to automate some, if not all, of this work.
In many cases, we can do this by simply setting each view’s Autoresizing
mask.
Autoresizing lets us define six parameters that describe how a view will
respond to changes in its superview size. These are the left margin, right
margin, top margin, bottom margin, height, and width. Each of these can be
set to be either fixed or flexible.
Here are the rules: Fixed parameters have a set size. They will not change
as the superview shrinks and grows. Flexible parameters, on the other hand,
can shrink and grow. Left margin + width + right margin will always equal
the superview’s width. Similarly, top margin + height + bottom margin will
equal the superview’s height.

--- Page 196 ---
If you have more than one flexible parameter for a given dimension, the
changes will be split between them. On the other hand, the margins have a
higher priority than the height and width—so if you set all three to fixed,
the size parameter will be ignored, and the height (or width) will change
with the superview.
By default, views have fixed top and left margins, fixed height and width,
and flexible bottom and right margins.
The masks can be set programmatically by passing a bitmask to the
view’s autoresizeMask property. Or it can be configured in Interface
Builder using the Autosizing tool in the Size inspector (Figure 3.2).
FIGURE 3.2 Interface Builder’s Autosizing tool
When using Interface Builder’s Autosizing tool, the red I-bars indicate a
fixed margin, while the red arrows indicate a flexible height or width. Tap
the control to turn them on or off. The Example shows a mini-animation
demonstrating how your view’s size will change as its superview shrinks
and grows. This makes it easy to visually verify your settings.
 Note
The Autosizing tool will only appear if Auto Layout is turned
off. By default, Auto Layout is turned on for all nib files or
storyboards. You can turn it off on a file-by-file basis. Open
the storyboard or nib, and select the File inspector. In the
Interface Builder Document settings uncheck the “use
Autolayout” checkbox.
This system has several advantages. It is relatively simple. Use it once or
twice and you understand how it handles most common layout situations.

--- Page 197 ---
Its biggest problem, however, comes from this simplicity. It can handle only
relatively simple layouts. Specifically, it works best when only one element
in a row (or column) is flexible. Trying to manage multiple flexible
elements tends to produce an interface that feels somewhat sloppy, as the
space between elements grows and shrinks with the view’s size.
If we want more precise, complex changes, we need to either manage the
layout programmatically or switch to Auto Layout.
Auto Layout
Auto Layout is a declarative, constraints-based layout engine. Apple created
Auto Layout to fill in the gaps left by Autoresizing. In theory, it should
eliminate the need to programmatically lay out our view hierarchies. Instead
of specifying a view’s size or location, Auto Layout lets us define complex
relationships between views, giving us an incredible amount of power—but
this power comes at a cost. Auto Layout is much harder to understand and
set up than Autoresizing.
There are two main challenges to using Auto Layout. The first is the
technical challenge. We must learn the Auto Layout API and Interface
Builder’s controls before we can use it effectively.
The second challenge is mental. Auto Layout requires a fundamental shift
in the way we think about views. When using Auto Layout, we no longer
specify a view’s size and position using its frame, bounds, and center.
Instead, we specify a number of constraints. Picking the correct set of
constraints is like solving logic problems. And, like any new puzzle, it can
be baffling and frustrating at first. Rest assured, it gets easier.
Auto Layout’s constraints can be represented as linear equations, as
shown here:
Click here to view code image
Attribute_1 = Multiplier * Attribute_2 + Constant
The attributes can be any of the following:
Left Edge
Right Edge
Top Edge
Bottom Edge
Leading Edge
Trailing Edge

--- Page 198 ---
Width
Height
CenterX
CenterY
Baseline
Not An Attribute
Of these, three merit special mention. Leading Edge is the first edge you
run across based on the current local’s reading direction. For left-to-right
languages like English, this would be the left edge. Trailing Edge is the
opposite, the right edge for English. By using the Leading Edge and
Trailing Edge (instead of Left Edge and Right Edge), our UI elements will
automatically reorder themselves when we switch from a left-to-right
language to a right-to-left language.
“Not An Attribute” indicates that the attribute (and multiplier) will not be
used in this calculation. We can use this to define constant values.
Here are some examples in pseudo-code:
Click here to view code image
// Example 1: Setting a constant height
View's Height = 0.0 * Not An Attribute + 40.0;
// Example 2: Setting a fixed distance between two buttons
Button_2's Leading Edge = 1.0 * Button_1's Trailing Edge + 8.0;
// Example 3: Make two buttons have the same width
Button_2's Width = 1.0 * Button_1's Width + 0.0;
// Example 4: Centering a view in its superview
View's CenterX = 1.0 * Superview's CenterX + 0.0;
View's CenterY = 1.0 * Superview's CenterY + 0.0;
// Example 5: Giving a view a constant aspect ratio
View's Height = 2.0 * View's Width + 0.0;
To use Auto Layout, we define a set of rules, and the system tries to
fulfill them. Unfortunately, like most rules-based systems, each individual
constraint may seem simple enough—but as they are combined, they may
create unintended consequences. As the number of constraints grows, it gets
harder and harder to accurately guess what the system will do at runtime.
My advice is to build your interfaces iteratively and test them often.

--- Page 199 ---
Sufficient, Nonambiguous Layouts
To generate predictable results, we must declare constraints that are both
sufficient and nonambiguous. Typically this means we need at least four
constraints per view: one to define its height, one to define its width, one to
define its x-coordinate, and one to define its y-coordinate. Of course, there
are many ways to skin this cat, but as long as we declare two of the possible
attributes for each dimension, we should be fine. For example, to specify a
view’s y-axis, we could specify the Top and Bottom, Top and Height,
Bottom and Height, Center Y and Height, or Baseline and Height. Other
combinations are possible (Top and Center Y, for example), but these will
be somewhat rare.
We also need to avoid assigning too many constraints—creating conflicts
that cannot be simultaneously satisfied. For example, I cannot define a
view’s Top, Height, and Bottom. One of these will need to change as the
superview’s height changes.
So far this seems fairly straightforward. Just create two and only two x-
dimension constraints and two and only two y-dimension constraints for
each view in your view hierarchy. You should be good to go. Of course,
nothing about Auto Layout will ever be that straightforward. The problem is
that I lied.
Actually constraints don’t have to be linear equations. They can also be
inequalities. For example, we could define a minimum width for a view as
shown here:
Click here to view code image
View's Width >= 0.0 * Not An Attribute + 20.0;
When you use inequalities, you will need more than four constraints to
specify an unambiguous layout. To make matters worse, each constraint
also has a priority. Priorities range from 1 to 1,000. If it’s set to 1,000, the
constraint is required. Anything less than 1,000 is optional. The system will
try to satisfy all the optional constraints in order from highest priority to
lowest.
Finally, some controls have a natural size. Buttons, for example, are
typically 30 points tall and wide enough to hold their title text. Text fields,
on the other hand, are also 30 points tall but don’t have a preferred width.

--- Page 200 ---
We say that these views have an intrinsic size—and this automatically
generates a whole new set of optional constraints for us.
Intrinsic Sizes
We can set the intrinsic size of a UIView subclass by overriding its
intrinsicContentSize method. This method should return a
CGSize. This could be a fixed size, or a size calculated from the view’s
contents. If the view does not have an intrinsic size for a given dimension, it
should use UIViewNoIntrinsicMetric for that dimension. By
default, UIView returns {UIViewNoIntrinsicMetric,
UIViewNoIntrinsicMetric}.
If we need to recalculate the intrinsic size (for example, after changing
the view’s content), we should call
invalidateIntrinsicContentSize. The system will then use the
new intrinsic size on the next layout pass.
Auto Layout creates four constraints based on a view’s intrinsic size: two
pairs of inequalities per axis. The compression resistance maintains the
view’s minimum height and width, while the content hugging defines its
maximum. The linear equations are shown here:
Click here to view code image
// Compression Resistance
View's Height >= 0.0 * Not An Attribute + View's Intrinsic
Height;
View's Width >= 0.0 * Not An Attribute + View's Intrinsic Width;
// Content Hugging
View's Height <= 0.0 * Not An Attribute + View's Intrinsic
Height;
View's Width <= 0.0 * Not An Attribute + View's Intrinsic Width;
By default, the content hugging priority is set to 250, and the
compression resistance priority is set to 750. Some elements may have
different defaults. For example, the content hugging priority for UILabel
is 251. This means most other user interface elements will be stretched
before the label. We can modify the priorities for these constraints by
calling
setContentCompressionResistancePriority:forAxis: and
setContentHuggingPriority:forAxis:. Note that Apple has

--- Page 201 ---
provided a few constants to make setting the priorities easier (see Table
3.2).
TABLE 3.2 Priority Constants
This gives us considerable flexibility when it comes to our views. For
one button, we might set both the compression resistance and the content
hugging to UILayoutPriorityRequired. This would force the
button to a fixed size. For another, we might set the x-axis content hugging
to UILayoutPriorityDefaultLow and set all others to
UILayoutPriorityRequired. This would give it a fixed height and a
minimum width but would allow it to grow to fill the available space.
Specifying Constraints
There are four ways to set up a view’s constraints. We can simply use the
default constraints. We can programmatically define each constraint. We
can programmatically set multiple constraints using the Visual Format
language. Finally, we can set up the constraints in Interface Builder.
While we will primarily use Interface Builder throughout this book,
understanding how to build constraints in code really helps clarify exactly
what Interface Builder is doing for us.
Default Constraints
Whenever we add a view to the view hierarchy, the system automatically
generates a set of constraints to match the view’s Autoresizing mask. As we
saw earlier, all views have an Autoresizing mask with a fixed left margin,
fixed top margin, fixed height, and fixed width.
Sometimes these default constraints can prove useful. In many cases, it
might be easier to define the Autoresizing mask and use the auto-generated
constraints, rather than creating our own constraints by hand. Additionally,
the default constraints act as an escape valve. As long as we are using the
default constraints, we can continue to modify the view’s size and position

--- Page 202 ---
by simply modifying its frame, bounds, and center properties. As we
will see, this can be particularly helpful when animating views or using
UIDynamics.
However, we will often want to use our own constraints—and that means
we need to disable the default constraints first. To disable the default
constraints, simply call
setTranslatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints: and
pass NO.
Constraint API
Our constraints are instances of the NSLayoutConstraint class. We
can create new constraints by calling NSLayoutConstraint’s
constraintWithItem:attribute:relatedBy:toItem:attr
ibute:multiplier:constant: method. This method is a direct
translation of the linear equation we saw earlier.
The first two arguments define the view and the attribute we are
constraining. The attribute must be of type NSLayoutAttribute, as
shown here:
Click here to view code image
enum {
    NSLayoutAttributeLeft = 1,
    NSLayoutAttributeRight,
    NSLayoutAttributeTop,
    NSLayoutAttributeBottom,
    NSLayoutAttributeLeading,
    NSLayoutAttributeTrailing,
    NSLayoutAttributeWidth,
    NSLayoutAttributeHeight,
    NSLayoutAttributeCenterX,
    NSLayoutAttributeCenterY,
    NSLayoutAttributeBaseline,
    
    NSLayoutAttributeNotAnAttribute = 0
};
typedef NSInteger NSLayoutAttribute;
Next we pass an NSLayoutRelation to define the type of equation,
as shown here:

--- Page 203 ---
Click here to view code image
enum {
    NSLayoutRelationLessThanOrEqual = -1,
    NSLayoutRelationEqual = 0,
    NSLayoutRelationGreaterThanOrEqual = 1,
};
typedef NSInteger NSLayoutRelation;
The next two arguments define the view and the attribute for the right
side of the equation. Again, the attribute must be an
NSLayoutAttribute. These are followed by the multiplier and the
constant (both CGFloats).
So, the following call:
Click here to view code image
NSLayoutConstraint *constraint =
[NSLayoutConstraint constraintWithItem:view1
                             attribute:attribute1
                             relatedBy:relationship
                                toItem:view2
                             attribute:attribute2
                            multiplier:mx
                              constant:c];
defines the following linear equation:
Click here to view code image
view1.attribute1 view2.attribute2 * mx + c;
Now, I described the items as views. That’s not 100 percent correct.
Technically, they are ids. Most of the time we will be creating constraints
between views (or other UIView subclasses). However, there are two
notable exceptions. UIViewController defines two properties that we
can also use in our constraints: topLayoutGuide and
bottomLayoutGuide.
The exact location of the top layout guide will change depending on
which bars are visible. If the scene has a navigation bar, it will be the
bottom of the navigation bar. If the scene has only a status bar, it will be the
bottom of the status bar. If the scene doesn’t have any bars, it will use the
top of the view. By creating a constraint to the top layout guide, we can
guarantee that our controls are positioned correctly below the scene’s bars
and that the location will automatically adapt if we change the bars.

--- Page 204 ---
The bottom Layout Guide works similarly. If the scene has a toolbar or
tab bar, it will be at the top of the bar. If not, it will be the bottom of the
view in the current orientation.
These guides are particularly important in iOS 7. Our views should
extend under the bars, which are semi-transparent, allowing a highly
blurred and somewhat desaturated hint of our view to show through. This
adds a touch of context to our layout and can be particularly effective when
displaying scrolling content. However, obviously, when designing
nonscrolling views, we don’t want our controls to accidentally slide up
under the bars.
When laying out nonscrolling scenes, we should always create our
constraints to the layout guides instead of the top and bottom of the scene’s
main view. This will guarantee that our layouts adapt, even if we change the
workflow. For example, we can embed the scene in a navigation controller
or change the incoming segue from push to modal, and our layout will
automatically adjust.
Once we have created a constraint, we still need to add it to the system.
Constraints should be added to the closest ancestor of both views in the
constraint. By ancestor, I mean either the view itself, its superview, its
superview’s superview, or any other superview moving up the view
hierarchy.
For example, if we create a constraint between a view and its superview,
we should add the constraint to the superview. If we add a constraint
between two sibling buttons, we should add the constraint to their shared
superview.
We add constraints by calling UIView’s addConstraint: method
and passing our constraint.
The following code unambiguously defines a set of constraints for a
button and a text view. In a left-to-right language (like English), the button
should be a constant distance from the superview’s upper-left corner. It also
has a fixed width. The text field should be a fixed distance from the button’s
right edge. It is also vertically centered on the button. Finally, the right edge
of the text field should be a fixed distance from the superview’s right edge.
Therefore, as our superview resizes, the text field’s width will grow and
shrink to fill the space.

--- Page 205 ---
Click here to view code image
// Setup Button's Constraints
NSLayoutConstraint *buttonX =
[NSLayoutConstraint
 constraintWithItem:myButton
 attribute:NSLayoutAttributeLeading
 relatedBy:NSLayoutRelationEqual
 toItem:view
 attribute:NSLayoutAttributeLeft multiplier:1.0
 constant:20.0];
[view addConstraint:buttonX];
NSLayoutConstraint *buttonY =
[NSLayoutConstraint
 constraintWithItem:myButton
 attribute:NSLayoutAttributeTop
 relatedBy:NSLayoutRelationEqual
 toItem:view
 attribute:NSLayoutAttributeTop
 multiplier:1.0
 constant:20.0];
[view addConstraint:buttonY];
// Setup Button's Intrinsic Size Priorities
[myButton
 setContentHuggingPriority:UILayoutPriorityRequired
 forAxis:UILayoutConstraintAxisHorizontal];
[myButton
 setContentCompressionResistancePriority:UILayoutPriorityRequire
d
 forAxis:UILayoutConstraintAxisHorizontal];
// Setup Textfield Constraints.
NSLayoutConstraint *textX =
[NSLayoutConstraint
 constraintWithItem:myTextField
 attribute:NSLayoutAttributeLeading
 relatedBy:NSLayoutRelationEqual
 toItem:myButton
 attribute:NSLayoutAttributeTrailing
 multiplier:1.0
 constant:5.0];
[view addConstraint:textX];
NSLayoutConstraint *textY =
[NSLayoutConstraint

--- Page 206 ---
 constraintWithItem:myTextField
 attribute:NSLayoutAttributeCenterY
 relatedBy:NSLayoutRelationEqual
 toItem:myButton
 attribute:NSLayoutAttributeCenterY
 multiplier:1.0
 constant:0.0];
[view addConstraint:textY];
NSLayoutConstraint *textWidth =
[NSLayoutConstraint
 constraintWithItem:myTextField
 attribute: NSLayoutAttributeTrailing
 relatedBy:NSLayoutRelationEqual
 toItem:view
 attribute: NSLayoutAttributeTrailing
 multiplier:1.0
 constant:-20.0];
[view addConstraint:textWidth];
In many ways, these are the easiest constraints to understand. However,
as you can see, they require a lot of typing. Fortunately, the Visual
Formatting language greatly reduces this—but it can also obscure some of
the details, making it somewhat harder to understand.
Visual Formatting Syntax
Hands up if you ever spent an afternoon drawing ASCII art. This feature is
for you.
NSLayoutConstraint supports a visual formatting syntax for
constraints. This allows us to “draw” our constraints using an ASCII-art like
syntax. The full details can be found in the iOS Document and API
Reference, Cocoa Auto Layout Guide, but I’ll go through the basics here.
We start by creating an NSString that defines a group of constraints.
These strings will use the symbols shown in Table 3.3.

--- Page 207 ---
TABLE 3.3 Auto Layout Visual Format
 Note
Do not use any spaces in your visual format string.
Here are a few examples:
 |-[view1]: Sets the standard spacing between the superview’s
leading edge and view1’s leading edge.

--- Page 208 ---
 [view1]-[view2]: Sets the standard spacing between the leading
edge of view2 and the trailing edge of view1.
 [view1][view2]: Aligns the leading edge of view2 to the trailing
edge of view1. There will be no space between the views.
 V:|-[view1]: Sets the standard vertical spacing between the
superview’s top and view1’s top.
 [view(200)]: Sets view’s width to 200 points.
 [view(<=200)]: Sets view’s width to 200 points or less.
 [view(>= 50,<=200)]: Sets view’s width to greater than 50 but
less than 200 points.
 [view1(==view2)]: Sets view1’s width equal to view2’s width.
Note that the equal relationship is optional; however, it can make the
formatting string easier to read.
 [view(200@500)]: Sets view’s width to 200 points and its
priority to 500.
 [view(standard@high)]: Sets view’s width to the standard
constant. Also sets its priority to the high constant.
We can also combine these strings into complex statements. The
following example lays out three equal-sized buttons using standard system
spacing between all the elements:
Click here to view code image
|-[view1]-[view2(==view1)]-[view3(==view2)]-|
We create these constraints using NSLayoutConstraint’s
constraintsWithVisualFormat:options:metrics:views:
method. The first argument is our visual formatting string. The second
argument specifies how the elements should be aligned and whether we
should use LTR, RTL, or Leading-To-Trailing relationships. Finally, we
pass in two dictionaries. The first defines our constants, and the second
contains our list of views.
The keys in these dictionaries must match the metric_strings and
view_strings used in our visual formatting. The values must be an
NSNumber (for metrics) or UIView (for views). We can also place the top

--- Page 209 ---
and bottom layout guides in the views dictionary, letting us draw constraints
to them as well.
While we can create the view dictionary by hand, we can also use the
NSDictionaryOfVariableBindings() function to automatically
build one for us. To call this method, pass in our views as arguments. It
returns a dictionary that uses our view’s name as the key.
This means the following two definitions for views are identical:
Click here to view code image
// Create a local variable for the guide
id topGuide = self.topLayoutGuide;
// Version 1
NSDictionary *views =
NSDictionaryOfVariableBindings(view1, view2, view3, view4,
topGuide);
// Version 2
NSDictionary *views =
@{@"view1":view1, @"view2":view2, @"view3":view3,
  @"view4":view4, @"topGuide":topGuide};
constraintsWithVisualFormat:options:metrics:views
: returns an array of constraints. We can add these to a view by calling
addConstraints:.
So, we can redefine our button and text field’s constraints using visual
formatting, as shown here:
Click here to view code image
NSDictionary *views =
NSDictionaryOfVariableBindings(myTextField, myButton);
// Defines both the horizontal constraints and the vertical
alignment
NSArray *constraints =
[NSLayoutConstraint
 constraintsWithVisualFormat:@"|-[myButton]-[myTextField]-|"
 options:NSLayoutFormatAlignAllCenterY |
 NSLayoutFormatDirectionLeadingToTrailing
 metrics:nil
 views:views];
// Define's the button's vertical position
NSArray *verticalConstraints =
[NSLayoutConstraint

--- Page 210 ---
 constraintsWithVisualFormat:@"V:|-[myButton]"
 options:0
 metrics:nil
 views:views];
[view addConstraints:constraints];
[view addConstraints:verticalConstraints];
// Still need to set the button's intrinsic size priorities
[myButton
 setContentHuggingPriority:UILayoutPriorityRequired
 forAxis:UILayoutConstraintAxisHorizontal];
[myButton
 setContentCompressionResistancePriority:UILayoutPriorityRequire
d
 forAxis:UILayoutConstraintAxisHorizontal];
It’s still a large chunk of code, but we’ve managed to compress five
separate constraints into two visual syntax calls. Obviously, the more UI
elements you have in each row or column, the greater the savings.
However, there are some limitations. For example, we cannot set a view’s
width relative to its height. If we want that sort of relationship, we will need
to explicitly define the constraint in code.
Editing Constraints in Interface Builder
Auto Layout took a fair bit of criticism in iOS 6. Most people agreed that it
was potentially useful and powerful—what they objected to was the way
Interface Builder handled Auto Layout.
Interface Builder tried to be too helpful. Whenever we added a view to a
storyboard or nib file, it automatically added constraints for that view based
on its position in the scene. It would also actively prevent us from making
ambiguous or invalid constraints.
This worked great for simple layouts—but once things got a bit complex,
you would inevitably want to change Interface Builder’s default constraints.
The problem was, you couldn’t necessarily just add or delete constraints—
that would create an invalid set of constraints. If you were clever, careful,
and a little bit obsessive, you could manage to work around these
restrictions and massage the constraints until they were exactly the way you
wanted them. However, if you then made any changes to the user interface,

--- Page 211 ---
Interface Builder would re-generate all your constraints, undoing all your
hard work.
Fortunately, all of that is behind us. With Xcode 5, Interface Builder no
longer tries to be helpful. Ironically, by doing less, it has become a lot more
useful. Yes, there’s a downside. We have to specify each and every
constraint ourselves. It won’t make any assumptions for us. However, we
have complete freedom to add, modify, and remove as many constraints as
we want. Even more importantly, since it no longer tries to help us, it won’t
accidentally undo our work.
When you add a user interface element in Interface Builder, the system
will begin by using its default constraints. The element will have a fixed
position relative to the top-left corner of its containing view. It will also
have a fixed width and a fixed height. As soon as we add our first
constraint, Interface Builder removes the default constraints. We must then
add a full set of constraints for that item.
Interface Builder has many constraint editing features. We won’t be able
to cover them all here. Instead, we will do a quick overview of the most
important editing features and then get some real-world experience using
these tools in Health Beat.
Interface Builder provides four onscreen constraints: Align, Pin, Resolve
Auto Layout Issues, and Resizing Behavior (Figure 3.3).
FIGURE 3.3 Interface Builder’s onscreen tools
The Align tool lets us select two or more elements and then set
constraints to align their edges, centers, or baselines. We can also align
elements with the containing view (Figure 3.4). We can also specify which
frames get updated when we add these constraints.

--- Page 212 ---
FIGURE 3.4 Auto Layout’s Align tool
For the Pin tool, we can select a single item and then set constraints to its
nearest neighbor (which may be the containing superview a nearby view, or
the closest layout guide). We can also specify a fixed height or width for the
item. Finally, we can select multiple items and give them equal heights or
widths or even align them (Figure 3.5). I’d be a bit careful using the
“nearest neighbor” controls, especially in complex scenes. Its definition of
nearest neighbor may be different than yours. However, notice that you can
click the drop-down arrow on the nearest neighbor settings to specify the
correct neighbor.

--- Page 213 ---
FIGURE 3.5 Auto Layout’s Pin tool
We will primarily use the Resolve Auto Layout Issues tool to update our
view’s frame based on its current constraints, or to clear away all the
constraints, giving us a fresh start. There are some controls to autogenerate
missing constraints or revert to recommended constraints—but I don’t
recommend using them. In my experience, they rarely do what I expect and
typically cause more problems than they solve. Notice that the menu is
divided into two parts. The top half acts on the currently selected item. The
bottom half acts on all the user interface elements in the view controller
(Figure 3.6).

--- Page 214 ---
FIGURE 3.6 Auto Layout’s Resolve Auto Layout Issues tool
Finally, we have the Resizing Behavior tool (Figure 3.7). This provides
toggles that let us define which constraints are updated live while we resize
views within the scene. I typically leave this set to the defaults.
FIGURE 3.7 Auto Layout’s Resizing Behavior tool
The Editor > Canvas menu can also be useful when working with
constraints. We can control exactly what we want Interface Builder to show.
We can even set the canvas to automatically update our frames as we add
constraints. While this may sound like a good idea, it usually isn’t.
Typically we need to set a number of constraints before updating the frame
makes sense. Otherwise, it may be swept off the screen or shrunk until it is
teeny-tiny. Usually I leave the canvas settings alone, unless I’m debugging
a specific problem, and I think the additional visualizations will help.
The Size inspector also has a number of useful settings. It lets us set the
content hugging and compression resistance priorities for our selected view.
It also lists all the constraints for a given view, letting us delete, select, or
edit those constraints.
Onscreen constraints appear as little I-bars or lines. Orange constraints
are warnings. These can occur either because the layout is still ambiguous
or because our view is in the wrong location or is the wrong size. In the
latter case, it will also show the correct frame as a dashed orange box. Red

--- Page 215 ---
constraints indicate errors. These occur when we have conflicting
constraints. Blue constraints mean everything is fine. The element’s
position and size are uniquely defined by our constraints.
We can select the constraints, either by clicking them directly in the
editor or by selecting them in the Document Outline or Size inspector. Once
selected, we can modify the constraint’s relationship type, constant value,
and priority from the Attributes inspector. We can also specify that a
constraint is a placeholder, which will be removed at build time.
Presumably, we would programmatically replace it at runtime.
Finally, we can draw connections between our constraints and outlets in
our Interface Builder. This lets us programmatically modify or replace the
constraints.
Other Constraint Methods
We can override a few other methods to help control Auto Layout. These
may not be particularly useful in our day-to-day coding, but it’s nice to
know that they exist.
The first is requiresConstraintBasedLayout. This UIView
class method returns NO by default. Our custom UIView subclasses should
override this to return YES if they require Auto Layout.
 Note
In my testing, I haven’t found any cases where the system’s
behavior changes based on the
requiresConstraintBasedLayout method’s return
value. If you add a view that uses Auto Layout to a view
hierarchy using Autoresizing, the system simply converts the
entire view hierarchy to Auto Layout. However, future code
—including our own code or third-party libraries—may
check this value, so we should make sure our UIView
subclasses behave correctly.
Next, when Auto Layout aligns two views, it actually aligns them based
on their alignment rectangle—not on their frames. This might not be
immediately apparent, since the alignment rectangle is set to the view’s

--- Page 216 ---
frame by default. Still, if our view has some content that shouldn’t be
considered when aligning, a badge icon that sticks out past the view’s
regular content, for example, we may want to set the alignment rectangle to
a subsection of its frame.
The easiest way to set the alignment rect is to override the view’s
alignmentRectInsets method. This returns the UIEdgeInsets
that define the offset between the alignment rectangle and the view’s
frame. Alternatively, we can override alignmentRectForFrame:
and frameForAlignmentRect: methods to convert between the
alignment rect and its frame. By default, these methods call
alignmentRectInsets and perform the conversion based on those
insets.
Finally, a view can save some or all of its constraints when it is archived.
Each constraint has a shouldBeArchived property. By default, this is
set to NO, and the constraint is not saved with the view. However, if we
want the constraint to be saved, we can simply set its
shouldBeArchived property to YES.
Troubleshooting Auto Layout
With Xcode 5’s Auto Layout support, troubleshooting is a lot easier than it
used to be. We can visually see whether we have ambiguous or conflicting
layouts. Warnings and errors will also appear in the Document Outline.
Still, sometimes we need to dig a bit deeper to figure out what, exactly, is
going wrong.
There are really three types of problems we can run into when creating
constraints. Our constraints could be ambiguous, they could have conflicts,
or they could be logically incorrect.
Detecting Ambiguous Layouts
A view has an ambiguous layout if there is more than one possible layout
that satisfies all its constraints. Typically ambiguous layouts cause our view
to appear in the wrong location or to have the wrong size. Sometimes the
layout may change between one run and the next, or the view may
otherwise jump or shift unexpectedly.
Usually this means we need to add constraints. As stated earlier, each
view needs at least four constraints to specify both its position and its size.

--- Page 217 ---
If you are using inequalities, more constraints are needed.
However, we can also have ambiguous layouts when we have conflicting
nonrequired constraints with exactly the same priority. The system won’t be
able to determine which constraint should be fulfilled. In these cases, we
have to modify one of the priorities to break the tie.
If we’re programmatically creating constraints, we won’t be able to rely
on Interface Builder to detect ambiguous layouts for us. In these cases,
detecting and debugging ambiguous layouts is largely a matter of trial and
error; however, the system does provide a few tools to help. First, we have a
variety of debugging methods. These methods should be used only during
debugging, such as while writing code to explore the layout and determine
why our application is not behaving properly.
UIView’s hasAmbiguousLayout is our front-line tool. Quite simply,
it will return YES if the view has an ambiguous layout. It will return NO
otherwise. This provides a quick test. If the layout is ambiguous, we can
explore further. If not, then either our constraints are either just buggy or
there’s something else wrong with our code.
Next, UIView’s exerciseAmbiguityInLayout will randomly
change the view’s frame to another value that also satisfies its constraints.
By cycling through several alternates, you should soon get a feel for the
missing constraint.
Finally, constraintsAffectingLayoutForAxis: returns an
array containing all the constraints affecting the view’s layout along the
specified axis. We can then examine these constraints to get a better feel for
the problem.
Remember, if you can find a good place to set a breakpoint, you can call
these methods from the debugger’s console:
Click here to view code image
p (BOOL)[self hasAmbiguousLayout]
Instruments also provides some assistance. There is a Cocoa Layout
instrument that will track any changes to our constraints. Again, this is
primarily used when programmatically modifying or replacing constraints
—we can use Instruments to verify that the constraints are changing when
and where we expect.

--- Page 218 ---
Detecting Conflicts
Conflicts are both more serious and easier to detect. Conflicts occur when
two (or more) required constraints cannot both be satisfied. Fortunately, the
system throws an exception when it detects conflicting constraints.
By default, the system also catches this exception. It logs a warning to
the console and then chooses one of the constraints to ignore. It will then
continue to lay out our views.
A sample warning is shown here:
Click here to view code image
2012-12-28 01:07:09.880 AutoLayoutTest[43733:c07] Unable to
simultaneously satisfy constraints.
Probably at least one of the constraints in the following list
is one you don't want. Try this: (1) look at each constraint and
try to figure out which you don't expect; (2) find the code that
added the unwanted constraint or constraints and fix it. (Note:
If you're seeing NSAutoresizingMaskLayoutConstraints that you
don't understand, refer to the documentation for the UIView
property translatesAutoresizingMaskIntoConstraints)
(
   "<NSLayoutConstraint:0x7581490 H:[MyView:0x7580c30(60)]>",
   "<NSLayoutConstraint:0x7581320 H:[MyView:0x7580c30(80)]>"
)
Will attempt to recover by breaking constraint
<NSLayoutConstraint:0x7581320 H:[MyView:0x7580c30(80)]>
 Note
When possible, NSLayoutConstraint’s description
method uses visual formatting. Where this is not possible, it
will use pseudocode to write out the linear equation directly.
In this example, you can see that we’ve set two different constraints
specifying the height of MyView. In one case, we set the height to 60
points. In the other, we set it to 80 points. The system chose to ignore the
80-point constraint and continue to lay out the view.
We can set a breakpoint to detect this exception. Either set an exception
breakpoint or set a symbolic breakpoint for objc_exception_throw.
However, this will provide useful information only for constraints set in a

--- Page 219 ---
view’s updateConstraints method. Constraints added anywhere else
will throw an exception during the next update phase—not at the point
when the constraint was added.
Layout Timing
Whether we use Auto Layout, Autoresizing, or old-school programmatic
layouts, our views are processed in three phases: Update Constraint,
Layout, and Display.
The system performs these phases once each time we cycle through the
run loop. These phases affect only dirty views—views that have been
explicitly marked as needing an update. The system will check to see
whether our view needs to have its constraints updated, needs to have its
layout updated, or needs to be redrawn before calling the relevant method.
Therefore, if nothing has changed, nothing much happens.
Update Constraints Phase
This constraint is useful only if you are using Auto Layout. Here, the
system starts with the leaf views and works up the view hierarchy toward
the application’s window. If a view’s constraints need to be updated, the
system will call the view’s updateConstraints method. We typically
override this method in our view subclasses to dynamically provide
constraints at runtime.
We should never call updateConstraints directly. Instead, call
setNeedsUpdateConstraints. This will mark the view for updating,
and the system will call updateConstraints for us on the next pass
through the Update Constraints phase.
UIViewController has a similar method named
updateViewConstraints. We can alternatively override this method
to programmatically provide constraints at the controller layer.
updateViewConstraints is also triggered by
setNeedsUpdateConstraints, and it is called after its view’s
updateConstraints method.
If we ever need to change a view’s constraints at runtime, we should
remove the old constraints and then call
setNeedsUpdateConstraints. Our custom

--- Page 220 ---
updateConstraints or updateViewConstraints methods can
then provide the new constraints.
Layout Phase
The Layout phase proceeds in a similar manner; however, it starts with the
window and works down toward the leaf views. Again, if a view’s layout
needs to be updated, the system will call the view’s layoutSubviews
method. We indicate that a view’s layout needs to be updated by calling the
setNeedsLayout method.
Additionally, if a view’s content has changed, we can invalidate its
intrinsic content size by calling
invalidateIntrinsicContentSize. The next time through the
layout phase, the system will call the view’s intrinsicContentSize
method to get its new content size.
If you’re not using Auto Layout, the default implementation of
layoutSubviews does not do anything. However, we can override this
method to provide our own custom layouts. With Auto Layout enabled, the
view will take its list of constraints and calculate the proper bound,
center, and frame properties for its contained views.
While I do not recommend mixing code that directly modifies the
bounds, center, and frame with Auto Layout, if you need to do this,
be sure to set your custom values after the call to [super
layoutSubviews]. Otherwise, the system will clobber your values with
its newly calculated values.
Display Phase
Finally, we have the Display phase. This works the same with or without
Auto Layout. The system will call drawRect: as necessary for our views.
We can trigger drawing by calling setNeedsDisplay or
setNeedsDisplayInRect:.
Note that iOS heavily caches its views. Often, we draw the view once,
and then we never draw it again. The system will continue to reuse the
cached version, even if we move the view, cover and uncover it, change its
size, rotate it, or even fade it in and out.
This can cause rendering problems when enlarging a view’s frame. By
default the system will simply stretch the cached version to fit. We can

--- Page 221 ---
force our views to redraw whenever their frame changes by setting their
content mode, as shown here:
Click here to view code image
self.view.contentMode = UIViewContentModeRedraw;
There is one time when the system will redraw our views. If a view is not
currently part of the view hierarchy and a memory warning comes in, then
the system may clear the view’s graphics cache. If this happens, the next
time you place the view onscreen, the system will call drawRect: to
redraw it.
Updating Health Beat
We have a lot to accomplish, so let’s get back to our project. We want to let
users add and remove weight entries. We need to design both our Add Entry
and Entry Detail views. And, we want to spruce up our history view. Let’s
start with the history view.
Custom Table View Cells
Currently we are displaying our weight entries using one of the prebuilt cell
layouts. The basic cell gives us a single black, left-aligned label and an
optional image view. iOS actually defines four prebuilt cell layouts.
However, we often want to create our own. And, with storyboards, custom
cells are very easy to use.
 Note
Interface Builder’s support for custom table view cells and
static tables are built into storyboards. You cannot use them
on nib files. In fact, I find the storyboard’s expanded table
view support so useful, I feel that it is one of the most
compelling reasons to use storyboards.
Open Main.storyboard and navigate to the History Table View
Controller. Select our table view cell, and in the Attributes inspector, change
the Style to Custom. We now have an almost blank slate to work with. Our
cell is empty except for the disclosure indicator on the right side.

--- Page 222 ---
Drag a label from the library into the cell. Use the guidelines to make
sure the label is against the left margin and centered in the cell. Also note
how the cell’s content area is highlighted in blue—this is the only space we
have to work with (Figure 3.8).
FIGURE 3.8 Editing the table view cell’s content
Double-click the label and change its text to Weight. Then drag a second
label, and line it up on the content area’s right margin. Double-click this
label and change its text to Date. These are just placeholders—we’ll
dynamically replace them with real data at runtime.
Select the Weight label. We want to change its font. In the Attributes
inspector, click the icon inside the Font text field. This will bring up the
fonts control (Figure 3.9).

--- Page 223 ---
FIGURE 3.9 Changing the font
Click the Font pop-up button. This will bring up a list of fonts. In
particular, look at the fonts listed under Text Styles. These are our Dynamic
Types. We will talk about Dynamic Types more in the “Dynamic Type”
section. For now just understand that the user will be able to set the font
size for their device, and we will update our user interface to match their
settings.
For the Weight label, set the font to Headline. For the Date, set it to
Subhead. We should also set the Date’s Alignment to right-aligned (
).
Our custom cell should look like Figure 3.10.
FIGURE 3.10 Our custom table view cell

--- Page 224 ---
Adding Auto Layout Constraints
Now we need to add our Auto Layout constraints. Our goal is to have the
weight fixed on the left side. The date label will stretch to fill the remaining
space, with the standard spacing between them. Everything should be
centered vertically in the cell.
Let’s start with the Weight. Control-click the Weight label and drag to the
left. Let go of the mouse anywhere inside the cell but left of the label
(Figure 3.11). From the pop-up menu, select Leading Space to Container.
This places an orange I-bar to the left of our label, and a dashed orange box
now surrounds our label. Congratulations, we’ve successfully created an
ambiguous layout.
FIGURE 3.11 Drawing the constraint
Let’s take a quick look at the problem. In the top-right corner of the
History Table View Controller scene’s section in the Document Outline, you
should see a little reddish-orange arrow icon. If you click this, it will show
you all the warnings and errors for our constraints. We can get similar
information in the Issue navigator—but I like the feedback that the
Document Outline provides.
In our case, it shows us that we’re missing a constraint for our Weight
label. We need to specify its Y position. It also says that we have a
misplaced view. The Weight label’s frame isn’t quite in the correct position
given its current constraints.
We always want to completely constrain our layout before we update our
frames. In this case, adding the Y constraint is easy. Repeat the procedure
we performed before. Control-drag from the Weight label to someplace in
the cell left of the label. This time, select Center Vertically in Container.

--- Page 225 ---
Interface Builder will add a blue line across the middle of our cell. Also
notice that our I-bar has turned blue.
Our label has an intrinsic height and width, so this should be enough to
unambiguously constrain it. Remember, we need only two vertical
constraints and two horizontal constraints, and the intrinsic sizes act as one
constraint in each dimension.
Unfortunately, the dashed box around our label indicates that something’s
still not quite right. If you look at our warnings again, you’ll see that the
view is still misplaced.
Select the Weight label, and then click the Resolve Auto Layout Issues
button. In the pop-up menu, select Update Frames. Note: you could
alternatively select the Editor > Resolve Auto Layout Issues > Update
Frames menu item.
Once that’s done, the orange box should vanish. Our Document Outline
will also show that there are no Auto Layout issues.
Date is going to be similar. However, before we begin, stretch the Date
label so that its right edge is next to the Weight label. You should see a short
blue guideline when you get close. Use that to line up the edges (Figure
3.12).
FIGURE 3.12 Stretching the Date label to fit
Now Control-drag from the Date label to someplace inside the cell but to
the right of the label. Select Trailing Space to Container. Now, Control-drag
from Date to Weight. Select Center Y. Control-drag from Date to Weight
again, this time selecting Horizontal Spacing.
Once we do that, we get all kinds of orange. What happened here? If we
look at the Auto Layout warnings and errors in our Document Outline, it
says that we have content priority ambiguity. The layout engine cannot
fulfill all our constraints. Specifically, it cannot fulfill the content hugging

--- Page 226 ---
constraints for both our Weight and Date labels. Fortunately, both of these
constraints are optional. Unfortunately, they have the same priority. The
system doesn’t know which one to choose.
We want our Weight to remain static and have our Date stretch to fill the
space. So, let’s make Weight’s intrinsic size mandatory. Select the Weight
label and switch to the Size inspector. Set its Content Hugging and its
Content Compression Resistance Priorities to 1000. This means our weight
label will always be the correct size for its content. Of course, this size will
vary depending on the font size and the amount of text—but the layout
engine won’t stretch or shrink it in response to rotations or other resizing
events.
While this looks good, it might not be pixel perfect. The problem with
drawing the constraints this way is that the system will use the current
spacing to determine its constraints. So, if you’re 21 points from the side, it
will set a 21-point constraint, not the standard 20-point constraint.
So, let’s double-check everything. In the Document Outline, expand the
list of constraints. For the Center Y and Baseline alignments, the Constant
should be 0. For the Horizontal spaces, the Constant should be 20 for the
margins and 8 between the labels. However, I typically just click the
Standard checkbox and let the system sort out the exact sizes.
With that done, everything is blue except Date’s frame. Update its frame,
and we’re good to go.
Connecting Our Outlets
Now we need some way to programmatically change our Weight and Date’s
text when we configure the cell. There are two ways of doing this. We could
just add a unique tag to each of the labels. Then, in our view controller, we
could simply search for the labels by their tag number. This is simple, in
that it doesn’t require any extra classes. However, I don’t think it really
communicates the developer’s intent. Four months down the line, we might
not remember what tag 23 meant.
Instead, I like to make custom UITableViewCell subclasses. These
subclasses will have properties for all the UI elements we need access to.
It’s a little more work to set up, but I think it’s a lot cleaner, easier to
understand, and, in the long run, more maintainable.

--- Page 227 ---
Let’s start by creating our new class. In the Project navigator, Control-
click the Views group and select New File... > iOS > Cocoa Touch >
Objective-C class. Make it a subclass of UITableViewCell, and name it
HistoryCell.
We need to declare two outlets for our labels. Unfortunately, we cannot
Control-drag from Interface Builder to our code this time. We have to create
them the old fashioned way—by typing.
Open HistoryCell.h and add the following two lines to the
@interface block:
Click here to view code image
@property (weak, nonatomic) IBOutlet UILabel *weightLabel;
@property (weak, nonatomic) IBOutlet UILabel *dateLabel;
These are simply property declarations; however, we’ve added the
IBOutlet keyword. IBOutlet is simply defined as white space. The
compiler doesn’t see it at all. However, Xcode is smart enough to search for
it and knows that it defines a drag target for Interface Builder.
Also, we’re deliberately putting the outlets in the public interface this
time. When it comes to view controllers, I see a real benefit to hiding away
our interface outlets. We don’t want anything outside our view controller
manipulating them directly. However, for simple views like this, it seems
like an exercise in busywork with no real concrete benefits. These labels
will be part of HistoryTableViewController’s view hierarchy, and
it’s OK for the view controller to modify any part of its hierarchy.
Furthermore, HistoryCells will still be hidden away inside
HistoryTableViewController. So, that’s good enough for me.
OK, let’s wire up our cells. Open Main.storyboard again. Make
sure you’re zoomed in on the History Table View Controller scene, and
select our custom cell. In the Identity inspector, set its class to HistoryCell.
Then, Control-click the cell to bring up its connections HUD. Connect our
dateLabel outlet to our Date label and our weightLabel outlet to our
Weight Label (drag from the circle beside the outlet to the control and let
go).
Now we just need to use these outlets. But, before we can do that, let’s
add some helper methods to let us more easily create properly formatted
weight strings.

--- Page 228 ---
Formatting Weight Strings
Numbers are surprisingly complex. Different parts of the world have
different ways of representing them. In particular, the decimal mark—the
symbol that separates the integer part and the fractional parts of a number—
can change from region to region. Some places use a period. Others use a
comma. The choice of a decimal mark also affects the thousands separator.
When you start representing percentages or currency, it just gets more
complex.
And dates are even worse. There are a number of ways to represent a
date, even in a single region. Some formats spell out the month names or
use abbreviations; others use just numbers and punctuation. Furthermore,
the order of the elements and the exact means of separating them can vary.
Ideally, we would like to internationalize the presentation of numbers and
dates. We’ve already seen this done for dates in Chapter 2, “Our
Application’s Architecture.” We used an NSDateFormatter to produce
localized dates in our WeightEntry’s description method.
Now, we should do the same thing for the weight value. But it’s more
than just using a correctly localized number. We should also create methods
to properly append the correct weight unit as well. Wrapping all this in a
few helper methods will make displaying our weight data and switching
units much easier.
 Note
Localization is a big topic. A full description is outside the
scope of this book. However, we will look at the basics in
Chapter 9, “The Last Mile.”
Open WeightEntry.h, and add the following method declarations just
before the @end directive:
Click here to view code image
+ (NSString*)stringForUnit:(WeightUnit)unit;
+ (NSString*)stringForWeight:(float)weight ofUnit:
(WeightUnit)unit;
+ (NSString*)stringForWeightInLbs:(float)weight inUnit:
(WeightUnit)unit;

--- Page 229 ---
- (float)weightInUnit:(WeightUnit)unit;
- (NSString*)stringForWeightInUnit:(WeightUnit)unit;
Now, switch to WeightEntry.m, and let’s implement the methods.
But, before we do, we need to create a static NSNumberFormatter. Add
the following, just after our LBS_PER_KG constant declaration:
Click here to view code image
static NSNumberFormatter* formatter;
There are two ways to use number formatters. We could use the
localizedStringFromNumber:numberStyle: class method, but
that offers only six predefined styles. We need to customize the default
decimal style a bit, which means we need to create our own
NSNumberFormatter instance.
However, we don’t want to create a new number formatter every time we
display a weight string. Instead, let’s create a static formatter, which we can
then freely access anywhere in the WeightEntry.m file. Unfortunately,
we cannot create a number formatter constant—since there is no way to
instantiate the number formatter at compile time. Instead, we’ll do the next
best thing. We will use a regular static variable and set its value during our
class’s initalize method.
There are actually two class methods that we can use to initialize class-
level resources. One is load, and the other is initialize. They both
have their little quirks and gotchas.
The load method runs early. Very early. In fact, it runs before main().
As a result, the system may not be properly set up yet. For example, we
won’t have an autorelease pool—if we’re using any Objective-C code, we
need to provide our own. Also, other classes may not be properly loaded. In
general, all the frameworks we link to should be loaded. Other classes in
our project may or may not be loaded, and any frameworks that link to our
code will not be loaded.
Another oddity, when we looked at Categories in the bonus chapter,
“Objective-C,” I emphasized how important it was to never, never, ever
override methods in a category. Turns out, there is one exception: load.
Load is not called like other methods.

--- Page 230 ---
The system calls load only if it is implemented in the class or one of the
class’s categories. It will call the class’s load method first and will then
call any of the categories’ load methods. This lets us provide custom
initialization in both our classes and our categories and often makes load an
ideal place to do dangerous things such as dynamically implementing
methods or even replacing existing methods.
initialize runs much later. It is run the first time a class is used. This
means it won’t run if the class is never used. At this point, we have a full
Objective-C runtime available, and all our classes are loaded, so it is a
generally a safer place do our custom initialization. There is one small
catch, however. initialize might get called multiple times.
If you override initialize in a class and then create subclasses of
that class, your initialize method will get called once for the class and
then once for each subclass that doesn’t also override initialize. As a result,
we always want to check our classes before running any code. This is true,
even if we don’t currently plan on making any subclasses. You never know
what the future might hold.
So, let’s add the initialize method as shown here:
Click here to view code image
+ (void)initialize
{
    if (self == [WeightEntry class])
    {
        formatter = [[NSNumberFormatter alloc] init];
        [formatter
setNumberStyle:NSNumberFormatterDecimalStyle];
        [formatter setMinimum:[NSNumber numberWithFloat:0.0f]];
        [formatter setMaximumFractionDigits:2];
    }
}
We start by making sure that the WeightEntry class, and not one of its
subclasses, is indeed calling this. Then we instantiate our number formatter.
We set it to the decimal style and then modify it so that it has a minimum
value of 0.0 and so that it will show our weights to only two decimal places.
With our formatter in place, let’s look at our string methods, one at a
time.

--- Page 231 ---
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - String Methods
+ (NSString*)stringForUnit:(WeightUnit)unit
{
    switch (unit)
    {
        case LBS:
            return @"lbs";
            
        case KG:
            return @"kg";
            
        default:
            [NSException
             raise:NSInvalidArgumentException
             format:@"The value %d is not a valid WeightUnit",
unit];
    }
    
    // This will never be executed.
    return @"";
}
The stringForUnit: method simply takes a WeightUnit value
and returns the corresponding string. If we pass in a value that does not
correspond to one of our defined units, it throws an exception. Note that the
final return is simply added to make the compiler happy. That code cannot
be reached.
Click here to view code image
+ (NSString*)stringForWeight:(float)weight ofUnit:
(WeightUnit)unit
{
    NSString* weightString =
    [formatter stringFromNumber:@(weight)];
    
    NSString* unitString = [WeightEntry stringForUnit:unit];
    
    return [NSString stringWithFormat:@"%@ %@",
            weightString,
            unitString];
}
This method creates a complete weight string. The @(weight) call
converts our floating-point value to an NSNumber object. We then pass the
number object to our number formatter’s stringFromNumber: method.

--- Page 232 ---
This will create a properly localized number string, using the format that we
set in our initialize method.
Next, we call stringForUnit: to get our unit string. We then
combine the two strings with a space between. This will produce results like
“125.32 lbs” or “45.53 kg.”
Click here to view code image
+ (NSString*)stringForWeightInLbs:(float)weight inUnit:
(WeightUnit)unit
{
    float convertedWeight;
    switch (unit)
    {
        case LBS:
            convertedWeight = weight;
            break;
        case KG:
            convertedWeight = [WeightEntry
convertLbsToKg:weight];
            break;
        default:
            [NSException raise:NSInvalidArgumentException
                        format:@"%d is not a valid WeightUnit",
unit];
    }
    
    
    return [WeightEntry stringForWeight:convertedWeight
ofUnit:unit];
}
This method makes it easier to print out strings directly from our
WeightEntry objects. Since our objects store the weight in pounds, this
method will take the weight in pounds and automatically convert it if
necessary.
The code is actually very similar to stringForUnit: We check the
unit type. If it’s LBS, we use the weight value directly. If it’s KG, we
convert it. If it’s anything else, we throw an exception. Once that’s done, we
simply call stringForWeight:ofUnit: to produce the weight string.
So far, we’ve just added class methods. However, we’d like to add
instance methods that let us directly request a weight string from our
WeightEntry objects. We’ll start by adding a method to request the
weight value in a given unit.

--- Page 233 ---
Click here to view code image
- (float)weightInUnit:(WeightUnit)unit
{
    switch (unit)
    {
        case LBS:
            return self.weightInLbs;
            
        case KG:
            return [WeightEntry
convertLbsToKg:self.weightInLbs];
            
        default:
            [NSException raise:NSInvalidArgumentException
                        format:@"The value %d is not a valid
WeightUnit", unit];
    }
    
    // This will never be executed.
    return 0.0f;
}
This is the same basic construction. If the unit is LBS, we return our
weightInLbs directly. If the unit is KG, we convert it and return the
result. Otherwise, we throw an exception.
 Note
We’ve seen the same basic switch statement three times, with
only subtitle variations in the code. When you see this type
of repetition, it’s often a sign that the class needs to be
refactored, in this case, rewriting the class to get rid of the
duplicate switch statements. One solution would be to
provide separate subclasses for the different units (e.g.,
WeightEntryInLBS and WeightEntryInKG).
However, given the size of the class and the relatively small
amount of repetition, I think the cure would be worse than
the disease in this case. I’d rather leave the repetition as is.
With the rest of the code in place, our stringForWeightInUnit:
method ends up being very simple. All the heavy lifting is done by the
methods we defined earlier.

--- Page 234 ---
Click here to view code image
- (NSString*)stringForWeightInUnit:(WeightUnit)unit
{
    return [WeightEntry stringForWeight:[self weightInUnit:unit]
                                 ofUnit:unit];
}
Displaying Our Weights
Now we just need to combine our weight string methods with our new
custom cell. Open HistoryTableViewController.m and at the top
and add an import directive for HistoryCell.h.
#import "HistoryCell.h"
Next, let’s add a private method to configure our cells.
Click here to view code image
- (void)configureCell:(HistoryCell *)cell forIndexPath:
(NSIndexPath *)indexPath
{
    WeightEntry *entry =
    [self.weightHistoryDocument entryAtIndexPath:indexPath];
    cell.weightLabel.text =
    [entry stringForWeightInUnit:getDefaultUnits()];
    cell.dateLabel.text = [NSDateFormatter
                           localizedStringFromDate:entry.date
                           dateStyle:NSDateFormatterShortStyle
                           timeStyle:NSDateFormatterShortStyle];
}
Here, we grab the entry for the given index path. Then we use our new
stringForWeightInUnit: method to get the weight string, using our
getDefaultUnits() function to retrieve the default units. Then we use
a date formatter to create a localized string for our date. It will use the short
style for both the date and the time.
Since the cell configuration is so short, it’s often tempting to put it
directly inside the tableView:cellForRowAtIndexPath: method.
However, this is usually a mistake. In most projects, we will end up needing
to reconfigure cells outside the
tableView:cellForRowAtIndexPath: method. For example, if we

--- Page 235 ---
let users modify entries, then we would need to update the cell content if
that entry was currently being displayed.
Now we just need to call this method. Modify
tableView:cellForRowAtIndexPath: as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (UITableViewCell *)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView
cellForRowAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath
{
    static NSString *CellIdentifier = @"History Cell";
    HistoryCell *cell =
    [tableView dequeueReusableCellWithIdentifier:CellIdentifier
                                    forIndexPath:indexPath];
    
    [self configureCell:cell forIndexPath:indexPath];
    
    return cell;
}
Build and run the application. Our history view should now use our
custom cells, as shown in Figure 3.13.

--- Page 237 ---
FIGURE 3.13 Our new history cells
Entry Detail View
Next we need to set up our Entry Detail View. Currently we have a static
table—but we haven’t yet filled in its contents. We want to use this view to
display a table of data. We’ll have headers on the left with the values on the
right. This is very similar to the layout for our rows in the history view.
Open Main.storyboard and zoom in on the Entry Detail View
Controller scene. You should see the static table from the previous chapter.
Currently it has one section and three rows. Delete two of these rows. You
can select them, either in the editor or in the Document Outline, and then
press the Delete key. We now have a single row to edit. We’ll use this as a
template for all our rows.
To begin with, we don’t want to let users select the row. The easiest way
to disable this is to select the Table View Cell and change its Selection
attribute in the Attributes inspector to None.
Now, drag out a label. Vertically center it in the row’s content area and
align it with the left margin guideline. In the Attributes inspector, set its
Font to Headline and its Text to Max Loss. We’re going to make labels for
weight, date, average, max loss, and max gain. Max loss happens to be the
longest. Using it now will make laying out the later rows easier.
Next, drag out a text field. Line it up so that it is also vertically centered
and aligned with the guideline just to the right of our label. Then stretch it
to the right margin guideline. Set its Font to Subhead and its text to 100.
Right-align the text. Then scroll down to the Control section of the
Attributes inspector, and uncheck the Enabled setting. This will let us
display text but will prevent the users from editing it.
The layout should look like Figure 3.14.

--- Page 238 ---
FIGURE 3.14 Laying out our detail view cell
Why are we using a text field this time? Two reasons. First, I wanted to
show you something new. Second, if we ever decide to expand the app to
make these values editable, we will already have the text fields in place. All
we need to do is enable the relevant text fields and add the code to handle
the edits.
Also, we will eventually want to get rid of the text field’s border—but,
having the border visible will make it easier to work with. So, let’s leave
that alone for now.
Let’s add our constraints. Select the label and click the Pin tool at the
bottom of the editor. In the Add New Constraints section, click the
disclosure view for the left constraint. Make sure the Content View is
selected (it should be the only option), and select Use Standard Value. For
the right constraint, we want the Round Style Test Field (should be the
default) and Use Standard Value. Click the “Add 2 Constraints” button to
add these constraints.
With the label still selected, click the Align tool. Check the Vertical
Center in Container and make sure the value is set to 0. Click the Add 1
Constraint button.
Now select our text field. Use the Pin tool to pin its right side to the
content view using the standard value. Now select both the label and the
text field. In the Alignment tool, check Baselines and make sure the value is
set to 0. Click the Add 1 Constraint button to add this constraint.
Now we want to set the text field’s Border Style to no border (
) and
update its frame. That should clear out all of our warnings and errors. We
have a valid, unambiguous layout.

--- Page 239 ---
Notice that this time we did not have to change our label’s content
hugging. By default, the text field has a content hugging of 250. This is
lower than the label’s 251, so the system will automatically choose to
expand and contract our text field—which is what we want.
We also don’t have to worry about checking the constraint values this
time around. Using the Pin and Align tools guarantee that we will have
exactly the values we want. However, we have to be careful when using
them in complex layouts and make sure they are adding constraints to the
correct views.
Now, let’s add our other rows. In the Document Outline, select the Entry
Detail View Controller scene’s Table View Section. In the Attributes
inspector, change Rows to 3. Interface Builder makes two copies of our
row. It copies everything across—even our constraints.
Now select the Table View and change its Sections attribute to 2. We
should now have two sections with three rows in each. Delete one row from
the top section.
Select the first section and set its Header attribute to Entry Data. Select
the second section and set its header to Monthly Statistics. Now we want to
edit our labels. From top to bottom they should be Weight, Date, Average,
Max Loss, and Max Gain. Update the frames, if necessary. Our completed
table should look like Figure 3.15.

--- Page 240 ---
FIGURE 3.15 Our completed Entry Detail View

--- Page 241 ---
Creating Our Outlets
If we want to set our text field’s values, we need to have outlets that
connect to them. Let’s create those now. With the Entry Detail View
Controller scene still open in Interface Builder, switch to the Assistant
Editor. Make sure EntryDetailViewController.m is open in the
second edit window.
Control-drag from the text fields to the class extension. Create all the
properties as shown here:
Click here to view code image
@property (weak, nonatomic) IBOutlet UITextField
*weightTextField;
@property (weak, nonatomic) IBOutlet UITextField *dateTextField;
@property (weak, nonatomic) IBOutlet UITextField
*averageTextField;
@property (weak, nonatomic) IBOutlet UITextField *lossTextField;
@property (weak, nonatomic) IBOutlet UITextField *gainTextField;
Updating Our View
As we discussed in the previous chapter, we typically pass the data to our
new view controller during the prepareForSegue:sender: method.
We then use the data to update our view during viewWillAppear:. We
already took care of the first step. Let’s do the second.
Let’s start by adding an updateUI method. Switch back to the Standard
Editor and open EntryDetailViewController.m. At the top of the
file, import WeightEntry.h, and then add the following method:
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Private Methods
- (void)updateUI
{
    WeightUnit unit = getDefaultUnits();
    self.weightTextField.text =
    [self.entry stringForWeightInUnit:unit];
    
    self.dateTextField.text =
    [NSDateFormatter localizedStringFromDate:self.entry.date
                                   dateStyle:NSDateFormatterMedi
umStyle
                                   timeStyle:NSDateFormatterShor
tStyle];

--- Page 242 ---
    
}
So far, this looks a lot like our configureCell:forIndexPath:
method. The biggest difference is that we are using the medium date style
instead of the short date style. Also, we’re setting only the weight and date
fields so far. We’ll come back and handle the rest soon.
Now, we need to override viewWillAppear: and call our update
method.
Click here to view code image
- (void)viewWillAppear:(BOOL)animated
{
    [super viewWillAppear:animated];
    [self updateUI];
}
If you run the application and select one of the entries, it will display our
new view. The weight and detail text should be filled in, as expected.
To calculate our monthly statistics, we need more information. That
means we need an additional property. Switch to
EntryDetailViewController.h and add the following property:
Click here to view code image
@property (strong, nonatomic) NSArray *lastMonthsEntries;
Now, switch back to the implementation file. Let’s add the following
code to the end of the updateUI method (after we set the
dateTextField’s text but before the final curly bracket).
Click here to view code image
float average =
[[self.lastMonthsEntries valueForKeyPath:@"@avg.weightInLbs"]
floatValue];
float min =
[[self.lastMonthsEntries valueForKeyPath:@"@min.weightInLbs"]
floatValue];
float max =
[[self.lastMonthsEntries valueForKeyPath:@"@max.weightInLbs"]
floatValue];
float lossFromMax = max - self.entry.weightInLbs;

--- Page 243 ---
NSAssert(lossFromMax >= 0.0f, @"This should always be a non-
negative number");
float gainFromMin = self.entry.weightInLbs - min;
NSAssert(gainFromMin >= 0.0f, @"This should always be a non-
negative number");
self.averageTextField.text =
[WeightEntry stringForWeightInLbs:average inUnit:unit];
self.gainTextField.text =
[WeightEntry stringForWeightInLbs:gainFromMin inUnit:unit];
self.lossTextField.text =
[WeightEntry stringForWeightInLbs:lossFromMax inUnit:unit];
This code assumes that lastMonthsEntries is an array of
WeightEntries. Here, we are using Key-Value Coding’s collection
operators. These operators rely on a specially formatted key path. Normal
key paths act similarly to dot notation. Here, however, our leftmost segment
is a KVC operator—a keyword that begins with an @.
Apple defines a number of collection operators: @count, @average,
@min, @max, and @sum. It also defines a number of union operators:
@distinctUnionOfObjects, @unionOfObjects,
@distinctUnionOfArrays, @unionOfArrays, and
@distinctUnionOfSets.
All KVC operators, except @count, require a right key path. That is,
they require a dot after the keyword, with the property name of the value
the operator will be using. This could be self, to use the object itself.
In our case, we will use @avg.weightInLbs. This will calculate the
average of the weightInLbs property for every item in our array.
@min.weightInLbs returns the minimum weight, while
@max.weightInLbs returns the maximum. These values are returned as
NSNumber objects, so we have to call floatValue to get the underlying
floating-point value.
We do a little more math to calculate how much we’ve gained from the
minimum or lost from the maximum. There are a few assertions, which just
act as sanity checks. Then we use these values to set our text fields. Note
that since we don’t have an entry object to represent our average, max loss,

--- Page 244 ---
or max gain, we’re using the stringForWeightInLbs:InUnit:
class method to create the weight string.
If you run the code, it will actually crash. Our first assertion is triggered.
We haven’t set our array yet, so its value is nil. This means any calls we
make will return nil or 0. Our average, min, and max values are therefore
all equal to 0, and max – self.entry.weightInLBS is a negative
number.
The problem is, we need to pass along an array of entries when we segue
to this scene. Let’s fix that.
Filtering Our Array
Let’s add a method to WeightHistoryDocument that can return a
subset of our entries. Open WeightHistoryDocument.h and declare
the following method just after
enumerateEntriesAscending:withBlock::
Click here to view code image
- (NSArray*)weightEntriesAfter:(NSDate *)startDate
                        before:(NSDate *)endDate;
Next, switch to the .m file and add the following implementation (also
after enumerateEntriesAscending:withBlock:):
Click here to view code image
- (NSArray *)weightEntriesAfter:(NSDate *)startDate
                         before:(NSDate *)endDate
{
    
    NSPredicate *betweenDates =
    [NSPredicate predicateWithBlock:^BOOL(WeightEntry *entry,
                                         NSDictionary *bindings)
{
        return ([entry.date compare:startDate] !=
NSOrderedAscending) &&
        ([entry.date compare:endDate] != NSOrderedDescending);
    }];
    
    return [self.weightHistory
filteredArrayUsingPredicate:betweenDates];
}

--- Page 245 ---
viewWillappear: and viewDidAppear:
The viewWillAppear: and viewDidAppear: methods
can be somewhat confusing. Generally speaking, the system calls
these methods whenever a view controller is used to display
another view controller. This includes displaying modal views,
adding new views to a navigation controller, or switching
between views on a tab bar. The system will even call these
notification methods when a view reappears, such as when
returning from a modal view or when a covering view is popped
off the navigation stack.
Technically, viewWillAppear: and viewDidAppear: are
called whenever our controller’s view is added to the view
hierarchy. viewWillDisappear: and
viewDidDisappear: are called when the view is removed
from the view hierarchy. It has nothing to do with the visual
appearance. The view could be covered. It could be hidden. It
could have an alpha of 0.0. None of that matters.
However, manually adding a view using the addSubview:
method does not trigger these notifications. While this may seem
confusing, it points to a common design problem. If your view
appears onscreen but your view controller’s
viewWillAppear: and viewDidAppear: methods are not
called, you probably have an inconsistent view hierarchy. This
occurs when you add a view to the view hierarchy without
properly adding its view controller to the view controller
hierarchy.
The view and view controller hierarchies are related but separate.
The controller hierarchy is typically smaller, since each
controller will manage a large number of views. On the other
hand, controllers may have views that are not currently in the
view hierarchy. For example, when a navigation or tab controller
moves from one child view controller to the next, it removes the
old controller’s views from the view hierarchy; however, those
controllers are still part of the view controller hierarchy.

--- Page 246 ---
To have a consistent view controller hierarchy, look at each view
controller’s view property. That view’s superview must be
part of the view hierarchy managed by the controller’s
parentViewController. It doesn’t need to be the parent’s
view property, but it must be a view directly created by and
managed by the parent controller.
Most of the time inconsistent hierarchies come from adding a
view to the view hierarchy without adding the controller to the
controller hierarchy. There are a few ways to fix this. Most
simply, you could get rid of the view’s controller and add the
view directly to its superview’s controller. After all, view
controllers already manage a number of views. Adding a property
to a view that may be added and removed dynamically is no
different than adding properties and outlets to other interface
elements.
Alternatively, we could create a custom container view controller
and use it to present our subview’s controller. As the name
suggests, a container view controller manages one or more child
view controllers. We talked about container view controllers in
Chapter 2. UIKit provides a few common container view
controllers, including UINavigationController,
UITabBarController, and UIPageViewController.
However, we’re not limited to those. We can create our own
container view controllers. The UIViewController class
reference has a detailed explanation about creating custom
container view controllers. However, there are four essential
methods (addChildViewController:,
removeFromParentViewController,
willMoveToParentViewController:,
didMoveToParentViewController:) as well as the
childViewControllers property. Outside code should
never call these methods directly. Rather, we should create a
public interface for adding and removing our child view
controllers and then use these methods in our implementation.

--- Page 247 ---
Here, we’re creating an NSPredicate object using a block. Predicates
have a number of uses. One is to filter arrays. When we use the predicate, it
will iterate over the array, calling our block once for each item. If our block
returns YES, then it will include the item in the returned array. If it returns
NO, it will skip the item. Our block code simply checks to make sure each
entry is between the two dates, inclusively.
Now we just need to call this method and pass the results to our detail
view. We could put this code directly in
HistoryTableViewController’s prepareForSegue:sender:
method. But that method can get cluttered fast. Let’s create a private
method to handle all our configuration needs.
Open HistoryTableViewController.m, and add the following
method to the end of our private methods:
Click here to view code image
- (void)configureWeightEntryViewController:
(EntryDetailViewController *)controller
{
    NSIndexPath *selectedPath = [self.tableView
indexPathForSelectedRow];
    WeightEntry *entry =
    [self.weightHistoryDocument entryAtIndexPath:selectedPath];
    
    NSCalendar *calendar =
    [[NSCalendar alloc]
initWithCalendarIdentifier:NSGregorianCalendar];
    
    NSDateComponents *dateComponents =
    [calendar components:NSYearCalendarUnit |
NSMonthCalendarUnit |
     NSDayCalendarUnit fromDate:entry.date];
    
    [dateComponents setMonth:[dateComponents month] - 1];
    NSDate *lastMonth = [calendar
dateFromComponents:dateComponents];
    
    controller.entry =entry;
    controller.lastMonthsEntries =
    [self.weightHistoryDocument weightEntriesAfter:lastMonth
                                            before:entry.date];
}
The beginning should be familiar. We get the index path of the currently
selected row, and then we grab the weight entry for that index path. What

--- Page 248 ---
comes next requires a bit of explaining. Basically we want to calculate the
date exactly one month before our entry’s date. We will then pass along
both the current entry and all the entries in the month leading up to it—
including the current entry.
However, date arithmetic gets hard fast. Different months have a different
number of days, not to mention issues like leap years and leap seconds. And
that’s just the Gregorian calendar. Different calendars may also track things
differently.
Therefore, instead of trying to do the date calculation ourselves, we will
use an NSCalendar object to handle all these messy details. We start by
instantiating a Gregorian calendar object. The Gregorian calendar is simply
the 12-month, January to December calendar most of us use every day.
We then use the calendar to get the date components for our entry date.
Specifically, we ask for the year, month, and day. We can then modify these
date components. In our code, we decrease the month component by one
month. The calendar object is smart enough to adjust the year component as
well, if necessary. Finally, we use the new components to calculate a new
date. Note, since we don’t use the time components, the new date object
will be set to midnight of the specified day.
We use the calculated date and our entry’s date to get our filtered array of
dates. We then pass both the entry and the filtered list to our incoming detail
view.
Now, we just need to call this method. Modify
prepareForSegue:sender: as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (void)prepareForSegue:(UIStoryboardSegue *)segue sender:
(id)sender
{
    if ([segue.identifier isEqualToString:@"Entry Detail
Segue"])
    {
        [self configureWeightEntryViewController:
         segue.destinationViewController];
    }
}
If you run the app and select our sample entries, you will see that the
statistics data is now filled in. Notice that we always get all the entries in

--- Page 249 ---
the month leading up to our selected date. So, if you pick the top date, you
will get the stats for all three entries (Figure 3.16). If you pick the bottom
date, there are no earlier dates, so the average will be equal to the weight,
and the loss values will both be 0.

--- Page 251 ---
FIGURE 3.16 The completed detail view
Adding and Deleting Entries
We also need a way to add and delete our entries. Let’s look at deleting
first, since it’s the easiest.
Open HistoryTableViewController.m and navigate to the
viewDidLoad method. Notice the commented code that says,
“Uncomment the following line to display an Edit button in the navigation
bar?” That code will add an edit button to our navigation bar. The only
problem is, it will add it to the right side. We already have a button on the
right side, so we want our edit button on the left.
Instead, add the following code to viewDidLoad:
Click here to view code image
self.navigationItem.leftBarButtonItem = self.editButtonItem;
The edit button is provided by the system. When the button is tapped, it
puts our table into the editing mode. Run the application, and tap the edit
button. Delete icons will appear before each of our rows. If you tap one, a
red delete button will slide in from the right (Figure 3.17). However,
tapping the delete button does not do anything.

--- Page 253 ---
FIGURE 3.17 Editing mode
Scroll down until you find the commented-out
tableView:commitEditingStyle:forRowAtIndexPath:
method. Uncomment that method.
The current method checks the editing style and then has a stub for each
style. As you can see, there are two editing styles that can be triggered from
editing mode: inserts and deletes. In our app, we will never get an insert
method. To trigger that, we’d have to create a row with a
UITableViewCellEditingStyleInsert editing style. I find that,
unless your table will only ever display a limited number of items, adding
an “add entry” row is just more trouble than it’s worth. Our plus button in
the navigation bar will work better, since we won’t need to worry about it
scrolling off the screen.
So, we need to worry only about the
UITableViewCellEditingStyleDelete branch. Currently, it
contains a comment telling us to delete the item from our data source. Then
it removes the row from the table. Actually, we only need to delete the item
from our data source. We’ve already written the code to update our table
whenever the data source changes.
So, modify the method as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (void)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView
commitEditingStyle:(UITableViewCellEditingStyle)editingStyle
forRowAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath
{
    if (editingStyle == UITableViewCellEditingStyleDelete) {
        [self.weightHistoryDocument
deleteEntryAtIndexPath:indexPath];
    }   
    else if (editingStyle == UITableViewCellEditingStyleInsert)
{
        // Create a new instance of the appropriate class,
insert
        // it into the array, and add a new row to the table
view
    }   
}
Run the application again. Now, when you delete rows, they are actually
deleted from the screen. Also note, there is a slight bug. If you happen to

--- Page 254 ---
put the table into edit mode while a new row is being inserted, you can end
up with blank rows in your table. This is hard to trigger, and it shouldn’t
occur during normal use. In later chapters we will disable the user interface
when loading and syncing our data, which will prevent the problem.
Now we just need to add our entries.
Laying Out the Add Entry View
Open Main.storyboard and zoom in on the Add Entry View Controller
scene. We want to start by adding a title to the top. This is our most
complex layout yet, so let’s take it in steps. Drag out a label, and set the
following:
1. Pin the left and right sides to the View and the top to the Top Layout
Guide using the standard value.
2. Set its Text attribute to Add a New Weight Entry.
3. Center align the text.
4. Set its font to Headline.
5. Update the frame, if necessary.
Now drag out another label. Use the guidelines to position it against the
right margin and below our title. Give it the following settings:
1. Pin the left side to the View using the standard value.
2. Select the Vertical Space constraint between the two labels. Set its
Relationship attribute to Greater Than or Equal.
3. Set the label’s Text attribute to Weight.
4. Set the Font to Subhead.
Since our vertical constraint is now an inequality, we need more
constraints to unambiguously define our position. Control-drag between the
Weight label and our title label. Create a second Vertical Space constraint.
Select the new constraint and, in the Attributes inspector, set the following:
1. Set its Constant by checking the Standard box.
2. Set the Relationship to Less Than or Equal.
3. Set the Priority to 250.
The first vertical constraint means our Weight label will never be closer
to our Headline than the standard distance. The second constraint says that

--- Page 255 ---
it will try to stay as close to the standard distance as possible—but it’s a
relatively low priority, letting it move further down the screen if necessary.
Next, drag out a text field and position it next to our Weight label. Set it
up as shown here:
1. Pin the left side to our Weight label and the right side to the View
using the standard value.
2. Create a vertical constraint between the text field and our title label,
using the standard spacing, greater than or equal relationship, and a
priority of 1000.
3. Create a second vertical constraint between the text field and our title
label, using the standard spacing, less than or equal relationship, and a
priority of 250.
4. Select both the Weight label and the text field. Align their baselines.
5. Set the text field’s Font to Body.
6. Set the Clear Button attribute to Appears while editing.
7. Set its Keyboard attribute to Decimal Pad.
8. Update the frames, as necessary.
This should create a label and text field pair. The text field will be nicely
positioned next to the label and will shrink and stretch horizontally to fill
the screen. The pair’s position beneath the title is determined by the taller of
the two. Initially this is the text field—but that could change (e.g., if we
later changed the text field to a borderless text field or greatly increased the
label’s font).
We’ve also set the text field to use a number pad for entering data. This
lets us type any numbers, plus the period and a Delete key. We’ve also
enabled the clear button when the text field is being edited. This lets the
user quickly clear the content of the text field and start over.
Run the app, and press the plus button to bring up this view. Make sure
everything adjusts properly as you rotate between landscape and portrait.
Tap the text field, and the number pad should come up. We can enter
numbers and delete or clear the numbers, but we don’t have any way to
dismiss the number pad. We’ll fix that shortly.

--- Page 256 ---
Making Room for the Keyboard
Tapping the text field will automatically display the specified
keyboard. The system slides the keyboard up from the bottom,
covering the lower portion of your content. This will not trigger
any Auto Layout or Autoresizing behaviors (the view’s size
remains unchanged, and the bottom portion is simply covered).
We need to make sure our users can see the selected text field
and reach the controls. This can create problems, especially in
landscape orientation, since the keyboard will cover most of the
screen. One option is to deliberately position all the controls so
that they are still visible even in landscape orientation. However,
this has two limitations: It makes the view appear somewhat top-
heavy, and it’s possible only for the simplest views.
Most of the time, you will need to manually reposition or resize
the controls (typically using a scroll view) so that the selected
control is visible. The keyboard sends out a number of
notifications that you can use to make these modifications:
UIKeyboardWillShowNotification,
UIKeyboardDidShowNotification,
UIKeyboardWillHideNotification, and
UIKeyboardDidHideNotification.
Note: if you use a static table view to lay out your forms, the
view will automatically scroll as necessary to avoid the
keyboard. If we use a custom view inside a scroll view, we will
have to code this behavior ourselves.
For the Health Beat application, our
AddEntryViewController works well in portrait
orientation. In landscape, the date text field may be partially
covered, depending on the font size. We will fix this next chapter
when we introduce custom transitions and animation.
Repeat this procedure to create a second label and text field pair. This
time, the label’s text should be Date. The Date label’s two vertical
constraints should be drawn between it and the Weight label, while the Date
text field’s two vertical constraints should be drawn between it and the

--- Page 257 ---
Weight text field. Also, leave the Date’s Keyboard as Default, and change
its Return Key to Done. This will give us the standard keyboard but will
change the appearance of the Return key to make it more appropriate for
our app. Otherwise, all the settings are the same.
To make the Return key dismiss our keyboard, Control-click the second
text field. Then drag from the “Did End on Exit” Sent event to the Add
Entry View Controller, and select doneEditing: from the pop-up HUD.
At this point, we should have no warnings or errors with our layout. The
views should adjust nicely as we rotate from landscape to portrait. We can
select either of the text fields, and we get a different keyboard for each. The
only problem is, the layout looks a bit odd. It would be nice if we could
align the two text fields.
Now, we could easily hard code in a value—but since we’re using Auto
Layout, let’s do something a bit more dynamic. We will modify our
horizontal constraints between the labels and the text fields, similar to how
we set the paired vertical constraints earlier. This will let our layout adapt,
even if we change our labels’ text. That could be handy, for example, when
translating the app to other languages.
Let’s start by making the text fields an equal width. Select both text
fields. In the Pin tool, check the Equal Widths, and create the constraint.
Now, let’s start working on the Weight label and text field.
1. Select the Horizontal Spacing constraint between the label and the
text field.
2. Set its Relationship to Greater Than or Equal. Make sure its Constant
is set to the standard value.
3. Create a second horizontal constraint.
4. Select the new constraint and set its Relationship to Less Than or
Equal.
5. Set its Constant to the standard value.
6. Set its Priority to 250.
7. Select the text field. In the Size inspector, set its Content Hugging
priority to 100.
This gives us the following. The vertical space between the text field and
the label has a fixed minimum size, but can grow larger, if necessary.

--- Page 258 ---
However, the text field’s hugging constraint has a lower priority, so it will
be resized first, if possible. Repeat these steps for the Date label and text
field, and resize all the frames in the view controller. This should give us an
unambiguous layout with no warnings or errors. The text fields should be
perfectly aligned and should be 8 points away from our Weight label—with
a slightly longer distance between the Date label and its text field. When
you run the app, it should rotate nicely.
Let’s add Save and Cancel buttons to the bottom of the screen. Generally
you want the safer option closer to the bottom-right corner. This is just
playing the odds. Most people hold their phones in their right hand. The
button in the bottom-right corner is the one most likely to be pressed by
accident. In our case, canceling is safer than saving, so it goes on the right.
Drag out two buttons. Align one with the guidelines in the bottom-left
corner. Align the other with the guidelines in the bottom right. Set the left
button’s title to Save and the right button’s to Cancel.
Then set the following:
1. Pin the Save button’s left side to the View, its right side to the Button,
and its bottom to the Bottom Layout Guide using the standard
spacing.
2. Pin the Cancel button’s right side to the View and its bottom to the
Bottom Layout Guide using the standard spacing.
3. Select both buttons, and pin their widths equal.
4. Update both frames.
The buttons will now resize automatically to fill the bottom of the screen
with a nice space between them. Run the app again and make sure
everything looks right.

--- Page 259 ---
 Note
We deliberately created a highly dynamic layout using a
large number of constraints. This has the advantage of
automatically adjusting should the relative size of any of our
user elements change. However, we could simplify the
constraints by making a few assumptions. For example, it’s
probably safe to assume that our text field will always be
taller than our label. Also, if you’re having trouble getting the
layout to work, try downloading the sample code from the
book’s site
(www.freelancemadscience.com/ios7_source/
), and go through the user interface, comparing your
constraints to the sample code.
Updating the Text Fields
Now, let’s set up the view’s contents. We’re not passing any data to this
view when it loads. However, we still want to set the date to the current date
and time. We also want to select the weight text field so that the user can
start entering data immediately.
With Main.storyboard still open to the Add Entry View Controller
scene, switch to the Assistant Editor. Control-drag from the text fields to the
class extension to create the following three outlets:
Click here to view code image
@property (weak, nonatomic) IBOutlet UITextField
*weightTextField;
@property (weak, nonatomic) IBOutlet UITextField *dateTextField;
@property (weak, nonatomic) IBOutlet UIButton *saveButton;
Switch to the Standard Editor. This time open
AddEntryViewController.h. Import WeightUnits.h, and then
add three properties to the public interface.
Click here to view code image
@property (assign, nonatomic, readonly) WeightUnit units;
@property (assign, nonatomic, readonly) float weight;
@property (strong, nonatomic, readonly) NSDate *date;

--- Page 260 ---
This will allow outside code to access, but not modify, these values.
However, we also want to declare them as readwrite in the private class
extension, so we can modify them internally. Switch to
AddEntryViewController.m, and insert the following properties into
the class extension:
Click here to view code image
@property (assign, nonatomic, readwrite) WeightUnit units;
@property (assign, nonatomic, readwrite) float weight;
@property (strong, nonatomic, readwrite) NSDate *date;
We aren’t passing any data to this view controller. Instead, we should set
up our default values when the controller first loads. Modify
viewDidLoad as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (void)viewDidLoad
{
    [super viewDidLoad];
    self.date = [NSDate date];
    self.weight = 0.0;
    self.units = getDefaultUnits();
}
Next, we want to update the user interface when the view appears. Just
like the EntryDetailViewController, let’s create an updateUI
method to do the real work. Add this code to the bottom of
AddEntryViewController.m.
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Private Methods
- (void)updateUI
{
    [self updateWeightText];
    [self updateDateText];
    [self enableSaveButton];
}
The update logic gets a little complex, so we’re going to split it into three
separate functions. Let’s add them as private methods.
Click here to view code image
- (void)updateWeightText
{

--- Page 261 ---
    if (self.weight == 0.0)
    {
        self.weightTextField.text = @"";
    }
    else
    {
        self.weightTextField.text =
        [NSNumberFormatter
         localizedStringFromNumber:@(self.weight)
         numberStyle:NSNumberFormatterDecimalStyle];
    }
}
The updateWeightText method just checks to see whether our
weight is set to 0.0. If it is, it clears out the text field. If not, it fills in the
text field using a decimal style number formatter.
Click here to view code image
- (void)updateDateText
{
    if (self.date == nil)
    {
        self.dateTextField.text = @"";
    }
    else
    {
        self.dateTextField.text =
        [NSDateFormatter
         localizedStringFromDate:self.date
         dateStyle:NSDateFormatterMediumStyle
         timeStyle:NSDateFormatterShortStyle];
        self.dateTextField.textColor =
        [UIColor blackColor];
    }
}
updateDateText is very similar. Here, we check to see whether our
date property is nil. If it is, we clear the date text field. If not, we fill the
date text field using the medium date style and the short time style. We also
set the date field’s text color to black. We will be changing the text color
later—this line guarantees that the text color gets reset to the default color if
we have a valid date.
Click here to view code image
- (void)enableSaveButton
{

--- Page 262 ---
    BOOL enabled = YES;
    enabled &= (![self.weightTextField.text
isEqualToString:@""]);
    enabled &= (![self.dateTextField.text isEqualToString:@""]);
    self.saveButton.enabled = enabled;
}
This method calculates whether both the weight and date text fields have
a valid entry. If they both have valid data, it enables the save button. If they
don’t, it disables the button. This prevents the user from saving data unless
we have a valid weight and date.
Now we just need to call these methods. After viewDidLoad, add the
following viewWillAppear: method:
Click here to view code image
- (void)viewWillAppear:(BOOL)animated
{
    [super viewWillAppear:animated];
    [self updateUI];
    [self.weightTextField becomeFirstResponder];
}
Here, we simply call our new updateUI method. Then we call the
weight text field’s becomeFirstResponder method. This will assign
our text field first responder status, letting it receive keyboard events. It will
also display the keyboard.

--- Page 263 ---
First Responder
We talked a bit about responders in Chapter 1. Our application
uses the responder chain to respond to events. To participate in
the responder chain, an object must be a subclass of
UIResponder. All views, view controllers, the application, and
even the app delegate are subclasses (either directly or indirectly)
of UIResponder—so they can all be part of the responder
chain.
For touch events, the procedure is simple. We use hit testing to
determine the topmost view that was tapped. That view either
handles the event or passes the event on up the responder chain.
The responder chain then hands the event from view to
superview, when necessary making a detour to the view’s
controller, until it finally reaches the window, the application and
the app delegate. This gives us a lot of freedom to determine
where and how our events are processed. We can handle them in
the view, in the view controller, or at the application or app
delegate level.
The First Responder is a related topic. Unlike touch events,
there’s no way to calculate where keyboard or motion events
should go. Instead, we select the first responder for these events
using becomeFirstResponder and
resignFirstResponder.
Most of the time we will be calling these methods on text fields
and text views. becomeFirstResponder selects the text
field, placing the cursor in the text field and bringing up the
keyboard. It also sets the text field as the first responder for any
keyboard or motion events. resignFirstResponder
deselects the text field and dismisses the keyboard.
Not all UIResponder subclasses can become first responder.
Two other methods help determine first responder status:
canBecomeFirstResponder and
canResignFirstResponder. By default,
canBecomeFirstResponder returns NO, and
canResignFirstResponder returns YES. Obviously,

--- Page 264 ---
UITextField and UITextView override
canBecomeFirstResponder to return YES. We can
override these methods in our own classes as well. However,
that’s not enough to do text input. If we want to enable simple
text input, our view must also adopt both the UIKeyInput and
UITextInputTraints protocols.
Run the app and bring up the scene. The date text field should be filled in
with the current date and time. The weight text field should be empty but
selected and waiting for text. The keyboard should be visible. We cannot
see the Save button, but it will be disabled, at least until we enter weight
data.
However, clearly we need some way to dismiss the keyboard. Often, I
like to have the keyboard dismissed when the user taps the Return key—
however, our number pad doesn’t have a Return key. We will have to add
our own Done button in an inputAccessoryView.
Adding an Input Accessory View
UIViewResponder defines two input properties: the inputView and
the inputAccessoryView. The inputView is the view that the
responder will display as a custom keyboard. If it is set to nil, the
responder simply displays the default keyboard. The
inputAccessoryView is displayed above the keyboard. Typically this
is a toolbar with one or more buttons on it. If it is set to nil, the system
does not display any accessory views. Both of these properties are set to nil
by default, and both are defined as readonly for UIResponder.
Fortunately, for both the UITextView and UITextField, these
properties are re-declared as readwrite. This lets us easily set our own
custom keyboards or keyboard accessories.
For this project, we’re going to add a simple keyboard accessory. I want
to lay out the accessory in Interface Builder. Unfortunately, it’s not part of
the storyboard—and we cannot have free-floating views in our storyboards.
We can, however, have them in nib files. So, let’s start by adding a new nib
file to our project.
Control-click the Controllers group in the Project navigator, select New
File... > iOS > User Interface > Empty, and click Next. Set the Device

--- Page 265 ---
Family to iPhone. Click Next again. Name it AddEntryAccessory and click
Create.
This will create an empty nib file. Notice that the user interface is
somewhat different than when editing storyboards. The Document Outline
is gone. Instead we have a dock. It’s similar, but instead of showing all the
scenes in our storyboard, it just shows the items in this particular nib. Right
now it only has our placeholder objects. The First Responder, which we
discussed in Chapter 1, and the File’s Owner.
The File’s Owner is our link to the outside world. It is not created by the
nib. It already exists in our code, and acts as the bridge between our code
and the objects in the nib.
Select the File’s Owner icon. You can expand the dock to see the icon’s
names, if necessary. Then switch to the Identity inspector. It is currently set
as an NSObject. Let’s change its custom class to
AddEntryViewController. Unfortunately, sometimes Xcode doesn’t
properly update the list of custom classes in the drop-down menu. If
AddEntryViewController isn’t listed, you can either type it in
(which can be a bit difficult due to autocomplete’s “helpfulness”), or you
can close the project and reopen it. That should force Interface Builder to
properly update its list of custom classes.
This setting does not change anything. As I said earlier, our File’s Owner
will already exist before the nib loads. However, by telling Interface Builder
the File’s Owner type, we’re able to set actions and outlets.
This may also seem a bit odd. Our AddEntryViewController will
now be associated with at least two separate nib files. The storyboard will
create at least one nib file, which will lay out most of the view’s contents.
Now, our new nib file will load supplementary views—things that are not
normally part of the storyboard layout, but still need to be associated with
the controller.
As long as there is no overlap between the two sets of outlets, there’s no
problem. We can load the storyboard and our nib separately. Each one will
set up and configure their own views and outlets.
Next, drag out a toolbar from the Object library and place it in the editor
window. You can see the toolbar is added as a top-level object in our nib. As
we saw last chapter, after our nib loads, all the top-level objects are

--- Page 266 ---
autoreleased. They will be deleted from memory unless something in our
code refers to them. Typically that means assigning them to one of our
File’s Owner’s outlets.
Open the Assistant editor. It should automatically bring up
AddEntryViewController.m. Control-drag from the toolbar to our
class extension to create the following outlet.
Click here to view code image
@property (strong, nonatomic) IBOutlet UIToolbar
*accessoryToolbar;
Now let’s lay out our toolbar. It already has a single button named Item.
However, we really want the button on the right side. Drag a Flexible Space
Bar Button Item from the Object library and place it to the left of our Item
button. The Item button should automatically slide to the right. Double-
click the item button and type Done. Our toolbar should now look like
Figure 3.18.
FIGURE 3.18 Our accessory view
Next, Control-click the Done button and drag down into our code.
Position the cursor below our didReceiveMemoryWarning method,
and let go. Name the action doneEditing. Now modify the
doneEditing: method as shown.
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Action Methods
- (IBAction)doneEditing:(id)sender {
    if ([self.weightTextField isFirstResponder])
    {
        [self weightEditingDone];
    }
    
    if ([self.dateTextField isFirstResponder])
    {
        [self dateEditingDone];

--- Page 267 ---
    }
}
We start by checking to see which text field is currently the first
responder. Then we close a corresponding ...Done method for that text
field. Now we just need to add these methods to the bottom of our private
methods.
Click here to view code image
- (void)weightEditingDone
{
    self.weight = [self.weightTextField.text floatValue];
    [self updateUI];
    [self.weightTextField resignFirstResponder];
}
Here, we start by converting our weight text field’s text into a floating-
point value, and assigning that to our weight. Then we update our user
interface and resign first responder status—dismissing the keyboard.
Now, since we are using a highly restricted keyboard, the user input will
almost always be a valid floating-point number. The only thing the user can
mess up is the decimal point. They could, in theory, enter .....04..20.32. or
something similar. floatValue will do its best to interpret anything the
user throws at it. If it cannot make sense of the gibberish, it will simply
return 0.0. Since we are immediately updating our user interface, this will
cause the text field to clear, making it obvious that the user needs to try
again.
Click here to view code image
- (void)dateEditingDone
{
    [self updateUI];
    [self.dateTextField resignFirstResponder];
}
The date editing method is even simpler. Here, we just update the UI and
dismiss our keyboard. We’re done. Well, not really. Entering dates is a
rather complex and difficult topic. We’ll be handling it in a bit.
Now, let’s just add our input accessory view to our text fields. Add
another private method, as shown below:

--- Page 268 ---
Click here to view code image
- (void)setupInputAccessories
{
    UINib *nib =
    [UINib nibWithNibName:@"AddEntryAccessory" bundle:nil];
    
    [nib instantiateWithOwner:self options:nil];
    
    NSAssert(self.accessoryToolbar != nil,
             @"We should have a valid input accessory toolbar");
    NSAssert(self.weightTextField != nil,
             @"we should have a valid weight text field");
    NSAssert(self.dateTextField != nil,
             @"we should have a valid date text field");
    
    self.weightTextField.inputAccessoryView =
self.accessoryToolbar;
    self.dateTextField.inputAccessoryView =
self.accessoryToolbar;
}
We start by creating a UINib object for our nib file. Then we load the
nib, passing in self as the File’s Owner. There are several different ways
to load nib files. This one has the advantage of caching the nib’s contents.
It’s probably not going to make a big difference to our application’s speed
or memory usage—but we might end up loading the nib multiple times
during our application’s lifetime. We may as well cache it.
Next, we have a series of asserts—we just want to verify that our
accessory bar and text field all exist. If any of these fail, they will throw an
exception and the app will crash.
Finally, we assign our new toolbar to our text fields’
inputAccessoryView properties.
We just need to call this method from viewDidLoad. Add the
following line to the bottom of viewDidLoad, after we assign our units
but before the closing curly bracket.
Click here to view code image
[self setupInputAccessories];
Now run the app. When you bring up the Add Entry view, our new
accessory bar should appear above the keyboard (Figure 3.19). Try entering
a valid weight and tap the Done button. The keyboard should disappear and

--- Page 269 ---
the Save button will be enabled. Try entering an invalid weight or clearing
the date. The Save button will be disabled.

--- Page 271 ---
FIGURE 3.19 Our accessory view
Entering Dates
How are we going to let the user enter dates? We could force them to enter
a specifically formatted date string—but that doesn’t lead to a very friendly
user interface. Alternatively, we could replace the default keyboard with a
date picker, and grab the results directly from the picker. That works well—
but there’s actually an approach that I like even better.
The Foundation framework provides a very powerful data detection tool.
The NSDataDetector class is a subclass of
NSRegularExpression. It is designed to detect a wide range of data
elements in text. For example, we can use it to detect phone numbers,
addresses, hyperlinks, flight numbers, or even dates.
We will use a data detector to find dates in our user’s string. If the string
is a date string, we will use it to calculate the date. If it isn’t, we will display
the text in red and change the Done button’s title to Cancel. If the user
presses Cancel, we will reset the date to the last selected date and time.
Since we’re going to change the Done button’s text, we need an outlet to
our button. Open AddEntryAccessory.xib and switch to the
Assistant editor. Control-drag from the Done button to create the following
outlet in AddEntryViewController.m’s class extension.
Click here to view code image
@property (weak, nonatomic) IBOutlet UIBarButtonItem
*accessoryDoneButton;
Switch back to the Standard editor, and open
AddEntryViewController.m again. Let’s add a couple additional
private methods. The first one will determine if a string is a properly
formatted date string.
Click here to view code image
- (NSDate *)dateFromString:(NSString *)dateString
{
    NSError *dateDetectionError;
    NSDataDetector *dateDetector =
    [NSDataDetector dataDetectorWithTypes:NSTextCheckingTypeDate
                                    error:&dateDetectionError];
    
    // Trim off any white space at the beginning or end of our
string

--- Page 272 ---
    dateString =
    [dateString stringByTrimmingCharactersInSet:
     [NSCharacterSet whitespaceAndNewlineCharacterSet]];
    
    NSRange allText = NSMakeRange(0, [dateString length]);
    
    NSTextCheckingResult *result =
    [dateDetector firstMatchInString:dateString
                             options:0
                               range:allText];
    
    // If our string is a date string, return the date
    if (NSEqualRanges(result.range, allText))
    {
        return result.date;
    }
    
    // If not, return nil
    return nil;
}
We start by creating our data detector, and we set it to detect dates. Note
that the type argument is a bitmask. We could combine multiple
NSTextCheckingType values, but we are only interested in dates here.
Then we trim the white space off the beginning and end of our string. We
calculate the NSRange for our entire, newly trimmed string, and we check
to see if we find any dates.
If the range of the first date we find is the same as the range for our
string, we have a match. This means, there could be a valid date buried
somewhere in our string, but we’d consider it a failure. In order to get
unambiguous results, we only count the user’s input as a match if the entire
string is a single date value.
If we’ve found a date, we return it. Otherwise we return nil.
Click here to view code image
- (void)setDateStatusForString:(NSString *)dateString
{
    // if it's an empty string, we will simply use the current
date
    if ([dateString isEqualToString:@""])
    {
        self.dateTextField.textColor = [UIColor redColor];
        self.accessoryDoneButton.title = @"Cancel";
        return;
    }

--- Page 273 ---
    
    if ([self dateFromString:dateString])
    {
        self.dateTextField.textColor = [UIColor darkTextColor];
        self.accessoryDoneButton.title = @"Done";
    }
    else
    {
        self.dateTextField.textColor = [UIColor redColor];
        self.accessoryDoneButton.title = @"Cancel";
    }
}
This method sets the text color and Done button text based on the
dateString argument. First it checks to see if we have a valid date
string. If we do, it sets the text color to the default darkTextColor and
the button’s title to Done. If we don’t it sets the text color to red and the
button’s title to Cancel.
Now, to use these methods, we need to set our view controller as the text
field’s delegate. Let’s start by adopting the delegate protocol. Still in
AddEntryViewController.m, scroll up to the class extension, and
modify the @interface line as shown below:
Click here to view code image
@interface AddEntryViewController () <UITextFieldDelegate>
Now, we need to set ourselves as the text field’s delegate. Open
Main.storyboard. Zoom in on our Add Entry View Controller scene.
Control-click the date text field to bring up the connections HUD. Then
drag from the delegate’s circle to our view controller icon (either in the
dock or in the Document Outline). This sets our controller as that view’s
delegate.
Now we just need to implement a couple of delegate methods. I
recommend adding them after the Action Methods section.
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - UITextFieldDelegate Methods
- (BOOL)textField:(UITextField *)textField
shouldChangeCharactersInRange:(NSRange)range
replacementString:(NSString *)string
{
    NSString *potentialDateString =

--- Page 274 ---
    [textField.text stringByReplacingCharactersInRange:range
                                            withString:string];
    [self setDateStatusForString:potentialDateString];
    return YES;
}
This method will be called whenever the user makes any changes to our
text field. This is a “should” method, so we can return YES or NO. If we
return YES, the change occurs. If we return NO, then the change is canceled.
This is one of the easiest ways to filter user input into a text field.
Here, however, we aren’t interested in filtering. We simply want to be
alerted to any changes. Whenever a change occurs, we take the change and
apply it to the current string value. This gives us the value that the text field
will have once the change is accepted. We then call
setDateStatusForString: to set our button name and text color
based on that string. Then we return YES to accept the change.
Click here to view code image
- (BOOL)textFieldShouldClear:(UITextField *)textField
{
    self.accessoryDoneButton.title = @"Cancel";
    return YES;
}
The second UITextFieldDelegate method simply sets the Done
button’s title to “Cancel” whenever the user presses the clear button.
Finally, make the following changes to our dateEditingDone
method.
Click here to view code image
- (void)dateEditingDone
{
    NSDate *date = [self
dateFromString:self.dateTextField.text];
   
    if (date) {
        self.date = date;
    }
    
    [self updateUI];
    [self.dateTextField resignFirstResponder];
}

--- Page 275 ---
Here, we start by grabbing the date from our text field’s text. If we have a
valid date, we assign it to self.date. Then we update our UI as before.
Run the application and try to enter date values. Notice that you can enter
dates in a number of different formats. You can use the mm/dd/yy format.
You could type it out in words or abbreviations. You can even use phrases
like “today in the morning” or “yesterday afternoon.”
It’s very powerful and moderately amazing. Not perfect, however. I’d
probably add a few pre-processing steps. For example, I wish it would
detect the phrase “now.” But, I’ll leave that as an exercise for the reader.
Adding the Units Button
Now, let’s add a button to change the units. However, instead of just adding
a button anywhere on the screen, let’s place it inside the weight text field.
And let’s have the button toggle between pounds and kilograms.
Let’s start by creating the button. We need a button that isn’t already part
of any view hierarchy. We could programmatically create it—but, again, I
like to use Interface Builder whenever possible. Just like the input
accessory, we cannot have free-floating buttons in our storyboard—but we
can put it in a nib file.
And, conveniently, we already have a nib file associated with the correct
view controller. Open AddEntryAccessory.xib. Drag a button from
the library and place it somewhere beneath our tab bar. Change its title to
lbs. Switch to the Size inspector and change its height to 17 points and its
width to 25 points.
Now, open the Assistant Editor and Control-drag our new button down to
AddEntryViewController.m’s class extension. Add a new outlet, as
shown:
Click here to view code image
@property (strong, nonatomic) IBOutlet UIButton *unitButton;
Now our button will automatically get assigned to this outlet when our
nib is loaded. However, we also want the button to trigger an action.
Control-drag again, but this time drag down to the bottom of the Action
methods. Create the following action:

--- Page 276 ---
Click here to view code image
- (IBAction)unitButtonTapped:(id)sender {
}
Switch back to the Standard editor and open
AddEntryViewController.m again. At the top of the file, import
WeightEntry.h. Then add the following code to the end of
setupInputAccessories, just before its closing curly bracket.
Click here to view code image
NSString *unitString = [WeightEntry stringForUnit:self.units];
[self.unitButton setTitle:unitString
forState:UIControlStateNormal];
self.weightTextField.rightViewMode = UITextFieldViewModeAlways;
self.weightTextField.rightView = self.unitButton;
We start by getting the unit string for our current units. Then we set that
string as the button’s title. Finally we set the text field to always display our
button, and add our button to the right side of the text field.
Now, implement unitButtonTapped: as shown:
Click here to view code image
- (IBAction)unitButtonTapped:(id)sender {
    
    if (self.units == LBS)
    {
        self.units = KG;
    }
    else
    {
        self.units = LBS;
    }
    
    NSString *unitString = [WeightEntry
stringForUnit:self.units];
    [self.unitButton setTitle:unitString
forState:UIControlStateNormal];
}
We’re just checking the current value of self.unit, and switching it
from LBS to KG or from KG to LBS as necessary. Then we update our
button’s title to match.
Run the application. You should now be able to tap on the unit button to
toggle between lbs and kg (Figure 3.20).

--- Page 278 ---
FIGURE 3.20 Adding the unit button

--- Page 279 ---
UIControls and State
Both setTitle:forState: and
setTitleColor:forState: refer to the button’s state.
Every control has a state: normal, highlighted, selected, or
disabled. Different actions can change the control’s state (see
Table 3.4). Our button uses only two. It is highlighted when
touched; otherwise, it is normal.
TABLE 3.4 Control States
When setting per-state attributes, if you don’t explicitly assign a
value to a given state, that state will default back to the
UIControlStateNormal setting. For example, in our code
we only had to set the title once. Unless we say otherwise, every
other state will use this value as well.
This brings up a point that is often confused. If you look up
UIControlState in the developer documentation, the enum
is defined as a bitmask. This means we should be able to
combine multiple states using the bitwise OR operator (|). As a
result, you might be tempted to explicitly set the title for all the
states using code like this:

--- Page 280 ---
Click here to view code image
UIControlState all =  UIControlStateNormal |
                       UIControlStateSelected |
                       UIControlStateHighlighted |
                       UIControlStateDisabled;
[self.button setText:@"default text" forState:all]
Unfortunately, this does not work. Instead of setting the title for
all states, you are actually setting the title for a single state:
specifically, the state in which the control is selected,
highlighted, and disabled—all at the same time (in this case,
UIControlStateNormal is ignored).
This can be handy when creating things like custom two-state
buttons. These buttons have an ON and an OFF state, and each of
these states can be displayed either normally or highlighted. This
means we need to define four different appearances for these four
different states.
We can use the button’s selected property to indicate its
ON/OFF state. Our appearances are then defined as follows:
UIControlStateNormal means the button is OFF;
UIControlStateHighlighted means the button is OFF
and touched; UIControlStateSelected means the button
is ON; and UIControlStateHighlighted |
UIControlStateSelected means the button is both ON
and touched. Note that UIControlStateDisabled is not
used here.
Again, if you’re simply trying to set a default appearance across
all the states, just use UIControlStateNormal and let the
others default back to it.

--- Page 281 ---
Segue Unwinding
We want to have our Save and Cancel buttons take us back to our history
view. However, we cannot simply draw a segue from these buttons back to
that scene. Remember, when we perform a segue, we create a new instance
of the destination, so drawing a segue back to the history view wouldn’t
return us to the old view, it would create an entirely new view. As we added
new entries to our history, we would continue layering view upon view
upon view.
Instead, we want to unwind the segue, or return to a previous point in our
workflow. Segue unwinding lets us move back down the chain of segues
towards our initial scene. We can move as far as we wish back along this
chain. To do this, we must create unwind action methods in the view
controller of the scene we wish to return to.
Since we want to go back to the history view, open
HistoryTableViewController.m. Start by importing
AddEntryViewController.h. Then add the following methods, after
the Navigation methods.
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Storyboard Unwinding Methods
- (IBAction)addNewEntrySaved:(UIStoryboardSegue *)segue
{
    AddEntryViewController *controller =
segue.sourceViewController;
    
    WeightEntry *entry = [WeightEntry
entryWithWeight:controller.weight
                                           usingUnits:controller
.units
                                              forDate:controller
.date];
    
    [self.weightHistoryDocument addEntry:entry];
}
- (IBAction)addNewEntryCanceled:(UIStoryboardSegue *)segue
{
    // We don't need to do anything here.
}
These methods look exactly like our other action methods, except they
take a UIStoryboardSegue argument. The Save method creates a new

--- Page 282 ---
WeightEntry instance, grabbing the weight, unit, and date values from
our Add Entry view. Then it adds this entry to our weight history document.
Of course, modifying the document triggers a notification, which will then
update our table view.
The canceled method doesn’t need to do anything. Once we unwind back
to this scene, we’re done.
Let’s connect these methods to our buttons. Open Main.storyboard
again. We still want to work with the Add Entry View Controller scene.
Control-drag from the Save button to the Exit icon in the scene’s dock.
When you let go, you will see that our new segue unwinding actions show
up as options in the pop-up HUD. Select addNewEntrySaved:. Do the
same thing for the Cancel button, but select addNewEntryCanceled:.
Now, run the application. Try adding a new weight entry and click Save.
The new weight entry should show up at the top of the History view. Try
again, this time click Cancel. You return to the history view, but nothing
changes.
With this code in place, we no longer need our mock data. The user can
now enter his own data. Of course the data is deleted as soon as the app
exits—but we’ll look at saving this data in Chapter 5, “Loading and Saving
Data” and Chapter 7, “Core Data.”
Open RootTabViewController.m. Navigate to the addMocData
method, and comment it out. You can select the entire method and type 
/
to comment out all the highlighted code. This, however, creates an error. To
fix it, we also need to scroll up to the viewDidLoad method and
comment out the following line:
//    [self addMocData];
Dynamic Type
Dynamic Type really addresses three issues:
1. It gives the user a way to set the font size for all of their apps. Any
application that supports Dynamic Type will automatically adjust its
font size per the user’s request.
2. Fonts that look good in a larger font size are often hard to read when
reduced to a smaller font sizes. Similarly, fonts that are clear and
legible when small tend to look too heavy when enlarged. To solve

--- Page 283 ---
this problem, Dynamic Type uses a collection of similar fonts, each
one finely tuned for a particular size. The exact font it returns will
vary depending on both the user’s font settings as well as the
particular style requested.
3. Dynamic Type declares a number of different font styles: headline,
subhead, body, footnote, caption1, and caption2. By declaring fonts
based on their intended use in the user interface, we should be able to
create a more consistent look and feel across applications.
Unfortunately, the “dynamic” in Dynamic Type refers to the fact that the
fonts are dynamically selected based on the user’s size selection and the
style. They do not dynamically update when the user changes his font
selection. In fact, supporting Dynamic Type requires a fair bit of work to
update all the fonts properly.
We need to update the fonts when the application first launches to grab
the current font sizes specified by the user. We also need to listen for the
UIContentSizeCategoryDidChangeNotification, and update
all of our fonts whenever the user changes the font setting.
This is potentially a lot of work spread across a large number of files.
However, we can use a few Objective-C tricks to streamline it somewhat.
To start with, we don’t want to force each and every view controller to
observe UIContentSizeCategoryDidChangeNotification.
Instead, let’s have the app delegate listen for changes. When that change
occurs, we send a message down the view controller hierarchy.
Unfortunately, to really get this to work, we need to add new methods to the
UIViewController class—which all of our view controllers would
then inherit. Fortunately, in Objective-C this is relatively easy. We just need
to use a category.

--- Page 284 ---
The Current State of Dynamic Type
Dynamic Type is one of the new features of iOS 7. As I’m
writing this, it feels like a feature with a lot of promise, but one
that still needs to be fleshed out a bit.
Having a set of well-thought-out, semantically declared type
styles could be a powerful and unifying design tool.
Unfortunately, Dynamic Type currently provides a very limited
range of styles to choose from. Apparently, we will only ever
need a single headline and a single subhead type for all our
layout needs. Worse yet, some of the font choices seem hard to
understand. For example, why is the Body font bigger than the
Subhead font?
Furthermore, Apple has yet to provide any clear guidance on
when and how these fonts should be used. Should we use them
for all user interface elements? Or should we save them for
relatively large chunks of text—things like email, social media
messages, and e-books?
Over time, I’m sure we will see this feature expand, its intended
use will be clarified, and perhaps it will even be automated. I
can’t wait to see how its usage evolves as more and more
developers adopt it. For now, however, I suspect a lot of people
will do exactly what I did for this book. Pick a few type styles
largely based on how they look, rather than worrying about their
intended role is in the application. Unfortunately, this means each
developer will probably be using them differently, possibly
giving the overall OS a bit of a hodge-podge appearance.
Let’s start by creating a category on UIViewController. Control-
click the Controller’s group in the Project navigator and select New File... >
iOS > Cocoa Touch > Objective-C Category. Set the Category to
HBTUpdateFonts and the “Category on” to UIViewController. Click
Next, and when the next sheet appears, click Create.
Open UIViewController+HBTUpdateFonts.h. Declare our new
method as shown:

--- Page 285 ---
Click here to view code image
@interface UIViewController (HBTUpdateFonts)
- (void)HBT_updateFonts;
@end
Remember, when using categories we should always add a prefix to our
methods. Since Apple is rapidly using up all the good two-letter prefixes for
their own frameworks, I prefer to use three letter prefixes. Unfortunately,
HBT was the best three-letter prefix I could come up with for Health Beat.
Sorry about that.
Now, lets switch to UIViewController+HBTUpdateFonts.m and
implement this method.
Click here to view code image
-(void)HBT_updateFonts
{
    for (UIViewController *controller in
self.childViewControllers)
    {
        [controller HBT_updateFonts];
    }
    
    if (self.presentedViewController.presentingViewController ==
self)
    {
        [self.presentedViewController HBT_updateFonts];
    }
}
This will become the default implementation for all our view controllers.
It simply iterates over all the view controller’s children and calls
HBT_updateFonts on them. It also checks to see if there is a presented
view controller, and calls HBT_updateFonts on it as well. The code
here gets a bit odd, but it’s important because of the way views are
presented.
When you call
presentViewController:animated:completion:, or use a
modal segue, the system will start with the current view controller and
begin searching for the correct presentation context. Basically, it calls
definesPresentationContext on the presenting view controller. If
this returns NO, it moves up the view controller hierarchy, calling

--- Page 286 ---
definesPresentationContext on each controller. If it doesn’t find
a match, it will use the application’s window as the presentation context.
By default, definesPresentationContext returns NO. This
means, when you press the plus button in the History scene, our
HistoryTableViewController is not actually presenting our Add
Entry scene. It’s actually passed all the way back to our tab view controller.
Similarly, presentedViewController returns the view controller
presented by the current view controller or any of its ancestors. In our case,
if the Add Entry scene is shown, RootTabBarController,
HistoryNavigationController, and
HistoryTableViewController will all return our
AddEntryViewController object as their
presentedViewController.
This means we cannot just use the value of
presentedViewController. Instead, we use a slight trick. We ask the
presented view controller for the controller that is presenting it. If this value
matches the current view controller, we know that we’ve found the
presentation context. This is the controller that is actually presenting our
scene. We will also let it update the presented view controller’s fonts.
Additionally, we are modeling this method on other methods that get
passed along the view controller hierarchy. The default implementation
doesn’t do anything. We can override this method to take specific actions in
our classes; however, when we override it, we must call super at some
point in our implementation. This is exactly how methods like
viewWillAppear: operate.
So, let’s add the notification that will trigger all this. Open
AppDelegate.m. At the top, we need to import our new class category.
Click here to view code image
#import "UIViewController+HBTUpdateFonts.h"
Next, let’s add a class extension on the AppDelegate. Add the
following code before the @implementation block:
Click here to view code image
@interface AppDelegate()
@property (strong, nonatomic) id fontChangeObserver;

--- Page 287 ---
@end
Now, modify the
application:didFinishLaunchingWithOptions: method to
register for notifications.
Click here to view code image
- (BOOL)application:(UIApplication *)application
didFinishLaunchingWithOptions: (NSDictionary *)launchOptions
{
    
    __weak AppDelegate *_self = self;
    self.fontChangeObserver =
    [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
     addObserverForName:UIContentSizeCategoryDidChangeNotificati
on
     object:[UIApplication sharedApplication]
     queue:[NSOperationQueue mainQueue]
     usingBlock:^(NSNotification *note) {
         [_self.window.rootViewController HBT_updateFonts];
     }];
    
    return YES;
}
The content size category is the setting that determines which font size
we should use for our dynamic fonts. Whenever this changes, we will
update our fonts.
As always, whenever we register for notifications, we also need to make
sure we unregister. Add the following dealloc method:
Click here to view code image
- (void)dealloc
{
    if (self.fontChangeObserver)
    {
        [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter] removeObserver:
          self.fontChangeObserver];
    }
}
This isn’t, strictly speaking, required. Our app delegate should exist
throughout the entire lifetime of our application. Still, this is a good habit to
get into. If you start cutting corners, you may forget it when it really is
important.

--- Page 288 ---
So, which classes need to have their fonts updated? We’ve used the
Dynamic Type settings in our History Table, Entry Detail, and Add Entry
scenes.
Updating the History Table’s Fonts
Let’s start with the History Table. Open
HistoryTableViewController.m and modify the
configureCell:forIndexPath: method as shown:
Click here to view code image
- (void)configureCell:(HistoryCell *)cell forIndexPath:
(NSIndexPath *)indexPath
{
    WeightEntry *entry =
    [self.weightHistoryDocument entryAtIndexPath:indexPath];
    cell.weightLabel.text =
    [entry stringForWeightInUnit:getDefaultUnits()];
    cell.dateLabel.text = [NSDateFormatter
                           localizedStringFromDate:entry.date
                           dateStyle:NSDateFormatterShortStyle
                           timeStyle:NSDateFormatterShortStyle];
    
    cell.weightLabel.font =
    [UIFont preferredFontForTextStyle:UIFontTextStyleHeadline];
   
    cell.dateLabel.font =
    [UIFont
preferredFontForTextStyle:UIFontTextStyleSubheadline];
}
The preferredFontForTextStyle: method simply returns the
correct, dynamic font for the requested style, given the user’s current
settings.
Run the application again. Create a few entries. So far, everything looks
the same. Press the home button (
H in the simulator) and open the
Settings app. In General > Text Size, change the size of the text. If you go
back to our app, you will see that nothing has happened. However, create a
new entry, and it will appear in the newly selected font size (Figure 3.21).

--- Page 290 ---
FIGURE 3.21 One cell using the new font size
We’re using the user specified font—but we’re not updating our interface
when the setting changes. At the top of
HealthTableViewController.m, import our HBTUpdateFonts
category. Then add the following method just below
didReceiveMemoryWarning:
Click here to view code image
- (void)HBT_updateFonts
{
    [super HBT_updateFonts];
    [self.tableView reloadData];
}
This simply reloads our table. Now, if you run the app, you can switch
the fonts, and our table automatically updates in response.
Updating the Add Entry Scene’s Fonts
In the Add Entry scene, we need to update the fonts on both text fields, and
on all three labels. We already have outlets for the text fields, but we need
to add outlets for our labels. Open Main.storyboard. Switch to the
Assistant editor and Control-drag the following outlets to
AddEntryViewController.m
Click here to view code image
@property (weak, nonatomic) IBOutlet UILabel *titleLabel;
@property (weak, nonatomic) IBOutlet UILabel *weightLabel;
@property (weak, nonatomic) IBOutlet UILabel *dateLabel;
Switch back to the Standard editor and open
AddEntryViewController.m. Import our HBTUpdateFonts
category at the top. Next, we need to update our fonts both when the view
first appears and when we receive our update notifications. Since we will be
using the same code in two places, let’s create a private method to handle
the actual updates.
Add the following method just below updateDateText:
Click here to view code image
- (void)updateFonts
{
    self.titleLabel.font =
    [UIFont preferredFontForTextStyle:UIFontTextStyleHeadline];

--- Page 291 ---
    
    self.weightLabel.font =
    [UIFont
preferredFontForTextStyle:UIFontTextStyleSubheadline];
    
    self.dateLabel.font =
    [UIFont
preferredFontForTextStyle:UIFontTextStyleSubheadline];
    
    self.weightTextField.font =
    [UIFont preferredFontForTextStyle:UIFontTextStyleBody];
    
    self.dateTextField.font =
    [UIFont preferredFontForTextStyle:UIFontTextStyleBody];
}
This just goes through and sets all of our fonts to use Dynamic Type.
Notice that we’re using the same styles here that we used when creating the
interface in Interface Builder.
Now, we just need to call this method. Override HBT_updateFonts
just below didReceiveMemoryWarning:
- (void)HBT_updateFonts
{
    [super HBT_updateFonts];
    [self updateFonts];
}
And add the following line to viewWillAppear:.
Click here to view code image
- (void)viewWillAppear:(BOOL)animated
{
    [super viewWillAppear:animated];
    [self updateFonts];
    [self updateUI];
    [self.weightTextField becomeFirstResponder];
}
That’s it. Run the application and make sure this scene updates its fonts
and layout as expected.
Updating the Entry Detail Scene’s Fonts
Our entry detail scene has five labels and five text fields. All of them need
to be updated. Fortunately, the general procedure is the same as our Add
Entry scene.

--- Page 292 ---
We already have outlets for all the text fields, so let’s start by adding
outlets for the labels. Create the following outlets:
Click here to view code image
@property (weak, nonatomic) IBOutlet UILabel *weightLabel;
@property (weak, nonatomic) IBOutlet UILabel *dateLabel;
@property (weak, nonatomic) IBOutlet UILabel *averageLabel;
@property (weak, nonatomic) IBOutlet UILabel *lossLabel;
@property (weak, nonatomic) IBOutlet UILabel *gainLabel;
Now open EntryDetailViewController.m and import our
category’s header. Then add the following private method:
Click here to view code image
- (void)updateFonts
{
    self.weightLabel.font =
    [UIFont preferredFontForTextStyle:UIFontTextStyleHeadline];
    
    self.dateLabel.font =
    [UIFont preferredFontForTextStyle:UIFontTextStyleHeadline];
    
    self.averageLabel.font =
    [UIFont preferredFontForTextStyle:UIFontTextStyleHeadline];
    
    self.lossLabel.font =
    [UIFont preferredFontForTextStyle:UIFontTextStyleHeadline];
    
    self.gainLabel.font =
    [UIFont preferredFontForTextStyle:UIFontTextStyleHeadline];
    
    self.weightTextField.font =
    [UIFont
preferredFontForTextStyle:UIFontTextStyleSubheadline];
    
    self.dateTextField.font =
    [UIFont
preferredFontForTextStyle:UIFontTextStyleSubheadline];
    
    self.averageTextField.font =
    [UIFont
preferredFontForTextStyle:UIFontTextStyleSubheadline];
    
    self.lossTextField.font =
    [UIFont
preferredFontForTextStyle:UIFontTextStyleSubheadline];
    
    self.gainTextField.font =
    [UIFont

--- Page 293 ---
preferredFontForTextStyle:UIFontTextStyleSubheadline];
}
Now add our HBT_updateFonts method:
Click here to view code image
- (void)HBT_updateFonts
{
    [super HBT_updateFonts];
    [self updateFonts];
}
And call updateFonts from within viewWillAppear:
Click here to view code image
- (void)viewWillAppear:(BOOL)animated
{
    [super viewWillAppear:animated];
    [self updateFonts];
    [self updateUI];
}
Again, run the application and make sure the fonts change as expected.
Customizing Our Appearance
Finally, let’s make a few, minor changes to our application’s appearance.
Originally, with iOS applications, we were relatively limited in our
ability to change the appearance of the built-in controls. Yes, we could set a
view’s backgroundColor. We could modify a label’s textColor.
But, if we wanted to go beyond this, we would have to custom draw our
own controls.
With iOS 5, Apple introduced UIAppearance. This was an easy way
to customize the appearance of the views and controls in UIKit. It came in
two parts. First, it added a number of methods to let us modify the
appearance of our controls directly. For example, the UISwitch gained
methods like onImage:, offImage:, onTintColor:, and
offTintColor:. Second, the UIAppearance proxy let us make these
changes on every instances of a class in our application, or even on all the
instances of a class placed within a given view.
Now, not surprisingly, with the radical UI changes in iOS 7, there have
also been a number of changes to UIAppearance. Many of the

--- Page 294 ---
customization methods no longer do anything in iOS 7—so be sure to read
the documentation carefully before you call them.
Mostly, however, the tintColor: method has gained new prominence.
Previously, tintColor: was used by a few controls to set some sort of
coloration—now, however, it has been added as a property of UIView.
That means everything displayed on our screen has a tint color.
Many classes, like UIView, UILabel, or UITextField, don’t really
use it to do anything. Other controls, however, will take the tint color and
use it to somehow modify their appearance. For example, it is used to set a
button’s text color. Furthermore, if you don’t set a view’s tint color, it will
inherit the tint color of its superview. This means we can set our window’s
tint color, and (more or less) customize our entire application’s appearance
(more or less).
Let’s try that. Add the following code to AppDelegate.m’s
application:didFinishLaunchingWithOptions: method.
Click here to view code image
self.window.tintColor =
[UIColor colorWithRed:0.5f green:0.0f blue:0.0f alpha:1.0f];
Now run the application. Notice how our navigation bar, toolbar, and
buttons have all changed to a darker red color? In fact, the only thing that
hasn’t changed is the button on our accessory view. The keyboard and
keyboard accessory aren’t part of our view hierarchy. We’ll need to set that
tint color manually.
Open AddEntryViewController.m and navigate to the
setupInputAccessories method. Add the following line to the
bottom of the method:
Click here to view code image
self.accessoryDoneButton.tintColor =
[[[[UIApplication sharedApplication] delegate] window]
tintColor];
Here, we are grabbing the tint color from our application’s window and
applying it to our Done button. Now, if you run the application, it picks up
our custom color as well.

--- Page 295 ---
Also notice that the tint color does not change the color of our labels or
text views. Those we must specifically change using their textColor
property. We’ve already seen this. We modified the text color in our date
text field to turn red whenever the user entered an invalid date string.
Let’s also add a tiny splash of color to our Entry Detail scene. When the
weight is below the monthly average, show the weight in green. When it’s
above, show it in red.
To do this, let’s add the following code to the bottom of
EntryDetailViewController’s updateUI method:
Click here to view code image
if (self.entry.weightInLbs > average)
{
    self.weightTextField.textColor = [UIColor redColor];
}
else if (self.entry.weightInLbs < average)
{
    self.weightTextField.textColor =
    [UIColor colorWithRed:0.0f green:0.5f blue:0.0f alpha:1.0f];
}
else
{
    self.weightTextField.textColor = [UIColor darkTextColor];
}
Here, we’re using the standard red color for weights above average. For
weights below average, I’ve selected a custom green color. [UIColor
greenColor] was simply too bright for my taste.
That’s it. Setting the tint color and a couple of text colors really only
scratches the surface when it comes to customizing our application’s
appearance. For even greater customization, we could still use the old
UIAppearance methods and proxies. We can also do custom drawing,
when necessary. Though, honestly, in iOS 7, the application’s appearance
has become somewhat secondary. In many cases, we want our application
to fade into the background. It simply exists to highlight the user’s content.
Instead, we’re encouraged to customize the animations used to present and
dismiss our views.

--- Page 296 ---
Wrapping Up
Throughout this chapter, we dug into the details behind views and view
controllers as we fleshed out our History, Add Entry, and Entry Detail
scenes. In Chapter 4, “Custom Views and Custom Transitions,” we will
begin working on our graph view. We will look at both drawing custom
views and providing custom animations. Looking further down the road, we
will add even more advanced UI features in Chapter 8, “Advanced User
Interfaces.”
Other Resources
 Cocoa Auto Layout Guide
iOS Developer’s Library
This is the ultimate authority on all things Auto Layout. It’s not
necessarily the first place I would go, if I had a quick question. But, it
is great when you really want to dig into the details.
 WWDC Videos
https://developer.apple.com/videos/
These are videos of Apple engineers talking about the tools and
technologies that they have created. You can pick up a ton of great
tips and tricks by watching these videos. In particular, however, I
wanted to point out the Auto Layout videos. There are three Auto
Layout videos in the WWDC 2012 set: Introduction to Auto Layout
for iOS and OS X, Auto Layout by Example, and Best Practices for
Mastering Auto Layout. Just ignore everything they say about
Interface Builder—the rest is golden. For Xcode 5 Interface Builder
instructions, check out the WWDC 2013 video, Taking Control of
Auto Layout in Xcode 5.
 View Controller Programming Guide for iOS
iOS Developer’s Library
If you have any questions on how to best use view controllers, I
recommend reading through this guide. This includes information on
using Interface Builder and storyboards.
 Key Value Coding Programming Guide: Collection Operators
iOS Developer’s Library

--- Page 297 ---
This has additional information on the collection operators with
examples.
 NSHipster
http://nshipster.com
As always, a great source for information. Particularly relevant to this
chapter are the articles on KVC Collection Operators and
NSDataDetector.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 298 ---
Chapter 4. Custom Views and Custom Transitions
This chapter will focus on customizing the user interface. First, we will
look at drawing. By drawing our own views, we can create a wide range of
visual effects—and by extension, a wide range of custom controls. Then we
will look at setting the transitions between scenes and providing animations
for those transitions.
In previous versions of iOS, custom drawing grew to become a large part
of many applications. As developers tried to give their applications a unique
look and feel or tried to push beyond the boundaries of the UIKit controls,
they began to increasingly rely on custom drawing to make their
applications stand out.
However, iOS 7 is different. In iOS 7, Apple recommends pushing the
application’s user interface into the background. It should, for the most part,
disappear, focusing attention on the user’s data rather than drawing
attention to itself. As a result, the developers are encouraged to create their
own unique look and feel through less visually obvious techniques. In this
new paradigm, custom animations may replace custom interfaces as the
new distinguishing feature.
Custom Drawing
In previous chapters, we set up the GraphViewController and made
sure that it received a copy of our weightHistoryDocument.
However, it is still just displaying an empty, white view. Let’s change that.
We’re going to create a custom view with custom drawing—actually, to
more easily handle the tab bar and status bar, we will be creating two
custom views and split our drawing between them.
Let’s start with the background view. This will be the backdrop to our
graph. So, let’s make it look like a sheet of graph paper.

--- Page 299 ---
Drawing the Background View
Create a new Objective-C class in the Views group. Name it
BackgroundView, and make it a subclass of UIView. You should be an
expert at creating classes by now, so I won’t walk through all the steps.
However, if you need help, just follow the examples from previous
chapters.
There are a number of values we will need when drawing our graph grid.
For example, how thick are the lines? How much space do we have
between lines, and what color are the lines?
We could hard-code all this information into our application; however, I
prefer to create properties for these values and then set up default values
when the view is instantiated. This gives us a functional view that we can
use right out of the box—but also lets us programmatically modify the
view, if we want.
Open BackgroundView.h. Add the following properties to the header
file:
Click here to view code image
@property (assign, nonatomic) CGFloat gridSpacing;
@property (assign, nonatomic) CGFloat gridLineWidth;
@property (assign, nonatomic) CGFloat gridXOffset;
@property (assign, nonatomic) CGFloat gridYOffset;
@property (strong, nonatomic) UIColor *gridLineColor;
Now, open BackgroundView.m. The template automatically creates
an initWithFrame: method for us, as well as a commented-out
drawRect:. We will use both of these.
Let’s start by setting up our default values. Views can be created in one
of two ways. We could programmatically create the view by calling alloc
and one of its init methods. Eventually, this will call our
initWithFrame: method, since that is our designated initializer. More
likely, however, we will load the view from a nib file or storyboard. In this
case, initWithFrame: is not called. The system calls
initWithCoder: instead.
To be thorough, we should have both an initWithFrame: method
and an initWithCoder: method. Furthermore, both of these methods

--- Page 300 ---
should perform the same basic setup steps. We will do this by moving the
real work to a private method that both init methods can then call.
awakeFromNib
When loading objects from a nib, you may want to perform any
additional configuration and setup in the object’s
awakeFromNib method. Remember, initWithCoder: is
called when the object is first instantiated. Then all of its outlets
and actions are connected. Finally, awakeFromNib is called.
This means you cannot access any of the object’s outlets in the
initWithCoder: method. They are, however, available in
awakeFromNib.
In our case, we don’t have any outlets. Also, I like the symmetry
between initWithFrame: and initWithCoder:. Still,
awakeFromNib can be a safer location for additional
configuration.
Add the following line to the existing initWithFrame: method:
Click here to view code image
- (id)initWithFrame:(CGRect)frame
{
    self = [super initWithFrame:frame];
    if (self) {
        [self setDefaults];
    }
    return self;
}
This calls our (as yet undefined) setDefaults method. Now, just
below initWithFrame:, create the initWithCoder: method as
shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (id)initWithCoder:(NSCoder *)aDecoder
{
    self = [super initWithCoder:aDecoder];
    if (self) {
        [self setDefaults];
    }

--- Page 301 ---
    return self;
}
We discussed initWithCoder: in the “Secret Life of Nibs” section of
Chapter 2, “Our Application’s Architecture.” It is similar to, but separate
from, our regular initialization chain. Generally speaking,
initWithCoder: is called whenever we load an object from disk, and
nibs and storyboards get compiled into binary files, which the system loads
at runtime. Not surprising, we will see initWithCoder: again in
Chapter 5, “Loading and Saving Data.”
Now, we just need to create our setDefaults method. Create the
following code at the bottom of our implementation block:
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Private Methods
- (void)setDefaults
{
    self.backgroundColor = [UIColor whiteColor];
    self.opaque = YES;
    
    self.gridSpacing = 20.0;
    
    if (self.contentScaleFactor == 2.0)
    {
        self.gridLineWidth = 0.5;
        self.gridXOffset = 0.25;
        self.gridYOffset = 0.25;
    }
    else
    {
        self.gridLineWidth = 1.0;
        self.gridXOffset = 0.5;
        self.gridYOffset = 0.5;
    }
    
    self.gridLineColor = [UIColor lightGrayColor];
}
We start by setting our view’s background color to clear. This will
override any background color we set in Interface Builder. I often use this
trick when working with custom views, since they will not get drawn in
Interface Builder. By default, all views appear as a rectangular area on the
screen. Often we need to set a temporary background color, since the views
otherwise match the parent’s background color or are clear (letting the

--- Page 302 ---
parent view show through). This, effectively, makes them invisible in
Interface Builder.
By setting this property when the view is first loaded, we can freely give
it any background color we want in Interface Builder. This make our
custom views easier to see while we work on them. Plus, by setting the
value when the view is created, we can still override it programmatically in
the controller’s viewDidLoad if we want.
Next, we set the view to opaque. This means we promise to fill the
entire view from corner to corner with opaque data. In our case, we’re
providing a completely opaque background color. If we programmatically
change the background color to a translucent color, we should also change
the opaque property.
Opaque Views
Each view has an opaque property. This property acts as a hint
to the drawing system. If the property is set to YES, the drawing
system will assume the view is completely opaque and will
optimize the drawing code appropriately. If it is set to NO, the
drawing system will composite this view with any underlying
views. Typically, this means checking pixel by pixel and
blending multiple values for each pixel, if necessary. This allows
for more elaborate visual effects—but also increases the
computational cost.
By default, opaque is set to YES. We should avoid changing
this unless we actually need transparent or translucent areas
within our view.
However, having an opaque view means our custom drawing
code must completely fill the provided rectangle. We cannot
leave any transparent or semi-transparent regions that might let
underlying views show through. The simplest solution is to
assign an opaque backgroundColor, which will implicitly
fill the entire view’s rectangle.
Next, we check the view’s scale factor. The default value we use for our
line width, the x-offset and the y-offset, all vary depending on whether we

--- Page 303 ---
are drawing to a regular or a Retina display.
All the iPhones and iPod touches that support iOS 7 have Retina
displays. However, the iPad 2 and the iPad mini still use regular displays—
so it’s a good idea to support both resolutions. After all, even if we are
creating an iPhone-only app, it may end up running on an iPad.
Additionally, Apple may release new devices that also have non-Retina
displays. The iPad mini is a perfect example. It has the same resolution as a
regular size iPad 2; it just shrinks the pixel size down by about 80 percent.
Also, like the iPad 2, it uses a non-Retina display, presumably to reduce
cost and improve performance and energy use.
We want to draw the smallest line possible. This means the line must be
1-pixel wide, not 1-point wide. We, therefore, have to check the scale and
calculate our line width appropriately. Furthermore, we also need to make
sure our lines are properly aligned with the underlying pixels. That means
we have to offset them by half the line’s width (or, in this case, half a pixel).
Now we need to draw our grid. Uncomment the drawRect: method.
The system calls this method during each display phase, as discussed in
Chapter 3, “Developing Views and View Controllers.” Basically, each time
through the run loop, the system will check all the views in the view
hierarchy and see whether they need to be redrawn. If they do, it will call
their drawRect: method.
Also as mentioned in the previous chapter, our views aggressively cache
their content. Therefore, most normal operations (changing their frame,
rotating them, covering them up, uncovering them, moving them, hiding
them, or even fading them in and out) won’t force the views to be redrawn.
Most of the time this means our view will be drawn once when it is first
created. It may be redrawn if our system runs low on memory while it’s
offscreen. Otherwise, the system will just continue to use the cached
version.

--- Page 304 ---
Drawing for the Retina Display
As you probably know, the iPhone’s Retina display has a
960x640 display. This is four times the number of pixels as the
3GS and earlier models. This could result in a lot of complexity
for developers—if we had to constantly test for the screen size
and alter our drawing code to match. Fortunately, Apple has
hidden much of this complexity from us.
All the native drawing functions (Core Graphics, UIKit, and
Core Animation) use a logical coordinate system measured in
points. A point is approximately 1/160 of an inch. It’s important
to note that these points may or may not be the same as the
screen’s pixels. Draw a 1-point-wide line on a regular display,
and you get a 1-pixel-wide line. Draw the same line on a Retina
display, and it is now 2 pixels wide. This also means a full-screen
frame is the same size, regardless of the display type. We still
have three screen sizes to deal with: iPhone 3.5-inch, iPhone 4-
inch, and iPad. But, three is better than five or six.
A device’s scale factor gives us the conversion between points
and pixels. You can access the scale property from the
UIScreen, UIView, UIImage, or CALayer classes. This
allows us to perform any resolution-dependent processing.
However, we actually get a lot of support for free.
 All standard UIKit views are automatically drawn at the
correct resolution.
 Vector-based drawings (e.g., UIBezierPath, CGPathRef,
and PDFs) automatically take advantage of the higher
resolution to produce smoother lines.
 All text is automatically rendered at the higher resolution.
There are, however, some steps we still need to take to fully
support multiple screen resolutions. One obvious example occurs
when loading and displaying images and other bitmapped art. We
need to create higher-resolution copies of these files for the
Retina display. Fortunately, UIKit supports automatically loading
the correct resolution from the assets category.

--- Page 305 ---
Let’s say you have a 20-pixel by 30-pixel image named
stamp.png. You also need to create a Retina version that is 40
x 60 pixels. Now open the Images.xcassets. The catalog
editor has two parts: a list of all your assets on the left and a
detail view on the right.
Drag and drop your original image into the assets list. Xcode will
automatically make a new entry for it called stamp. Now select
the stamp entry. The detail view will show you the 1x version of
your image, with a placeholder for the 2x. Drag the Retina
version into the 2x position. The image is now ready to use. You
just need to request the image by the asset’s name, as shown
here:
Click here to view code image
UIImage* stampImage =
[UIImage imageNamed:@"stamp"];
UIKit will automatically load the correct version for your device.
Similarly, if we are creating bitmaps programmatically, we will
want to make sure we give them the correct scale factor. The
UIGraphicsBeginImageContext function creates a
bitmap-based graphics context with a 1.0 scale factor. Instead,
use the UIGraphicsBeginImageContextWithOptions
function and pass in the correct scale (which you can access by
calling [[UIScreen mainScreen] scale]).
Core Animation layers may also need explicit support. Whenever
you create a new CALayer (one that is not already associated
with a view), it comes with a default scale value of 1.0. If you
then draw this layer onto a Retina display, it will automatically
scale up to match the screen. You can prevent this by manually
changing the layer’s scale factor and then providing resolution-
appropriate content.
Finally, OpenGL ES also uses a 1.0 scale by default. Everything
will still draw on the Retina display, but it will be scaled up and
may appear blocky (especially when compared to properly scaled
drawings). To get full-scale rendering, we must increase the size
of our render buffers. This, however, can have severe

--- Page 306 ---
performance implications. Therefore, we must make these
changes manually. Changing a view’s contentScaleFactor
will automatically alter the underlying CAEAGLLayer,
increasing the size of the render buffers by the scale factor.
It is also important to test your drawing code on all the devices
you intend to support. Drawing a 0.5-point-wide line may look
fine on a retina display but appear large and fuzzy on a regular
display. Similarly, higher-resolution resources use more memory
and may take longer to load and process. This is particularly true
for full-screen images.
Even with all these exceptions and corner cases, iOS’s logical
coordinate system greatly simplifies creating custom drawing
code that works across multiple resolutions. Most of the time we
get automatic Retina support without doing anything at all.

--- Page 307 ---
Subpixel Drawing
All of our drawing routines use CGFloat, CGPoint, CGSize,
and CGRect, and all of these use floating-point values. That
means we can draw a 0.34-pixel-wide line at y = 23.428.
Obviously, however, our screen cannot display partial pixels.
Instead, our drawing engine simulates subpixel resolutions using
anti-aliasing—proportionally blending the drawn line with the
background color in each partial pixel. Anti-aliasing makes lines
look smoother, especially curved or diagonal lines. It fills in the
otherwise harsh, jagged edges. Unfortunately, it can also make
our drawings appear softer or somewhat fuzzy.
By default, anti-aliasing is turned on for any window or bitmap
context. It is turned off for any other graphics contexts. However,
we can explicitly set our context’s anti-aliasing using the
CGContextSetShouldAntiAlias() function.
It’s also important to realize that the graphics context’s
coordinates fall in between the pixels, and the drawing engine
centers the lines on their endpoints. For example, if you draw a
1-point-wide horizontal line at y = 20, on a non-Retina display
(iPad 2 or iPad mini, for example), the line will actually be
drawn half in pixel row 19 and half in row 20. If anti-aliasing is
turned on, this will result in two rows of pixels, each with a 50
percent blend. If anti-aliasing is off, you will get a 2-pixel-wide
line. You can fix this by offsetting the drawing coordinates by
half a point (y = 20.5). Then the line will fall exactly along the
row of pixels.
For a Retina display, the 1-point line will result in a 2-pixel line
that properly fills both rows on either side of the y-coordinate. A
0.5 pixel-wide line, though, will similarly need to be offset by
0.25 pixels. For more information on how Retina displays and
scale factors work, see the “Drawing for the Retina Display”
sidebar.
Additionally, when the system does ask us to draw or redraw a view, it
typically asks us to draw the entire view. The rect passed into

--- Page 308 ---
drawRect: will be equal to the view’s bounds. The only time this isn’t
true is when we start using tiled layers or when we explicitly call
setNeedsDisplayInRect: and specify a subsection of our view.
 Note
We should never call drawRect: directly. Instead, we can
force a view to redraw its contents by calling
setNeedsDisplay or setNeedsDisplayInRect:.
This will force the view to be redrawn the next time through
the run loop. setNeedsDisplay will update the entire
view, while setNeedsDisplayInRect: will redraw
only the specified portion of the view.
Drawing is expensive. If you’re creating a view that updates frequently,
you should try to minimize the amount of drawing your class performs with
each update. Write your drawRect: method so that it doesn’t do
unnecessary drawing outside the specified rect. You should also use
setNeedsDisplayInRect: to redraw the smallest possible portion.
However, for Health Beat, our views display largely static data. The graph
is updated only when a new entry is added. As a result, we can take the
easier approach, disregard the rect argument, and simply redraw the
entire view.
Implement drawRect: as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (void)drawRect:(CGRect)rect
{
    CGFloat width = CGRectGetWidth(self.bounds);
    CGFloat height = CGRectGetHeight(self.bounds);
    
    UIBezierPath *path = [UIBezierPath bezierPath];
    path.lineWidth = self.gridLineWidth;
    
    CGFloat x = self.gridXOffset;
    while (x <= width)
    {
        [path moveToPoint:CGPointMake(x, 0.0)];
        [path addLineToPoint:CGPointMake(x, height)];
        x += self.gridSpacing;

--- Page 309 ---
    }
    
    CGFloat y = self.gridYOffset;
    while (y <= height)
    {
        [path moveToPoint:CGPointMake(0.0, y)];
        [path addLineToPoint:CGPointMake(width, y)];
        y += self.gridSpacing;
    }
    
    [self.gridLineColor setStroke];
    [path stroke];
}
We start by using some of the CGGeometry functions to extract the width
and height from our view’s bounds. Then we create an empty
UIBezierPath.
Bezier paths let us mathematically define shapes. These could be open
shapes (basically lines and curves) or closed shapes (squares, circles,
rectangles, and so on). We define the path as a series of lines and curved
segments. The lines have a simple start and end point. The curves have a
start and end point and two control points, which define the shape of the
curve. If you’ve ever drawn curved lines in a vector art program, you know
what I’m talking about. We can use our UIBezierPath to draw the
outline (stroking the path) or to fill in the closed shape (filling the path).
UIBezierPath also has a number of convenience methods to produce
ready-made shapes. For example, we can create paths for rectangles, ovals,
rounded rectangles, and arcs using these convenience methods.
For our grid, the path will just be a series of straight lines. We start with
an empty path and then add each line to the path. Then we draw it to the
screen.
Notice, when we create the path, we set the line’s width. Then we create
a line every 20 points, both horizontally and vertically. We start by moving
the cursor to the beginning of the next line by calling moveToPoint:, and
then we add the line to the path by calling addLineToPoint:. Once all
the lines have been added, we set the line color by calling UIColor’s
setStroke method. Then we draw the lines by calling the path’s
stroke method.

--- Page 310 ---
We still need to tell our storyboard to use this background view. Open
Main.storyboard and zoom in on the Graph View Controller scene.
Select the scene’s view object (either in the Document Outline or by
clicking the center of the scene), and in the Identity inspector, change Class
to BackgroundView.
Just like in Chapter 3, the class should be listed in the drop-down;
however, sometimes Xcode doesn’t correctly pick up all our new classes. If
this happens to you, you can just type in the name, or you can quit out of
Xcode and restart it—forcing it to update the class lists.
Run the application and tap the Graph tab. It should display a nice, graph
paper effect (Figure 4.1).

--- Page 312 ---
FIGURE 4.1 Our background view
There are a couple of points worth discussing here. First, notice how our
drawing stretches up under the status bar. Actually, it’s also stretched down
below the tab bar, but the tab bar blurs and fades the image quite a bit, so
it’s not obvious.
One of the biggest changes with iOS 7 is the way it handles our bars. In
previous versions of iOS, our background view would automatically shrink
to fit the area between the bars. In iOS 7, it extends behind the bars by
default.
We can change this, if we want. We could set the view controller’s
edgesForExtendedLayout to UIRectEdgeNone. In our view, this
would prevent our background view from extending below the tab bar. It
will also make the tab bar opaque. However, this won’t affect the status bar.
We actually want our background view to extend behind our bars. It
gives our UI a sense of context. However, we want the actual content to be
displayed between the bars. To facilitate this, we will draw our actual graph
in a separate view, and we will use auto layout to size that view properly
between the top and bottom layout guides.
Also notice, the status bar does not have any background color at all. It is
completely transparent. We can set whether it displays its contents using a
light or a dark font—but that’s it. If we want to blur or fade out the content
behind the bar, we need to provide an additional view to do that for us.
However, I will leave that as a homework exercise.
There is one slight problem with our background view, however. Run the
app again and try rotating it. When we rotate our view, auto layout will
change its frame to fill the screen horizontally. However, as I said earlier,
this does not cause our view to redraw. Instead, it simply reuses the cached
version, stretching it to fit (Figure 4.2).

--- Page 313 ---
FIGURE 4.2 The background view is stretched when rotated.
We could fix this by calling setNeedsDisplay after our view rotates
—but there’s an easier way. Open BackgroundView.m again. Find
setDefaults, and add the following line after self.opaque = YES:
Click here to view code image
self.contentMode = UIViewContentModeRedraw;
The content mode is used to determine how a view lays out its content
when its bounds change. Here, we are telling our view to automatically
redraw itself. We can still move the view, rotate it, fade it in, or cover it up.
None of that will cause it to redraw. However, change the size of its frame
or bounds, and it will be redrawn to match.
Run the app again. It will now display correctly as you rotate it.
Drawing the Line Graph
Now let’s add the line graph. Let’s start by creating a new UIView
subclass named GraphView. Place this in the Views group with our other
views.
Before we get to the code, let’s set up everything in Interface Builder.
Open Main.storyboard. We should still be zoomed into the Graph
View Controller scene.

--- Page 314 ---
Drag a new view out and place it in the scene. Shrink it so that it is a
small box in the middle of the scene and then change its Class to
GraphView and its background to lightGray. This will make it easier to
see (Figure 4.3).

--- Page 315 ---
FIGURE 4.3 Adding the view

--- Page 316 ---
We want to resize it so that it fills the screen from left to right, from the
top layout guide to the bottom. However, it will be easier to let Auto Layout
do that for us. With the graph view selected, click the Pin tool. We want to
use the Add New Constraints controls to set the constraints shown in Table
4.1. Next, set Update Frames to Items of New Constraints, and click the
Add 4 Constraints button. The view should expand as desired.
TABLE 4.1 Graph View’s Constraints
Run the app and navigate to our graph view. It should fill the screen as
shown in Figure 4.4. Rotate the app and make sure it resizes correctly.

--- Page 318 ---
FIGURE 4.4 The properly sized graph view
There’s one last step before we get to the code. We will need an outlet to
our graph view. Switch to the Assistant editor, Control-drag from the graph
view to GraphViewController.m’s class extension, and create the
following outlet:
Click here to view code image
@property (weak, nonatomic) IBOutlet GraphView *graphView;
Unfortunately, this creates an “Unknown type name ‘GraphView’” error.
We can fix this by scrolling to the top of GraphViewController.m
and importing GraphView.h.
Now, switch back to the Standard editor, and open GraphView.h. We
want to add a number of properties to our class. First, we need an
NSArray to contain the weight entries we intend to graph. We also need to
add a number of properties to control our graph’s appearance. This will
follow the general pattern we used for the background view.
Add the following properties to GraphView’s public header:
Click here to view code image
// This must be an array sorted by date in ascending order.
@property (strong, nonatomic) NSArray *weightEntries;
@property (assign, nonatomic) CGFloat margin;
@property (assign, nonatomic) CGFloat guideLineWidth;
@property (assign, nonatomic) CGFloat guideLineYOffset;
@property (strong, nonatomic) UIColor *guideLineColor;
@property (assign, nonatomic) CGFloat graphLineWidth;
@property (assign, nonatomic) CGFloat dotSize;
Notice that we’re assuming our weight entries are sorted in ascending
order. When we implement our code, we’ll add a few sanity checks to help
validate the incoming data—but we won’t do an item-by-item check of our
array. Instead, we will assume that the calling code correctly follows the
contract expressed in our comment. If it doesn’t, the results will be
unpredictable.
We’ve seen this methodology before. Objective-C often works best when
you clearly communicate your intent and assume other developers will
follow that intent. Unfortunately, in this case, we don’t have any syntax

--- Page 319 ---
tricks that we can use to express our intent. We must rely on comments.
This is, however, an excellent use case for documentation comments. I’ll
leave that as an exercise for the truly dedicated reader.
Switch to GraphView.m. Just like our background view, we want the
pair of matching init... methods, with a private setDefaults
method. The init... methods are shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (id)initWithFrame:(CGRect)frame
{
    self = [super initWithFrame:frame];
    if (self) {
        [self setDefaults];
    }
    return self;
}
- (id)initWithCoder:(NSCoder *)aDecoder
{
    self = [super initWithCoder:aDecoder];
    if (self) {
        [self setDefaults];
    }
    return self;
}
And, at the bottom of the implementation block, add the setDefaults
method.
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Private Methods
- (void)setDefaults
{
    self.contentMode = UIViewContentModeRedraw;
    self.backgroundColor = [UIColor clearColor];
    self.opaque = NO;
    
    self.margin = 20.0;
    
    if (self.contentScaleFactor == 2.0)
    {
        self.guideLineYOffset = 0.0;
    }
    else
    {
        self.guideLineYOffset = 0.5;

--- Page 320 ---
    }
    
    self.guideLineWidth = 1.0;
    self.guideLineColor = [UIColor darkGrayColor];
    
    self.graphLineWidth = 2.0;
    self.dotSize = 4.0;
}
This code is almost the same as our background view. Yes, the property
names and values have changed, but the basic concept is the same. Notice
that we are using a clear backgroundColor, letting our background
view show through. We have also set the opaque property to YES.
Additionally, since our graph line’s width is an even number of pixels,
we don’t need to worry about aligning it to the underlying pixels. If it’s
drawn as a vertical or horizontal line, it will already correctly fill 1 pixel
above and 1 pixel below the given coordinates (in a non-Retina display). By
a similar logic, the 1-point guidelines need to be offset only in non-Retina
displays.
The app should successfully build and run. However, notice that our
previously gray graph view has completely vanished. Now we just need to
add some custom drawing, to give it a bit of content.
For the purpose of this book, we want to keep our graph simple. So, we
will just draw three horizontal guidelines with labels and the line graph
itself. Also, we’re not trying to match the graph with the background view’s
underlying graph paper. In a production app, you would probably want to
add guidelines or labels for the horizontal axis, as well as coordinate the
background and graph views, giving the graph paper actual meaning.
Passing the Data
The graph will be scaled to vertically fill our space, with the maximum
value near the top of our view and the minimum near the bottom. It will
also horizontally fill our view, with the earliest dates close to the left side
and the latest date close to the right.
But, before we can do this, we need to pass in our weight entry data.
Open GraphViewController.m. First things first—we need to import
WeightHistoryDocument.h. We already added a forward declaration
in the .h file, but we never actually imported the class. It hasn’t been
necessary, since we haven’t used it—until now.

--- Page 321 ---
Then, add a viewWillAppear: method, as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (void)viewWillAppear:(BOOL)animated
{
    [super viewWillAppear:animated];
  
    self.graphView.weightEntries =
    [[[self.weightHistoryDocument allEntries]
       reverseObjectEnumerator] allObjects];
}
As our GraphView’s comments indicated, we want to pass our weight
entries in ascending order. However, our document stores them in
descending order. So, we have to reverse this array.
We grab all the entries from our weight history document. We then access
the reverse enumerator for these entries. The reverse enumerator lets us
iterate over all the objects in the reverse order. Finally we call the
enumerator’s allObjects method. This returns the remaining objects in
the collection. Since we haven’t enumerated over any objects yet, it returns
the entire array. This is a quick technique for reversing any array.
Of course, we could have just passed the entire weight history document
to our graph view, but isolating an array of entries has several advantages.
First, as a general rule, we don’t want to give any object more access to our
model than is absolutely necessary. More pragmatically, writing the code
this way gives us a lot of flexibility for future expansions. We could easily
modify our code to just graph the entries from last week, last month, or last
year. We’d just need to filter our entries before we passed them along.
Unfortunately, there is one small problem with this approach.
WeightHistoryDocument doesn’t have an allEntries method.
Let’s fix that. Open WeightHistoryDocument.h and declare
allEntries just below weightEntriesAfter:before:.
- (NSArray *)allEntries;
Now switch to WeightHistoryDocument.m. Implement
allEntries as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (NSArray *)allEntries
{

--- Page 322 ---
    return [self.weightHistory copy];
}
Here, we’re making a copy of our history array and returning the copy.
This avoids exposing our internal data, and prevents other parts of our
application from accidentally altering it.
 Note
We have two options when it comes to returning our internal
array. We could create an immutable copy of our array and
return it, as shown here. This is the safest approach.
Unfortunately, it can get very expensive, especially once our
array grows quite large. Alternatively, we could just return
the weightHistory array unmodified. While this may
seem risky, our method signature says that we’re returning an
NSArray. Therefore, anyone calling this method should
treat the returned value as an immutable array. Calling
NSMutableArray methods on it would violate our
contract. Since we call this method only once, when our view
appears, the more secure approach is probably better.
However, if we had to call this method multiple times in a
tight loop, we might want to switch and just return our
internal data directly. As always, if you have doubts, profile
your application and base your decision on hard data.
Now, switch back to GraphView.m. There are a number of private
properties we want to add. Some of these will hold statistical data about our
entries. Others will hold layout data—letting us easily calculate these values
once and then use them across a number of different drawing methods.
At the top of GraphView.m, import WeightEntry.h, and then add a
class extension as shown here:
Click here to view code image
#import "WeightEntry.h"
@interface GraphView ()
@property (assign, nonatomic) float minimumWeight;

--- Page 323 ---
@property (assign, nonatomic) float maximumWeight;
@property (assign, nonatomic) float averageWeight;
@property (strong, nonatomic) NSDate *earliestDate;
@property (strong, nonatomic) NSDate *latestDate;
@property (assign, nonatomic) CGFloat topY;
@property (assign, nonatomic) CGFloat bottomY;
@property (assign, nonatomic) CGFloat minX;
@property (assign, nonatomic) CGFloat maxX;
@end
Now, let’s add a custom setter for our weightEntries property. This
will set the statistical data any time our entries change.
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Accessor Methods
- (void)setWeightEntries:(NSArray *)weightEntries
{
    _weightEntries = weightEntries;
    
    if ([_weightEntries count] > 0)
    {
        self.minimumWeight =
        [[weightEntries valueForKeyPath:@"@min.weightInLbs"]
floatValue];
        
        self.maximumWeight =
        [[weightEntries valueForKeyPath:@"@max.weightInLbs"]
floatValue];
        
        self.averageWeight =
        [[weightEntries valueForKeyPath:@"@avg.weightInLbs"]
floatValue];
        
        self.earliestDate =
        [weightEntries valueForKeyPath:@"@min.date"];
        
        self.latestDate =
        [weightEntries valueForKeyPath:@"@max.date"];
        
        NSAssert([self.latestDate isEqualToDate:
                  [[self.weightEntries lastObject] date]],
                 @"The weight entry array must be "
                 @"in ascending chronological order");
        
        NSAssert([self.earliestDate isEqualToDate:
                  [self.weightEntries[0] date]],
                 @"The weight entry array must be "

--- Page 324 ---
                 @"in ascending chronological order");
    }
    else
    {
        self.minimumWeight = 0.0;
        self.maximumWeight = 0.0;
        self.averageWeight = 0.0;
        self.earliestDate = nil;
        self.latestDate = nil;
    }
    
    [self setNeedsDisplay];
}
Ideally, nothing in this method comes as a surprise. We assign the
incoming value to our property. Then we check to see whether our new
array has any elements. If it does, we set up our statistical data. Here, we’re
using the KVC operators we used in the “Updating Our View” section of
Chapter 3. Notice that we can use them for both the weight and the date
properties. @min.date gives us the earliest date in the array, while
@max.date gives us the latest. We also check the first and last object and
make sure the first object is our earliest date and the last object is our latest
date. This acts as a quick sanity check. Obviously it won’t catch every
possible mistake—but it is fast, and it will catch most obvious problems
(like forgetting to reverse our array). As a bonus, it works even if our array
has only one entry.
If our array is empty (or has been set to nil), we simply clear out the
stats data.
Now, let’s draw the graph. Drawing code can get very complex, so we’re
going to split it into a number of helper methods.
Start by adding methods to calculate our graph size. We’ll be storing
these values in instance variables. I’m always a bit uncomfortable when I
store temporary data in an instance variable. I like to clear it out as soon as
I’m done—preventing me from accidentally misusing the data when it’s no
longer valid. So, let’s make a method to clean up our data as well.
Add these private methods to the bottom of our implementation block:
Click here to view code image
- (void)calculateGraphSize
{

--- Page 325 ---
    CGRect innerBounds =
    CGRectInset(self.bounds, self.margin, self.margin);
    self.topY = CGRectGetMinY(innerBounds) + self.margin;
    self.bottomY = CGRectGetMaxY(innerBounds);
    self.minX = CGRectGetMinX(innerBounds);
    self.maxX = CGRectGetMaxX(innerBounds);
}
- (void)clearGraphSize
{
    self.topY = 0.0;
    self.bottomY = 0.0;
    self.minX = 0.0;
    self.maxX = 0.0;
}
The calculateGraphSize shows off more of the CGGeometry
functions. Here, we use CGRectInset to take a rectangle and shrink it.
Each side will be moved in by our margin. Given our default values, this
will create a new rectangle that is centered on the old one but is 40 points
shorter and 40 points thinner.
You can also use this method to make rectangles larger, by using negative
inset values.
Then we use the CGRectGet... methods to pull out various bits of
data. The topY value deserves special attention. We want the top margin to
be twice as big as the bottom, left, and right. Basically, we want all of our
content to fit inside the innerBounds rectangle. We will use the topY
and bottomY to draw our minimum and maximum weight guidelines.
However, the top guideline needs a little extra room for its label.
The clearGraphSize method is much simpler; we just set everything
to 0.0.
Now, let’s add a private drawGraph method.
Click here to view code image
- (void)drawGraph
{
    // if we don't have any entries, we're done
    if ([self.weightEntries count] == 0) return;
    
    UIBezierPath *barGraph = [UIBezierPath bezierPath];
    barGraph.lineWidth = self.graphLineWidth;
    
    BOOL firstEntry = YES;

--- Page 326 ---
    for (WeightEntry *entry in self.weightEntries) {
        
        CGPoint point =
        CGPointMake([self calculateXForDate:entry.date],
                    [self
calculateYForWeight:entry.weightInLbs]);
        
        if (firstEntry)
        {
            [barGraph moveToPoint:point];
            firstEntry = NO;
        }
        else
        {
            [barGraph addLineToPoint:point];
        }
        
        if (entry.weightInLbs == self.maximumWeight)
        {
            [self drawDotForEntry:entry];
        }
        
        if (entry.weightInLbs == self.minimumWeight)
        {
            [self drawDotForEntry:entry];
        }
    }
    
    [self.tintColor setStroke];
    [barGraph stroke];
}
We start by checking to see whether we have any entries. If we don’t
have any entries, we’re done. There’s no graph to draw.
If we do have entries, we create an empty Bezier path to hold our line
graph. We iterate over all the entries in our array. We calculate the correct x-
and y-coordinates for each entry, based on their weight and date. Then, for
the first entry we move the cursor to the correct coordinates. For every
other entry, we add a line from the previous coordinates to our new
coordinates. If our entry is our minimum or maximum value, we draw a dot
at that location as well. Finally we draw the line. This time, we’re using our
view’s tintColor. We discussed tintColor in the “Customizing Our
Appearance” section of Chapter 3. Basically, graphView’s tintColor
will default to our window’s tint color—but we could programmatically
customize this view by giving it a different tintColor.

--- Page 327 ---
Let’s add the methods to calculate our x- and y-coordinates. Start with
the x-coordinate.
Click here to view code image
- (CGFloat) calculateXForDate:(NSDate *)date
{
    NSAssert([self.weightEntries count] > 0,
             @"You must have more than one entry "
             @"before you call this method");
    
    if ([self.earliestDate compare:self.latestDate] ==
NSOrderedSame )
    {
        return (self.maxX + self.minX) / (CGFloat)2.0;
    }
    
    NSTimeInterval max =
    [self.latestDate timeIntervalSinceDate:self.earliestDate];
    
    NSTimeInterval interval =
    [date timeIntervalSinceDate:self.earliestDate];
    
    CGFloat width = self.maxX - self.minX;
    CGFloat percent = (CGFloat)(interval / max);
    return percent * width + self.minX;
}
We start with a quick sanity check. This method should never be called if
we don’t have any entries. Then we check to see whether our earliest date
and our latest date are the same. If they are (for example, if we have only
one date), they should be centered in our graph. Otherwise, we need to
convert our dates into numbers that we can perform mathematical
operations on. The easiest way to do this is using the
timeIntervalSinceDate: method. This will return a double
containing the number of seconds between the current date and the
specified dates.
We can then use these values to calculate each date’s relative position
between our earliest and latest dates. We calculate a percentage from 0.0
(the earliest date) to 1.0 (the latest date). Then we use that percentage to
determine our x-coordinate.
Note that our literal floating-point values and our time intervals are
doubles. If we compile this on 32-bit, we want to convert them down to
floats. If we compile on 64-bit, we want to leave them alone. We can

--- Page 328 ---
accomplish this by casting them to CGFloat—since its size changes with
the target platform.
Now, let’s calculate the y-values.
Click here to view code image
- (CGFloat)calculateYForWeight:(CGFloat)weight
{
    NSAssert([self.weightEntries count] > 0,
             @"You must have more than one entry "
             @"before you call this method");
    
    if (self.minimumWeight == self.maximumWeight)
    {
        return (self.bottomY + self.topY) / (CGFloat)2.0;
    }  
    
    CGFloat height = self.bottomY - self.topY;
    CGFloat percent = (CGFloat)1.0 - (weight -
self.minimumWeight) /
    (self.maximumWeight - self.minimumWeight);
    
    return height * percent + self.topY;
}
The Y value calculations are similar. On the one hand, the code is a little
simpler, since we can do mathematical operations on the weight values
directly. Notice, however, that the math to calculate our percentage is much
more complicated. There are two reasons for this. First, in our dates, the
earliest date will always have a value of 0.0. With our weights, this is not
true. We need to adjust for our minimum weight. Second, remember that
our y-coordinates increase as you move down the screen. This means our
maximum weight must have the smallest y-coordinate, while our minimum
weight has the largest. We do this by inverting our percentage, subtracting
the value we calculate from 1.0.
Now, let’s add the method to draw our dots.
Click here to view code image
- (void)drawDotForEntry:(WeightEntry *)entry
{
    CGFloat x = [self calculateXForDate:entry.date];
    CGFloat y = [self calculateYForWeight:entry.weightInLbs];
    CGRect boundingBox =
    CGRectMake(x - (self.dotSize / (CGFloat)2.0),
               y - (self.dotSize / (CGFloat)2.0),

--- Page 329 ---
               self.dotSize,
               self.dotSize);
    
    UIBezierPath *dot =
    [UIBezierPath bezierPathWithOvalInRect:boundingBox];
    
    [self.tintColor setFill];
    [dot fill];
}
Here we get the x- and y-coordinates for our entry and calculate a
bounding box for our dot. Our bounding box’s height and width are equal to
our dotSize property, and it is centered on our x- and y-coordinates. We
then call bezierPathWithOvalInRect: to calculate a circular Bezier
path that will fit inside this bounding box. Then we draw the dot, using our
view’s tint color as the fill color.
Now, we just need to call these methods. Replace the commented out
drawRect: with the version shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (void)drawRect:(CGRect)rect
{
    [self calculateGraphSize];
    [self drawGraph];
    [self clearGraphSize];
}
Build and run the application. When it has zero entries, the graph view is
blank. If you add one entry, it will appear as a dot, roughly in the center of
the screen. Add two or more entries, and it will draw the graph’s line
(Figure 4.5). Rotate it, and the graph will be redrawn in the new
orientation.

--- Page 331 ---
FIGURE 4.5 A graph with four entries
Now we just need to add our guidelines. Let’s start by making a private
method to draw a guideline.
Click here to view code image
- (void)drawGuidelineAtY:(CGFloat)y withLabelText:(NSString
*)text
{
    UIFont *font =
    [UIFont preferredFontForTextStyle:UIFontTextStyleCaption1];
    
    NSDictionary *textAttributes =
    @{NSFontAttributeName:font,
      NSForegroundColorAttributeName:self.guideLineColor};
    
    CGSize textSize = [text sizeWithAttributes:textAttributes];
    CGRect textRect = CGRectMake(self.minX,
                                 y - textSize.height - 1,
                                 textSize.width,
                                 textSize.height);
    
    textRect = CGRectIntegral(textRect);
    
    UIBezierPath *textbox = [UIBezierPath
bezierPathWithRect:textRect];
    [self.superview.backgroundColor setFill];
    [textbox fill];
    
    [text drawInRect:textRect withAttributes:textAttributes];
    
    CGFloat pattern[] = {5, 2};
    
    UIBezierPath *line = [UIBezierPath bezierPath];
    line.lineWidth = self.guideLineWidth;
    [line setLineDash:pattern count:2 phase:0];
    
    [line moveToPoint:CGPointMake(CGRectGetMinX(self.bounds),
y)];
    [line addLineToPoint:CGPointMake(CGRectGetMaxX(self.bounds),
y)];
    
    [self.guideLineColor setStroke];;
    [line stroke];
}
We start by getting the Dynamic Type font for the Caption 1 style. Then
we create a dictionary of text attributes. These attributes are defined in
NSAttributedString UIKit Addons Reference. They can be used for

--- Page 332 ---
formatting parts of an attributed string; however, we will be using them to
format our entire string. We’re setting the font to our Dynamic Type font
and setting the text color to the guideline color.
Once that’s done, we use these attributes to calculate the size needed to
draw our text. Then we create a rectangle big enough to hold the text and
whose bottom edge is 1 point above the provided y-coordinate. Notice that
we use CGRectIntegral() on our rectangle. This will return the
smallest integral-valued rectangle that contains the source rectangle.
The sizeWithAttributes: method typically returns sizes that
include fractions of a pixel. However, we want to make sure our rectangle is
properly aligned with the underlying pixels. Unlike the custom line
drawing, when working with text, we should not offset our rectangle—the
text-rendering engine will handle that for us.
We first use the textRect to draw a box using our
BackgroundView’s background color. This will create an apparently
blank space for our label, making it easier to read. Then we draw our text
into the same rectangle.
Next, we define our line. Again, we start with an empty path. We set the
line’s width, and we set the dash pattern. Here, we’re using a C array. This
is one of the few places where you’ll see a C array in Objective-C. Our
dashed line pattern will draw a segment 5 points long, followed by a 2-point
gap. It then repeats this pattern.
We draw this line from the left edge of our view to the right edge of our
view along the provided y-coordinate. This means our line will lay just
below the bottom edge of our text’s bounding box. Finally, we set the line
color and draw the line.
Now we need to create our guidelines. We will have three: one for the
max weight, one for the minimum weight, and one for the average weight.
Add the following method to our implementation file:
Click here to view code image
- (void) drawLabelsAndGuides
{
    if ([self.weightEntries count] == 0) return;
    
    WeightUnit unit = getDefaultUnits();
    
    if (self.minimumWeight == self.maximumWeight)

--- Page 333 ---
    {
        float weight = [self.weightEntries[0] weightInLbs];
        
        NSString * weightLabel =
        [NSString stringWithFormat:@"Weight: %@",
         [WeightEntry stringForWeightInLbs:weight inUnit:unit]];
        
        [self drawGuidelineAtY:[self calculateYForWeight:weight]
                 withLabelText:weightLabel];
    }
    else
    {
        NSString *minLabel =
        [NSString stringWithFormat:@"Min: %@",
         [WeightEntry stringForWeightInLbs:self.minimumWeight
                                    inUnit:unit]];
        
        NSString *maxLabel =
        [NSString stringWithFormat:@"Max: %@",
         [WeightEntry stringForWeightInLbs:self.maximumWeight
                                    inUnit:unit]];
        
        NSString *averageLabel =
        [NSString stringWithFormat:@"Average: %@",
         [WeightEntry stringForWeightInLbs:self.averageWeight
                                    inUnit:unit]];
        
        [self drawGuidelineAtY:self.topY
                 withLabelText:maxLabel];
        
        [self drawGuidelineAtY:self.bottomY
                 withLabelText:minLabel];
        
        [self drawGuidelineAtY:
         [self calculateYForWeight:self.averageWeight]
                 withLabelText:averageLabel];
    }
}
In this method, we simply check to see whether we don’t have any
entries. If there are no entries, then we don’t need to draw any guidelines,
so we just return. Next, we check to see whether all of our entries have the
same weight (either because we have only one entry or because the user
entered the same weight for all entries). If we have only one weight value,
we create a single weight label and draw our line at the calculated y-
coordinate (which should be the vertical center of the graph). Our line

--- Page 334 ---
should match up with the dot or line that we drew in our drawGraph
method.
If we have more than one weight value, we create a minimum, maximum,
and average strings and then draw lines corresponding to the appropriate
values.
Now, add this method to drawRect: as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (void)drawRect:(CGRect)rect
{
    [self calculateGraphSize];
    [self drawGraph];
    [self drawLabelsAndGuides];
    [self clearGraphSize];
}
Run the application. With no entries, the graph view is still blank. Add a
single entry. This will appear in roughly the middle of the screen, with a
guideline running right through our dot. Add multiple lines. You should see
the Max, Average, and Min guidelines (Figure 4.6).

--- Page 336 ---
FIGURE 4.6 Our completed graph view
Our graph is almost done. We just need to update the fonts when the user
changes them. We will use the same basic procedure we used in the
previous chapter for our history and entry detail views.
Open GraphViewController.m and import
UIViewController+HBTUpdates.h. Now we need to override our
HBT_updateFonts method as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (void)HBT_updateFonts
{
    [super HBT_updateFonts];
    [self.graphView setNeedsDisplay];
}
If the user changes the font size, this method will mark our graph view as
needing to be redrawn. The next time through the run loop, the system will
redraw the graph, picking up the new fonts in the process.
Run the app. It will now update correctly when the user changes the font
size.
Now, as you can see, there’s a lot of room for improvement in this graph.
Ideally, however, you’ve learned a lot along the way. We’ve covered
drawing lines (the grid, graph, and guide lines), shapes (the dots), and text.
There are similar methods for drawing images as well—though, it is often
easier to just insert a UIImageView into your application. The
UIImageView’s drawing code is highly optimized, and you’re unlikely to
match its performance.
You should be able to use these, and the other UIKit drawing methods, to
create your own custom views. However, it doesn’t end here. There are a
couple of other graphic techniques worth considering.
Other Graphics Techniques
Under the hood, all of the UIKit drawing methods are actually calling Core
Graphics methods. Core Graphics is a low-level C-based library for high-
performance drawing. While, most of the time, we can do everything we
want at the UIKit level—if you need special features (e.g., gradients or
shadows), you will need to switch to Core Graphics.

--- Page 337 ---
All core graphics functions take a CGContextRef as their first
argument. The context is an opaque type that represents the drawing
environment. Our UIKit methods also draw into a context—however, the
context is hidden from us by default. We can access it, if we need, by
calling UIGraphicsGetCurrentContext(). This lets us freely mix
UIKit and Core Graphics drawing code.
In the drawRect: method, our code is drawn into a context that is then
displayed on the screen, we can also create graphics contexts to produce
JPEG or PNG images or PDFs. We may even use graphics contexts when
printing.
However, custom drawing isn’t the only way to produce a custom user
interface. We can also drop bitmap images into our layout. There are two
main techniques for adding bitmaps. If it’s simply artwork, we can just
place a UIImageView in our view hierarchy and set its image property.
If, however, our image needs to respond to touches, we can place a custom
UIButton and then call its backgroundImageForState: method
(or set the background image in Interface Builder).
Bitmaps are often easier than custom drawing. You simply ask your
graphic designer to create them for you. You place them in the assets
catalog, and you drop them into your interface.
However, custom drawn interfaces have a number of advantages. The
biggest is their size. Custom drawn views require considerably less memory
than bitmaps. The custom drawn views can also be redrawn to any arbitrary
size. If we want to change the size of a bitmapped image, we usually need
to get our graphic designer to make a new one. Finally, custom drawn views
can be dynamically generated at runtime. Bitmaps can only really present
static, unchanging pieces of art.
Often, however, we can get many of the advantages of bitmaps while
sidestepping their weaknesses by using resizeable images or image patterns.
For more information, check out -[UIImage
resizableImageWithCapInsets:], +[UIColor
colorWithPatternImage:}, and the Asset Catalog Help.

--- Page 338 ---
 Note
When using bitmapped images, you should always use PNG
files, if possible. Xcode will optimize the PNG files for the
underlying iOS hardware during compile time. Other formats
may require additional processing at runtime, which may
cause noticeable sluggishness or delays, especially for large
files.
Updating Our Drawing When the Data Changes
There’s one last modification to our graph view. We need to make sure our
graph is updated whenever our data changes. This isn’t so important now,
but it will become extremely important once we implement iCloud syncing.
To do this, we need to listen for our model’s notifications. However,
unlike our history view, we don’t need to track each change individually.
Instead, we will update our entire graph once all the changes are complete.
This means we need to track only a single notification.
Open GraphViewController.m. In the class extension, add the
following property:
Click here to view code image
@property (strong, nonatomic) id modelChangesCompleteObserver;
Now, add a dealloc method just below
initWithNibName:bundle:.
Click here to view code image
- (void)dealloc
{
    NSNotificationCenter *center = [NSNotificationCenter
defaultCenter];
    
    if (self.modelChangesCompleteObserver)
    {
        [center
removeObserver:self.modelChangesCompleteObserver];
    }
}

--- Page 339 ---
Next, let’s set up our observer. Since there’s only one and the code is so
simple, let’s just put this in viewDidLoad:.
Click here to view code image
- (void)viewDidLoad
{
    [super viewDidLoad];
    self.tabBarItem.selectedImage =
    [UIImage imageNamed:@"graph_selected"];
    
    NSNotificationCenter *center = [NSNotificationCenter
defaultCenter];
    NSOperationQueue *mainQueue = [NSOperationQueue mainQueue];
    __weak GraphViewController *_self = self;
   
    self.modelChangesCompleteObserver =
    [center
     addObserverForName:WeightHistoryDocumentChangesCompleteNoti
fication
     object:self.weightHistoryDocument
     queue:mainQueue
     usingBlock:^(NSNotification *note) {
         _self.graphView.weightEntries =
         [[[_self.weightHistoryDocument allEntries]
           reverseObjectEnumerator] allObjects];
     }];
}
This just resets our graph view’s weight entry array whenever our
document changes. Unfortunately, there’s no way to test this code yet. We
will get a chance to test it later this chapter, however.
Custom Transitions
iOS 7 provides classes and methods to support adding custom transitions to
our scenes. Specifically, we can customize the transitions when presenting
modal views, when switching between tabs, when pushing or popping
views onto a navigation controller, and during layout-to-layout transitions
between collection view controllers.
In this chapter, we will look at custom transitions when presenting view
controllers and when switching between tabs.
For modal segues, the transitions give us a lot of control beyond just
modifying the transition’s animation. We can also define the final shape and
size of our presented view. Since the presented view no longer needs to

--- Page 340 ---
cover the entire screen, our presenting scene remains in the view hierarchy.
We may even be able to interact with any exposed portions of that original
scene.
This is an important change, especially for the iPhone. In previous
versions of the iOS SDK, presented views had to fill the entire screen on the
iPhone (we had a few additional options on the iPad, but they were still
relatively limited).
The ability to modify the tab bar animation is also a nice improvement.
Before iOS 7, tab bar controllers could not use any animation at all.
Touching a tab bar would instantaneously change the content.
However, we’re not just going to add an animation sequence between our
tabs; we will also create an interactive transition, letting the users drive the
transition using a pan gesture. As the user slides her finger across the
screen, we will match the motion, sliding from one tab to the next.
Before we can do any of this, however, we need to understand how Core
Animation works. Core Animation is the underlying technology behind all
of our transitions.
Core Animation
I won’t lie to you: Core Animation is a rich, complex framework. Entire
books have been written on this topic. There are lots of little knobs to
tweak. However, UIKit has implemented a number of wrapper methods
around the basic Core Animation functionality. This lets us easily animate
our views, without dropping into the full complexity of the Core Animation
framework.
The bad news is UIKit actually exposes two different animation APIs.
The old API consists of calling a number of UIView methods. However,
these methods must be called in the correct order or you will get unexpected
behaviors. Furthermore, coordinating between different animations proved
difficult.
While these methods have not been officially deprecated yet, their use is
no longer recommended for any applications targeting iOS 4.0 or beyond.
Since our minimum deployment target is iOS 4.3, there is no good reason to
use these methods anymore.

--- Page 341 ---
Instead, we want to use UIView’s block-based animation API. UIKit
provides a number of class methods in the block-based animation API.
Some of these let us animate our views—moving them, resizing them, and
fading them in and out. Others let us transition between views. They will
remove a view from the view hierarchy, replacing it with a different view.
All UIViews have a number of animatable properties. These include
frame, bounds, center, transform, alpha, backgroundColor,
and contentStretch. To animate our view, we call one of the
animation methods. Inside the animation block, we change one or more of
these properties. Core Animation will then calculate the interpolated values
for that property for each frame over the block’s duration—and it will
smoothly animate the results.
If I want to move the view, I just change the frame or the center. If I
want to scale or rotate the view, I change the transform. If I want it to
fade in or fade out, I change the alpha. Everything else is just bells and
whistles.
UIView’s animation methods are listed here:
 animateWithDuration:animations: This is the simplest
animation method. We provide a duration and the animation block. It
animates our changes over the given duration.
 animateWithDuration:animations:completion: This
adds a completion block. This block runs after our animation has
ended. We can use this to clean up resources, set final positions,
trigger actions, or even chain one animation to the next.
animateWithDuration:delay:options:animations:c
ompletion: This is the real workhorse. It provides the most
options for simple animations. We can set the duration, a delay before
the animation begins, a bitmask of animation options, our animation
block, and a completion block.
animateWithDuration:delay:usingSpringWithDampi
ng:initialSpringVelocity:options:animations:co
mpletion: This is a newer animation method. It’s used to create
simple, spring-like effects. If you want to give the animation a slight

--- Page 342 ---
bounce before it settles into the final state, this is your method. You
can control the spring’s behavior by modifying the dampening and
initial velocity arguments. We will look at other techniques for
creating realistic, physics-based animations when we talk about
UIDynamics in Chapter 8.
animateKeyframesWithDuration:delay:options:ani
mations:completion: We can use this method to run keyframe
animations. These are more complex animations tied to specific points
in time. To set up keyframe animations, you must call
addKeyframeWithRelativeStartTime:relativeDurat
ion:animations: inside this method’s animation block.
addKeyframeWithRelativeStartTime:relativeDurat
ion:animations: Call this method inside
animateKeyframesWithDuration:delay:options:ani
mations:completion:’s animation block to set up keyframe
animations.
performSystemAnimation:onViews:options:animati
ons:completion: This method lets us perform a predefined
system animation on an array of views. We can also specify other
animations that will run in parallel. At this point, this lets us only
delete views. The views are removed from the view hierarchy when
the animation block is complete.
transitionWithView:duration:options:animations
:completion: We can use this method to add, remove, show, or
hide subviews of the specified container view. The change between
states will be animated using the transition style specified in the
options. This gives us more flexibility than
transitionFromView:toView:duration:options:com
pletion:, but it requires more work to set up properly.
transitionFromView:toView:duration:options:com

--- Page 343 ---
pletion: This method replaces the “from view” with the “to view”
using the transition animation specified in the options. By default the
“from view” is removed from the view hierarchy, and the “to view” is
added to the view hierarchy when the animation is complete.
 performWithoutAnimation: You can call methods that include
animation blocks inside this method’s block. The changes in those
animation blocks will take effect immediately with no animation.
Auto Layout and Core Animation
The easiest way to move views around using animation is to modify the
view’s frame or center inside an animation block. This works fine as
long as our view only has implicit auto layout constraints. In other words,
we added a view to our view hierarchy, either programmatically or using
Interface Builder, but we don’t provide any constraints for that view.
As long as a view has implicit constraints, we can continue to
programmatically alter its position and size using the frame and center
properties. However, once we start adding explicit constraints, things get
more difficult. We can no longer think in terms of the frame or the
center. If we try, we may get the view to move, but Auto Layout and
Core Animation code will eventually fight for control over the view’s
position. This can result in unexpected results. The animation may run to
completion, only to have the view snap back to its original position. The
animation may seem to work properly, only to revert after our device rotates
or after some other call updates our constraints. Sometimes it can even
cause views to flicker back to an old position briefly at the end of the
animation. It all depends on the exact nature of the animation and the
timing of the updates.
So, if we want to animate changes in size or position of a view with
explicit constraints, we have two options.
 We can modify one of the existing constraints inside the animation
block. This is the easiest option, but it is also more limited. We can
change only the constraint’s constant property. Nothing else.
 We can remove the old constraint, add a new constraint, and then call
layoutIfNeeded inside the animation block. This lets us make
any arbitrary changes to our constraints but requires more work.

--- Page 344 ---
For the purpose of the Health Beat project, we will perform animation on
views only with implicit constraints. These are easier to write and easier to
understand. I recommend shying away from animating Auto Layout
constraints until you have gotten very comfortable with both Core
Animation and Auto Layout.
Customizing View Presentation
When creating our own transitions, we have two options: custom transitions
and interactive transitions. Custom transitions work like most transitions
we’ve seen. We trigger the transition, and then it automatically runs to
completion. Most transitions occur rather rapidly, usually in 0.25 seconds.
On the other hand, the user drives interactive transitions. Before iOS 7,
we had only one example of an interactive transition—the
UIPageViewController. This is the controller behind iBook’s page
flip animation. As you drag your finger across the screen, the page seems to
curl, following your finger. You can move the finger forward or backward.
You can stop, speed up, or slow down. The animation follows along. Lift
your finger and the page either flips to its original position or continues to
flip to the new page.
We will start with a custom transition since it is simpler. The actual
transition isn’t too difficult—though it does have a number of moving parts
to keep track of. However, it radically changes the behavior of our
application, which will require some additional work to support.
Customizing Our Add Entry View’s Transition
Our application presents our Add Entry View controller as a modal view. It
slides in from the bottom and then slides back out again when we are done.
We want to change this. Instead of covering the entire screen, we’d like to
cover just a small rectangle in the center. We’d also like to fade in and out,
instead of sliding.
Doing this requires three steps.
1. We set the presented controller’s modalPresentationStyle to
UIModalPresentationCustom.
2. We provide a transitioning delegate.
3. The transitioning delegate creates an object, which implements the
actual animation sequences for us. It will actually provide two

--- Page 345 ---
separate animation sequences: one to present our view, one to dismiss
it.
Open HistoryTableViewController.m and add the following
code to the bottom of its prepareForSegue:sender: method. This
should go after the if block but before the closing curly bracket.
Click here to view code image
if ([segue.identifier isEqualToString:@"Add Entry Segue"])
{
    UIViewController *destinationController =
    segue.destinationViewController;
        
    destinationController.modalPresentationStyle =
    UIModalPresentationCustom;
        
    destinationController.transitioningDelegate = self;
}
Next, we need to have our history table view controller adopt the
UIViewControllerTransitioningDelegate protocol. Scroll up
to the top of the file, and modify the class extension’s declaration as shown
here:
Click here to view code image
@interface HistoryTableViewController ()
<UIViewControllerTransitioningDelegate>
This should get rid of our errors, but if you run the app and bring up the
add entry view, you’ll see that nothing has changed. Actually, the rotations
no longer work properly—so things are worse than before.
We need to implement two of
UIViewControllerTransitioningDelegate’s methods:
animationControllerForPresentedController:presenti
ngController:sourceController: and
animationControllerForDismissedController:. However,
before we do this, we need to create our animation controller class.

--- Page 346 ---
Animator Object
We need to create an object, which will manage our transition’s animation.
In the Controller’s group, create a new Objective-C class named
AddEntryAnimator. It should be a subclass of NSObject. Open
AddEntryAnimator.h, and modify it as shown here:
Click here to view code image
@interface AddEntryAnimator : NSObject
<UIViewControllerAnimatedTransitioning>
@property (assign, nonatomic, getter = isPresenting) BOOL
presenting;
@end
We’re simply adopting the
UIViewControllerAnimatedTransitioning protocol and
declaring a presenting property.
Our AddEntryAnimator will be responsible for actually animating
the appearance and disappearance of our Add Entry view. To do this, we
must implement two methods: animateTransition: and
transitionDuration:.
Switch to AddEntryAnimator.m. At the top of the file, let’s import
AddEntryViewController.h. Next, let’s define a constant value
before the @implementation block.
Click here to view code image
static const NSTimeInterval AnimationDuration = 0.25;
This is the duration we will use for our animations. We can now
implement the transitionDuration: method as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (NSTimeInterval)transitionDuration:
(id<UIViewControllerContextTransitioning>)transitionContext
{
    return AnimationDuration;
}
This method just returns our constant.
Now, let’s look at animateTransition: method. This method takes
a single argument, our transition context. This is an opaque type, but it
adopts the UIViewControllerContextTransitioning protocol.

--- Page 347 ---
As we will see, the context provides a wide range of important information
about our transition. This includes giving us access to our view controllers,
the beginning and ending frames for their views (if defined by the
transition), and our container view.
Our views and view controller hierarchies must be in a consistent state
before our transition begins. They must also return to a consistent state after
our transition ends. However, during the transition, they may pass through a
temporary inconsistent state. To help manage this, we use a container view.
The system will create the container and add it to our view hierarchy. It then
acts as our superview during our animation sequence.
 Note
When presenting view controllers, the container view is
always full screen and in portrait orientation. If you are
animating views in landscape orientation, you will need to
make any necessary conversions to the coordinates to get the
desired results.
As part of animateTransition:, we need to perform the following
steps:
1. Make sure both views have been added to the container view.
2. Animate the transition from one view to the next.
3. Make sure each view is in its final position, if defined.
4. Call completeTransition: to end the transition and put things
back into a consistent state.
Since we are using the same animator for both presenting and dismissing
our views, our animateTransition: method must handle both cases.
To simplify things, we will do some preprocessing in
animateTransition:, but then call separate private methods to handle
the actual animations.
Add the animateTransition: method, as shown here:
Click here to view code image
-(void)animateTransition:
(id<UIViewControllerContextTransitioning>)transitionContext

--- Page 348 ---
{
    id fromViewController =
    [transitionContext viewControllerForKey:
     UITransitionContextFromViewControllerKey];
    
    id toViewController =
    [transitionContext viewControllerForKey:
     UITransitionContextToViewControllerKey];
    
    UIView *containerView = [transitionContext containerView];
    
    if (self.presenting)
    {
        [self
         presentAddEntryViewController:toViewController
         overParentViewController:fromViewController
         usingContainerView:containerView
         transitionContext:transitionContext];
    }
    else
    {
        [self
         dismissAddEntryViewController:fromViewController
         fromParentViewController:toViewController
         usingContainerView:containerView
         transitionContext:transitionContext];
    }
}
We start by requesting the “from” and “to” view controllers from our
transition context. Then we ask for our container view. We check to see
whether we’re presenting or dismissing our Add Entry view, and then we
call the corresponding helper method.
When presenting view controllers, the from- and to-controllers can be a
common source of confusion and errors. When our Add Entry View is
appearing, the from-controller will be our RootTabBarController.
This is the presenting view controller as defined by our current presentation
context. The to-controller is our AddEntryViewController.
However, when we’re dismissing the Add Entry View, these roles are
reversed.
This means, sometimes our AddEntryViewController is the to-
controller. Sometimes it’s the from-controller. By using helper functions,
we can pass the toViewController and fromViewController in
as more clearly named arguments. This lets us work with the

--- Page 349 ---
parentController and addEntryController—instead of trying
to remember which is “from” and which is “to” in each particular case.
Next, add the
presentAddEntryViewController:overParentViewContro
ller:usingContainerView:transitionContext: method as
shown here:
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - private
- (void) presentAddEntryViewController:
(AddEntryViewController *)addEntryController
overParentViewController:(UIViewController *)parentController
usingContainerView:(UIView *)containerView
transitionContext:
(id<UIViewControllerContextTransitioning>)transitionContext
{
    
    [containerView addSubview:parentController.view];
    [containerView addSubview:addEntryController.view];
    
    UIView *addEntryView = addEntryController.view;
    UIView *parentView = parentController.view;
    CGPoint center = parentView.center;
    UIInterfaceOrientation orientation =
    parentController.interfaceOrientation;
    if (UIInterfaceOrientationIsPortrait(orientation))    {
        addEntryView.frame = CGRectMake(0.0, 0.0, 280.0, 170.0);
    }
    else
    {
        addEntryView.frame = CGRectMake(0.0, 0.0, 170.0, 280.0);
    }
    
    addEntryView.center = center;
    addEntryView.alpha = 0.0;
    
    [UIView
     animateWithDuration:AnimationDuration
     animations:^{
         addEntryView.alpha = 1.0;
     }
     completion:^(BOOL finished) {
         [transitionContext completeTransition:YES];
     }];    
}

--- Page 350 ---
We start by adding both views to the container view. We want to make
sure the parent view is added first, so our Add Entry view appears above it
when drawn. According to the documentation, the system usually adds the
from-controller to the container for us, but we typically have to add the to-
controller ourselves. Personally, I find it easiest to just add both views. This
won’t hurt anything, and it guarantees that both views are properly added
and that they will be added in the correct order.
Next, we need to make sure our views end up in the proper position.
Since we are presenting a view controller (instead of using the navigation
controller or tab bar), our to-controller doesn’t have a preset destination. We
get to define its final size and location. However, our parent view controller
must not move. We could verify this by calling our transition context’s
initialFrameForViewController: and
finalFrameForViewController: methods for both view
controllers. If it has a required position, it will return the frame for that
location. If not, it returns CGRectZero instead—freeing us to do whatever
we want.
We’re going to make our Add Entry view 280 points wide and 170 points
tall. We are also going to center it in its superview. However, we need to
make sure all of these coordinates are in the container view’s coordinate
system, which is always in a portrait orientation.
Finally we perform the actual animation. We set our view’s alpha to
0.0, making it invisible. Then we use an animation block to fade it in, by
setting the alpha to 1.0 inside the animation block. When the animation
is complete, we call completeTransition:. This puts our view and
view controller hierarchies into their final state and performs other cleanup
tasks.

--- Page 351 ---
 Note
completeTransition:’s argument should be YES if
our transition completed successfully, NO if the animation
was canceled. Most custom transitions cannot be canceled, so
we almost always just pass YES. However, this argument
becomes more important when writing interactive transitions.
As you will see, the dismissal code is similar but much simpler. Add the
following method, as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (void) dismissAddEntryViewController:
(AddEntryViewController *)addEntryController
fromParentViewController:(UIViewController *)parentController
usingContainerView:(UIView *)containerView
transitionContext:
(id<UIViewControllerContextTransitioning>)transitionContext
{
    [containerView addSubview:parentController.view];
    [containerView addSubview:addEntryController.view];
    
    [UIView
     animateWithDuration:AnimationDuration
     animations:^{
         addEntryController.view.alpha = 0.0;
     } completion:^(BOOL finished) {
         [transitionContext completeTransition:YES];
     }];
}
This time, we don’t need to worry about calculating anyone’s frame.
Again, the parent view should not move, while the Add Entry view will be
removed from the view hierarchy and deallocated. So, we can safely ignore
both of their frames.
We just add both views to the container view and then create our
animation block. This time, we just set the Add Entry view’s alpha to 0.0
inside the animation block and then call completeTransition: in the
completion block.

--- Page 352 ---
Implementing the Delegate Methods
Now, open HistoryTableViewController.m and import
AddEntryAnimator.h. Then add the following methods after the
storyboard unwinding methods:
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - UIViewControllerTransitioningDelegate Methods
- (id<UIViewControllerAnimatedTransitioning>)
animationControllerForPresentedController:(UIViewController
*)presented
presentingController:(UIViewController *)presenting
sourceController:(UIViewController *)source
{
    AddEntryAnimator *animator = [[AddEntryAnimator alloc]
init];
    animator.presenting = YES;
    return animator;
}
- (id<UIViewControllerAnimatedTransitioning>)
animationControllerForDismissedController:(UIViewController
*)dismissed
{
    AddEntryAnimator *animator = [[AddEntryAnimator alloc]
init];
    animator.presenting = NO;
    return animator;
}
The first method is called when performing the modal segue to our
AddEntryView Controller. The second is called when our segue
unwinds and our AddEntryViewController is dismissed. In both
cases, we instantiate an animator. We set its presenting property, and
we return the animator. The animator does all the real work.
Run the application, and display our Add Entry view. As you can see,
there are a couple of problems. Our keyboard covers our view. Our weight
label is truncated—we really want our text fields to shrink instead. Our
view is not easy to see against the background. It does not rotate properly.
When the Cancel or Save button is pressed, it is not dismissed. And, we can
still use the controls of our background view. Click the Graph tab or the
Edit button, and they operate normally.

--- Page 353 ---
As you can see, switching from presenting a modal view to presenting a
custom pop-up can involve quite a few changes to our code.
General Cleanup
Let’s fix the easy things first. For whatever reason, when we use the regular
modal presentation style, the segue unwinding methods will automatically
dismiss our presented view controller. We didn’t have to do anything.
However, with the custom presentation style, we need to programmatically
dismiss our presented controller.
Still in HistoryTableViewController.m, navigate to our segue
unwinding methods. Add the following line to the bottom of both
addNewEntrySaved: and addNewEntryCanceled::
Click here to view code image
[self dismissViewControllerAnimated:YES completion:nil];
Our Add Entry view will now be properly dismissed whenever the Save
or Cancel button is tapped.
Next, open Main.storyboard and zoom in on the Add Entry View
Controller scene. Our Auto Layout constraints did not work as we expected.
Our labels are supposed to remain the same size, while our text fields grow
and shrink. This worked properly when we expanded the view, but didn’t
work now that we shrunk the view.
There were no unusual warnings in the console, so either we have a bug
in our constraint logic or we have managed to create an ambiguous
constraint. According to Interface Builder, everything’s OK, so let’s take a
look at the compression resistance and hugging priorities for our labels and
text fields.
Our labels have a content hugging of 251 and a compression resistance of
750. Our text fields have a content hugging of 100 and a compression
resistance of 750. We reduced their content hugging to make sure they
stretched when the view grew wider during rotations; however, we never
thought about our views becoming smaller. Both the text field and the label
have a content hugging of 750, which means we have an ambiguous layout.
The system doesn’t know which element to shrink.
Drop the Horizontal Compression Resistance on both text fields to 100.
This breaks the tie. Now, when we run the app, our text fields shrink instead

--- Page 354 ---
of our labels.
 Note
Interface Builder did not alert us to this ambiguous layout,
because typically the view’s width typically expands only
from its portrait orientation. Interface Builder does not check
every possible change—just the most common ones.
This, however, introduces another problem. Our text fields are now too
small for our date. Open AddEntryViewController.m and modify
updateDateText as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (void)updateDateText
{
    if (self.date == nil)
    {
        self.dateTextField.text = @"";
    }
    else
    {
        self.dateTextField.text =
        [NSDateFormatter
         localizedStringFromDate:self.date
         dateStyle:NSDateFormatterShortStyle
         timeStyle:NSDateFormatterShortStyle];
        
        self.dateTextField.textColor =
        [UIColor darkTextColor];
    }
}
Now, back in Main.storyboard, select the date text field, and
change its Min Font Size attribute to 12. That should both give us more
space, and let the font shrink if necessary.
While we’re in Interface Builder, let’s do something about our view’s
appearance. Select the View, and then click the Background attribute. In the
pop-up menu, select Other.... This brings up the color picker. I want a very
light blue—almost, but not quite, white. Select the Color Sliders tab, and set
it to RGB Sliders. Set the Red to 240, Green to 245, and Blue to 255. Then

--- Page 355 ---
close the color picker. This will help our Add Entry view stand out against
the background.
Finally, let’s fix the rotation. Switch back to
AddEntryViewController.m and add the following method just
under HBT_updateFonts:
Click here to view code image
- (void)willAnimateRotationToInterfaceOrientation:
(UIInterfaceOrientation)toInterfaceOrientation
duration:(NSTimeInterval)duration
{
    [self centerViewInParent];
}
This method is called from within our rotation’s animation block, so any
animatable properties that we change here will be animated along with the
rotation. We will be updating our view’s position in a few different
methods, so we should extract that code into its own, private method. Add
the centerViewInParent method to the bottom of our private
methods, just before the @end directive.
Click here to view code image
- (void)centerViewInParent
{
    UIView *parentView = self.view.superview;
    CGPoint center = parentView.center;
    center = [parentView convertPoint:center
                             fromView:parentView.superview];
    self.view.center = center;
}
Here, we calculate our center’s new position. Again, we grab the
superview’s center and then convert it to the correct coordinate system.
Finally, we assign it to our view.
This will cause our view’s location to update properly when rotated.
Avoiding the Keyboard
We need to listen to the keyboard notifications and move out of the way of
our incoming keyboard. We also need to adjust our position if the keyboard
is being displayed when a new text field is selected or when we rotate. This
means we need to know the keyboard’s state.

--- Page 356 ---
Let’s start by listening to some of the keyboard appearance and
disappearance notifications. Open AddEntryViewController.m. In
the class extension, we need to add two properties for our observers. We
also need a property to hold our keyboard’s frame and a property to record
whether it’s currently being displayed.
Click here to view code image
@property (strong, nonatomic) id keyboardWillAppearObserver;
@property (strong, nonatomic) id keyboardWillDisappearObserver;
@property (assign, nonatomic) CGRect keyboardFrame;
@property (assign, nonatomic) BOOL keyboardIsShown;
Now, after initWithNibName:bundle:, add a dealloc method
to remove these observers.
Click here to view code image
- (void)dealloc
{
    NSNotificationCenter *center = [NSNotificationCenter
defaultCenter];
    
    if (self.keyboardWillAppearObserver)
    {
        [center removeObserver:self.keyboardWillAppearObserver];
    }
    
    if (self.keyboardWillDisappearObserver)
    {
        [center
removeObserver:self.keyboardWillDisappearObserver];
    }
}
Most of the time, we’ve removed our observers just because it’s a good
habit to get into. However, since the view controllers in question would last
throughout our application’s entire life cycle, it was not vital. In this case,
however, it is required. Our Add Entry View Controller will be deallocated
after it is dismissed. We must make sure it removes all its observers before
it disappears.
Now, navigate to viewDidLoad: We’re going to add the following line
to the bottom of the method (just after the call to
setupInputAccessories):
[self setupNotifications];

--- Page 357 ---
Next, we need to implement this method. Add setupNotifications
just after our centerViewInParent method:
Click here to view code image
- (void)setupNotifications
{
    NSNotificationCenter *center = [NSNotificationCenter
defaultCenter];
    NSOperationQueue *mainQueue = [NSOperationQueue mainQueue];
    UIWindow *window =
    [[[UIApplication sharedApplication] delegate] window];
    
    __weak AddEntryViewController *_self = self;
    
    self.keyboardWillAppearObserver =
    [center
     addObserverForName:UIKeyboardWillShowNotification
     object:nil
     queue:mainQueue
     usingBlock:^(NSNotification *note) {
         _self.keyboardIsShown = YES;
         CGRect frame =
         [note.userInfo[UIKeyboardFrameEndUserInfoKey]
CGRectValue];
         frame = [window convertRect:frame fromWindow:nil];
         frame = [_self.view.superview convertRect:frame
fromView:window];
         _self.keyboardFrame = frame;
         
         NSTimeInterval duration =
         [note.userInfo[UIKeyboardAnimationDurationUserInfoKey]
          doubleValue];
         
         [UIView animateWithDuration:duration animations:^{
             [_self placeFirstResponderAboveKeyboard];
         }];
     }];
    
    
    self.keyboardWillDisappearObserver =
    [center
     addObserverForName:UIKeyboardWillHideNotification
     object:nil
     queue:mainQueue
     usingBlock:^(NSNotification *note) {
         _self.keyboardIsShown = NO;
         _self.keyboardFrame = CGRectZero;
         
         NSTimeInterval duration =

--- Page 358 ---
         [note.userInfo[UIKeyboardAnimationDurationUserInfoKey]
          doubleValue];
         
         [UIView animateWithDuration:duration animations:^{
             [_self centerViewInParent];
         }];
     }];
}
When the keyboard appears, we set keyboardIsShown to YES, and
then we grab the keyboard’s end frame from the notification’s userInfo
dictionary. We convert it into our superview’s coordinate system. Then we
call a private method to update our position relative to the keyboard. We do
the update in an animation block and set the animation duration to our
keyboard’s appearance duration—this helps match our keyboard’s
animation.
When the keyboard will disappear notification is received, we set
keyboardIsShown to NO. We set the keyboard’s frame to all zeros, and
we center our view in the frame. Again, we use an animation block to sync
with our keyboard’s disappearance.
We still need to implement
placeFirstResponderAboveKeyboard. Add this after our
setupNotifications method.
Click here to view code image
- (void)placeFirstResponderAboveKeyboard
{
    UIView *parentView = self.view.superview;
    CGPoint currentCenter = self.view.center;
    
    UIView *firstResponder = [self.dateTextField
isFirstResponder] ?
    self.dateTextField : self.weightTextField;
    
    CGRect textFrame = [parentView
convertRect:firstResponder.frame
                                      fromView:self.view];
    
    // our superview is always in portrait orientation
    UIInterfaceOrientation orientation =
self.interfaceOrientation;
    if (UIInterfaceOrientationIsPortrait(orientation))
    {
        CGFloat textBottom = CGRectGetMaxY(textFrame);

--- Page 359 ---
        CGFloat targetLocation =
        CGRectGetMinY(self.keyboardFrame) - (CGFloat)8.0;
        currentCenter.y += targetLocation - textBottom;
    }
    else if (orientation == UIInterfaceOrientationLandscapeLeft)
    {
        CGFloat textBottom = CGRectGetMaxX(textFrame);
        CGFloat targetLocation =
        CGRectGetMinX(self.keyboardFrame) - (CGFloat)8.0;
        currentCenter.x += targetLocation - textBottom;
    }
    else
    {
        CGFloat textBottom = CGRectGetMinX(textFrame);
        CGFloat targetLocation =
        CGRectGetMaxX(self.keyboardFrame) + (CGFloat)8.0;
        currentCenter.x += targetLocation - textBottom;
    }
    
    self.view.center = currentCenter;
}
We start by grabbing our parent view and our current center. We want to
make sure that all coordinates are in our parent view’s coordinate system, so
we will convert our coordinates when necessary.
Next, we determine who our first responder is. Here, we use C’s ternary
operator. Basically, it has three parts. It checks to see whether the first part
(before the question mark) is true. If it is true, it returns the second part
(between the question mark and the colon). If it’s not true, it returns the
third part (after the colon).
We can then convert our first responder’s frame to the parent view’s
coordinate system and calculate the distance we need to move our view.
This gets a bit complicated, as you can see.
Here’s the problem. You might think that our Add Entry view’s
superview would be the presenting controller’s view (e.g., the
RootTabBarController’s view). This is not the case. It’s actually kept
in the container view from our transition. And, just like inside our
transition, the container view is always kept in portrait orientation. This
means we have to adjust our coordinates appropriately.
Conceptually, we get the bottom of the selected text view and the top of
our keyboard. We calculate the difference between them, adding in an 8-

--- Page 360 ---
point margin. Then we offset our view’s center by that difference. Of
course, the details vary depending on our current orientation.
This will shift our view so that the currently selected text field is just
above the keyboard. Notice that it also works when we rotate, since our
keyboard is removed and re-added during rotations.
Now, our keyboard moves out of the way—most of the time. However,
there’s a problem when our view first appears. The keyboard appears as
well, but the timing doesn’t quite work. The simplest solution is to move
our call to becomeFirstResponder from viewWillAppear: to
viewDidAppear:. This delays the appearance of our keyboard, making
sure our view can move out of the way as expected.
Delete the following line from viewWillAppear::
Click here to view code image
[self.weightTextField becomeFirstResponder];
And, just after that method, implement viewDidAppear: as shown
here:
Click here to view code image
- (void)viewDidAppear:(BOOL)animated
{
    [super viewDidAppear:animated];
    [self.weightTextField becomeFirstResponder];
}
One last tweak. If we are currently editing one text field and we select the
other text field, our view should shift appropriately. Let’s start by adding an
action method that the views can trigger when they begin editing.
Add this method right after the unitButtonTapped method:
Click here to view code image
- (IBAction)textFieldSelected:(id)sender {
    if (self.keyboardIsShown)
    {
        [UIView animateWithDuration:0.25 animations:^{
            [self placeFirstResponderAboveKeyboard];
        }];
    }
}

--- Page 361 ---
Here, we just check to make sure the keyboard is already showing. If it
is, we adjust our view’s positioning inside an animation block with a
quarter-second duration.
 Note
If in doubt, use a quarter-second animations. These usually
match the system animations nicely.
Now, let’s switch to Main.storyboard. Control-click the weight text
field to bring up its connections HUD. Drag from Editing Did Begin to our
Add Entry View Controller, and select textFieldSelected:. Do the same
thing for our date text field.
 Note
We could have used the Assistant editor to Control-drag
between the UI and code—however, I find that connecting a
second control to an existing action is often tricky in the
Assistant editor. One of the keys to enjoying Interface
Builder is to realize that there are multiple ways to achieve
most tasks. If one approach isn’t working, try another.
That’s it. Our pop-up view now automatically adjusts its positioning
relative to the keyboard. Run the app and test it. It would be nice to have a
Next button in our toolbar to toggle between the text fields, but I’ll leave
that as an exercise for the reader.

--- Page 362 ---
Rotating the Container View
The fact that the container view is always in portrait orientation
may seem odd—but it makes sense once we dig a bit deeper.
Remember, our transition’s container view acts as the superview
for both our presenting and our presented view controller. And,
as we saw, the presenting view controller is our
RootTabBarController.
Now, before the transition began, the
RootTabBarController’s superview was our window, and
the window is always displayed as full screen and in portrait
orientation, so the container view simply matches that.
While this makes sense, it’s often harder to work with. Ideally we
would like to rotate the container view to the interface’s current
orientation and just present our view controllers inside it. This is
possible, but it may be more work than is worth.
The basic procedure is simple. Grab the transform from the from-
controller. Assign that to the container view. Then set the
transform for both the from-controller and the to-controller to
CGAffineTransformIdentity. Update the frames as
necessary.
The code should look like the following:
Click here to view code image
// Adjust the coordinate system of all three views
containerView.transform =
fromViewController.view.transform;
containerView.frame = window.bounds;
fromViewController.view.transform =
CGAffineTransformIdentity;
fromViewController.view.frame = containerView.bounds;
toViewController.view.transform =
CGAffineTransformIdentity;
This, however, isn’t enough. The system expects our views to be
in the original orientation. It will also “helpfully” reset some (but

--- Page 363 ---
not all) of the transforms. To make things work completely
correctly, you’ll need to set everything up before each animation
block and then reset it during the completion handler. That also
means we’d have to do a similar shuffle-and-reset in our
placeFirstResponderAboveKeyboard method.
However, if all of that is done correctly, we wouldn’t need to
check the orientation and modify our math. Of course, I think the
modified math is simpler—but your mileage may vary.
Making the View Modal Again
Currently, the users can interact with the scenes behind our Add Entry view.
This doesn’t cause any real problems. You can actually use this to make
sure our graph view is updating properly. With the History view showing,
bring up the Add Entry view. Then tap the Done button to dismiss the
keyboard. With our Add Entry view still showing, select the Graph tab.
Now enter a weight. It should appear on the graph.
While this is somewhat interesting, I’d rather make our Add Entry scene
behave like a modal view again. I think that would be less surprising and
confusing to the users. Fortunately, this is rather easy to do. However, the
solution is not obvious or intuitive.
We just need to modify the way our Add Entry view performs hit testing.
When a finger touches the screen, the system uses hit testing to determine
exactly which element was touched. For each touch event, it asks the
window if the touch was within its bounds. If it was, the window asks all of
its children. If the touch was within any of their bounds, they ask all their
children. This repeats all the way down the view hierarchy.
The system does this using the hitTest:withEvent: method. By
default, if the touch event is outside the receiver’s bounds, it returns nil.
Otherwise, it calls hitTest:withEvent: on all of its subviews. If any
of them return a non-nil value, it returns the results from the subview at
the highest index (the one that would lie on top of all the others).
Otherwise, it returns itself.
So, we’ve already seen that our Add Entry view’s superview is our
transition’s container view. This view fills the entire screen. So, no matter
where the user touches on the screen, it will be inside the container’s

--- Page 364 ---
bounds. The container will then call our view’s hitTest:withEvent:
method. We just need to guarantee that our view never returns nil. This
will allow our view to grab all the touch events whenever it is displayed.
So, let’s start by adding a new UIView subclass to the Views group.
Name this class AddEntryView. Then open AddEntryView.m. We
don’t need the initWithFrame: or the commented-out drawRect:
methods. Delete them both. Then add the following method:
Click here to view code image
- (UIView *)hitTest:(CGPoint)point withEvent:(UIEvent *)event
{
    UIView *view = [super hitTest:point withEvent:event];
    if (view == nil) return self;
    return view;
}
Here, we call super’s hitTest:withEvent:. If this returns a value,
we simply pass that value along. Otherwise, we return self. This lets our
view’s subviews continue to respond to touch events but grabs and ignores
all other touch events.
Now, open Main.storyboard. Zoom in on the Add Entry View
Controller scene. Select the scene’s view, and in the Identity inspector,
change its class to AddEntryView.
Run the application. When you bring up the Add Entry view, you can no
longer touch any of the controls below our view. However, the keyboard
still works, since it is displayed above our view.
Last Thoughts on Presenting Custom Views
The actual custom animation had a number of cogs and gears that needed to
be connected correctly, but it really wasn’t that hard. We spent most of our
time writing custom code to deal with the fact that our Add Entry view was
no longer a full-screen, modal view.
In fact, we’ve written all of the custom code with the basic assumption
that our Add Entry View Controller will always be presented using the
UIModalPresentationCustom presentation style.
If we ever plan on pushing this controller onto a navigation stack, adding
it to our tab bar, or even presenting it full screen using the
UIModalPresentationFullScreen style, we would need to check

--- Page 365 ---
and see how our view is being displayed and then enable or disable the code
as appropriate.
We could use our view controller’s presentingViewController,
navigationController, tabBarController,
modalPresentationStyle, and similar properties to determine this.
However, going through all the different corner cases gets quite involved.
The good news is if you mess this up, it will be immediately, visibly
obvious. This is not one of those bugs that can sneak up and bite you
unexpectedly.
Interactive Transitions
Now, let’s look at interactive transitions.
There’s good news, bad news, and good news again. Interactive
transitions build upon everything we learned about custom transitions. They
are a bit more complex, since we have to sync them with a gesture (or really
anything that can programmatically drive our percentages). We also need to
determine whether our transition is finished or whether it has been
canceled.
Fortunately, we are just adding animation and a bit of additional
interactivity to the tab bar controller—we’re not making fundamental
changes to the way these scenes are presented, like we did with our Add
Entry scene. So, once the animation is working, we’re done.
When presenting a view controller, we had to set the controller’s
transitioningDelegate. Fortunately, when customizing the
transitions for tab bars or navigation bars, the animation methods have
already been added to the UITabBarControllerDelegate and
UINavigationControllerDelegate protocols. So, we just need to
create an object that adopts UITabBarControllerDelegate. Assign
it as our tab bar’s delegate and implement the animation methods
Just like before, our delegate will return an animator object that adopts
the UIViewControllerAnimatedTransitioning protocol. This
will manage the noninteractive portions of our animation; for example, if
you select a new tab, the animator object will automatically animate the
transition from one scene to the next.

--- Page 366 ---
If we want to add interactivity, we also need to return an object that
adopts the UIViewControllerInteractiveTransitioning
protocol. This is responsible for the interactive portion. Interactively driving
the animation could get quite complex. Fortunately, UIKit provides a
concrete implementation,
UIPercentDrivenInteractiveTransition, that handles most of
the details for us.
The percent-driven interactive transition will actually use our animator
object. It can access the frames that the animator object produces and
display the correct frame based on the interaction’s current state.
While driving the animation interactively, we just change the percentage,
and the animation updates appropriately. If we cancel the interaction, it will
use the animator to roll back the animation to its beginning state. If we
finish the interaction, it will use the animator to complete any remaining
animation, bringing the views to their correct, final position.
Strictly speaking, we don’t need to subclass
UIPercentDrivenInteractiveTransition, but I find that it
usually simplifies our application’s logic. It also lets us combine our
UIPercentDrivenInteractiveTransition and our
UITabBarControllerDelegate into a single object.
Creating the Animator Object
So, let’s start with our animator object. In the Controllers group, create a
new NSObject subclass named TabAnimator.
Now that we have a couple of animators, let’s give them their own group.
Select TabAnimator.h, TabAnimator.m, AddEntryAnimator.h,
and AddEntryAnimator.m. Control-click them and select “New Group
from Selection” from the pop-up menu. Name the group Animators.
In my mind, these objects belong with the controllers, so I will leave this
group inside the Controllers group. However, you could drag it up to the top
level or into one of the other groups, if you wanted.
Now, select TabAnimator.h. Modify it as shown here:
Click here to view code image
@interface TabAnimator : NSObject
<UIViewControllerAnimatedTransitioning>
@property (weak, nonatomic) UITabBarController

--- Page 367 ---
*tabBarController;
@end
We are simply adopting the
UIViewControllerAnimatedTransitioning protocol and adding
a property that will refer back to our tab bar controller.
Switch to TabAnimator.m. At the top of the file, before the beginning
of our @implementation block, we need to declare a constant for our
duration. Add the following line of code:
Click here to view code image
static const NSTimeInterval AnimationDuration = 0.25;
Now, we can define our methods. As before, we have to implement only
two methods. The first is transitionDuration:.
Click here to view code image
-(NSTimeInterval)transitionDuration:
(id<UIViewControllerContextTransitioning>)transitionContext
{
    return AnimationDuration;
}
Just like our AddEntryAnimator, this method returns our constant.
After this, add the animateTransition: method.
Click here to view code image
-(void)animateTransition:
(id<UIViewControllerContextTransitioning>)transitionContext
{
    UIViewController *fromViewController =
    [transitionContext viewControllerForKey:
     UITransitionContextFromViewControllerKey];
    
    UIViewController *toViewController =
    [transitionContext viewControllerForKey:
     UITransitionContextToViewControllerKey];
    
    NSUInteger fromIndex =
    [self.tabBarController.viewControllers
     indexOfObject:fromViewController];
    
    NSUInteger toIndex =
    [self.tabBarController.viewControllers
     indexOfObject:toViewController];
    

--- Page 368 ---
    BOOL goRight = (fromIndex < toIndex);
    
    UIView *container = [transitionContext containerView];
    
    CGRect initialFromFrame =
    [transitionContext
initialFrameForViewController:fromViewController];
    
    CGRect finalToFrame =
    [transitionContext
finalFrameForViewController:toViewController];
    
    CGRect offscreenLeft =
    CGRectOffset(initialFromFrame,
                 - CGRectGetWidth(container.bounds),
                 0.0);
    
    
    CGRect offscreenRight =
    CGRectOffset(initialFromFrame,
                 CGRectGetWidth(container.bounds),
                 0.0);
    
    CGRect initialToFrame;
    CGRect finalFromFrame;
    if (goRight)
    {
        initialToFrame = offscreenRight;
        finalFromFrame = offscreenLeft;
    } else
    {
        initialToFrame = offscreenLeft;
        finalFromFrame = offscreenRight;
    }
    
    fromViewController.view.frame = initialFromFrame;
    toViewController.view.frame = initialToFrame;
    
    [container addSubview:fromViewController.view];
    [container addSubview:toViewController.view];
    
    UIViewAnimationOptions options = 0;
    if ([transitionContext isInteractive])
    {
        options = UIViewAnimationOptionCurveLinear;
    }
    
    [UIView
     animateWithDuration:AnimationDuration
     delay:0.0

--- Page 369 ---
     options:options
     animations:^{
         toViewController.view.frame = finalToFrame;
         fromViewController.view.frame = finalFromFrame;
     } completion:^(BOOL finished) {
         BOOL didComplete = ![transitionContext
transitionWasCancelled];
         
         if (!didComplete)
         {
             toViewController.view.frame = initialToFrame;
             fromViewController.view.frame = initialFromFrame;
         }
         
         [transitionContext completeTransition:didComplete];
     }];
}
Phew, that’s a lot of code! Let’s walk through it. Just as before, we start
by grabbing our “from” and “to” view controllers. Since we are adding a
custom transition to a tab bar, we don’t have the same confusion we did
with the custom presentation. We are always moving explicitly from one
controller to another controller. The from-controller is the controller we
started with. The to-controller is the new tab’s controller. We may not make
it. Our transition may get canceled. But it is our intended destination.
Even if the interactive portion gets canceled, it doesn’t change these
objects—our interactive transition will simply run this animation in reverse.
Next, we calculate the tab index of our from- and to-controllers, and we
determine whether we are sliding to the right or to the left.
We grab our container and request the initial frame for our from- and the
final frame for our to-controller. In theory, these should be the same frame,
since our final view is replacing our initial view. However, I like to grab
them as separate local variables—just in case something changes in future
implementations.
Also, notice that, unlike the presentation transition, the
transitionContext defines a final frame for our to-controller. This
means our to-controller’s view must be in the specified position when the
animation ends. However, the context does not specify a starting position
for our to-controller. It also does not specify an ending position for our
from-controller. Since we’re sliding views in and out, we’d like the to-
controller to start just offscreen and the from-controller to end just off the

--- Page 370 ---
opposite side. Whether they are sliding from the left or right edge depends
on the transition’s direction.
Returning to our code, we take the from-controller’s initial frame and use
CGRectOffset() to create new frames that are shifted horizontally just
past the edge of the screen. These are our offscreenLeft and
offscreenRight rectangles.
Notice that, unlike the presenting transition, the container view will
rotate to match our tab bar’s orientation. This means we don’t need to
modify our math based on our orientation.
Next, we use the offscreen rectangles to set our to-controller’s initial
frame and our from-controller’s final frame. We make sure our views are in
the correct starting position, and we add them to our container view.
There’s one last pretransition check. We see whether our animation is
interactive. If it is, we’re going to set the animation curve to linear. If not,
we will use the default curve.
By default, our animations are not displayed at a linear speed. Rather,
they ease in and ease out. This means they start at a complete stop. They
accelerate up to speed, and then they decelerate back to a stop. This gives
the animation a nice appearance that mimics the way physical objects
move. However, the ease-in-out animation curve is not always appropriate,
so we can change the animation curve by passing the correct option to the
relevant animation methods.
In this case, when we are presenting an interactive animation, we want to
make sure our view stays under the user’s finger. That means we must use a
linear animation. Otherwise, the view and finger will move at different
rates.
Finally, we perform our animation. We have to use the longer
animateWithDuration:delay:
options:animations:completion: method, since we may be
changing our animation’s curve.
In the animation block, we simply update the frames for both our “to”
and “from” view controllers. In the completion block, we check to see
whether the animation was canceled. If it was, we reset the frames to their
initial positions. Finally, we call completeTransition:. We pass YES
if the transition completed and NO if it was canceled. This should close out

--- Page 371 ---
the transition and move the view and view controller hierarchies into their
final states.
 Note
In theory, we shouldn’t need to reset the frames in our
completion handler. The transition should reset the frames
automatically if the transition is canceled. Unfortunately, as
of the iOS 7.0 release, in some cases, the frames do not reset
properly. This can result in the system having a completely
black screen after a transition is canceled. Programmatically
resetting the frames fixes this problem.
Building TabInteractiveTransition
Now let’s create our UIPercentDrivenInteractiveTransition
subclass. This object will also act as our
UITabBarControllerDelegate. Create a new Objective-C class in
the Animators group. Name it TabInteractiveTransition and
make it a subclass of UIPercentDrivenInteractiveTransition.
Next, open TabInteractiveTransition.h. We want to adopt the
UITabBarControllerDelegate property and declare a public
method, as shown here:
Click here to view code image
@interface TabInteractiveTransition :
UIPercentDrivenInteractiveTransition
<UITabBarControllerDelegate>
- (id)initWithTabBarController:(UITabBarController *)parent;
@end
Switch to TabIntractiveTransition.m, and import
TabAnimator.h. And create a class extension with the following
properties:
Click here to view code image
@interface TabInteractiveTransition ()
@property (assign, nonatomic, getter = isInteractive) BOOL
interactive;
@property (weak, nonatomic) UITabBarController *parent;

--- Page 372 ---
@property (assign, nonatomic) NSUInteger oldIndex;
@property (assign, nonatomic) NSUInteger newIndex;
@end
The interactive property will track whether we’re currently in an
interactive transition. The parent property will hold a reference to our tab
bar controller. Finally, the newIndex and oldIndex properties will hold
the starting and ending tab indexes for the duration of our transition.
Now, add our init... methods. These go just after the
@implementation line.
Click here to view code image
- (id)initWithTabBarController:(UITabBarController *)parent
{
    self = [super init];
    if (self) {
        _parent = parent;
        _interactive = NO;
    }
    return self;
}
- (id)init
{
    [self doesNotRecognizeSelector:_cmd];
    return nil;
}
initWithTabBarController is our designated initializer. It just
sets the parent property and starts with interactive set to NO. Then,
as always, we override the designated init method of its superclass. This
time, we throw an exception if this method is called. This forces us to
always use our designated initializer.
Now, we have two animation methods from
UITabBarControllerDelegate that we need to implement. The first
returns our animation object.
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark = UITabBarControllerDelegate Methods
-(id<UIViewControllerAnimatedTransitioning>)tabBarController:
(UITabBarController *)tabBarController
animationControllerForTransitionFromViewController:
(UIViewController *)fromVC

--- Page 373 ---
toViewController:(UIViewController *)toVC
{
    TabAnimator *animator = [[TabAnimator alloc] init];
    animator.tabBarController = self.parent;
    return animator;
}
Here, we just instantiate TabAnimator, set its tabBarController
property and return it.
Testing the Custom Animation
Before we wire in our interactivity, let’s test the custom animation. Switch
to RootTabBarController.m, and import
TabInteractiveTransition.h. Then add the following property to
the class extension:
Click here to view code image
@property (strong, nonatomic) TabInteractiveTransition
*interactiveTransition;
This will hold our interactive transition object.
Finally, at the bottom of viewDidLoad, add the following two lines of
code:
Click here to view code image
self.interactiveTransition =
[[TabInteractiveTransition alloc]
initWithTabBarController:self];
self.delegate = self.interactiveTransition;
Here, we instantiate our TabInteractiveTransition object and
assign it to our interactiveTransition property. We also assign it
to our delegate property. This may seem like unnecessary duplication,
but both steps are important.
We need to assign our object to our delegate property, since that’s where
the real work is done. Unfortunately, delegate properties are almost
always weak. This helps prevent retain cycles. Unfortunately, this also
means that the delegate property, alone, won’t keep our
TabInteractiveTransition object in memory. If we want it to last
beyond this method, we need to assign it to a strong property as well.

--- Page 374 ---
The interactiveTransition property simply exists to keep our
TabInteractiveTransition object alive.
Run the application and tap the tab bars. Our custom animation will now
slide between the History and Graph views.
Adding Interactivity
We have a custom animation, but it’s not yet interactive. Let’s fix that.
Open TabInteractiveTransition.h and declare two additional
methods.
Click here to view code image
- (void)handleLeftPan:(UIPanGestureRecognizer *)recognizer;
- (void)handleRightPan:(UIPanGestureRecognizer *)recognizer;
We will connect these to our gesture recognizer in a minute.
Switch to TabInteractiveTransition.m. We still have one more
delegate method to implement.
Click here to view code image
-
(id<UIViewControllerInteractiveTransitioning>)tabBarController:
(UITabBarController *)tabBarController
interactionControllerForAnimationController:
(id<UIViewControllerAnimatedTransitioning>)animationController
{
    if (self.interactive)
    {
        return self;
    }
    
    return nil;
}
If we want to produce an interactive transition, we must implement both
tabBarController:animationControllerForTransitionF
romViewController: toViewController: and
tabBarController:interactionControllerForAnimation
Controller:. The interaction controller method will not be called unless
the animation controller returns a valid object.
In this case, we simply return self if we’re in an interactive state.
Otherwise, we return nil. Or, to put it more simply, if the user starts the

--- Page 375 ---
animation with a gesture, this method will return self, and the animation
will proceed interactively. If the user simply taps one of the tabs, it will
return nil, and the animation will complete automatically.
Now, all we need to do is set up a gesture recognizer to drive the
interactive transition.
Gesture Recognizers
There are two ways to handle touch events. First, we could use low-level
touch handling to monitor each and every touch. Alternatively, we could use
higher-level gesture recognizers to recognize and respond to common
gestures.
Let’s look at the low-level approach first.
Whenever the user’s finger touches the screen, this creates a touch event.
The system uses hit testing to determine which view was tapped. That view
is then sent the touch event. If it doesn’t respond, the touch event is passed
up the responder chain, giving others a chance to respond.
UIResponder defines a number of methods that we can override to
respond to touch events. These include touchesBegan:withEvent:,
touchesMoved:withEvent:, touchesEnded:withEvent:, and
touchesCanceled:withEvent:. Both our views and our view
controllers inherit from UIResponder, so we can implement these
methods in either place.
If you want to receive the event and not let it pass on up the responder
chain, you must implement all four methods, and you should not call
super. If you want to just peek at the event and then place it back on the
responder chain (possibly letting others respond to it as well), you can just
implement the methods you are interested in—but you must call super
somewhere inside your method.
While this lets us easily receive simple touch information, tracking
touches over time to detect more-complex gestures gets very complex. Even
something as simple as distinguishing between a single tap, a double tap,
and a long press would involve a fair bit of code. Worse yet, if developers
create their own, custom algorithms to recognize each gesture, different
applications may respond slightly differently to different gestures.

--- Page 376 ---
To solve both of these problems, the iOS SDK provides a set of
predefined gesture recognizers. Each gesture recognizer has a number of
properties and methods and can be used either to request information from
the recognizer or to fine-tune the recognizer’s behavior. The recognizers are
listed in Table 4.2. We can also create our own, custom gesture recognizers
—though that is an advanced topic and beyond the scope of this book.
TABLE 4.2 Gesture Recognizers
In many cases, we can set up our gesture recognizers in Interface Builder.
We can drag them out and drop them onto a view. Then we can select the
gesture recognizer icon to set its attributes. Finally, we can Control-drag
from the icon to our code in the Assistant editor to create a method that will
be called whenever the recognizer fires.

--- Page 377 ---
For discrete gesture recognizers, this method is called once, when the
gesture is recognized. For continuous recognizers, it is called when the
gesture begins, again for each update, and then when the gesture is canceled
or ends. Our method will need to check the recognizer’s state and respond
accordingly.
We’re going to add screen edge pan recognizers to all the view
controllers managed by our tab bar. This is a continuous gesture, so we can
monitor how far the user has moved their finger across the screen.
We could do this in Interface Builder; however, the screen edge pan
recognizer has not been added to the library yet. So, we cannot just drag
and drop it in place. More importantly, we will want to automate adding
these gesture recognizers based on the tab’s index; that way the gesture
recognizers will be added correctly even if we end up adding or removing
tabs later.
Open RootTabBarController.m. Add the following method to the
bottom of the private methods:
Click here to view code image
- (void)addPanGestureRecognizerToViewController:
(UIViewController *)controller
forEdges:(UIRectEdge)edges
{
    NSParameterAssert((edges == UIRectEdgeLeft)||
                      (edges == UIRectEdgeRight));
    SEL selector;
    
    if (edges == UIRectEdgeLeft)
    {
        selector = @selector(handleRightPan:);
    }
    else
    {
        selector = @selector(handleLeftPan:);
    }
        
    UIScreenEdgePanGestureRecognizer *panRecognizer =
    [[UIScreenEdgePanGestureRecognizer alloc]
     initWithTarget:self.interactiveTransition
     action:selector];
    
    panRecognizer.maximumNumberOfTouches = 1;
    panRecognizer.minimumNumberOfTouches = 1;
    panRecognizer.edges = edges;

--- Page 378 ---
    [controller.view addGestureRecognizer:panRecognizer];
}
Here we start with a parameter assert. This is just like a normal
NSAssert, but it’s specifically designed for checking incoming parameter
values. It’s also easier to use, since the system automatically generates the
error message for us. In this case, we just want to verify that we are setting
our recognizer to watch either the left or right edge (not the top, bottom, or
multiple edges).
Next, we determine the selector for the method that should be called
when the gesture is triggered. If we’re panning from the left to the right, it’s
the handleRightPan: method. If we’re panning from the right to the
left, it’s the handleLeftPan: method. The right or left in the handler’s
name refers to the direction of motion—not the starting position.
We then create our gesture recognizer, passing in our interactive
transition as the target, and our selector as the action. When the recognizer
is triggered, it will call the specified method on our interactive transition
object.
Finally, we set it to respond to one, and only one finger, from the
specified edge. Then we add it to our container’s view.
Now we need to call this method once for each view controller. Add the
following method right before
addPanGestureRecognzierToViewController:forEdges::
Click here to view code image
- (void)setupEdgePanGestureRecognizers
{
    NSUInteger count = [self.viewControllers count];
    for (NSUInteger index = 0; index < count; index++)
    {
        UIViewController *controller =
self.viewControllers[index];
        
        if (index == 0) {
            [self
addPanGestureRecognizerToViewController:controller
                  forEdges:UIRectEdgeRight];
        }
        else if (index == count - 1)
        {
            [self
addPanGestureRecognizerToViewController:controller

--- Page 379 ---
                  forEdges:UIRectEdgeLeft];
        }
        else {
            [self
addPanGestureRecognizerToViewController:controller
                  forEdges:UIRectEdgeRight];
            
            [self
addPanGestureRecognizerToViewController:controller
                  forEdges:UIRectEdgeLeft];
        }
    }
}
This method iterates over all our view controllers. This time, we don’t
use fast enumeration, since we actually need the index number. If it’s the
first tab, we add a gesture recognizer on the right edge. If it’s the last tab,
we add a gesture recognizer on the left edge. If it’s somewhere in the
middle, we add them to both edges.
Now, add the following line to the bottom of viewDidLoad:
Click here to view code image
[self setupEdgePanGestureRecognizers];
This sets up our gesture recognizers when our tab bar controller loads.
Now we just need to implement handleRightPan: and
handleLeftPan:. Switch to TabInteractiveTransition.m and
add the following method to the bottom of the @implementation block:
Click here to view code image
- (void)handleLeftPan:(UIPanGestureRecognizer *)recognizer
{
    CGPoint translation = [recognizer
translationInView:self.parent.view];
    CGFloat percent =
    -translation.x / CGRectGetWidth(self.parent.view.bounds);
    percent = MAX(percent, 0.0f);
    percent = MIN(percent, 1.0f);
    
    if (recognizer.state == UIGestureRecognizerStateBegan)
    {
        NSAssert(self.oldIndex == 0, @"We shouldn't already have
an "
                 @"old index value");

--- Page 380 ---
        NSAssert(self.newIndex == 0, @"We shouldn't already have
a "
                 @"new index value");
        
        self.oldIndex = self.parent.selectedIndex;
        NSAssert(self.oldIndex != NSNotFound,
                 @"Interactive transitions from the "
                 @"More tab are not possible");
        
        self.newIndex = self.oldIndex + 1;
        NSAssert(self.newIndex < [self.parent.viewControllers
count],
                 @"Trying to navigate past the last tab");
        
    }
    
    [self handleRecognizer:recognizer
      forTransitionPercent:percent];
}
We start by getting the translation from our gesture recognizer. This is the
amount our finger has moved from the original point of contact. We then
convert this to a percentage. As a safety step, we clamp this value so that it
cannot be lower than 0.0 or higher than 1.0. These values will make sense
only during change notifications—not when the recognizer began, ended, or
was canceled—but we’re going to precalculate them anyway, making the
rest of our code easer to read. If it’s not a change notification, the percent
will simply get ignored.
Next, if this is a begin notification, we save our new and old index. Then
we call handleRecognzier:forTransitionPercent:.
handleRightPan: is largely the same. The math for calculating our
percentage is a little different, since the gesture is moving in the opposite
direction.
Click here to view code image
- (void)handleRightPan:(UIPanGestureRecognizer *)recognizer
{
    CGPoint translation = [recognizer
translationInView:self.parent.view];
    CGFloat percent =
    translation.x / CGRectGetWidth(self.parent.view.bounds);
    percent = MAX(percent, 0.0f);
    percent = MIN(percent, 1.0f);

--- Page 381 ---
    
    if (recognizer.state == UIGestureRecognizerStateBegan)
    {
        NSAssert(self.oldIndex == 0, @"We shouldn't already have
an "
                 @"old index value");
        NSAssert(self.newIndex == 0, @"We shouldn't already have
a "
                 @"new index value");
        self.oldIndex = self.parent.selectedIndex;
        NSAssert(self.oldIndex != NSNotFound,
                 @"Interactive transitions from the "
                 @"More tab are not possible");
        
        self.newIndex = self.oldIndex - 1;
        NSAssert(self.newIndex >= 0,
                 @"Trying to navigate past the first tab");
        
    }
    [self handleRecognizer:recognizer
      forTransitionPercent:percent];
}
Finally, add the handleRecognzier:forTransitionPercent:
method after the other two.
Click here to view code image
- (void)handleRecognizer:(UIPanGestureRecognizer *)recognizer
    forTransitionPercent:(CGFloat)percent
{
    switch (recognizer.state)
    {
        case UIGestureRecognizerStateBegan:
            self.interactive = YES;
            self.parent.selectedIndex = self.newIndex;
            break;
            
        case UIGestureRecognizerStateChanged:
            [self updateInteractiveTransition:percent];
            break;
            
        case UIGestureRecognizerStateCancelled:
            self.completionSpeed = 0.5;
            [self cancelInteractiveTransition];
            self.interactive = NO;
            self.newIndex = 0;
            self.oldIndex = 0;
            break;

--- Page 382 ---
            
        case UIGestureRecognizerStateEnded:
            self.completionSpeed = 0.5;
            if (percent > 0.5)
            {
                [self finishInteractiveTransition];
            }
            else
            {
                [self cancelInteractiveTransition];
            }
            self.newIndex = 0;
            self.oldIndex = 0;
            self.interactive = NO;
            break;
            
        default:
            NSLog(@"*** Invalid state found %@ ***",
@(recognizer.state));
    }
}
Since the edge pan recognizer is a continuous recognizer, it will send us
updates as our finger moves across the screen. This method checks the
recognizer’s state and responds appropriately.
If the recognizer has just begun, it places us in interactive mode and then
changes the tab bar’s index to the new index.
Every time we get a change update, it updates our animation percentage
by calling UIPercentDrivenInteractiveTransition’s
updateInteractiveTransition: method.
If the recognizer is canceled, we cancel the transition, clear our index
properties, and set interactive to NO.
Finally, if the gesture ends normally (because the user lifts his finger or
runs past the edge of the screen), it checks to see how much we have
completed. If it is greater than 50 percent, it finishes the transition. The
animation will automatically complete. If it is less than 50 percent, it
cancels the transition. The animation will automatically roll back to the
initial state.

--- Page 383 ---
 Note
There appears to be a bug with the iOS 7.0 release. If you
cancel an interactive transition, you will often see a flash of
black where the to-controller should be. Fortunately, slowing
down the animation seems to fix this. In the sample code, we
set the completion speed to 0.5 both when the gesture is
canceled and when the gesture completes. Obviously, this
shouldn’t be necessary. In fact, we should use the completion
speed to speed up our slow down our animation, usually
based on our own aesthetics, but perhaps to match the
gesture’s velocity or some other value.
That’s it. Run the app. You can now swipe your finger from the edge of
the screen to trigger the transition.
Wrapping Up
In this chapter, we examined a number of techniques that will be helpful
when building your own custom views and custom controls. This includes
custom drawing, custom transitions, and tracking user interaction through
gesture recognizers.
We will take this a step further in Chapter 8, when we look at advanced
user interface techniques. In the meantime, Chapter 5 will look at saving
our application’s data. Chapter 6 will look at syncing that data using iCloud,
and Chapter 7 will look at replacing our custom model with Core Data.
Other Resources
 Quartz 2D Programming Guide
OS Developer’s Library
This is the complete guide for using Core Graphics. If you want to go
beyond the basics, you should definitely read through this
programming guide.
 PaintCode
www.paintcodeapp.com

--- Page 384 ---
This is a third-party application for creating custom-drawn interfaces.
PaintCode is an illustrator-like drawing tool—but it saves the graphics
as Objective-C Code. We can then take that code and paste it into our
application. Sometimes the code can be used as-is. Sometimes it
needs to be cleaned up or refactored. Regardless, it can save a
significant amount of time over coding everything by hand.
While the application may be a bit pricy, I highly recommend
downloading and playing around with the demo. If nothing else, it’s a
great tool for learning how to generate a wide range of visual effects
with Core Graphics.
 Event Handling Guide for iOS
iOS Developer’s Library
This guide provides detailed information about all aspects of iOS
event handling. This includes low-level event handling, hit testing,
gesture recognizers, and even handling motion or remote control
events.
 Core Animation Programming Guide
iOS Developer’s Library
This guide provides a detailed discussion of Core Animation. Note
that this goes very deep into a fairly complex topic—however, most
of the time we can add a touch of animation to our user interface
without getting bogged down in the Core Animation framework itself.
Still, if you run into a situation where your animation isn’t behaving
quite the way you expect, this is a good resource to have in your back
pocket.
 Custom Transitions Using View Controllers
2013 WWDC Videos
Currently, this is the only source of information about custom
transitions from Apple. This presentation covers both custom
transitions and interactive transitions. While this provides a nice,
high-level explanation of the API, it often feels frustratingly thin on
details. Hopefully Apple will supplement this presentation with either
sample code or a Custom Transition Programming Guide in the near
future.

--- Page 385 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 386 ---
Chapter 5. Loading and Saving Data
This chapter will focus on loading and saving data. We will begin with a
brief discussion on living within the iOS file system. Working on an iOS
device is different from working on a desktop machine. The most obvious
change is, of course, the added security. We, as developers, are severely
limited as to where we can save, open, or modify files. But, the differences
go much deeper. For example, we need to make sure our application’s data
plays nicely with the app’s updates and backups. We even need to rethink
the way we handle UI design. In the typical iOS application, there are no
save buttons and no folders or files to search through. We need to make the
whole procedure more transparent and more natural to our users.
Finally, we will look at the different ways to store data, from storing
preferences in the user defaults to serializing complete object graphs.
The iOS File System
Always remember, iOS is not a desktop operating system. Some of the
things we take for granted on desktop machines become impossible,
inappropriate, or at least very difficult in iOS. The file system is a great
example. Where the desktop often displays dialog boxes to open and save
files, forcing the user to search through a forest of directories, iOS goes to
great lengths to hide the underlying file system, both from the user and
from the applications.
This provides two main benefits. For the user, this greatly simplifies the
experience. You don’t need to worry about where files are stored or how to
find them. Your application handles all of this for you.
For the applications, limiting access to the file system improves system
security. Each application is limited to its own sandbox. The application can
freely open and save files within this sandbox, but it cannot touch anything
outside these carefully defined boundaries. This protects both your data and
the system files from accidental (or worse yet, malicious) alterations.
Unfortunately, it also makes sharing files between applications somewhat
difficult. The communication channels between applications remain both
limited and tightly controlled.

--- Page 387 ---
Sandbox Basics
Each iOS application is given its own sandbox. This is a unique directory
that can be accessed only by that application. The sandbox contains both the
application bundle and all of its data. It also acts as the home directory for
our application. With rare exceptions, our application cannot access any
part of the file system outside our sandbox. Even data inside the sandbox
may be tightly controlled.
By default, iOS organizes the sandbox into a number of well-known
directories. Each directory has its own intended use. When our application
saves its data, we need to make sure we store its information in the correct
location. Figure 5.1 shows the common directories.
FIGURE 5.1 The sandbox and its directories

--- Page 388 ---
Accessing the Sandbox
Working with the file system in iOS often feels like we are
poking around in the dark. Sometimes it helps to just pry open
the sandbox and rummage around inside.
Fortunately, we can do this. There are two ways to glimpse
behind the curtain. If you’re running an app in the simulator, you
can access the simulator’s file system at
~/Library/Application Support/iPhone
Simulator/7.0/Applications/. This directory will have
all the sandboxes for the iOS 7.0 simulator. Different simulators
will have slightly different paths.
We can also view, download, and upload data to the sandbox on a
test device.
1. Plug a test device into your computer.
2. Inside Xcode, select the Window > Organizer menu item.
3. In the Organizer window, select the Devices tab.
4. In the navigation bar, expand the selected device, and select
the Applications option.
5. Select the application you want to explore.
The Organizer will display its sandbox (everything except the
application bundle) at the bottom of the screen (Figure 5.2).
Click the download button to save a copy of the app’s data. This
will be saved as a data bundle. Control-click the bundle and
select Show Package Contents to explore it. We can also use the
Upload button to upload custom, test data to our device—which
can be quite helpful during testing and debugging.

--- Page 389 ---
FIGURE 5.2 Viewing the application’s sandbox
Not all of these directories are created when the application is installed.
The Application Bundle, Documents, Library, Caches, and Temporary
folders will all exist by default. The system may create the others, as it
needs them.
A brief description of each directory is listed below:
 Application Bundle (<app_name>.app): When our application is
compiled, the executable and all the resources are placed in our
application bundle. The bundle is then cryptographically signed. The
system checks this signature before running the application. If
anything has changed, the signature will not match, and the
application will not run.
The bundle is (obviously) read-only. Any resources that we add to our
project will be included in the application bundle. We can load these
resources from the bundle; however, we cannot add, modify, or delete
anything inside the bundle.

--- Page 390 ---
Bundles are just folders that OS X treats as files. If you want to view
the contents of an application bundle, locate the bundle in the Finder.
Then Control-click the bundle and select Show Package Contents.
This will open the bundle’s contents in a separate window.
 Documents: As the name implies, this is where we store our
documents. Here, the word documents has a very specific meaning.
We are referring to any file that contains user-generated data.
For example, when writing a text editor, this is where we save the
user’s text files. When designing a game, this is where we store the
saved game files. For Health Beat, this is where we save our
WeightHistoryDocument.
Files in the Documents directory are backed up. They are transferred
to the new sandbox when our app upgrades, and they can be shared
with iTunes. This means we need to think carefully about every file
we place in the Documents directory.
 Documents/Inbox: The Inbox directory will store files that were sent
to our app by outside applications. For example, if the user tells the
Mail application to send a file extension to our application, that file
will be saved here. Other document interaction controllers may also
place files here.
Our application can read and delete files in this folder, but we cannot
create new files or modify the existing files. If the user needs to edit
the file, we should move it from the Inbox to the Documents directory
and then open it.
 Library: This is the root directory for all application support files. It
contains our Caches, Application Support, and Preferences
directories. We don’t typically use this directory directly. Instead, we
will request one of the subdirectories. However, we can create our
own subdirectories here as well. This can be particularly useful for
files that we don’t want to expose to the user.
Everything in the library directory is transferred to the new
application sandbox when an app is upgraded. All of its contents,
except the Caches directory, are also backed up.
 Temporary (tmp): The Temporary directory provides a handy
location for storing information that does not need to survive past the

--- Page 391 ---
current session. This often includes scratch space needed for large
calculations and similar transient uses.
If possible, we should delete our temporary files when they are no
longer needed; however, the system will periodically clear out the
Temporary directory when our application is not running.
Data in the temporary directory is not backed up. It is also not
transferred to the new sandbox when our app is upgraded
 Caches: The Caches directory also stores temporary information;
however, this directory focuses on caching data to improve
performance. Most of the time this means saving information that we
may need to reuse later. This includes any resources that we download
or any derived data that takes a long time or a lot of computational
effort to re-create.
The Caches directory differs from the Temporary directory in one
important aspect—items in the Caches directory typically persist
beyond the current session. In fact, they may stay around indefinitely.
The system begins clearing the Caches directory only when the device
starts to run out of storage space. Unfortunately, this means anything
we place in the Caches directory could be deleted at any time—so we
must check and re-download or re-create the files, if necessary.
 Application Support: We can use this directory to hold any data files
that the application needs to run but that aren’t created by the user.
This often includes modified copies of resources from our application
bundle.
The Application Support directory is both backed up and transferred
to the new sandbox when updating. Note, however, that the system
does not create this directory by default. We will need to create it
before we can use it.
 Preferences: This directory is used to store our preferences. We don’t
typically interact directly with this directory. Instead, we use the
NSUserDefaults API to save and load preference data. That data
is then stored in this directory in as a plist file.
Preference data is both backed up and transferred to the new sandbox
when updating. We will look at using NSUserDefaults in the
“Managing User Preferences” section later this chapter.

--- Page 392 ---
In addition to these directories, our iOS application can create its own
subdirectories in either the Library or Documents directory. We can do this
to provide additional organization to our data, as necessary.
Backing Up Our Data
iOS devices can back up their data in one of two ways. They can back up to
iTunes when plugged into a computer, or they can back up wirelessly to
iCloud.
With a few specific exceptions, the system backs up everything inside the
Documents and Library directories (including Application Support and
Preferences).
The Caches and Temporary directories are not backed up. Furthermore,
we can apply the com.apple.MobileBackup extended attribute to any
files or directories to exclude them from the backup.
We need to carefully think about which files get backed up. From the
beginning, Apple encouraged developers to make sure the backed-up data
was as lean and streamlined as possible—but in the age of iCloud backups,
this has become even more important.
Most people have only 5GB in their iCloud account. You don’t want to
be responsible for chewing through a large chunk of that storage space.
Specifically, any file that can be downloaded or generated again should be
excluded from the backup. Either place the file in the Caches Directory or
use NSURL’s setResourceValue:forKey:error: method to
exclude the file or directory, as shown here:
Click here to view code image
[URL setResourceValue:@YES
               forKey:NSURLIsExcludedFromBackupKey
                error: &error];

--- Page 393 ---
 Note
Be extra, double careful when it comes to downloaded
content like video or audio files. Apple will reject apps that
place files like these in the backup. You have been warned.
Sharing with iTunes
If the UIFileSharingEnabled key is set in the application’s
Info.plist, then everything inside the Documents directory appears in
iTunes. Users can add or delete files from iTunes, modifying the content
stored on their device.
Unfortunately, many applications produce or consume files that are
intended for sharing (PDFs, text files, image files, and so on) but may store
their internal state in a proprietary binary format. Typically, we don’t want
to share these proprietary files with iTunes.
Ideally, we should save this private data in another location. If it is
simply application data (not a user document), then we can stash it in the
Application Support directory. If, on the other hand, it really is a private
version of the user’s document, then we probably want to create a custom
directory to hold it. Apple recommends creating a
<Application_Home>/Library/Private Documents directory
for these cases.
The system does not share anything within the Temporary, Caches, or
Application Support directories with iTunes.
Upgrading Our Application
When upgrading an app, the system starts by creating a new sandbox for
our application. It then downloads the new application bundle into that
sandbox.
Once downloaded, the system validates the application bundle. If
everything looks good, it copies the entire contents of the Documents and
Library directories. It then deletes the old application sandbox only after
everything has finished transferring successfully.
Anything that is not in the Documents or Library directory (including
subdirectories such as Caches, Preferences, or Application Support) cannot

--- Page 394 ---
be copied to the new version and can be deleted when the application
updates. Since applications are automatically updated in the background in
iOS 7, this could happen at any time.
This, obviously, becomes a rather strong argument against making
random directories inside your application’s sandbox. As much as possible,
use the common directories, and use them for their intended purposes.
Beyond the Sandbox
There are a few ways to reach beyond the sandbox. If we’re accessing a
public system resource—such as our address book, our calendar, our photo
album, or our music—we can access that data through the appropriate
framework. Each framework defines the API used to access, create, modify,
or delete those resources.
Note, each API will limit exactly which data we can access and what we
can do with it. For example, we can add images to the photo library, but we
cannot delete images. Additionally, to help prevent privacy violations, many
of these frameworks will ask the user for permission before we can access
them.
We can also use the UIDocumentInteractionController to
send files to other applications that support the same file type or use the
UIActivityViewController to send our data to various standard
services: copying to the pasteboard, posting to social media sites, sending
by email, and others.
Next, iCloud extends the sandbox, as we will see in Chapter 6, “iCloud
Syncing.”
Finally, the Security framework provides methods for reading and
writing data to the keychain. A keychain is an encrypted storage for
passwords and other secret information. It is intended only for storing small
pieces of data, such as passwords, API keys, and the like, and should not be
used for encrypting and storing general data.
The keychain’s data is stored outside the apps sandbox. This means it is
not deleted when the application is deleted. If you want your application to
clear its keychain data whenever it’s deleted and reinstalled, you will need
to do so programmatically the first time the application launches.
Keychain data is backed up by iTunes. A keychain item that is password
protected can be restored onto a different device only if its accessibility is

--- Page 395 ---
not set to kSecAttAccessibleAlwaysThisDeviceOnly. With iOS
7, keychain data can also be synced to iCloud. Keychain data is not affected
by application updates in any way.
Accessing Commonly Used Directories
The iOS SDK gives us a number of methods for accessing the common
directories. Some methods return the path to the directory as an
NSString. Others return NSURL objects. We can easily convert between
paths and URLs using NSURL’s URLWithString: and path methods.
In general, I try to use NSURLs whenever possible. Most methods that
deal with files have both a path and a URL version—however, there are a
few methods that exist in only one version or the other.
 NSHomeDirectory(): This function returns the path to our
application’s home directory (a.k.a. our application’s sandbox) as an
NSString.
 NSTemporaryDirectory(): This function returns the path to
our temporary directory as an NSString.
 NSFileManager: This class represents our basic interface with the
file system. We will use it to create directories, as well as moving,
renaming, examining, and deleting files. Two methods, in particular,
can help us retrieve the URL for our Documents, Library, Caches, or
Application Support directories.
 URLsForDirectory:inDomains: returns an array of URLs.
This method was originally designed for OS X, so it has a number of
options that simply don’t work in iOS. For our purposes, we can use
NSDocumentDirectory, NSLibraryDirectory,
NSCachesDirectory, or
NSApplicationSupportDirectory for the search path. We
always use NSUserDomainMask for the domain mask. This will
return an array with one item.
URLForDirectory:inDomain:appropriateForURL:cre
ate:error: can be used to locate or create the specified directory.
When simply looking up the known directories, the directory and
domain arguments are the same as

--- Page 396 ---
URLsForDirectory:inDomains:, and the
appropriateForURL: argument should be nil. We also pass a
BOOL value, indicating whether we want the method to create the
directory for us, if it doesn’t already exist. Finally, in case something
goes wrong, we have an error output argument.
We can also use this method to create a new, temporary directory for
us. In this case, we pass NSItemReplacementDirectory as the
directory argument and then provide a valid parent directory as the
appropriateForURL: argument.
This method returns a single NSURL object. In some ways, that makes
it easier to use, since we don’t need to pull the URL from the array.
However, we also have to deal with a few extra parameters, so pick
your poison. Note that this method can be particularly handy when
accessing the Application Support directory, since it can create that
directory for us automatically.
 NSBundle: We can call [NSBundle mainBundle] to get an
object for our application’s bundle. We can then use this object to
access resources in the bundle. The NSBundle class defines a
number of methods that return both URLs and paths, as in
URLForResource:withExtension:. We pass in the filename
(without the extension) and the extension, and we get back an NSURL
for that file.
This works for any resource file that we’ve added to our project. By
default, they are stored in the root of our application’s bundle.
However, we can also organize our resources into directories. If we
do, we must call
URLsForResourcesWithExtension:subdirectory: and
pass in the directory name as well.
Some other classes also support loading data directly from the bundle.
UIImage’s imageNamed: method will automatically search for the
given image in the application bundle. Similarly, UINib and
UIViewController can search for and load nib files.
Using Paths
Once you have the path to a file or directory, what can you do with it?

--- Page 397 ---
Well, NSString has a number of methods for manipulating paths. For
example, stringByAppendingPathComponent: adds a subdirectory
or filename to an existing path.
stringByDeletingLastPathComponent: lets us move back up the
directory tree. NSURL has a set of parallel methods, letting us easily
manipulate URLs as well.
NSFileManager also provides a number of useful methods for
querying and manipulating the file system. For example, the following code
explores a given path. If it points to a file, it will print out information about
that file. If it points to a directory, it will get a list of the entire directory’s
contents and then recursively explore each item in the list.
Click here to view code image
- (void)explorePath:(NSString*)path
{
    // Access singleton file manager.
    NSFileManager* fileManager = [NSFileManager defaultManager];
    BOOL isDirectory;
    
    // If the file doesn't exist, display an error
    // message and return.
    if (![fileManager fileExistsAtPath:path
                           isDirectory:&isDirectory])
    {
        NSLog(@"%@ does not exist", path);
        return;
    }
    
    // If it's not a directory, print out some
    // information about it.
    if (!isDirectory)
    {
        [self printFileInformationForPath:path];
        return;
    }
    
    // If it is a directory, print out the full path and then
    // recurse over all its children.
    NSLog(@"Directory: %@", path);
    
    NSArray* childPaths =
    [fileManager contentsOfDirectoryAtPath:path error:nil];
    
    for (NSString* childPath in childPaths)
    {
        [self explorePath:

--- Page 398 ---
         [path stringByAppendingPathComponent:childPath]];
    }
}
We start by getting a reference to the default file manager. Then we check
to see whether a file or directory exists at the provided path. If we have a
regular file, we call our printFileInformationForPath: method.
If it’s a directory, we call contentsOfDirectoryAtPath:error:
to get an array containing the directory’s contents. This performs a shallow
search. It gives us the names of all the subdirectories, files, and symbolic
links within the provided directory; however, it does not return the contents
of those subdirectories, traverse the links, or return the current (.) or parent
(..) directories.
We then iterate over this array, recursively calling explorePath: on
each entry. Note that the strings in the array represent just the file and
directory names, not the complete path. We must append these names to our
path to create each child path.
Click here to view code image
- (void)printFileInformationForPath:(NSString*)path
{
    NSFileManager* fileManager = [NSFileManager defaultManager];
    NSString* fileName = [path lastPathComponent];
    
    NSMutableArray *permissions = [NSMutableArray array];
    
    if ([fileManager isReadableFileAtPath:path])
    {
        [permissions addObject:@"readable"];
    }
    if ([fileManager isWritableFileAtPath:path])
    {
        [permissions addObject:@"writeable"];
    }
    if ([fileManager isExecutableFileAtPath:path])
    {
        [permissions addObject:@"executable"];
    }
    if ([fileManager isDeletableFileAtPath:path])
    {
        [permissions addObject:@"deletable"];
    }
    
    NSString *permissionString;
    if ([permissions count] == 0)

--- Page 399 ---
    {
        permissionString = @"none";
    }
    else
    {
        permissionString = [permissions
componentsJoinedByString:@", "];
    }
    NSLog(@"File: %@ Permissions: %@", fileName,
permissionString);
}
In printFileInformationForPath: we extract the filename
from the path and then query the file manager about the file’s permissions:
Can we read, write, execute, or delete the file? Once we’re done, we print
out this information.
Note that we’re using NSArray’s componentsJoinedByString:
method to combine an array of our permission strings into a single, comma-
separated string. This is a simple, elegant way to solve this problem,
ensuring that we get a comma between each permission but nothing after
the last entry.
Now, we can use this method to explore our entire application’s sandbox
by calling it as shown here:
Click here to view code image
[self explorePath:NSHomeDirectory()];
I highly recommend reading through the full documentation for
NSFileManager before doing any serious file system work. There are a
wide range of methods to help you move, delete, and even create files,
links, and directories.

--- Page 400 ---
 Note
While explorePath: demonstrates a number of
NSFileManager, NSArray, and NSString methods, it
is not really the best way to iterate over a deep set of nested
directories. For production code, I recommend using
enumeratorAtPath: or
enumeratorAtURL:includingPropertiesForKey
s:options:errorHandler: instead.
While file manipulation and exploration is fun, ultimately we want to use
these paths to save or load our data. Cocoa provides a number of options for
us. Many classes have methods both for initializing objects from a file and
for saving objects directly to a file. This includes NSString (for text files)
and UIImage (for image files), as well as many of the collection classes
(for collections of supported objects) and even NSData (for raw access to a
file’s bits).
These methods are often useful for quick tasks; however, saving an entire
application’s state typically requires something a bit more robust. Here, we
could use one of NSCoder’s subclasses to save and load entire hierarchies
of objects. Our only restriction is that all the objects in the hierarchy must
adopt the NSCoding protocol. Typically this means using the
NSKeyedArchiver and NSKeyedUnarchiver classes to perform our
serialization, while adding the initWithCoder: and
encodeWithCoder: methods to our custom classes.
Alternatively, we can use database technologies to persist our
application’s data. For on-device storage, these include using either SQLite
or Core Data with an SQLite-based store. While NSCoding forces us to
save and load an entire file at a time, SQLite and Core Data let us work
with smaller, discrete chunks of data. Core Data, in particular, has a number
of features to help us manage and greatly reduce our application’s memory
footprint. Of course, this comes at a cost. These technologies tend to be a
bit more complex. Still, we will look at Core Data in more depth in Chapter
7, “Core Data.”

--- Page 401 ---
Managing User Preferences
Preferences are special. They define the customizable portions of the
application. How loud are the sound effects? Have you watched this video
before? If so, how far did you get? Or, in the case of Health Beat, do you
want to measure the weights in pounds or kilograms?
While the users may change these values, the application needs a default
value to start with. As a result, we often refer to preferences as defaults (or,
to be more precise, user defaults).
Typically, applications save their preferences separately from the rest of
their data. This means we can change the sound effect volume without
affecting our saved games. More importantly, when you switch from one
saved game to another, the volume probably shouldn’t change.
Furthermore, preferences can represent both the explicit and implicit
settings for our application. Explicit preferences are exposed to the user,
either in the Settings app or through settings controls in our application. For
example, if users want to change the sound effect volume, we present a
slider and let them adjust it as they want.
Implicit preferences, on the other hand, are inferred from the user’s
actions. In most cases we simply watch what the user is doing and record it.
This could include recording the last site visited in a web view or the last
paragraph read in an e-book reader.
In theory, implicit data could include the current state of the user
interface. What tab did the user have open the last time she used the
application? If they were filling in a form, what data had they entered so
far? However, iOS provides a separate API for saving and restoring the user
interface’s state. You can find more information about this in the “State
Persistence and Restoration” bonus chapter.
As we saw earlier, iOS has a specific directory for saving preferences, the
Library/Preferences directory. However, we usually don’t touch
this directory directly. Instead, we should use the NSUserDefaults class
(or, alternatively, Core Foundation’s CFPreferences API) to store and
load our preference data.
NSUserDefaults gives us programmatic access to the defaults
database. This stores information in key-value pairs. To use this class,
access the shared object using the standardUserDefaults class

--- Page 402 ---
method. Then we can call a variety of methods to set and retrieve values for
the specified keys.
All of the changes are cached locally to improve performance. We can
call the synchronize method to force updates. This both writes local
changes to disk and updates the in-memory values from disk. However, the
system will automatically synchronize itself periodically, including saving
before the app goes to the background. So, we need to call synchronize
only when we want to programmatically force an update.
But wait, there’s more. The NSUserDefaults interface is only the
beginning. We can also add a Settings.bundle to our application. This
allows us to configure a custom preferences page in the device’s Settings
application. This page uses the same defaults database as the
NSUserDefaults class, allowing us to freely mix both in-app and
Settings-based preferences.
The Settings application provides a convenient, centralized location for
many preferences. In many ways, it is better than designing your own in-
application settings. You don’t need to build the interface or find a way to
fit it into the application’s workflow. You just configure the
Settings.bundle’s .plist file, and iOS handles the rest.
Unfortunately, Settings pages have a serious drawback: They aren’t part
of the application, so it’s easy for users to forget about them. I can only
speak for myself, but I’d like to think I’m reasonably technically savvy.
Still, I rarely remember to check Settings after installing a new app. When I
do remember, it’s only after I’ve wasted hours searching for an in-app way
to change the default behavior.
General wisdom says that the Settings app should be used for settings
that the user makes once and then largely leaves alone. In-app settings
should be used for things the user often changes while working with the
app. However, there is no clear dividing line between these two. In practice,
the Settings app has a relatively limited range of controls. This may force
the decision for us. In addition, in-app settings can be easier for users to
find and use. Of course, that relies on your ability to add them to your
application’s interface in a manner that is both unobtrusive and helpful, and
that’s often easier said than done.

--- Page 403 ---
Adding Preferences to Health Beat
We have only a single preference value for Health Beat, our default units.
Our font size is already handled through Dynamic Type, and the user
interface’s state should really be handled using State Preservation and
Restoration. Still, we need some way to store and load our default units, and
NSUserDefaults is the best fit, by far.
We already have a function to get the default weight. Let’s create a
function to save the defaults. Open WeightUnits.h and add the
following function declaration at the bottom of the file. Be sure to add a
blank line after the function, or you will receive a compiler warning.
Click here to view code image
void setDefaultUnits(WeightUnit defaultUnit);
Switch to WeightUnits.m. Add a static string constant to use as our
unit default key, and then modify getDefaultUnits as shown here:
Click here to view code image
static NSString * const WeightUnitsDefaultUnitsKey =
@"WeightUnitsDefaultUnitsKey";
WeightUnit getDefaultUnits(void)
{
    return (WeightUnit)[[NSUserDefaults standardUserDefaults]
                        integerForKey:WeightUnitsDefaultUnitsKey
];
}
Here, instead of simply returning LBS, we grab the current value from
our user preferences. We will use the
WeightUnitsDefaultUnitsKey string to both get and set this value.
If the value has not been set yet, this will default to 0, which happens to be
LBS. That is exactly what we want.
In your own projects, you may have to check whether a value has been
set for a given key and return an appropriate default value if it has not. You
can also bulk-set the default values for your keys by calling
registerDefaults:. This lets you specify the value that is returned
whenever we do not have a specific value stored for that key. Note, the
values set by registerDefaults: are not saved to disk, so you need to

--- Page 404 ---
call this method every time your application launches—often in
application:didFinishLaunchingWithOptions:.
Now, let’s add our setDefaultUnits() function.
Click here to view code image
void setDefaultUnits(WeightUnit defaultUnit)
{
    [[NSUserDefaults standardUserDefaults]
     setInteger:defaultUnit
     forKey:WeightUnitsDefaultUnitsKey];
}
Here, we simply use our key to store the provided unit value.
 Note
I strongly recommend wrapping all calls to
NSUserDefaults behind a custom interface. Here, we use
simple C functions. For more complex applications, you may
want to create your own singleton class.
Keeping all the NSUserDefault code in one place will
make the rest of our application cleaner and easier to
maintain. We can properly type our accessor methods. Plus,
this will make adopting iCloud Key-Value syncing much,
much easier, as we will see in Chapter 6. Using a custom
singleton class has the added advantage of letting us
customize our change notifications as well.
We’re going to treat this as an implicit property. When the user changes
the units in the Add Entry scene, we will update the default units to match.
So, open AddEntryViewController.m.
We no longer need a property to store our units, so at the top of the file,
delete the units property declaration. This should create several errors in
the file. We will fix them as we go along.
Scroll down to viewDidLoad and remove the line that assigns the
default units to our unit property. Next, scroll down to the
unitButtonTapped: method. Modify it as shown here:

--- Page 405 ---
Click here to view code image
- (IBAction)unitButtonTapped:(id)sender {
    
    if (getDefaultUnits() == LBS)
    {
        setDefaultUnits(KG);
    }
    else
    {
        setDefaultUnits(LBS);
    }
    
    NSString *unitString = [WeightEntry
stringForUnit:getDefaultUnits()];
    [self.unitButton setTitle:unitString
forState:UIControlStateNormal];
}
Finally, scroll down to setupInputAccessories and change the
following line:
Click here to view code image
NSString *unitString = [WeightEntry
stringForUnit:getDefaultUnits()];
That should fix all the warnings—unfortunately, we’re not done yet.
Switch to AddEntryViewController.h and delete the unit
property from there as well. That creates more warnings. Open
HistoryTableViewController.m and navigate to the
addNewEntrySaved method. Modify this method as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (IBAction)addNewEntrySaved:(UIStoryboardSegue *)segue
{
    AddEntryViewController *controller =
segue.sourceViewController;
    
    WeightEntry *entry = [WeightEntry
entryWithWeight:controller.weight
                                           usingUnits:getDefault
Units()
                                              forDate:controller
.date];
    
    [self.weightHistoryDocument addEntry:entry];
    [self dismissViewControllerAnimated:YES completion:nil];
}

--- Page 406 ---
Now we’re done. Build and run the application. Open the Add Entry
view, and change the units to KG. Cancel the Add Entry view and open it
again. Notice that the system is still using KG for the units. Try entering a
number of weights with different units. Notice that the history view is not
updating properly. We end up with different rows displaying different units.
Instead, the application should update the entire table every time our default
units change.
To do this, we need to listen for the
NSUserDefaultsDidChangeNotification. However, much like
our font changes, the user default change is something that will affect a
significant portion of our application. While we could let each individual
view controller listen and respond to the notification on their own, that
results in a lot of code to write, test, and maintain. Instead, let’s do the same
thing we did for our font changes. We’ll let the app delegate listen for the
changes, and then it will dispatch an update method down our entire view
controller hierarchy.
Open UIViewController+HBTUpdates.h. We need to declare our
new update method as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (void)HBT_updateUserDefaults;
Now, switch to UIViewController+HBTUpdates.m. We could
just implement this method—but it’s going to look a lot like our existing
HBT_updateFonts method. In fact, dispatching messages down the
view controller hierarchy is a general problem. Let’s extract it into its own
method.
At the bottom of the @implementation block, just before the @end
directive, add the following private method:
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Private Methods
- (void)HBT_updateWithSelector:(SEL)selector
{
    for (UIViewController *controller in
self.childViewControllers)
    {
#pragma clang diagnostic push
#pragma clang diagnostic ignored "-Warc-performSelector-leaks"

--- Page 407 ---
        [controller performSelector:selector];
#pragma clang diagnostic pop
    }
    
    if (self.presentedViewController.presentingViewController ==
self)
    {
#pragma clang diagnostic push
#pragma clang diagnostic ignored "-Warc-performSelector-leaks"
        [self.presentedViewController performSelector:selector];
#pragma clang diagnostic pop
    }
}
This follows the same general pattern as our HBT_updateFonts
method. However, in this case, we are passing in the selector that we want
to call; then we’re indirectly calling that selector using the
performSelector: method.
There is one small catch. ARC doesn’t know anything about our selector,
so it has no idea how to handle the memory management. This will cause
the compiler to raise warnings.
We know that our selector refers to a method that doesn’t return any
objects, so there are no memory management issues. This means we can
safely ignore this warning. To do that, we have to tell our compiler to
temporarily turn off that particular warning. We do this using the #pragma
directives as shown.
With this in place, our HBT_updateFonts and
HBT_updateUserDefaults methods become simple.
Click here to view code image
-(void)HBT_updateFonts
{
    [self HBT_updateWithSelector:_cmd];
}
-(void)HBT_updateUserDefaults
{
    [self HBT_updateWithSelector:_cmd];
}
In both cases, we’re just calling updateWithSelector: and passing
_cmd. _cmd is one of the two hidden arguments to every method. It holds
the selector for the current method.

--- Page 408 ---
Now we have to set up our application delegate. Open
AppDelegate.m. In the class extension, add the following property:
Click here to view code image
@property (strong, nonatomic) id userDefaultsChangeObserver;
Then, modify the dealloc method to remove our new observer. We’re
also moving our notification center to a local variable, so each if statement
can access it.
Click here to view code image
- (void)dealloc
{
    NSNotificationCenter *center = [NSNotificationCenter
defaultCenter];
    
    if (self.fontChangeObserver)
    {
        [center removeObserver:self.fontChangeObserver];
    }
    
    if (self.userDefaultsChangeObserver)
    {
        [center removeObserver:self.userDefaultsChangeObserver];
    }
}
Finally, we modify the
application:didFinishLaunchingWithOptions: method to
set up our notifications. Again, I am extracting many of the common data
elements into local variables, to make it easier to use them for both
notifications.
Click here to view code image
- (BOOL)application:(UIApplication *)application
didFinishLaunchingWithOptions:(NSDictionary *)launchOptions
{
    self.window.tintColor =
    [UIColor colorWithRed:0.5 green:0.0 blue:0.0 alpha:1.0];
    
    UIViewController *rootViewController =
self.window.rootViewController;
    NSNotificationCenter *center = [NSNotificationCenter
defaultCenter];
    NSOperationQueue *mainQueue = [NSOperationQueue mainQueue];
    

--- Page 409 ---
    self.fontChangeObserver =
    [center
     addObserverForName:UIContentSizeCategoryDidChangeNotificati
on
     object:[UIApplication sharedApplication]
     queue:mainQueue
     usingBlock:^(NSNotification *note) {
         [rootViewController HBT_updateFonts];
     }];
    
    self.userDefaultsChangeObserver =
    [center
     addObserverForName:NSUserDefaultsDidChangeNotification
     object:[NSUserDefaults standardUserDefaults]
     queue:mainQueue
     usingBlock:^(NSNotification *note) {
         [rootViewController HBT_updateUserDefaults];
     }];
    
    return YES;
}
That’s it. Our entire view controller hierarchy will now be notified
whenever the user defaults change. Now we just need to override
HBT_updateUserDefaults in each of our controllers, to update their
content.
Open HistoryTableViewController.m and override
HBT_updateUserDefaults just under HBT_updateFonts.
Click here to view code image
- (void)HBT_updateUserDefaults
{
    [super HBT_updateUserDefaults];
    [self.tableView reloadData];
}
This is the same as our update fonts method. We just tell the table to
reload all its data. This will update all the unit values and labels.
Next, open EntryDetailViewController.m. Again, override
HBT_updateUserDefaults just under HBT_updateFonts.
Click here to view code image
- (void)HBT_updateUserDefaults
{
    [super HBT_updateUserDefaults];

--- Page 410 ---
    [self updateUI];
}
This time, we’re just calling our updateUI method. This will reset all
the text field contents, updating our weights and units.
Repeat this procedure for GraphViewController.m. This time
we’re going to call graph view’s setNeedsDisplay to force the view to
redraw itself. As before, this will update all the weights and unit labels.
Click here to view code image
- (void)HBT_updateUserDefaults
{
    [super HBT_updateUserDefaults];
    [self.graphView setNeedsDisplay];
}
Finally, open AddEntryViewController.m. This one requires a bit
more work. First, since our view will automatically update anytime the
defaults change, we no longer need to modify our button text in
unitButtonTapped:. Navigate to unitButtonTapped: and delete
the following lines of code:
Click here to view code image
NSString *unitString = [WeightEntry
stringForUnit:getDefaultUnits()];
[self.unitButton setTitle:unitString
forState:UIControlStateNormal];
Then move that code to our HBT_updateUserDefaults method.
Click here to view code image
- (void)HBT_updateUserDefaults
{
    [super HBT_updateUserDefaults];
    NSString *unitString = [WeightEntry
stringForUnit:getDefaultUnits()];
    [self.unitButton setTitle:unitString
forState:UIControlStateNormal];
}
That’s it. Our entire user interface should update correctly whenever we
change the default units. Run the application. Try changing the defaults
using the Add Entry scene, and then cycle through the other scene and make
sure they’re picking up the change.

--- Page 411 ---
Now, before you get too excited, the sad truth is, most of the scenes
would have updated themselves automatically during their
viewDidAppear: method anyway. So, our code isn’t really helping that
much yet. But it will...oh, yes...it will.
Once we add a custom preference page for our application, the default
values can be changed at any time in the background. Then our updates
become very, very important.
Adding System Settings Support
Adding a custom preferences page to the Systems application is not too
difficult. Control-click the Supporting Files group and select New File.
Under iOS > Resource, select Settings Bundle and click Next (Figure 5.3).
Make sure the file is named Settings, and click Create.
FIGURE 5.3 Adding a settings bundle
This adds the Settings.bundle file to your application. If you
expand this bundle, you will see that it contains an English-language
localization folder (en.lproj) with a strings file, and it contains a file
named Root.plist (Figure 5.4).

--- Page 412 ---
FIGURE 5.4 Settings.bundle’s contents
We’ve brushed up against property lists (or plists) a few times. Basically,
these files store key-value pairs. However, since the values can include
arrays and dictionaries, we can use them to manage complex data
structures. Property list files are commonly used to configure applications
in both iOS and Mac OS X.
Xcode displays property lists using a property list editor. Under the
surface, however, plists may be saved in a variety of formats, including a
JSON-like format, an XML format, and a binary format. For more
information, check out Apple’s Property List Programming Guide.
The default Root.plist defines a sample preferences page. If you
expand all the elements, you will see that it has a single group of settings,
somewhat simplistically titled Group. Next, we have three controls: a text
field titled Name, a toggle switch titled Enabled, and an untitled slider. Each
of these controls also has an identifier field (name_preference,
enabled_preference, and slider_preference). This value
should match the keys used to access these values from
NSUserDefaults (Figure 5.5).

--- Page 413 ---
FIGURE 5.5 Exploring Root.plist
Let’s see this preferences sheet in action. Run the application. This will
compile a new copy of your app that includes the Settings.bundle
and then upload it to the simulator or device. Once the application launches,
tap the home button to send it to the background. Switch to the Settings
application. You should now see an entry for Health Beat’s settings (Figure
5.6).

--- Page 414 ---
FIGURE 5.6 Our Health Beat entry in the Settings app
Tap the Health Beat row to open the custom preferences page. It has a
single group with three controls, just as we expected (Figure 5.7).

--- Page 415 ---
FIGURE 5.7 Health Beat’s settings page
Of course, this isn’t what we want. We really need a single group named
Units, with a single multivalue item that will allow us to choose between

--- Page 416 ---
pounds and kilograms. Edit the property list file so that it matches the
settings shown in Figure 5.8.
FIGURE 5.8 Health Beat’s finished Root.plist file
I find it easiest to just delete the four existing items and start fresh. Select
the Preference Items key. Plus and minus buttons will appear next to the
key name. Press the plus button twice. This will add two new items to the
Preference Items array. Expand Item 0. Change Type to Group, and change
Title to Units.
Next, expand Item 1. Change Type to Multi Value, Title to Weight, and
Identifier to WeightUnitsDefaultUnitsKey. For this to work correctly, the
Identifier entry must match the key we use to access our
NSUserDefaults values. In our case, it must match the
WeightUnitsDefaultUnitsKey constant we defined at the top of
WeightUnits.m.
Now select the Identifier row, and press the plus button three times. It
should automatically add the Default Value, Titles, and Values entries. If
not, rename them as needed.
For Default Value, set Type to Number and Value to 0. For Values,
expand it, and then press its plus button twice to add two new items to our
Values array. Item 0 should be of type Number and Value 0. Item 1 should
also be of type Number, with a value of 1. Do the same thing to Titles, but
make its item types String with values of lbs and kg.

--- Page 417 ---
Run the application again. Add weights, and open the graph view. Now
put the app in the background and open the Settings app. Navigate to the
Health Beat settings (Figure 5.9). Change the default units. Move back to
Health Beat. The graph should have automatically changed to match the
value in our Settings app. Repeat this test for the other scenes: History,
Entry Detail, and Add Entry.

--- Page 418 ---
FIGURE 5.9 Health Beat’s final preference page
In each case, the NSUserDefaultsDidChangeNotification is
being sent as soon as our application returns from the background. Our app

--- Page 419 ---
delegate receives the notification and sends the
HBT_updateUserDefaults message down the view controller
hierarchy, and everything is correctly updated. It’s an elegant solution to
managing global changes.
Saving the Weight History Document
When it comes to saving and loading custom data objects, we will be using
two different tools: NSCoding and NSCoder. NSCoding is a protocol
that our custom data objects must implement. It defines two methods.
initWithCoder: is called to load the object, while
encodeWithCoder is called to save the object.
NSCoder is an abstract superclass. It defines a number of methods to
save and load data. We cannot instantiate NSCoder directly; instead, we
will use one of its concrete subclasses. Typically we use
NSKeyedArchiver to save our data and NSKeyedUnarchiver to
load it.
These archivers support both saving to in-memory archives (storing our
object graph as an NSData) and serializing the archive directly to disk.
Often we use a two-step process, first creating the in-memory archive and
then saving the archive. This lets us more easily separate
archiving/unarchiving errors from disk read/write errors. As we will see, it
also lets us perform the in-memory archive tasks on the main thread and the
disk I/O tasks in the background.
While we could use these archivers directly, there’s actually a better way.
We will create a subclass of UIDocument, which will handle many of the
details involved in saving and loading our data automatically.

--- Page 420 ---
 Note
While we use NSKeyedArchiver and
NSKeyedUnarchiver in this example, NSCoder also
has an older set of concrete subclasses: NSArchiver and
NSUnarchiver. These archives do not use keys to save
and load their objects and values. Instead, they must load the
data in the same order they saved it. In general, you should
avoid using these whenever possible. They have been
replaced by the keyed archives for iOS and all versions of
Mac OS X 10.2 and newer.
Using a UIDocument
UIDocument is also an abstract subclass. To use it, we must subclass it
and implement the contentsForType:error: and
loadFromContents:ofType:error: methods. In our MVC design
pattern, UIDocument (and our subclasses) are a type of model object
controller. This gives us two, different types of controllers.
UIViewControllers are tightly bound with a particular set of views.
Similarly, the UIDocument is more tightly bound with our model. This
gives us a Model – Model Controller – View Controller – View design.

--- Page 421 ---
Using Keyed Archives
When using NSKeyedArchiver or NSKeyedUnarchiver,
all the objects and values are given a key to identify them. These
keys must be unique within the scope of the current object being
saved or loaded. Therefore, if you are creating a public class that
might be subclassed in the future, you should add a prefix to your
keys to prevent collisions with any possible future subclasses.
Additionally, you should avoid starting your keys with $, NS, or
UI, since these are used by the system. Apple’s documentation
recommends appending the full class name to the front of the
key.
While the keys add a little complexity, they give us considerable
flexibility when loading our data. We can load the data in any
order and even selectively choose which data to load. This gives
us better support for forward and backward compatibility should
our data structure change, letting us easily add or remove keyed
values from our archives.
Keyed archives are also easy to use. You can store an object
hierarchy into an NSData object by calling the
NSKeyedArchiver’s archivedDataWithRootObject:
class method. You save it to disk by calling
archiveRootObject:toFile: instead.
The system will take your root object and call its
encodeWithCoder: method, passing in a properly formatted
NSKeyedArchiver object. The keyed archive contains a
number of methods that you can use to store raw C values (e.g.,
encodeBool:forKey:, encodeInt:forKey:, and
encodeFloat:forKey:). It also includes a method for
encoding other objects, unsurprisingly named
encodeObject:forKey:. These children objects must also
adopt the NSCoding protocol. The system then calls their
encodeWithCoder: method, passing along the keyed
archive, until the entire object graph is saved.

--- Page 422 ---
Unarchiving works the same way. Simply call
NSKeyedUnarchiver’s unarchiveObjectWithData:
or unarchiveObjectWithFile: method. This will build
the object hierarchy, calling initWithCoder: on each object,
and then return the root object.
The archivers are smart enough to notice when your object graph
has multiple references to the same object, and they will
correctly save or load just one version of the object with all the
references properly linking to that object. This means we can
make our object graph as complex as we like. We don’t need to
worry about loops or circular references.
However, for the sake of performance, we want to minimize the
number of objects we save and load. Unless the operations are
computationally intense, you should manually set, calculate, or
create any values that you can, and then save and load only those
values that you absolutely must.
UIDocument was originally designed to support iCloud syncing.
However, as you will see, it provides a wide range of useful features, even
when used on its own. I highly recommend using UIDocument, even if
you never plan on turning on iCloud.
Specifically, UIDocument provides the following:
 Asynchronous background reading and writing of our data.
 Coordinated reads and writes, letting multiple processes safely access
our data files. While this is not particularly useful for most iOS
applications, because of the sandbox’s limitations, it will become very
important once we start using iCloud syncing.
 Safe, atomic write operations, by saving the document to a temporary
file first and then moving it to the final location.
 Automatically saving the document as the user changes it.
Of these, the automatic background saves are particularly important. To
help keep the user interface as responsive as possible, we should avoid
doing any tasks that take a considerable amount of time on the main thread.
In particular, this means we should avoid any file read/write operations or

--- Page 423 ---
any network operations on the main thread. While NSOperationQueue
makes dispatching tasks to a background relatively safe and easy, I’m not
going to complain about getting the background disk I/O for free.
Adding a UIDocument Subclass to Health Beat
Instead of creating a new class, we’re going to change our
WeightHistoryDocument into a UIDocument subclass. Open
WeightHistoryDocument.h.
Let’s start by changing WeightHistoryDocument’s superclass to
UIDocument. Modify the @interface line as shown here:
Click here to view code image
@interface WeightHistoryDocument : UIDocument
Next, let’s declare a few public class methods. We will use these to get
the URL for our local document and to check whether the document exists
yet. Add the following declarations to the bottom of the @interface
block, just before the @end directive:
+ (NSURL *)localFileURL;
+ (BOOL)localFileExists;
Now, switch to WeightHistoryDocument.m. At the top of the file,
just below the other constants, add the following constant definition:
Click here to view code image
// Used to create our file URLs
static NSString * const WeightHistoryDocumentFileName =
@"WeightHistoryDocument.data";
We will use this constant when creating URLs for our document file.

--- Page 424 ---
 Note
There’s nothing special about this particular filename or
extension. You’re free to pick any filename and extension
you want. However, I would shy away from common
extensions with known document types (such as .txt,
.doc, and .jpg).
Next, we have to modify the init method. Since we’re no longer
subclassing NSObject, init is no longer our superclass’s designated
initializer. Instead, it’s initWithFileURL: Let’s change our custom
init method so that it’s overriding initWithFileURL: instead.
Navigate to the init method and modify it as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (id)initWithFileURL:(NSURL *)url
{
    self = [super initWithFileURL:url];
    if (self) {
        _weightHistory = [NSMutableArray array];
    }
    return self;
}
Now, let’s add our class methods. Scroll down to the end of the public
methods, and add the following:
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Public Class Methods
+ (NSURL *)localFileURL
{
    NSArray *urls = [[NSFileManager defaultManager]
                     URLsForDirectory:NSDocumentDirectory
                     inDomains:NSUserDomainMask];
    
    NSURL *documentURL = [urls lastObject];
    return [documentURL URLByAppendingPathComponent:
            WeightHistoryDocumentFileName];
}

--- Page 425 ---
Here, we use the file manager’s URLsForDirectory:inDomains:
method to request our Documents directory. As we saw before, this method
returns an array. On the desktop, this array could have multiple matches,
especially when searching across multiple domains. However, on iOS, this
will have only one entry, so we can safely grab the last (or first) entry.
Then we create a new URL by adding our document filename as a path
component to the end of our directory’s URL. This will automatically insert
the slash between the directory and our file’s name.
Now, let’s add our localFileExists method.
Click here to view code image
+ (BOOL)localFileExists
{
    NSFileManager *manager = [NSFileManager defaultManager];
    BOOL isDirectory;
    BOOL fileExists = [manager fileExistsAtPath:[[self
localFileURL] path]
                                    isDirectory:&isDirectory];
    return fileExists || (!isDirectory);
}
Here, we get a reference to the default file manager. Then we call the file
manager’s fileExistsAtPath:isDirectory: method. The second
argument of this method is an out argument. We need to pass it a pointer to
a BOOL variable. If the file exists and it is a directory, the method will set
our BOOL variable to YES. If it’s a regular file, the method will set it to NO.
The local file exists if it is both present and if it is not a directory.
With the preliminaries out of the way, we’re ready to start working with
our UIDocument subclass. The following are the tasks we must perform
to get it up and running:
1. Add code to load or create our document.
2. Override contentsForType:error: to create a snapshot of our
document’s data so that the system can save it in the background.
3. Override loadFromContents:ofType:error: to extract our
document’s data from the content loaded in the background.
4. Respond to document state changes.
5. Let our UIDocument subclass know when changes have occurred
so it can trigger automatic background saves.

--- Page 426 ---
Loading and Creating Our Document
Open RootTabBarController.m, and navigate to the
viewDidLoad method. We’re going to extract the code to set up our
document into a private method. So, change viewDidLoad as shown
here:
Click here to view code image
- (void)viewDidLoad
{
    [super viewDidLoad];
    [self setupDocument];
    self.interactiveTransition =
    [[TabInteractiveTransition alloc]
initWithTabBarController:self];
    self.delegate = self.interactiveTransition;
    [self setupEdgePanGestureRecognizers];
}
Now, at the top of the private methods, add our setupDocument
method.
Click here to view code image
- (void)setupDocument
{
    NSURL *fileURL = [WeightHistoryDocument localFileURL];
    self.weightHistoryDocument = [[WeightHistoryDocument alloc]
                                  initWithFileURL:fileURL];
    
    [self.weightHistoryDocument addSubscriber:self];
    //    [self addMocData];
    [self documentReady];
    
    if ([WeightHistoryDocument localFileExists])
    {
        [self loadFileAtURL:fileURL];
    }
    else
    {
        [self createNewFileAtURL:fileURL];
    }
}
Here, we get the URL for our local file. We use that to instantiate our
weight history document. Then we add the tab controller as a subscriber,
and we call the documentReady method. Next, we check to see whether
the local file exists. If it does, we load the file. If it doesn’t, we create a new,

--- Page 427 ---
empty file. The document will actually be loaded or created on a
background thread and will send a state change notification once it is open
and ready to use.
There’s only one small problem with this. The documentReady
method’s name doesn’t really seem appropriate anymore. Let’s refactor this.
We could just change the method name both where it is defined and
where it is used. However, that could be a lot of work, especially if a
method ends up being called many times in many different files. Instead,
let’s use the refactoring tool.
Navigate to the documentReady method, and select the method name.
Then Control-click the method name and select Refactor > Rename.... In
the pop-up sheet, change the name to passDocumentToViewControllers
and press Preview.
The preview page will show us all the changes that the refactoring tool
will make throughout our document. In this case, it is both modifying the
method call inside our setupDocument method and changing the
method’s declaration. Click Save to make the changes.
Xcode might ask about enabling snapshots before making this change.
That is usually a good idea. I typically enable snapshots before refactoring,
so I can automatically revert to my original code if something goes horribly
wrong.

--- Page 428 ---
 Note
Occasionally you may receive the following warning when
trying to refactor code, “The selection is not a type that can
be renamed. Make a different selection and try again.”
Providing your selection was correct—method, class,
property, and variable names should all work—then Xcode’s
index has probably become corrupted. To fix this, quit out of
Xcode and delete the entire derived data directory (by default
it’s located at ~/Library/Developer/Xcode/DerivedData).
When you relaunch Xcode, it will rebuild its index, and
refactoring should work as expected.
Next, add loadFileAtURL: after our newly renamed
passDocumentToViewControllers method.
Click here to view code image
- (void)loadFileAtURL:(NSURL *)fileURL;
{
    NSLog(@"Loading File");
    __weak RootTabBarController *_self = self;
    [self.weightHistoryDocument
    openWithCompletionHandler:^(BOOL success) {
        if (!success)
        {
            NSLog(@"*** Corrupt file at %@, "
                  @"attempting to delete it and create a new "
                  @"data file. ***",
                  fileURL);
            
            [[NSFileManager defaultManager]
removeItemAtURL:fileURL
                                                      error:nil]
;
            
            [_self setupDocument];
            return;
        }
        else
        {
            NSLog(@"File Loaded");
        }

--- Page 429 ---
    }];
}
Here, we call UIDocument’s openWithCompletionHandler:
method. This method should be called on the main thread. It will load our
data file on a background thread and then call our completion handler on
the main thread once the file is open.
Notice that we don’t get a very verbose error message. Either the file
successfully loads or it doesn’t. We checked to make sure the file existed
before calling this method—so if we cannot load the file, we must assume
it’s corrupt. Let’s delete the corrupted file and create a new one. The easiest
way to do this is to just call our setupDocument method again.
Yes, this is a bit heavy-handed as far as error management goes, but it’s
better than nothing. Still, you’ll probably want to replace it in production
code. We should at least ask the user before deleting their document.
However, I’ll leave that as an extra-credit exercise.
Next, let’s add the createNewFileAtURL: method.
Click here to view code image
- (void)createNewFileAtURL:(NSURL *)fileURL
{
    NSLog(@"Creating New File");
    [self.weightHistoryDocument
     saveToURL:fileURL
     forSaveOperation:UIDocumentSaveForCreating
     completionHandler:^(BOOL success) {
         if (!success)
         {
             NSString *message =
             [NSString stringWithFormat:
              @"Unable to create a new file at %@", fileURL];
             
             NSLog(@"*** Error: %@ ***", message);
             
             [NSException
              raise:NSInternalInconsistencyException
              format:@"Error Creating UIDocument: %@", message];
         }
         else
         {
             NSLog(@"File Created");
             
         }

--- Page 430 ---
     }];
}
Again, we call UIDocument’s
saveToURL:forSaveOperation:completionHandler: method,
and again, this is an asynchronous, block-based method that should be
called from the main thread. It will save a new document on a background
thread. Once the document is ready for use, it calls our completion handler
on the main thread.
Most of the time, this method should fail because of a developer error.
Therefore, we’ll use very minimal error checking here. If something goes
wrong, we simply log a message to the console, and then throw an
exception. This will crash the application, letting us know there is a
problem.
While this is fine for development, it’s not so great for production. There
are legitimate reasons why this could fail in the real world. The most
obvious example is that the user’s device simply does not have enough
storage space left to save our file. We should, therefore, replace this with
user-friendly error handling before we ship.

--- Page 431 ---
Concurrent Programming in iOS
The UIDocument class is an excellent object lesson in
concurrent iOS programming. The basic assumption is that our
application should access its data only on the main thread. If we
need to process that data on a background thread (to save it, send
it across the network, or perform long and costly calculations on
it), we should create a copy of that data and pass the copy to the
background thread. Then, when the background thread is done, it
passes the results back to the main thread, and we can safely
update our data.
When done right, there’s no need for locks, semaphores, or other
synchronization. There’s no risk of deadlocks or race conditions.
Our multithreaded code is more robust and usually faster than
traditional threaded code.
However, we must be careful to create deep copies of our data
before moving it to the background. Simply calling the copy
method on an NSArray, for example, will create a shallow
copy. This could introduce race conditions, since we may have
two different threads reading and modifying the same objects at
the same time.
Often, the easiest way to make a deep copy is to archive the data,
just as we do in contentsForType:error:.
High-level threading operations are typically handled using the
NSOperationQueue class. A simple demo is shown here:
Click here to view code image
NSOperationQueue *backgroundQueue = [[NSOperationQueue alloc]
init];
backgroundQueue.name = @"Calculation Background Queue";
[backgroundQueue setMaxConcurrentOperationCount:1];
self.backgroundQueue = backgroundQueue;
First we create our operation queue. By default this will run on
one or more background threads. Operations are processed first-
in, first-out. However, the queue may process multiple operations
at once—the system will choose the exact number of threads to

--- Page 432 ---
allocate to a queue based on its current load and the resources
available.
In the sample, we give the queue a name. This isn’t required but
can make debugging easier. We also limit the number of
concurrent operations to 1, forcing the queue to perform its
actions serially. Then we assign the queue to an instance variable.
We need to make sure our queue survives for the entire lifetime
of the tasks assigned to it. Often the easiest way to do this is to
create an instance variable to hold the queue. Create the queue
when we first create our owning object. As long as the owning
object exists, the queue exists, and we can assign tasks to it as
needed.
There is a simple block-based API to add operations to a queue:
Click here to view code image
[self.backgroundQueue addOperationWithBlock:^{
    NSLog(@"printed from a background thread!");
}];
We can also explicitly create NSBlockOperation objects and
add them to the queue. This lets us customize the operation:
adding dependencies, priorities, or completion blocks. We can
also cancel operations or wait for them to complete.
iOS also supports low-level concurrent programming through the
Grand Central Dispatch (GCD) framework. This is a block-based
C framework. NSOperationQueues are actually
implemented using GCD. While NSOperationQueues add a
few high-level features (such as dependencies), they also lack
other features, such as barrier-blocks. Also, GCD has a slightly
lower overhead than NSOperationQueues—which can be
important in high-performance code.
Finally, a growing number of block-based asynchronous APIs are
showing up scattered throughout iOS’s frameworks. All of these
are built upon NSOperationQueues and GCD.
However, I often use code like this, even during the late beta testing
period. This code forces a hard crash when something goes wrong. My

--- Page 433 ---
testers will definitely notice and report the crash. Even more importantly, I
can have the testers send me a copy of their crash logs.
This is particularly useful if you know something might fail but you’re
not exactly sure how it could fail. By gathering crash logs from beta testers,
you will quickly get a list of the most common errors, and then you can
write code to specifically handle those situations.
Also notice that in both our loadFile... and createFile...
methods, we are using a lot of logging to help peek into UIDocument’s
inner workings. The one problem with UIDocument is that it can be rather
opaque at times. I find that adding a little extra logging can really help
when it comes to debugging problems later, especially timing issues.
If we run the application, you will see that it logs the Creating New File
message and then crashes with the following exception:
Click here to view code image
The default implementation of -[UIDocument writeContents:toURL:
forSaveOperation:originalContentsURL:error: only understands
contents
of type NSFileWrapper or NSData, not (null). You must override
one of
the write methods to support custom content types
Overriding contentsForType:error:
Whenever our UIDocument subclass tries to save its data, it will call the
contentsForType:error: method. We must override this method,
making and returning a snapshot of our current data. UIDocument
supports using either NSData or NSFileWrapper for the document’s
contents. The difference is that the system saves NSData objects as a
single file, while NSFileWrappers are saved as a hierarchy of directories
and files.
If possible, applications should try to use NSFileWrappers, breaking
up their data into natural, independent chunks. This lets the application
selectively save and load only those files that have actually changed. This is
especially true once we start syncing this data with iCloud. However,
Health Beat stores all of its data in a single array. Trying to partition this
across multiple files is more trouble than it’s worth. As a result, we’re going
to store everything inside a single NSData object.

--- Page 434 ---
The snapshotting procedure is done on the main thread. This is an in-
memory procedure, so there’s no risk of slowing down the user interface.
The system then saves the data to disk on a background thread—taking as
much time as it needs.
Open WeightHistoryDocument.m and implement
contentsForType:error: after the public class methods as shown
here:
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - UIDocument Methods
- (id)contentsForType:(NSString *)typeName
                error:(NSError *__autoreleasing *)outError
{
    NSLog(@"Saving our data...");
    return [NSKeyedArchiver
            archivedDataWithRootObject:self.weightHistory];
}
Here, we simply log the fact that we’re saving our data (again, helping us
peek behind the scene); then we archive our array to an NSData object and
return it.
Note that we aren’t doing any error handling here. If an error occurs, we
could create an error object, assign it to the outError pointer, and return
nil. However, this is rarely worth the effort.
archivedDataWithRootObject: almost always fails because of
developer error. In those cases, it throws an exception, which we should
discover and fix during development.
Actual runtime errors should occur only when the system is experiencing
a catastrophic failure—in which case there probably isn’t anything useful
we can do.

--- Page 435 ---
 Note
If you want to provide more robust error messages from
either contentsForType:error: or
loadFromContents:ofType:error:, you also need
to override
handleError:userInteractionPermitted: to
handle those errors. Otherwise, they will be silently
swallowed by the system.
Overriding loadFromContents:ofType:error:
Our loadFromContents:ofType:error: method is almost as
simple.
Click here to view code image
- (BOOL)loadFromContents:(id)contents
                  ofType:(NSString *)typeName
                   error:(NSError *__autoreleasing *)outError
{
    NSParameterAssert([contents isKindOfClass:[NSData class]]);
    NSLog(@"Loading our data...");
    @try {
        self.weightHistory =
        [NSKeyedUnarchiver
         unarchiveObjectWithData:contents];
    }
    @catch (NSException *exception) {
        NSLog(@"*** An Exception Occurred: %@ ***", exception);
        self.weightHistory = nil;
    }
    @finally {
        return self.weightHistory != nil;
    }
}
Here, the system will load our data file in the background and then will
call this method on the main thread, passing us either an NSData or an
NSFileWrapper. Since we’re saving NSData objects, we should get
NSDatas back. So, the first thing we do is check the contents argument and
make sure it is an NSData object.

--- Page 436 ---
Then we have an Objective-C try/catch block. We rarely use try/catch
blocks, but this is one of the few exceptions.
unarchiveObjectWithData: is almost as robust as
archiveDataWithRootObject:; however, there is one case where it
could fail. If the file becomes corrupt, unarchiveObjectWithData:
will throw an exception. Now, corrupt files should be exceedingly rare—
especially given all the safeguards UIDocument provides. Between its
safe, atomic writes and the file system coordination—not to mention the
closed nature of the app sandbox—there aren’t that many ways for our app
to shoot its data in the foot. Still, flash drives do occasionally fail, and you
never know when a rogue gamma ray might strike. So, corrupted files will
always remain an unfortunate possibility.
In the rare case when unarchiveObjectWithData: throws an
exception, we simply set our weight history to nil. And, if our weight
history is nil, we return NO. Otherwise, everything is good and we return
YES.
Again, we could create an NSError object and pass it through the out
argument—but, unless we’re planning to override
handleError:userInteractionPermitted: to explicitly handle
this error, it’s not going to make any difference.
Furthermore, since
handleError:userInteractionPermitted: has a tendency to
silently swallow our error messages, I often find it useful to override it as
well. Here, we’re just going to log the error message—giving us yet another
peek inside UIDocument’s black box.
Click here to view code image
- (void)handleError:(NSError *)error
userInteractionPermitted:(BOOL)userInteractionPermitted
{
    NSLog(@"*** A WeightHistoryDocument error occurred: %@ ***",
          [error localizedDescription]);
    
    [super
     handleError:error
     userInteractionPermitted:userInteractionPermitted];
}

--- Page 437 ---
If we’ve done our job correctly, we shouldn’t ever see this message in our
console. Still, when things don’t work quite right, it’s always nice to have
every clue possible.
Now, when we run the application, you will see that it successfully
creates the document the first time we launch it. It also loads the document
every time after that. However, we’re not actually saving any data yet. We
have a few more steps before saving and loading is completely enabled.
Responding to Document State Changes
Unfortunately, before we actually start saving data, we have to respond to
document state changes. UIDocument has five different states.
 UIDocumentStateNormal: The document is open and ready to
be used.
 UIDocumentStateClosed: The document either has not been
opened yet or has been closed.
 UIDocumentStateInConflict: This will occur only when
syncing with iCloud. It indicates that the system has detected
conflicting edits to our document.
 UIDocumentStateSavingError: The document experienced an
error while trying to save its state. We need to communicate this to the
user.
 UIDocumentStateEditingDisabled: Again, this is typically
seen only with iCloud. Document editing may be temporarily disabled
while the file is syncing, as well as during other errors.
The document starts in the UIDocumentStateClosed state. We want
to make sure the user cannot make any changes until it has successfully
opened. We also want to disable the Add Entry button whenever our
document is closed, in conflict or if editing is disabled. Additionally, we
want to dismiss the Add Entry scene, if it is being presented when we enter
any of these states.
Furthermore, since the document is automatically saving in the
background, we need to alert the user whenever any saving errors occur.
And, finally, we want to reload our history and graph scenes whenever
our document enters the UIDocumentStateNormal and

--- Page 438 ---
UIDocumentStateClosed states. This will let us set up our scenes
when our document first loads and clear the scenes if it closes.
Unlike our earlier example, we need to observe these changes in only
three places: our RootTabBarController (to display our save error
alert, no matter which scene is currently displayed), our
HistoryTableViewController, and our
GraphViewController.
We could use the same approach we did for our fonts and user defaults
and pass the notification down our view controller hierarchy—however,
that leaks information about our model a little more broadly than I’m
comfortable with.
We could also have each individual view controller listen for the
notification directly—like we did for the notifications about the document’s
contents. That’s a perfectly valid solution, even if it does end up being a lot
of repetitive code.
However, I’d like to use this as an opportunity to show you yet another
technique for passing information from one part of our application to
another. We’ve already used delegates; this time we’ll create our own
delegate API, or, rather, a delegate-like API.
In this case, instead of having a single delegate, our document object will
be able to have a collection of observing objects. Furthermore, these objects
won’t be able to modify the document’s behavior; they will just receive
information about the changes to the document. To avoid confusion, let’s
call these observing objects subscribers.
There are three steps to creating delegate-like APIs.
1. Create the protocol that the delegate must adopt.
2. Create the API for setting the delegate object.
3. Have the delegating object call the methods defined in our protocol
on its delegate.
Open WeightHistoryDocument.h. Now, we have a bit of a
chicken-and-the-egg problem here. We need to declare a protocol that our
subscribers must implement. This protocol needs to refer to our
WeightHistoryDocument class, so the class must be declared first.
However, our WeightHistoryDocument’s interface will also need to

--- Page 439 ---
refer to this protocol, so the protocol needs to be declared first. Fortunately,
we can cut through this Gordian knot with a simple forward declaration.
At the top of the file, just below the @class WeightEntry forward
declaration, add a second forward declaration for our property.
Click here to view code image
@protocol WeightHistoryDocumentSubscriber;
Then, at the bottom of the file, just below the @interface block’s
@end directive, add the full protocol declaration. Be sure to add a blank
line after the last @end as well.
Click here to view code image
@protocol WeightHistoryDocumentSubscriber <NSObject>
- (void)weightHistoryDocument:(WeightHistoryDocument *)document
               stateDidChange:(UIDocumentState)state;
@end
One of the advantages of a delegate-like approach is that we can make
the communication channel as rich and as complex as we like. We can
create as many methods as we want. Each method can have any number of
arguments. We can even make the methods optional or required—whatever
best fits our situation.
In this case, we’re just creating a single method. By tradition, these
methods always return the sender as their first argument. Here, we’re
sending the new state as our second. We’re also making this a required
method. There’s no point in adopting the
WeightHistoryDocumentSubscriber protocol unless you also
implement this method.
Now, we just need to add the methods to set and change our subscribers.
For a traditional delegate or data source, you would just create a public
property. However, in our case we don’t just want a single subscriber—we
want to be able to add an arbitrary number of subscribers. Therefore, we’ll
create methods to add and remove our subscribers.
Add the following two methods to the @interface block. I placed them
between the allEntries method declaration and the class method
declarations.

--- Page 440 ---
Click here to view code image
- (void)addSubscriber:(id
<WeightHistoryDocumentSubscriber>)subscriber;
- (void)removeSubscriber:(id
<WeightHistoryDocumentSubscriber>)subscriber;
Now we need to add a property to hold our subscribers. In theory, an
NSMutableArray would work. An NSMutableSet would be even
better, since it would let us have only one copy of each object. That would
keep our subscriber from receiving duplicate methods if we accidentally
added it twice.
However, both of these have a problem. These containers hold a strong
reference to any objects they contain. When storing delegate-like objects,
we always want to use a weak reference, to avoid potential retain cycles.
So, we need a collection object that uses weak references.
Enter NSHashTable. The NSHashTable class is based loosely on the
NSSet class, with a number of subtle differences. First, it is always
mutable. There is no immutable version. Second, we can define how it
stores the objects it contains. It can create strong references, it can copy the
objects, and it can create weak references. We can even use it to store
nonobject pointers.
Switch to WeightHistoryDocument.m and add the following
property to the class extension:
Click here to view code image
@property (strong, nonatomic)NSHashTable *subscribers;
Then, modify initWithFileURL: as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (id)initWithFileURL:(NSURL *)url
{
    self = [super initWithFileURL:url];
    if (self) {
        _weightHistory = [NSMutableArray array];
        _subscribers = [NSHashTable hashTableWithOptions:
                        NSHashTableWeakMemory];
        [self setupDocumentNotifications];
    }
    return self;
}

--- Page 441 ---
This creates a hash table that will store its objects with weak references.
Here, our weak references will actually play two roles. First, like with all
delegate-like objects, they help prevent retain cycles. Second, since they’re
zeroing weak references, the system will automatically set the subscriber to
nil whenever it is deallocated. This means, unlike the notification center
or KVO, our subscribers won’t need to unsubscribe before they are deleted.
The weak reference effectively lets them unsubscribe automatically.
Ignore the setupDocumentNotifications method for now. We
will implement it in a bit. Instead, implement the following two methods
just before our public class methods:
Click here to view code image
- (void)addSubscriber:
(id<WeightHistoryDocumentSubscriber>)subscriber
{
    [self.subscribers addObject:subscriber];
}
- (void)removeSubscriber:
(id<WeightHistoryDocumentSubscriber>)subscriber
{
    [self.subscribers removeObject:subscriber];
}
Now, we just need to have our WeightHistoryDocument call the
subscriber notification method. We want to do this whenever the
document’s state changes. Somewhat unintuitively, the easiest way to do
this is to have our WeightHistoryDocument listen for its own
notifications.
Add another property to the class extension. This one will hold our
notification observer.
Click here to view code image
@property (strong, nonatomic) id documentStateObserver;
Next, add a dealloc method to remove our observer. I usually place
these under the init... methods.
Click here to view code image
-(void)dealloc
{
    if (self.documentStateObserver)

--- Page 442 ---
    {
        [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
         removeObserver:self.documentStateObserver];
    }
}
And, finally, we need to register for our notifications. We’ve already
added the call to setupDocumentNotifications—now we just need
to implement that method. Place this at the end of our Private methods.
Click here to view code image
- (void)setupDocumentNotifications
{
    __weak WeightHistoryDocument *_self = self;
    self.documentStateObserver =
    [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
     addObserverForName:UIDocumentStateChangedNotification
     object:self
     queue:[NSOperationQueue mainQueue]
     usingBlock:^(NSNotification *note) {
         for (id <WeightHistoryDocumentSubscriber> subscriber
              in _self.subscribers)
         {
             [subscriber weightHistoryDocument:_self
                                stateDidChange:_self.documentSta
te];
         }
     }];
}
Here, we simply register for the document state changed notification.
When we receive that notification, we iterate over all our subscribers and
call the weightHistoryDocument:stateDidChange: method on
each one.
Now, we need to have our view controllers adopt the
WeightHistoryDocumentSubscriber protocol and implement the
weightHistoryDocument:stateDidChange: method. Then we
need to add them as subscribers to the document.
Open RootTabBarController.m and modify the class extension’s
@interface line as shown here:
Click here to view code image
@interface RootTabBarController ()
<WeightHistoryDocumentSubscriber>

--- Page 443 ---
Then add the WeightHistoryDocument:StateDidChange:
method, right before the private methods.
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - WeightHistoryDocumentSubscriber Methods
- (void)weightHistoryDocument:(WeightHistoryDocument *)document
               stateDidChange:(UIDocumentState)state {
    
    if (state == UIDocumentStateSavingError)
    {
        NSString *title = @"Error Saving Weight History";
        NSString *message = @"Unable to save the weight history
at this "
        @"time. Please free up some drive space on your device "
        @"and try again.";
        
        UIAlertView *alertView =
        [[UIAlertView alloc] initWithTitle:title
                                   message:message
                                  delegate:nil
                         cancelButtonTitle:@"OK"
                         otherButtonTitles:nil];
        
        [alertView show];
    }
}
Here, we check to see whether the state is
UIDocumentStateSavingError. If it is, we present an alert view,
letting users know we cannot save their changes.

--- Page 444 ---
 Note
Often we want to avoid using UIAlertView or
UIActionSheet unless we need to stop all activity and
ask the users how to proceed. Both of these interrupt the
current workflow and demand the user’s undivided attention.
Apple’s guidelines recommend using less intrusive visual
notifications when the users don’t actually have a choice to
make.
Despite that, I’ve chosen to use an alert view here for two
reasons. First, for the purpose of this exercise, it is the
simplest solution. Second, saving errors is important enough
that it warrants interrupting users. We want to make sure they
are aware of the problem.
Finally, modify the setupDocument method as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (void)setupDocument
{
    NSURL *fileURL = [WeightHistoryDocument localFileURL];
    self.weightHistoryDocument = [[WeightHistoryDocument alloc]
                                  initWithFileURL:fileURL];
    
    [self.weightHistoryDocument addSubscriber:self];
    
    //    [self addMocData];
    [self passDocumentToViewControllers];
    
    if ([WeightHistoryDocument localFileExists])
    {
        [self loadFileAtURL:fileURL];
    }
    else
    {
        [self createNewFileAtURL:fileURL];
    }
}
Next, open HistoryTableViewController.m. In the class
extension, have it adopt the WeightHistoryDocumentSubscriber
protocol.

--- Page 445 ---
Click here to view code image
@interface HistoryTableViewController ()
<UIViewControllerTransitioningDelegate,
WeightHistoryDocumentSubscriber>
Then, we need an outlet to our Add Entry button. Switch to the
Main.storyboard and open the Assistant Editor. Zoom in on the
History Table View Controller scene, and then Control-drag from the +
button in the navigation bar to the class extension. Create an outlet as
shown here:
Click here to view code image
@property (weak, nonatomic) IBOutlet UIBarButtonItem *addButton;
Now, switch back to the Standard editor and open
HistoryTableViewController.m. Add the
weightHistoryDocument:stateDidChange: method. I placed
this just after the accessor methods.
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - WeightHistoryDocumentStateObserver Methods
- (void)weightHistoryDocument:(WeightHistoryDocument *)document
               stateDidChange:(UIDocumentState)state
{
    if ((state == UIDocumentStateNormal) ||
        (state == UIDocumentStateClosed))
    {
        [self.tableView reloadData];
    }
    
    if (state != UIDocumentStateNormal)
    {
        if ([self.presentedViewController
             isKindOfClass:[AddEntryViewController class]])
        {
            [self dismissViewControllerAnimated:YES
completion:nil];
        }
    }
    
    [self updateAddButton];
}
If our state is either UIDocumentStateNormal or
UIDocumentStateClosed, we reload the table. If our state is not

--- Page 446 ---
UIDocumentStateNormal and we are presenting an
AddEntryViewController, then we dismiss the view. Finally, we
update our add button’s state.
Next, add the updateAddButton method to the bottom of our private
methods, as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (void)updateAddButton
{
    if (self.weightHistoryDocument.documentState ==
UIDocumentStateNormal)
    {
        self.addButton.enabled = YES;
    }
    else
    {
        self.addButton.enabled = NO;
    }
}
This checks the document’s state. If it’s UIDocumentStateNormal,
we enable the button. Otherwise, we disable the button. We also want to call
this method in our viewWillAppear: method to set the button’s state
whenever our view is displayed. Override viewWillAppear: just under
our viewDidLoad method.
Click here to view code image
- (void)viewWillAppear:(BOOL)animated
{
    [super viewWillAppear:animated];
    [self updateAddButton];
}
If you run the code now, you will see that the add button is disabled. It
never becomes enabled. This is because we haven’t registered as a
subscriber yet. Navigate to the setWeightHistoryDocument:
method, and modify it as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (void)setWeightHistoryDocument:
(WeightHistoryDocument *)weightHistoryDocument
{
    if (_weightHistoryDocument)
    {

--- Page 447 ---
        [self removeNotifications];
    }
    
    [weightHistoryDocument addSubscriber:self];
    _weightHistoryDocument = weightHistoryDocument;
    [self setupNotifications];
}
If everything is correct, when we run the application now, the button will
work as before. At this point, the file should load so quickly our button
instantly appears enabled, especially if you’re testing in the simulator.
Let’s slow things down to actually see it appear. Open
RootTabBarController.m and navigate to the setupDocument
method. Make the following changes:
Click here to view code image
if ([WeightHistoryDocument localFileExists])
{
//  [self loadFileAtURL:fileURL];
    [self performSelector:@selector(loadFileAtURL:)
               withObject:fileURL
               afterDelay:2.0];
}
else
{
//  [self createNewFileAtURL:fileURL];
    [self performSelector:@selector(createNewFileAtURL:)
               withObject:fileURL
               afterDelay:2.0];
}
This will create a two-second delay between when our document is
created and passed to the other view controllers and when our document is
loaded (or created) and its UIDocumentNormal state is set. When you
run the application, the Add Entry button should start disabled but should
become enabled after two seconds.
Once you’re convinced that the code is working properly, change
RootTableViewController’s setupDocument method back to the
original code.
We just need to update our graph view controller. Open
GraphViewController.m. Again, use the class extension to adopt the
WeightHistoryDocumentSubscriber protocol.

--- Page 448 ---
Click here to view code image
@interface GraphViewController ()
<WeightHistoryDocumentSubscriber>
Next, we need to add the graph view controller as a subscriber. The
easiest way to do this is to create a custom setter for our
weightHistoryDocument property, as shown. I added this to the end
of the @implementation block, just before the @end directive.
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Accessor Methods
- (void)setWeightHistoryDocument:
(WeightHistoryDocument *)weightHistoryDocument
{
    _weightHistoryDocument = weightHistoryDocument;
    [weightHistoryDocument addSubscriber:self];
}
And then we just need to implement the subscriber method. Implement
the following method just below our accessor method:
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - WeightHistoryDocumentStateObserver methods
- (void)weightHistoryDocument:(WeightHistoryDocument *)document
               stateDidChange:(UIDocumentState)state
{
    if ((state == UIDocumentStateNormal) ||
        (state == UIDocumentStateClosed))
    {
        self.graphView.weightEntries =
        [[[self.weightHistoryDocument allEntries]
          reverseObjectEnumerator] allObjects];
    }
}
Here, we check to see whether our state is either
UIDocumentStateNormal or UIDocumentStateClosed. In either
case, we reload our graph data. This will force our graph to redraw itself.
That’s it. Our application should be responding to all the relevant state
changes. We’ll do some additional work with state changes once we add
iCloud syncing in Chapter 6. In particular, we will need to resolve conflicts

--- Page 449 ---
as they arise. However, we don’t have to worry about that in a self-
contained app.
Triggering Automatic Background Saves
The UIDocument will save our data automatically—but, for this to
happen we need to let it know that a change has occurred. We can do this
either by calling its updateChangeCount: method or by setting an
undo action with the document’s undoManager.
In general, you should always try to go through the undo manager. This
not only triggers our automatic background saves but lets us add undo and
redo support to our application.
Adding undo actions is easy. We simply call the undo manager’s
prepareWithInvocationTarget: method. This method then
returns a proxy for our target. We can call any methods we want on that
proxy, and the undo manager will record them and invoke them on the
target when the undo action is triggered.
To register our undo actions, open WeightHistoryDocument.m and
navigate to the addEntry: method. Add the following code to the end of
the method, just before its closing curly bracket:
Click here to view code image
[[self.undoManager prepareWithInvocationTarget:self]
 deleteEntryAtIndexPath:indexPath];
[self.undoManager setActionName:
 [NSString stringWithFormat:@"Do you want to remove the %@.",
  weightEntry]];
The first expression simply tells the undo manager to call
deleteEntryAtIndexPath: with the given index path whenever this
undo action is triggered. The second expression sets the action name for the
undo action.
Action names are used by OS X to display contextual information in the
Edit menu. For example, if I check my word processor’s Edit menu right
now, it gives me the option to Undo Typing or to Redo Typing. “Typing” is
the current action name.

--- Page 450 ---
Know When to Load Them, Know When to Save Them
Unlike desktop applications, iOS apps shouldn’t have a Save
button. Instead, the application automatically saves its state at the
appropriate times. Of course, that raises the question, what are
the appropriate times?
Traditionally, there have been two basic approaches. The first
involves waiting and saving the application’s entire state (or at
least all the changes) just before it goes into the background or
terminates. The second involves saving each change as soon as
the user makes it. They both have their advantages and
disadvantages.
It is often simpler to wait and save everything at once. This can
greatly reduce the number of times you need to write to disk, and
it can streamline and simplify your code. This is especially true
when you are using NSCoding to persist a large object
hierarchy. You cannot save just part of the object hierarchy—it’s
an all-or-nothing procedure, and you probably don’t want to save
your whole data file every time you make a tiny little change.
On the other hand, iOS applications need to be able to transition
quickly to the background. In general, we have about five
seconds to save our data before the system kills our application.
In practice, we want to stay well short of that. We don’t want to
accidentally lose user data because it took a fraction of a second
longer than we expected. If our application needs to save a large
amount of data, we may need to find ways to split it up and save
off portions as the application is running, rather than leaving
everything until the end.
Additionally, even though well-made iOS applications tend to be
more reliable than their desktop counterparts, they still crash. If
you’re bulk-saving your application’s data, your users will lose
all their work from the current session.
Saving as you go helps to spread the computational cost over the
application’s entire life cycle. In general, this prevents any
noticeable lags as the application stops to load or save a large
chunk of its data. In practice, this can be harder to achieve. We

--- Page 451 ---
often intend to load only one or two entries—but if they refer to
other entries, which refer to still other entries, we may
accidentally pull in a lot more data than we expect.
You will typically need to use some sort of database or database-
like technology to support a save-as-you-go approach. I highly
recommend using Core Data, but SQLite is also well supported.
You can also find a number of third-party solutions that are worth
considering.
On the downside, loading and saving as you go can easily
become more complex and harder to maintain, especially if your
persistence code ends up scattered throughout your application
rather than concentrated in a couple of methods.
Additionally, you need to make sure your application’s data does
not end up in an inconsistent state if your application stops
unexpectedly. For example, if a typical task involves several
steps, you might want to wait until the entire task is finished
before saving your application. If your application crashes in the
middle of a task, saving after each step could leave a half-
finished, malformed task in your database.
Fortunately, UIDocument simplifies all of this. We no longer
need to worry about when our document will be saved.
UIDocument handles this for us. We simply tell the document
about any changes we make to the file, and it decides when to
save the file. UIDocument won’t necessarily save the
document immediately. For performance reasons, it will collect a
number of changes and then save all of them at once. However, it
always saves before the application goes into the background.
When testing, it’s important to always send the application to the
background before closing it. Xcode’s stop button does not
terminate the application in a nice, orderly manner. It kills the
app immediately. By sending it to the background first, we force
the app to save its data.
iOS does not use the action name directly. However, we can hijack this
feature and use it as a convenient place to stash additional context

--- Page 452 ---
information about our undo action. We will then use this context
information when confirming the undo action.
Now, add the following code to the beginning of the
deleteEntryAtIndexPath: method. In this case, it’s important that
we grab the entry before we delete it.
Click here to view code image
WeightEntry *entry = [self entryAtIndexPath:indexPath];
[[self.undoManager prepareWithInvocationTarget:self]
addEntry:entry];
[self.undoManager setActionName:
 [NSString stringWithFormat:@"Do you want to restore the %@.",
entry]];
With this code in place, our application should save its data correctly.
Run the application. Add some data. Press the home button to send it to the
background (or just wait, it will automatically save eventually).
However, instead of seeing the Saving our data... message in the
console, our application crashes. What went wrong?
If you scroll to the top of the exception, you should see something similar
to the following:
Click here to view code image
-[WeightEntry encodeWithCoder:]: unrecognized selector sent to
instance 0x8a18ad0
When we use the NSKeyedArchiver to convert our array into an
NSData object, the array calls encodeWithCoder: on all of the objects
that the array contains. The array should be filled with our WeightEntry
objects. Unfortunately, our WeightEntry class doesn’t yet adopted the
NSCoding protocol. That means they don’t have an
encodeWithCoder: method. Let’s fix that.
Implementing NSCoding
If we want to save or WeightEntrys, they need to adopt the NSCoding
protocol. As we’ve already seen, NSCoding declares only two methods:
initWithCoder: and encodeWithCoder:. Both are required.
Open WeightEntry.m. Let’s start by declaring a couple of constants
at the top of the file. Place the following two lines right after our number
formatter constant:

--- Page 453 ---
Click here to view code image
static NSString * const WeightEntryWeightInLbsKey =
@"WeightEntryWeightInLbsKey";
static NSString * const WeightEntryDateKey =
@"WeightEntryDateKey";
These are the keys we will use to save and load our data. Next, add the
following two methods just before our public methods:
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - NSCoding Methods
- (id)initWithCoder:(NSCoder *)aDecoder
{
    self = [super init];
    if (self)
    {
        _weightInLbs =
        [aDecoder decodeFloatForKey:WeightEntryWeightInLbsKey];
        _date = [aDecoder
decodeObjectForKey:WeightEntryDateKey];
    }
    return self;
}
- (void)encodeWithCoder:(NSCoder *)aCoder
{
    [aCoder encodeFloat:self.weightInLbs
                 forKey:WeightEntryWeightInLbsKey];
    [aCoder encodeObject:self.date forKey:WeightEntryDateKey];
}
initWithCoder: follows the same general pattern we’ve seen in all
our init... methods. However, there’s one small change. If our
superclass adopts the NSCoding protocol, we should call [super
initWithCoder:], just like we did in our BackgroundView and
GraphView classes in Chapter 4, “Custom Views and Custom
Transitions.”
WeightEntry is a subclass of NSObject. Since NSObject doesn’t
adopt the NSCoding protocol, we cannot call [super
initWithCoder:]. Instead, we’ll call the superclass’s designated

--- Page 454 ---
initializer—just to make sure we don’t skip any important initialization
code.
Inside initWithCoder:’s if block, we use our keys to pull our
values out of the archive and assign them to our instance variables. In
encodeWithCoder: we do the opposite. We take the values from our
instance variables and use the keys to save them in the archive.
If our superclass adopted the NSCoding protocol, we would have to call
super somewhere in this implementation. However, even in that cases, we
don’t have to worry about reassigning self or making sure that self !=
nil. That’s only for the init... methods. Just call [super
encodeObject:] somewhere in your implementation, and you’re good
to go.
There is another important point here. Notice that we’re explicitly saving
and loading our weightInLbs as floats, regardless of the underlying
architecture. While it’s tempting to update all data types to their 64-bit
versions for the new 64-bit devices, we need to make sure we’re using a
common format when we save and load our data. Since our weight values
won’t ever need the extra range or precision that the double provides, the
easiest solution is to just use float on both platforms.
That’s it. Run the app again. Create a new weight. Press the home button
to put the app in the background. You should see the “Saving our data...”
message appear in the console. Kill the application and run it again. It
should load the data successfully.
Adding an Undo Action
Since we’re registering undo actions, we may as well use them. iOS often
uses the shake gesture to trigger undo. However, it’s easy to accidentally
shake the device, so let’s ask users before we change their data.
Let’s start by making our HistoryTableViewController respond
to the shake gesture. Now, our controller inherits from UIResponder, and
UIResponder has a number of motion event methods we can implement
to receive this notification.
Typically, if we’re going to respond to UIResponder’s event
messages, we need to decide whether we’re going to grab the event and

--- Page 455 ---
keep it or whether we’re going to peek at the event and then pass it up the
responder chain.
In the first case, we need to implement all the responder methods, but we
shouldn’t call super inside our implementation. This will prevent the
event from proceeding up the responder chain. No one else will ever know
it existed.
In the second case, we just need to implement the method we’re
interested in, but we must call super somewhere inside our
implementation. This will pass the event back up the responder chain, and
other responders may also see and react to it.
Either approach is fine. For this project, let’s go ahead and grab the
event.
Open HistoryTableViewController.m, and start by adopting
the UIAlertViewDelegate protocol. This will allow us to respond to
button presses in any alert views we show.
At the top of the file modify the class extension’s @interface line as
shown here:
Click here to view code image
@interface HistoryTableViewController ()
<UIViewControllerTransitioningDelegate,
WeightHistoryDocumentSubscriber,
UIAlertViewDelegate>
Next, let’s add the following methods after our navigation methods:
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - UIResponder Methods
- (void)motionBegan:(UIEventSubtype)motion withEvent:(UIEvent
*)event
{
}
- (void)motionEnded:(UIEventSubtype)motion withEvent:(UIEvent
*)event
{
    if (motion == UIEventSubtypeMotionShake)
    {
        if (![self.weightHistoryDocument.undoManagercanUndo])
return;
      

--- Page 456 ---
        UIAlertView *alertView =
        [[UIAlertView alloc]
         initWithTitle:@"Confirm Undo"
         message:[self.weightHistoryDocument.undoManager
undoActionName]
         delegate:self
         cancelButtonTitle:@"Undo"
         otherButtonTitles:@"Cancel", nil];
        
        [alertView show];
    }
}
- (void)motionCancelled:(UIEventSubtype)motion withEvent:
(UIEvent *)event
{
}
Notice that motionBegan:withEvent: and
motionCancelled:withEvent: are simply stubs. They don’t do
anything. We implement them only to grab the events and prevent them
from passing up the responder chain.
In motionEnded:withEvent:, we start by making sure our motion
event is a shake event. Currently, there is only one type of motion event, so
this will always be true—but a little bit of future proofing never hurts.
Then, we check to see whether our undo manager has any undo actions in
its stack. If it doesn’t, we just return.
If we can undo the user’s last action, we display an AlertView. We set
the alert’s title to “Confirm Undo.” For the message, we grab the undo
action name that we set earlier. Then we set our history table view as the
delegate, and we give it two buttons, an OK button and a Cancel button.
The arguments get a little odd here. The cancel button is actually the first
button—or the leftmost button. The other button appears to the right. Now,
normally we want to have the default action on the right, since that’s the
easiest button to accidentally hit with your thumb. Most of the time, that
will be the action button—but when you’re doing a potentially destructive
action (like undoing someone’s entry), you should err on the side of
caution. So, despite the names, we’re placing our cancel button on the right.
Finally, we display the alert view.

--- Page 457 ---
This doesn’t do anything yet. We’re just asking the user if we should
actually undo the latest change.
Next, add the following method, just below our motion methods:
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - UIAlertViewDelegate Methods
- (void)alertView:(UIAlertView *)alertView
willDismissWithButtonIndex:(NSInteger)buttonIndex
{
    if (buttonIndex == 0)
    {
        [self.weightHistoryDocument.undoManager undo];
    }
}
This method is called whenever a button is pressed in our alert view. We
check to see whether it’s the first button (our OK button). If it is, we simply
tell the undo manager to undo the last registered action.
Run the application. Add some data. Now shake the device (in the
simulator, use ^
Z). And...nothing happens.
That’s because there’s a catch. Our view controller will respond to
motion events only if it is the first responder. But, calling
becomeFirstResponder won’t work either (OK, there are two
catches). Currently, our controller’s canBecomeFirstResponder
method returns NO. We need to override it to return YES. Then we need to
become the first responder. And finally, we can respond to motion events.
Add the following method immediately before our table view data source
methods:
Click here to view code image
- (BOOL)canBecomeFirstResponder
{
    return YES;
}
This lets us become first responder. Now, we need to request first
responder status in two places: first, when our view first appears, and
second, whenever we dismiss a modal view.
Start by calling becomeFirstResponder at the bottom of
viewWillAppear:.

--- Page 458 ---
Click here to view code image
- (void)viewWillAppear:(BOOL)animated
{
    [super viewWillAppear:animated];
    [self updateAddButton];
    [self becomeFirstResponder];
}
Then add it to our storyboard unwinding methods as well.
Click here to view code image
- (IBAction)addNewEntrySaved:(UIStoryboardSegue *)segue
{
    AddEntryViewController *controller =
segue.sourceViewController;
    
    WeightEntry *entry = [WeightEntry
entryWithWeight:controller.weight
                                           usingUnits:getDefault
Units()
                                              forDate:controller
.date];
    
    [self.weightHistoryDocument addEntry:entry];
    [self dismissViewControllerAnimated:YES completion:nil];
    [self becomeFirstResponder];
}
- (IBAction)addNewEntryCanceled:(UIStoryboardSegue *)segue
{
    [self dismissViewControllerAnimated:YES completion:nil];
    [self becomeFirstResponder];
}
Run the application again. Add some data. Shake the device and undo the
action. Remove some data. Shake the device and undo the action.
Everything should work as expected.

--- Page 459 ---
Wrapping Up
This chapter covered a lot of ground. We learned about the limits of the iOS
file system and how to work within our application’s sandbox. We saw a
number of methods for saving and loading our document’s data, from
storing user preferences using the NSUserDefaults API to saving
document data using a UIDocument subclass. We looked at different
techniques for sending notifications to broad sections of our application,
and we glimpsed a bit at concurrent programming. Finally, we learned how
to restore our user interface’s state so users can launch our application and
continue working exactly where they left off.
But, saving and loading data doesn’t end here. In the next chapter, we are
going to sync both our application’s preferences and our document’s data
using iCloud. Then, in Chapter 7, we will replace our current
WeightHistoryDocument with Core Data.
Other Resources
 Keychain Services Programming Guide
iOS Developer’s Library
This programming guide explains how to use the keychain service to
save passwords and other secret information. This is definitely a
must-read guide, if your application handles passwords or other
sensitive information.
 Preferences and Settings Programming Guide
iOS Developer’s Library
This guide gives more information on using NSUserDefaults and
the Settings bundle. It includes discussions on what type of
preferences we should save. How to provide an in-app interface for
our preferences. And more details on setting up the Settings bundle
and working with iOS’s Settings app.
 File System Programming Guide
iOS Developer’s Library
If you’re looking for more information on iOS’s file system, this
should be your first stop. Note, however, that this covers both the OS

--- Page 460 ---
X and the iOS file systems, so you have to read it somewhat carefully.
Much of what you see will only be appropriate on OS X.
 Concurrency Programming Guide
iOS Developer’s Library
This guide covers all the concurrent programming technologies
available for iOS development. This includes detailed information
about both NSOperationQueues and Grand Central Dispatch, and
beyond.
 iOS App Programming Guide: State Preservation and
Restoration
iOS Developer’s Library
While the entire iOS App Programming Guide is worth reading, the
section on State Preservation and Restoration provides detailed
information about the State Preservation and Restoration process.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 461 ---
Chapter 6. iCloud Syncing
iCloud is an umbrella term used to refer to a broad range of technologies. If
you want to leave your music, movies, or TV shows on the iTunes servers,
downloading them only as you need them, that’s iCloud. If you want to
automatically stream your photos to your Apple TV, that’s iCloud. If you
want to back up your iOS device wirelessly to the cloud, that’s also iCloud.
However, when developers talk about iCloud, we’re really talking about
Documents in the Cloud, or—to step away from Apple’s marketing
language—iCloud syncing. This is the only part of iCloud that we, as
developers, can touch.
The idea is simple enough. Users should be able to access their data on
all their devices. They can start writing a letter on their laptop, edit it during
lunch on their iPad, and then review and send it from their iPhone as they
walk back to the office.
From the user’s perspective, all the data transfers and syncing should be
handled automatically and transparently. They open their application, and
their data is already waiting for them.
What Is iCloud Syncing?
Before we dig into the details, it’s important to understand what iCloud
syncing is—or, more importantly—what it isn’t.
Specifically, iCloud is not the following:
 Remote storage
 A communication channel between different users
 A general communication channel between different applications
 A cross-platform syncing solution
iCloud syncing lets us sync all of our data and documents from one
application (or a tightly integrated suite of applications) among all the
devices owned by a single user. That’s it. Period.
We cannot use iCloud to create the next Twitter. We cannot build a suite
of collaborative editing tools on iCloud. We can’t even use it to share data
among different applications from different developers.

--- Page 462 ---
iCloud syncing may let us save a little storage space, since we can evict
old documents and redownload them the next time we need them. But, we
always work off a locally stored copy.
It may also provide a light backup for our documents. If someone drops
their phone in the toilet, they could redownload all the files onto their new
device. However, this isn’t a replacement for proper backups. For example,
we can download only the current version of our data from iCloud. If that
data were to become corrupt or to accidentally get overwritten or erased,
we’re out of luck.
Finally, iCloud syncing works best for users who live and work entirely
within Apple’s walled garden. While it can offer some Windows support, it
cannot be used to sync to Android or other OSs.
A number of third-party solutions provide cross-platform document
syncing to a greater or lesser degree. However, for iOS and OS X
applications, iCloud syncing provides the most convenient, most
transparent syncing solution for the broadest range of users.
iCloud APIs
iCloud syncing provides three different APIs: Key-Value Storage,
Document Storage, and Core Data Storage. We will examine both Key-
Value and Document Storage in this chapter. Core Data Storage will wait
until we discuss Core Data in Chapter 7.
Key-Value Storage
iCloud Key-Value Storage provides a simple interface for saving data in the
cloud. It is designed to store small, discrete values. In many ways, it
parallels the NSUserDefaults API. In fact, we will typically use it to
sync users preferences across multiple devices.
Unfortunately, Key-Value Storage is also more restricted than the other
syncing APIs. It can only store a limited amount of data, 1MB per user,
divided among up to 1,024 unique keys. Furthermore, it stores only
property-list data types: NSNumber, NSDate, NSString,
NSArray, NSDictionary, and NSData. Finally, it does not have any
conflict resolution—the last save always wins.
On the plus side, Key-Value Storage does not count toward the user’s
iCloud storage space, so there’s no reason not to use it.

--- Page 463 ---
Before we can use Key-Value Storage, we must enable iCloud in our
project. This involves changing the settings both in our application’s
entitlements and in the App ID. Furthermore, changing the App ID often
requires creating and downloading new provisioning profiles. Fortunately,
Xcode 5’s new Capabilities tool handles all of this for us. We simply turn
on iCloud support and make sure the key-value store is enabled. Then we’re
ready to go.
With the store enabled, we can access the shared
NSUbiquitousKeyValueStore object. This object defines a number
of methods we can use to read and write our data. The store initially caches
all our changes in memory, saving them to disk as needed.
Just like the UIDocument or the NSUserDefaults, the system will
always save before going to the background. Once the changes are saved to
disk, the system will alert the iCloud server, which will upload the change
to the cloud, and then push the update to all our other devices.
We don’t even need to worry about whether the user is logged into
iCloud. If the user is not logged in, iCloud Key-Value Storage continues to
save a local version of the data. Then, once iCloud becomes available, it
will sync its most recent data with the cloud.

--- Page 464 ---
 Note
Syncing the NSUbiquitousKeyValueStore does not
force the system to upload its changes to iCloud immediately.
Indeed, the system may deliberately delay uploading,
especially when our application makes frequent changes. The
more frequent the updates, the longer the delay.
In older versions of iOS, this made testing key-value syncing
something of a challenge. You could get only two or three
changes to sync before the system started throttling. Then,
suddenly, key-value syncing stopped working.
Now, however, the thresholds are much higher—
approximately 15 requests every 90 seconds before throttling
kicks in. So, you’re unlikely to accidentally trigger throttling
with anything except the extreme stress testing.
Since the Key-Value Storage API so closely resembles
NSUserDefaults, it’s tempting to just use Key-Value Storage as a drop-
in replacement. Resist this temptation.
The best approach involves using NSUserDefaults to manage the
application’s preferences locally and using Key-Value Storage to sync these
preferences across multiple devices.
This two-stage setup is both more robust and more flexible. For example,
we can compare incoming values from the cloud with what we’ve stored in
the user defaults. This lets us create our own, custom update rules.
Key-Value Storage’s last-save-wins approach works fine for many types
of data. If we’re tracking the last video that a user watched, last-save-wins
works fine. If we’re tracking the current default units in a weight-tracking
app, again last-save-wins seems perfectly acceptable. However, if we want
to sync a game’s high score across all our apps, we really need to make sure
the incoming value is actually higher than the current value in our user
defaults. If it is not higher, we should save the actual high score back out
into the cloud instead.

--- Page 465 ---
Seven Things You Should Never Store in iCloud
We always need to think about what, exactly, we’re saving in
iCloud. In general, we want to minimize the amount of data we
send and receive. However, there are a few, specific types of data
we should always watch out for.
 Passwords or other secrets: Sensitive data should be stored
in the keychain, never in the cloud.
 Device-specific data such as view size or scroll position:
These details may not have the same meaning on different
devices. An iPhone’s scroll position will be vastly different
than an iPad’s.
 Data that can cause “sync storms”: Things like last-
modified timestamps should not be synced. Otherwise, an
incoming update will modify the data, changing the timestamp
and triggering another sync. That will then update the data on
another device, changing its timestamp and triggering another
sync. Repeat until we’ve used up our entire monthly data plan.
 Device-specific data: For example, iOS uses a UIImage
object to hold image data. OS X uses an NSImage. These
objects are not compatible. If you want to sync between iOS
and the desktop, you need to save the image in a common
format (such as PNG or JPEG).
 Data that makes assumptions about the device’s bit size:
We cannot assume that all our devices use either 32- or 64-bit
processors. Our code must either translate the data or save it in
a common format. See the “Supporting 64-Bit Code” sidebar
in the “Objective-C” bonus chapter for more information.
 Data that can be re-created or downloaded easily: To help
minimize the amount of data being sent to iCloud, do not sync
anything that can be easily recreated by the application, either
by recalculating it or by downloading it again.
 SQLite databases: SQLite databases are not designed to be
modified by multiple processes concurrently. Syncing an
SQLite directly using iCloud is guaranteed to corrupt the

--- Page 466 ---
database. It’s not a question of if, it’s a question of when. As
we will see next chapter, Core Data solves this problem by
keeing the database out of the Ubiquity Container, and syncing
the transaction logs.
Document Storage
iCloud Document Storage lets us sync any files or file packages we want.
We are limited only by the amount of available storage space in the user’s
iCloud account. However, since most users have only the free 5GB account
and much of that space may be used to back up their devices, we need to be
a little careful about how much we sync to the cloud.
At its most basic, iCloud Document Storage creates a specially blessed
directory on our drive. We call this the Ubiquity Container. This container
lies outside our application’s regular sandbox. When we set up our
application for iCloud, we will extend the application sandbox to include
this directory (Figure 6.1).
FIGURE 6.1 The extended sandbox
When we save a document to the Ubiquity Container, the system actually
saves two pieces of data. It saves metadata about the document, and it saves

--- Page 467 ---
the document’s data.
The iCloud service monitors our Ubiquity Container and automatically
uploads any changes to the cloud. From there, iCloud automatically pushes
the metadata to all our devices (Figure 6.2); however, iOS devices will not
download the document data. Instead, the application must request the
download. Of course, once an iOS device has downloaded the document, it
will continue to automatically download any further updates.
FIGURE 6.2 The flow of data and metadata
Most of the time the data is transparently downloaded when the
application tries to load the file; however, iCloud provides API to both
monitor and trigger the download of nonlocal files. This is particularly
useful when dealing with large files. You don’t want to surprise the user
with unexpectedly long load times as the application struggles to download
a 2GB file. Often, it’s better to explicitly show whether the document is
local or in the cloud and let the user explicitly download it before trying to
open it.
iOS applications may also evict data from the Ubiquity Container. While
we can do this programmatically, the system will automatically evict data
when the device runs low on storage space, beginning with applications that

--- Page 468 ---
have not been opened recently. After all, the application can always
download the data from iCloud if necessary.
This design has a number of advantages. Since we are always modifying
a local file, we can work offline. The iCloud service will simply wait and
sync our document once the Internet becomes available. It also minimizes
bandwidth and data usage. All devices are notified of any changes, but iOS
devices download only the data they’re actually using.
OS X, on the other hand, acts as the greedy partner. As long as it has an
active iCloud connection, it will always download everything. This includes
iCloud data for iOS-only applications. Furthermore, OS X iCloud data is
never evicted. This means our OS X machine should have a reasonably up-
to-date copy of every document we have stored in the cloud.
If you open the Finder and go to ~/Library/Mobile
Documents/, you will see a list of all the Ubiquity Containers for all the
iCloud-enabled applications associated with your account. We can also add
and remove documents from these folders using the Finder. These changes
will be synced back to our iOS devices. This can be useful when setting up
test data.
Also, notice that non-Apple containers begin with a ten-digit developer
team ID. We can create a Ubiquity Container that is shared among different
applications from the same team—but we cannot share with other
applications from a different team. Still, shared containers can be
particularly useful, especially when creating free and paid versions of an
application. You don’t want someone to lose their iCloud data just because
they upgraded.
Also, we can create whatever subdirectories we need inside the Ubiquity
Container; however, there is one special subdirectory that we must be aware
of. Any files or file packages placed inside the Documents directory will
be displayed to the user by name. The user can select and delete these
documents individually. All the files placed outside the Documents
directory are combined and listed as “Documents & Data.” Users cannot
see or delete the individual files. However, they can delete all the data, if
they want.
Therefore, we have to be careful about where we save our files. As much
as possible, we should try to save our data into the Documents directory.

--- Page 469 ---
This gives users the most fine-grained control over their iCloud storage
space. However, we need to make sure that deleting just one of the files
won’t put our application into a bad state. If you have multiple files that
must be deleted as a group, either place them together in a file package or
store them outside the Documents directory.
To manage iCloud documents, on OS X open the Systems Preferences.
Select the iCloud preferences and then click the “Manage...” button in the
bottom-right corner. This will bring up a list of all the applications saving
data to iCloud. Select an application to see its documents and data. On iOS,
open the Settings app and select iCloud > Storage & Backup > Manage
Storage. Again, select an application to see its documents and data.
Finally, remember, the truth is always in the cloud. If you really want to
see exactly what’s in your iCloud storage, you should log into
http://developer.icloud.com. This site lets us browse through
and (in some cases) download the data directly from the iCloud servers.
Implementation Details
While the theory sounds relatively simple, once we get into the
implementation details, things begin to get complicated.
To enable document storage, we must add identifiers for our Ubiquity
Containers to our application’s entitlements. These identifiers define the
different containers available to our application. We can have as many
containers as we want, but the first container is somewhat special. Its
identifier must be the bundle identifier for the current target or the bundle
identifier for another app that has already been submitted to the App Store
using the same Team ID. Again, Xcode 5 handles all of this through the
Capabilities tool.
iCloud also tries to minimize the amount of data it needs to upload and
download. It will automatically break our application’s data into chunks and
—when possible—upload and download only the chunks that have actually
changed. iCloud will also transmit data peer-to-peer across the local Wi-Fi
network when it can. Still, as developers, we need to be careful with both
the amount of data we store and the amount of bandwidth we consume.
We also need to consider other things that the users might do to our data.
Here are a few key issues we must remember when working with iCloud
storage:

--- Page 470 ---
 Users may not have an active iCloud account.
 Users can log out of their iCloud account or log into another account
at any point.
 Users can deactivate or reactivate document storage at any point.
 Users can delete any file or file package inside the Documents
folder at any point.
 Users can also delete all the documents and data outside the
Documents folder.
 The iCloud server may download updates and modify our document
at any point. Our application must listen for and respond to these
changes.
 Conflicts are a part of iCloud life. We must detect and resolve all
conflicts as they occur.
To do this, we must perform the following steps:
1. Call ubiquityIdentityToken early in our application’s launch
cycle. This will tell us whether the user is logged into iCloud.
2. Listen and respond to the
NSUbiquityIdentityDidChangeNotification. This will
tell us when the user logs in, logs out, or changes iCloud accounts.
3. Get the URL for the Ubiquity Container by calling
URLForUbiquityContainerIdentifier:. As a side effect,
this also extends the application’s sandbox to include the Ubiquity
Container. This means we must call this method before we do any
read or write operations inside the container. It also means we often
need to call this for its side effect long before we need the actual
URL.
4. Move a document to the Ubiquity Container by calling
setUbiquitous:itemAtURL:destinationURL:error:.
Typically, we will create a file in the sandbox, letting the user use it
immediately, and then we will move it to the Ubiquity Container on a
background thread.
5. Search for documents in the Ubiquity Container using
NSMetadataQuery. This lets us know if a document exists, even if

--- Page 471 ---
it has not been downloaded yet. Since other copies of our application
might rename or move files, we should never store the URL or file
path to anything in the Ubiquity Container. Even if we know our
application never moves the file, it’s always best to search for files.
We never know how our application may change in the future.
6. Since we have two different processes accessing files in the Ubiquity
Container (our application and the iCloud service), we must perform
all file read and write operations using an NSFileCoordinator.
7. Whenever we display document data to users, we must adopt the
NSFilePresenter protocol. This protocol allows us to monitor
the data’s state and respond to changes as needed. This includes
loading a new version of the data whenever the iCloud server
downloads an update or managing conflicting versions as they are
detected.
Of these, the NSFileCoordinator and NSFilePresenters are
worth a little additional attention.
File Coordinators
File coordinators perform two main functions. First, they act as a blocking
mechanism, making sure no one else is reading a file while you are writing
it, or vice versa. Second, they coordinate reading and writing across
multiple processes. By default, a coordinated read action will cause all other
processes to write any unsaved data they have to that file before the read
operation can begin.
File coordinators allow any number of simultaneous read operations;
however, they will allow only one write operation at a time. Furthermore,
new read operations will block until the current write operation has
completed. A new write operation will also block until all the current read
or write operations have ended.
As far as the implementation goes, file coordinators use a block-based
API. We will perform the actual reading and writing operations inside the
block that we pass to the coordinator.
There are five main methods that we will use to perform coordination.
coordinateReadingItemAtURL:options:error:byAcc

--- Page 472 ---
essor: This is the basic coordinated read operation. We use it to
read from a single URL.
coordinateWritingItemAtURL:options:error:byAcc
essor: This is the basic coordinated write operation. We use it to
write to a single URL.
coordinateReadingItemAtURL:options:writingItem
AtURL:options:error:byAccessor: This method lets us
coordinate reading from one URL and writing to another URL. We
typically use this to copy a file or directory from one location to
another.
 If we are reading and writing to the same URL, we can often perform
both the read and the write inside a single coordinated write operation
instead, since writing is stricter than reading.
 There may be times, however, where we want to specify particular
options for both the reading and the writing operation. You can use
this method to handle those cases as well.
coordinateWritingItemAtURL:options:writingItem
AtURL:options:error:byAccessor: This method lets us
coordinate writing at two different URLS. We typically use this to
move a file or directory from one location to another.
prepareForReadingItemsAtURLs:options:writingIt
emsAtURLs:options:error:byAccessor: This lets us
batch process a number of read and write operations. This is often
faster than performing the individual coordinated reads and writes.
Note, however, that this method does not handle the actual
coordination. We must still call the appropriate coordinated read and
write methods inside this block.
All of these methods share a number of noteworthy features.
First, the blocks on these methods are all performed synchronously. Up
until now, most of the block-based APIs have been asynchronous. When we

--- Page 473 ---
pass a block to an asynchronous method, the system goes off and does some
processing and then calls our block at some undetermined time in the future
(if the block is ever called at all).
With the file coordinator blocks, on the other hand, we are guaranteed
that our block will run before the coordination method finishes. This makes
using the coordinators a little bit easier.
Additionally, these methods will block the thread they are called on. And,
since the file coordinator may need to wait until other operations are
finished, the thread could block for an indeterminate amount of time.
Therefore, we should never call these methods from the main thread.
Finally, the file coordinator will always provide us with a new URL to
use inside our reading and writing blocks. This is important, since another
coordinated write operation could move the files, changing their URLs.
File Presenters
File coordinators work hand-in-hand with file presenters.
NSFilePresenter is a protocol that we can implement to enable low-
level monitoring of our files and directories. We will receive notifications
whenever a coordinated write modifies, moves, or deletes a file. We may
also be asked to save any pending changes we have for a file. Finally, other
file coordinators can ask us to temporarily relinquish control over the file
that we’re monitoring.
Any time we are presenting an iCloud document’s data to the user, we
must implement a file presenter for that document, and we need to respond
to the notification methods as appropriate.
The need to use file coordinators and presenters makes reading and
writing to the Ubiquity Container considerably more difficult than normal
file I/O. Fortunately, UIDocument manages a lot of this complexity for
us. In particular, it already adopts the NSFilePresenter protocol. It
also automatically uses NSFileCoordinators during its standard load
and save operations.
The rest, however, is still up to us.

--- Page 474 ---
File Versioning
Before we add iCloud Document Storage to our application, we need to
make sure our data files have some type of versioning built in. This can be
as simple as adding a version number to the document—of course, if we
add a version number, that implies we’re also prepared to handle changes to
that version number.
The basic issue is as follows. As we continue to enhance our application
and release updates, we may reach a point where we want to change the
format of our data files. Maybe we want to add additional data. Maybe we
want to move away from a single array of WeightEntry objects, to
something more complex. Unfortunately, as soon as we change our data’s
format we will have two (or more) possible document types floating
around. Our application needs some way to identify the different document
types and respond appropriately.
Versioning is always a good idea; however, with iCloud syncing enabled,
it becomes a lot more serious. Newer versions of our application should be
able to detect and handle old file formats with little difficulty. The real
problem is when old versions of the app get ahold of newer documents.
Fortunately, given the fact that our files are hidden away from the users, and
the way that the App Store and iOS handle updates, it would be difficult, if
not impossible, for someone to accidentally open a newer document with an
older app.
However, as soon as we enable iCloud Document Storage, this is no
longer true. Users will be accessing the same file on multiple devices, and
they may not update all their devices at the same time.
iOS 7 partially solves the problem, since applications now update
automatically. However, what if the user turns off automatic updates? Or,
what if he’s accidentally left the device in airplane mode, and hasn’t yet
received the update? Or what happens if we release separate iPhone and
iPad versions of our app? Even if we try to release the updates at the same
time, one might be held up in Apple’s review process.
Bottom line, if something can happen it will happen. We should always
assume that the user could be running different versions of our app on
different devices. Therefore, our syncing needs to take this into account.
When we detect different versions of our application, we have four basic
options:

--- Page 475 ---
1. We could open the document and convert the data to the current
version. If the user makes changes, we save the document in the
current version. This is the easiest option to develop, but it has a few
risks. If a newer version of the application opens an old document, the
converted document may not be readable by the old app. Similarly, if
an old version of the application opens and saves the document, it will
undoubtedly erase any new data that was added to the file format.
2. We could open the document and convert the data to the current
version; however, when we save changes, we save them back as the
old version. Obviously, this is only an option for newer versions of
our application. An old version of the application has no idea what the
new data format should look like. Also, newer versions of our app
may lose data when they save to the older format.
3. We could open the document read-only, letting the user view the data
but not save changes.
4. We could refuse to open the document at all.
In addition, we need to decide how much information we’re going to pass
on to the user. In many cases it’s best to silently upgrade file formats
without ever notifying the user. However, we should always alert the user if
there’s a chance of data getting lost—possibly giving him a choice on how
he wants to proceed.
iCloud Document Storage Strategies
There are three main strategies for iCloud-enabled applications.
The simplest solution is to always use iCloud when it’s available and fall
back to the sandbox only if the user has either disabled document syncing
or is not logged into an iCloud account.
Alternatively, we can ask users if they want to use iCloud the first time it
becomes available. We then save either to iCloud or the sandbox based on
their decision. In this case, we probably want to give the users some way to
change their mind.
We also need to decide how changing from the sandbox to iCloud, or
back, affects the currently saved documents. The simplest approach is to
just leave the documents where they are. If users switch between the
sandbox and iCloud, we just give them a new, blank slate to work with.

--- Page 476 ---
Moving documents from the sandbox to iCloud isn’t the problem. It’s
moving files back from iCloud where things get sticky. Unfortunately, there
are a number of situations where we simply cannot migrate the data back
before it becomes unavailable. If the user is toggling a control that we
provide, then we can move the documents, no problem. But, if she disables
document syncing or logs out of iCloud, she will instantly lose access to
anything in the cloud. We won’t have a chance to move the documents
before they become unavailable.
The last iCloud strategy involves letting the user choose on a file-by-file
basis. In this case, we typically provide some mechanism for moving files
into and out of iCloud. This is, by far, the most complex approach.
Additionally, we still have problems moving documents back from iCloud.
If the user logs out or disables document syncing, she will lose access to
anything stored in the cloud. She’ll have to log back in or reenable
document syncing, transfer the files, and then log out again.
Picking the correct strategy is not easy, however, consider the following.
In iOS 7, users have the option to disable document syncing on an
application-by-application basis. This means they can disable document
syncing for our application, even if we use the simplest approach. And,
arguably, using Apple’s controls for disabling and enabling syncing gives
all the applications a common look and feel.
So, unless you’re working with very large files, I recommend taking the
simplest approach. It’s the easiest to implement, easiest for users to
understand, the most consistent, and the most robust.
If, however, you are saving significant amounts of data, you really should
ask users before eating into their iCloud storage. In this case, pick either the
second or third approach, based on the needs of your application.
Adding Key-Value Syncing to Health Beat
We need to start by enabling iCloud for our application. Click the blue
Health Beat icon in the Project navigator, and then click the Capabilities
tab. This page lists a variety of features we can enable for our application,
including iCloud, Game Center, Passbook, In-App Purchases, and others.
If we expand the iCloud capabilities, we can see that enabling it will add
the iCloud entitlement to our App ID, and it will add the iCloud container
identifiers to our entitlements (Figure 6.3).

--- Page 477 ---
FIGURE 6.3 The iCloud capabilities
In the past, this was a lot of work. We would typically create a new App
ID specifically for our application. This meant we would also need to create
and download a new provisioning profile. Then we’d need to go into our
project’s build settings and set it to use our new provisioning profile.
Finally, we’d need to create the entitlements file and set the proper iCloud
key-value pairs.
Fortunately, Xcode 5 simplifies this to the flick of a single switch. It has
also simplified the backend, letting us continue to use the Generic App ID
and team profile, which vastly cuts down on the number of IDs and profiles
that get linked to our developer account.
Somewhat ironically, turning on the iCloud capabilities won’t actually
prepare our application’s key-value store, but it gets our app into a state
where we can enable it.
Click the iCloud Capabilities switch to turn it on. The interface should
change to something similar to Figure 6.4. Your Ubiquity Container ID will
be different, but everything else should be the same.
FIGURE 6.4 iCloud capabilities enabled

--- Page 478 ---
We don’t actually need the Ubiquity Container ID yet, but let’s leave it.
We’ll use it in the next section. For the current task at hand, check the “Use
key-value store” box to enable key-value syncing.
The Capabilities tool lets us turn key-value syncing only on and off, and
by default it will use the current target’s bundle ID to set up our syncing.
This is fine for stand-alone apps, like Health Beat. However, if you want to
share key-value syncing across multiple apps (for example, syncing
between a free and a paid version of your app), you must manually edit
your entitlements file. You can find detailed instructions in Apple’s iCloud
Design Guide.
Since we already have our user defaults working, we just need to add the
code to sync them. There are four basic steps:
1. Whenever the user changes our defaults, we need to update the key-
value store.
2. We need to listen for updates from the store.
3. As soon as we’re listening for updates, we should sync our store to
download the current value.
4. When an update occurs, we need to decide whether we should update
our user defaults or whether we should keep the user defaults and
change the value in the store.
We can do step 1 with our existing framework easily enough. However,
only objects can listen for notifications. Our current defaults
implementation just uses C functions. So, we’ll need to move our code into
an object—and a singleton object at that.
Create a new subclass of NSObject named CloudManager. Then
open CloudManager.h. Modify the header file as shown here:
Click here to view code image
#import <Foundation/Foundation.h>
#import "WeightUnits.h"
@interface CloudManager : NSObject
+ (instancetype)sharedManager;
@property (assign, nonatomic) WeightUnit defaultWeightUnits;
@end
Here, we’re just importing the WeightUnits.h file and then declaring
our sharedManager class method and our defaultWeightUnits

--- Page 479 ---
property.
Switch to CloudManager.m. Let’s start by implementing the
sharedManager class method as shown here:
Click here to view code image
+ (instancetype)sharedManager
{
    static CloudManager *sharedManager = nil;
    static dispatch_once_t onceToken;
    dispatch_once(&onceToken, ^{
        sharedManager = [[self alloc] init];
    });
    
    return sharedManager;
}
Here, we’re using Grand Central Dispatch’s dispatch_once method
to create a thread-safe singleton instance. The sharedManager and
dispatch_once variables are static local variables. This means they are
declared at compile time. In the case of sharedManager, its initial value
is set to nil. Each time this method is called, it will reuse the same
variables; however, these variables can be accessed or modified only inside
this method. Also, the declaration lines are not called at runtime, so we do
not reset the sharedManager’s value to nil. They will continue to hold
whatever value was last assigned.
The dispatch_once method will execute the given block of code
once and only once in the entire lifetime of our application. If it is called
simultaneously from multiple threads, all the calls will wait synchronously
until the block has completed. Then they will all return.
In this case, we use it to create our shared manager and assign it to the
static variable. Then our class method simply returns that shared manager.
So, the first time this method is called, the dispatch_once block will
run, creating the shared manager; assign it to our static variable; and return
the manager. The next time it’s called, dispatch_once’s block won’t
run. Instead, we just return the instance stored in our static variable. This
lets us create the shared instance once but access it as many times as we
want.
Now, we need to create custom accessors for our
defaultWeightUnits property. These are going to be copied from

--- Page 480 ---
WeightUnit’s getDefaultUnits() and setDefaultUnits()—
with a few modifications to support iCloud syncing.
First, move the WeightUnitsDefaultUnitsKey constant from
WeightUnits.m to the top of CloudManager.m. We also need to
define DefaultWeightUnitsKey as shown here:
Click here to view code image
static NSString * const WeightUnitsDefaultUnitsKey =
@"WeightUnitsDefaultUnitsKey";
static NSString * const DefaultWeightUnitsKey =
@"defaultWeightUnits";
Notice that the second string value does not match the constant’s name.
Instead, it must match our defaultWeightUnits property.
Next, in CloudManager.m define the defaultWeightUnits
method and move the getDefaultUnits() implementation inside it as
shown here:
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Accessor Methods
- (WeightUnit)defaultWeightUnits
{
    return (WeightUnit)[[NSUserDefaults standardUserDefaults]
                        integerForKey:WeightUnitsDefaultUnitsKey
];
}
Do the same thing for setDefaultWeightUnits:; however, this
time we’re going to add a bit of code to sync the change to the iCloud key-
value store.
Click here to view code image
- (void)setDefaultWeightUnits:(WeightUnit)defaultUnit
{
    [[NSUserDefaults standardUserDefaults]
     setInteger:defaultUnit
     forKey:WeightUnitsDefaultUnitsKey];
    
    [[NSUbiquitousKeyValueStore defaultStore]
     setLongLong:defaultUnit
     forKey:WeightUnitsDefaultUnitsKey];
}

--- Page 481 ---
We start by changing the value in our user defaults. This is copied from
our setDefaultUnits() method. Then, we update the value stored in
the key-value store. Notice that while the
NSUbiquitousKeyValueStore API roughly mirrors the
NSUserDefaults API, it doesn’t have quite as many options. In fact, the
only option we have for integer data is to store our default units as a long
long.
Let’s switch back to WeightUnits.m for a second. Let’s modify
getDefaultUnits() and setDefaultUnits() to use our new
singleton. Start by importing CloudManager.h at the top of the file.
Then modify the two functions as shown here:
Click here to view code image
WeightUnit getDefaultUnits(void)
{
    return [[CloudManager sharedManager] defaultWeightUnits];
}
void setDefaultUnits(WeightUnit defaultUnit)
{
    [[CloudManager sharedManager]
setDefaultWeightUnits:defaultUnit];
}
With this in place, we won’t need to change our code anywhere else in
our application. The underlying implementation has changed, but the
interface remains the same. All of our existing code will continue to work
as expected.
 Note
I often like to provide a C function interface to access data in
my singleton objects. Both C functions and singleton objects
are global in scope—but the C functions often feel more
concise.
Now we need to listen for updates from the cloud. Switch back to
CloudManager.m. Let’s add a class extension at the top of the file, just

--- Page 482 ---
below the constants. Inside the extension, declare a property to hold our
observer.
Click here to view code image
@interface CloudManager ()
@property (strong, nonatomic) id ubiquitousStoreChangeObserver;
@end
Next, let’s override the init method as shown here:
- (id)init
{
    self = [super init];
    if (self) {
        [self setupCloudStore];
    }
    return self;
}
This simply calls setupCloudStore, which does the real work. We
will also need a dealloc method to remove our observer.
Click here to view code image
- (void)dealloc
{
    if (self.ubiquitousStoreChangeObserver)
    {
        [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
         removeObserver:self.ubiquitousStoreChangeObserver];
    }
}
Next, let’s implement setupCloudStore as a private method at the
bottom of the @implementation block.
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Private Methods
- (void)setupCloudStore
{
    NSUbiquitousKeyValueStore *cloudStore =
    [NSUbiquitousKeyValueStore defaultStore];
    
    self.ubiquitousStoreChangeObserver =
    [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
     addObserverForName:
     NSUbiquitousKeyValueStoreDidChangeExternallyNotification
     object:cloudStore

--- Page 483 ---
     queue:[NSOperationQueue mainQueue]
     usingBlock:^(NSNotification *note) {
         
         NSArray *effectedKeys =
         note.userInfo[NSUbiquitousKeyValueStoreChangedKeysKey];
         
         for (NSString *key in effectedKeys)
         {
             [self updateKey:key];
         }
     }];
    
    [cloudStore synchronize];
    //    [self eraseCloudKeyValueStorage];
}
This code gets a reference to our default key-value store object. Then we
register for the
NSUbiquitousKeyValueStoreDidChangeExternallyNotifi
cation notification. When this notification is called, we grab an array of
the affected keys from the notification’s userInfo dictionary. Then, for
each key, we call our yet-undefined updateKey: method. Finally, we
synchronize the key-value store, forcing the system to download the current
values from the cloud.
Also, notice the commented-out code at the bottom of the method. This is
our emergency escape hatch. It’s not uncommon to accidentally store
invalid data into iCloud during development. Having a “delete all” method
like this is helpful. If things start acting in unexpectedly bizarre ways,
uncomment this method. Run the app once to clear out the key-value store.
Quit the app as soon as it launches. Then comment out this line again.
 Note
You need to make sure a weight unit is displayed to ensure
this code runs. If your history is empty, click the plus button
to bring up the AddEntryViewController. Then you
can quit the application.
Now, let’s define updateKey: just below setupCloudStore.

--- Page 484 ---
Click here to view code image
- (void)updateKey:(NSString *)key
{
    NSUbiquitousKeyValueStore *cloudStore =
    [NSUbiquitousKeyValueStore defaultStore];
    
    NSUserDefaults *userDefaults =
    [NSUserDefaults standardUserDefaults];
    
    if ([key isEqualToString:WeightUnitsDefaultUnitsKey])
    {
        NSInteger weightValue =
        (NSInteger)[cloudStore longLongForKey:key];
        [self willChangeValueForKey:DefaultWeightUnitsKey];
        [userDefaults setInteger:weightValue forKey:key];
        [self didChangeValueForKey:DefaultWeightUnitsKey];
        return;
    }
    
    NSLog(@"*** Unrecognized Key: %@ ***", key);
    [NSException raise:NSGenericException
                format:@"Unrecognized key: %@", key];
}
Here, we grab references to both our key-value store and our user
defaults. Then we check the key; if it is equal to our
WeightUnitsDefaultUnitsKey, we grab the current value from the
iCloud store and assign it to our user defaults. It’s important that we bracket
this change with the KVO willChange... and didChange...
notifications, since we’re not going through the property’s setter.
Additionally, we’re not doing any additional processing or comparisons.
We’re simply adopting the key-value store’s last-save-wins approach. We
just use whatever value iCloud gives us.
If the key does not match our default unit key, we log an error message
and throw an exception.
We’ve made our new defaultWeightUnit property mostly KVO
compliant. However, there’s still one edge case to deal with. What happens
if the user changes our default units using the settings app?
Open AppDelegate.m. Import CloudManager.m and add the static
string for our defaultWeightUnits key as shown here:

--- Page 485 ---
Click here to view code image
#import "CloudManager.h"
static NSString * const DefaultUnitWeightsKey =
@"defaultWeightUnits";
Now, navigate to the
application:didFinishLaunchingWithOptions: method.
Modify our user defaults change observer.
Click here to view code image
self.userDefaultsChangeObserver =
[center
 addObserverForName:NSUserDefaultsDidChangeNotification
 object:[NSUserDefaults standardUserDefaults]
 queue:mainQueue
 usingBlock:^(NSNotification *note) {
     [[CloudManager sharedManager]
      didChangeValueForKey:DefaultUnitWeightsKey];        
     [rootViewController HBT_updateUserDefaults];
 }];
Here, we call didChange... after we receive notification of a change.
However, for this to work, we need to also call willChange... before
the change occurs. If the system doesn’t see both of these, it will not send
out the KVO notifications.
The easiest way to do this is to call willChange... in
applicationDidEnterBackground: as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (void)applicationDidEnterBackground:(UIApplication
*)application
{
    [[CloudManager sharedManager]
     willChangeValueForKey:DefaultUnitWeightsKey];
}
Here, willChange... will be called every time our application goes
to the background. However, since it won’t have any effect unless the
completing didChange... method is also called. Therefore, we won’t
send out KVO notifications unless the user actually modified the default
weight units in the Settings app.
Finally, let’s implement eraseCloudKeyValueStorage. Ideally we
won’t ever need to run this code, but it’s nice to have, just in case. Open

--- Page 486 ---
CloudManager.m and add this method to the end of the private methods.
Click here to view code image
- (void)eraseCloudKeyValueStorage
{
    NSUbiquitousKeyValueStore *cloudStore =
    [NSUbiquitousKeyValueStore defaultStore];
    
    NSArray *keys = [[cloudStore dictionaryRepresentation]
allKeys];
    for (NSString *key in keys)
    {
        [cloudStore removeObjectForKey:key];
    }
    
    [cloudStore synchronize];
}
This starts by getting an NSDictionary representation of everything
in our iCloud key-value store. Then we grab all the keys from the
dictionary. We iterate over the keys, removing each one from the store, and
then we force synchronize our store.
 Note
Neither deleting the application from the device nor deleting
all the data from iCloud storage using the System
Preferences or Settings app will clear out the key-value store.
Additionally, we cannot see the contents of the key-value
store at http://developer.icloud.com. The only
way to clear the store (or to explore its contents) is to do so
programmatically, as shown in our
eraseCloudKeyValueStore method.
That’s it. Let’s test our code. It’s easiest to test iCloud syncing with two
physical devices. However, with Xcode 5, it’s possible to do some testing in
the simulator. However, you will need to use the Debug > Trigger iCloud
sync menu item to download the new data from iCloud.
Launch two different copies of the application. Change the units on one
device. Then send the application in the background to force the key-value
store to sync. The change should appear on the other device within a few

--- Page 487 ---
seconds (maybe up to a minute, if you’re working at a café with a bad Wi-
Fi connection). Make sure that changes work in both directions.
As a second test, change the default units to kilograms, and sync the
change to the cloud. Then close the application on all your devices. Delete
the application from one of the devices. This will remove the user defaults
from that device. Run the app again on that device. It will start with an
empty history. Click the plus button to bring up the
AddEntryViewController. Notice that it initially says pounds for the
units. Let it sit for a few seconds. The units should automatically change to
kilograms—as it downloads the default values from iCloud and updates the
user defaults.
As you can see, the iCloud key-value syncing is relatively painless to
implement. It has also proven remarkably stable across a wide range of
production code. In my opinion, there is no reason not to implement it in
your own applications.
Adding Document Syncing to Health Beat
The good news is that UIDocument is designed to support iCloud
Document Storage. The bad news is there’s still a lot of work to get
everything set up properly.
We can divide this work into two main tasks. The first task involves
modifying how our document is loaded or created. The second task involves
managing conflicts when they arise.
However, before we begin either of those tasks, let’s talk a bit about file
versioning.
File Versioning in Health Beat
Since Health Beat uses a single file to store its data, we are effectively using
the most primitive type of versioning—the file name. If we change our data
format, we can always change our file name. That way older versions of the
application won’t see or even know about the new files. New versions of
the app, however, can still look for and upgrade older documents.
This is a simple and effective solution. However, we may want
something a little more robust. In that case, we really need to build
versioning in from the very beginning.

--- Page 488 ---
One option would be to change the way WeightHistoryDocument
saves its data. Instead of saving the weightHistory array directly, we
could create an object to represent our file format. This object would have
one property representing the actual data, and additional properties to
manage various pieces of metadata. At a minimum, I’d recommend having
a version number and a minimum value to read. This object would also
need to adopt the NSCoding protocol, letting it load and save its
properties.
Our file format object could then check the metadata before loading the
actual data. If the application’s file version is equal to the document’s file
version, we simply load the data normally. If the application’s version is
lower than the document’s version, but equal to or higher than the minimum
read value, we load the data, but we open the document as read-only and
alert the user. If the application’s file version is lower than the minimum
read value, we don’t even try to load the data; we just alert the user.
For this to work, we need to build the entire framework into the initial
version of our application. Obviously, there’s a fourth case that we will
eventually have to deal with, when the application’s version is higher than
the document’s version, but we wouldn’t need that in our initial release.
Having said all of this, I’m going to leave robust versioning as an
exercise for the truly dedicated reader. For this project, simple filename-
based versioning is sufficient.
Modifying Our Document’s Start-up Sequence
Currently, when our document starts up, we instantiate our document
object, then we check to see if a local copy exists. If it does, we load it. If
not, we create a new file. This start-up sequence is shown in Figure 6.5.

--- Page 489 ---
FIGURE 6.5 Original document start-up sequence
However, to support iCloud Document Syncing, we must use a somewhat
more complex start-up sequence, as shown in Figure 6.6.

--- Page 490 ---
FIGURE 6.6 iCloud document start-up sequence
If the user is not logged into iCloud, we will create a local file for them.
If they are logged into the cloud, we will search for an existing iCloud file.
If we cannot find one, we will either create or load a local file and then
migrate it to the cloud.

--- Page 491 ---
This has a number of nice features. As we discussed earlier, creating a
local file is much faster than creating a file in the Ubiquity Container, since
the Ubiquity Container’s file coordination can cause the code to block as
other read-write operations are performed. By creating a local file and
migrating it, we let our user start working with the application as quickly as
possible.
Additionally, if users have been working with the application for a while
before they sign up for iCloud, it will transparently move their existing
document to the cloud for them. They won’t lose any of their data.
However, the move to the cloud is a one-way operation. Once the data is
moved to the cloud, if users log out or disable document storage, their data
will disappear. They will need to reenable the iCloud account before they
can access their data.
To break this down into code, our CloudManager will be responsible
for determining whether iCloud is available and tracking user changes. Our
WeightHistoryDocument will extend the sandbox to include the
Ubiquity Container and will migrate the document to the Ubiquity
Container. Finally, our RootTabBarController will handle the iCloud
search and will manage the overall workflow.
Monitoring the iCloud User
Open CloudManager.h. At the top of the file, declare an external
constant string for our user changed notification and a C function to check
and see whether iCloud is available.
Click here to view code image
extern NSString * const CloudManagerUserChangedNotification;
BOOL isCloudAvailable(void);
Then, in the @interface block, add the following property:
Click here to view code image
@property (nonatomic, readonly, getter = isCloudAvailable)
BOOL cloudAvailable;
Just like our default weight units, we will use this virtual property to
check our current iCloud status, while the isCloudAvailable()
function will be a thin wrapper around this property.

--- Page 492 ---
Now switch to CloudManager.m and add the following code, right
before the class extension:
Click here to view code image
NSString * const CloudManagerUserChangedNotification =
@"CloudManagerUserChangedNotification";
BOOL isCloudAvailable(void)
{
    return [[CloudManager sharedManager] isCloudAvailable];
}
Here, we’re defining our notification constant, while our
isCloudAvailable() function calls our singleton’s
isCloudAvailable method.
Now, we need to add the following two properties to our class extension:
Click here to view code image
@property (strong, nonatomic) id ubiquityIdentityChangeObserver;
@property (strong, nonatomic) id <NSObject, NSCopying, NSCoding>
identityToken;
In the dealloc method, remove our new
ubiquityIdentityChangeObserver.
Click here to view code image
if (self.ubiquityIdentityChangeObserver)
{
    [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
     removeObserver:self.ubiquityIdentityChangeObserver];
}
Next, at the bottom of our Accessor methods, add the accessor and KVO
methods for our cloudAvailable property.
Click here to view code image
- (BOOL)isCloudAvailable
{
    return (self.identityToken != nil);
}
+ (NSSet *)keyPathsForValuesAffectingCloudAvailable
{
    return [NSSet setWithObject:@"identityToken"];
}

--- Page 493 ---
Notice that we renamed the getter to isCloudAvailable in the
property declaration. So, our custom getter method must use that method
name. However, the property’s key is still “cloudAvailable,” so we use
keyPathsForValuesAffectingCloudAvailable, not
keyPathsForValuesAffectingIsCloudAvailable.
The logic here is pretty simple. If we have a valid user identity token,
then iCloud is available. Similarly, changes to the token may indicate a
change in iCloud’s availability.
Now, implement the following method at the end of our private methods:
Click here to view code image
- (void)setupCloudUserMonitoring
{
    NSFileManager *defaultFileManager =
    [NSFileManager defaultManager];
    
    self.identityToken = [defaultFileManager
ubiquityIdentityToken];
    __weak CloudManager *_self = self;
    
    self.ubiquityIdentityChangeObserver =
    [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
     addObserverForName:NSUbiquityIdentityDidChangeNotification
     object:nil
     queue:[NSOperationQueue mainQueue]
     usingBlock:^(NSNotification *note) {
         _self.identityToken  =
         [defaultFileManager ubiquityIdentityToken];
         
         [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
          postNotificationName:CloudManagerUserChangedNotificati
on
          object:_self];
     }];
}
We start by getting a reference to the default file manager. Then we use
this reference to get our current ubiquity identity token. This will be a
unique token for the current user logged into iCloud. If the user isn’t
currently logged into iCloud or if he’s disabled document syncing, this will
return nil. We then assign that value to our identityToken property.
Next, we set up a notification to listen for changes to the iCloud user.
This notification will be triggered whenever the user performs an action that

--- Page 494 ---
might affect iCloud’s availability: logging out, logging in, disabling
document syncing, or reenabling document syncing.
When a change has occurred, we update our identityToken property,
and then we send out our own
CloudManagerUserChangedNotification. On the surface,
sending our own notification looks like a waste of time and effort. After all,
anyone can just listen for
NSUbiquityIdentityDidChangeNotification directly.
However, using our own notification has a distinct advantage.
When you have more than one observer listening to the same
notification, there’s no guarantee on which order the observer blocks will
run. This means other observers could run before we’ve had a chance to
update our identityToken property (and therefore our
cloudAvailable property). And, if this observer triggers code that calls
isCloudAvailable() or checks our manager’s cloudAvailable
property, it may get an incorrect value.
By listening to the CloudManagerUserChangedNotification
notification, we can guarantee that our observer’s block is called after our
identityToken and cloudAvailable properties have been properly
updated.
 Note
The
NSUbiquityIdentityDidChangeNotification is
smart enough to filter out cases where nothing has actually
changed. If the user logs out and then immediately logs back
into the same account or disables and then immediately
reenables Document Storage, no notification methods are
sent.
Finally, we need to call setupCloudUserMonitoring. Navigate
back up to our init method and modify it as shown here:

--- Page 495 ---
Click here to view code image
- (id)init
{
    self = [super init];
    if (self) {
        [self setupCloudStore];
        [self setupCloudUserMonitoring];
    }
    return self;
}
Expanding the Sandbox
Next, we need a way to expand our sandbox to include the Ubiquity
Container. We do this by calling the file manager’s
URLForUbiquityContainerIdentifier: method. This method
takes a single argument, which is the fully qualified container identifier for
the container we want to use. This ID uses the format <team_id>.
<container_id>, where the team ID is our team’s ten-digit ID and the
container ID is one of the values from the Ubiquity Containers list in our
iCloud Capabilities settings.
Fortunately, if we just pass nil, the system will automatically use the
fully qualified container identifier for the first Ubiquity Container in our
list. That means we need to worry only about passing in the ID if we have
more than one container.
Additionally, this method must always be called from a background
thread. Setting up the container, especially if the container does not yet
exist, can require a significant amount of time.
This means we will need to create an asynchronous method with a
callback handler.
Open WeightHistoryDocument.h. Let’s start by declaring a
CallbackHandler block type, just under our
EntryEnumeratorBlock block type.
Click here to view code image
typedef void (^CallbackHandler) (BOOL success);
Then declare the following class method, just after the other class
methods:

--- Page 496 ---
Click here to view code image
+ (void)setupCloudContainer:(CallbackHandler)callbackHandler;
Now, switch to WeightHistoryDocument.m. Before we can do
anything else, we need to set up our background queue. Declare the
following static variable just before the class extension:
Click here to view code image
static NSOperationQueue *WeightHistoryDocumentBackgroundQueue;
Then, right at the top of our @implementation block, define an
initialize method to set up the queue.
Click here to view code image
+ (void)initialize
{
    if (self == [WeightHistoryDocument class])
    {
        WeightHistoryDocumentBackgroundQueue =
        [[NSOperationQueue alloc] init];
        
        [WeightHistoryDocumentBackgroundQueue
         setName:@"Weight History Document Background Queue"];
        
        [WeightHistoryDocumentBackgroundQueue
         setMaxConcurrentOperationCount:1];
    }
}
Like all initialize methods, we start by checking to make sure this is
being called by our WeightHistoryDocument class and not a subclass.
Then, we instantiate our background queue, give it a name, and set it to
process our operations serially.
Now, we can finally implement our setupCloudContainer method.
Add the following to the end of our public class methods:
Click here to view code image
+ (void)setupCloudContainer:(CallbackHandler)callbackHandler
{
    [WeightHistoryDocumentBackgroundQueue
addOperationWithBlock:^{
        
        NSURL *url = [[NSFileManager defaultManager]
                      URLForUbiquityContainerIdentifier:nil];
        

--- Page 497 ---
        BOOL success = (url != nil);
        
        [[NSOperationQueue mainQueue]
         addOperationWithBlock:^{
             callbackHandler(success);
         }];
    }];
}
We start by adding an operation block to our background queue. Inside
this block, we request the Ubiquity Container URL from the default file
manager. We’re not particularly interested in the URL itself; we really just
want to trigger the side effect, extending our container.
However, we do use the URL to determine whether the operation was a
success. If we receive a valid URL, then iCloud is available and ready to
use. If not, then the sandbox has not been extended, and we cannot use
iCloud syncing.
Finally, we create a new operation block on our main thread. Inside the
operation block, we call our callback handler, passing it our success value.
This way, the callback handler always runs on the main thread.
Migrating the Document
Now, let’s add a method to let us migrate the document to iCloud. Switch
back to Weight HistoryDocument.h and declare the following
method immediately before our class methods:
- (void)migrateToCloud;
Now, switch back to WeightHistoryDocument.m and import
CloudManager.h. Next, add the migrateToCloud method to the end
of our public methods.
Click here to view code image
- (void)migrateToCloud
{
    NSAssert(self.documentState == UIDocumentStateNormal,
             @"We must be open and ready to use "
             @"before we can migrate to the cloud");
    
    NSAssert(isCloudAvailable(),
             @"iCloud storage must be available before we can
migrate");
    
    NSLog(@"Migrating to iCloud...");

--- Page 498 ---
    NSURL *fileURL = self.fileURL;
    [WeightHistoryDocumentBackgroundQueue
addOperationWithBlock:^{
        
        NSURL *cloudFileURL;
        cloudFileURL = [self createCloudURL];
        
        if (!cloudFileURL)
        {
            NSLog(@"*** Unable to access ubiquity container
***");
            return;
        }
        
        NSError *migrationError;
        BOOL success =
        [[NSFileManager defaultManager] setUbiquitous:YES
                                            itemAtURL:fileURL
                                       destinationURL:cloudFileU
RL
                                                error:&migration
Error];
        
        if (success)
        {
            NSLog(@"Migration Complete!");
        }
        else
        {
            NSLog(@"*** Unable To migrate: %@ ***",
                  [migrationError localizedDescription]);
        }
    }];
}
Here, we start by performing a couple of sanity checks. We should call
this method only if our document is open and ready to use and if our user is
logged into iCloud and document syncing is turned on.
If it passes those checks, we log a quick message at the console. Again, a
lot happens asynchronously or behind the scenes, so I like to add a few
logging messages, just to help me track the progress a bit more clearly.
Next, we get our file URL, and then we create an operation on the
background queue. Inside that operation, we calculate the cloud URL and
check to make sure we have access to the Ubiquity Container. Finally, we
call the file manager’s
setUbiquitous:itemAtURL:destinationURL:error: method.

--- Page 499 ---
Since setUbiquitous... performs coordinated writes, it could
block. Therefore, we should always call it on a background thread. To call
this method, we tell it whether we’re moving into or out of the Ubiquity
Container. Then we give it the current URL, the new URL, and the address
of an error object.
After this method returns, we do some light error checking. Again, the
error handling in this implementation is not what I’d call “production
quality” error handling. At this point, it’s more of a developer tool, designed
to provide us with additional information if something unexpected happens.
The documentation doesn’t really give us any clues as to why this
method may fail, leaving us to either guess or discover the errors on our
own. Personally I often use this style error checking through the beta testing
process—slowly replacing it with more robust error checking based on the
actual errors uncovered by my testers.
We still need to implement the createCloudURL method. The idea is
fairly straightforward. We will ask the file manager for the Ubiquity
Container’s URL (this time, we want the URL, not the side effect). We want
to place our document inside the Documents subfolder. This will let the
System Preferences and Settings app display our document as an individual
file. However, this means we may need to create the Documents folder.
Then, we build our cloud URL by appending the Documents folder and
our file name to the container URL.
The problem is, we must coordinate any write operations in the Ubiquity
Container. That includes creating our Documents folder. So, the final
code ends up being a bit complex.
Add the method to the bottom of our private methods as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (NSURL *)createCloudURL
{
    NSAssert(![[NSThread currentThread] isEqual:[NSThread
mainThread]],
             @"This must be called on a background queue.");
    
    NSFileManager *defaultManager =
    [NSFileManager defaultManager];
    
    NSURL *ubiquityContainer =
    [defaultManager URLForUbiquityContainerIdentifier:nil];

--- Page 500 ---
    
    if (!ubiquityContainer) return nil;
    
    NSURL *cloudDocumentDirectory =
    [ubiquityContainer
URLByAppendingPathComponent:@"Documents"];
    
    NSFileCoordinator *coordinator =
    [[NSFileCoordinator alloc] initWithFilePresenter:nil];
    __block BOOL success = YES;
    NSError *coordinatorError = nil;
    [coordinator
     coordinateWritingItemAtURL:cloudDocumentDirectory
     options:0
     error:&coordinatorError
     byAccessor:^(NSURL *newURL) {
         if (![defaultManager fileExistsAtPath:[newURL path]])
         {
             NSError *createDirectoryError;
             BOOL created =
             [defaultManager createDirectoryAtURL:newURL
                      withIntermediateDirectories:YES
                                       attributes:nil
                                            error:&createDirecto
ryError];
             
             if (!created)
             {
                 NSLog(@"*** Unable to create the Documents "
                       @"directory: %@ ***",
                       [createDirectoryError
localizedDescription]);
                 
                 success = NO;
             }
         }
     }];
    
    if (!success) return nil;
    
    return [cloudDocumentDirectory URLByAppendingPathComponent:
            WeightHistoryDocumentFileName];
}
We start with a quick sanity check. This method should be called only
from a background thread.
Next, we grab a reference to the default file manager and use that to get
our Ubiquity Container’s URL. If this does not return a valid URL, then our

--- Page 501 ---
Ubiquity Container is not available, and we should just return nil.
Assuming we have a valid URL, we append “Documents” to it, creating
the URL for our Documents directory. Then we create a file coordinator.
Since we are not yet presenting a document to the user, we can simply pass
in nil for the file presenter. Once we have the coordinator, we can perform
a coordinated write at our Documents directory’s URL.
The actual write operation is performed inside the block that we pass to
the coordinator. Notice that the coordinator will pass us a new URL. We
should always use that URL to perform our write operations.
Inside the write block, we check to see whether the Documents
directory exists. Technically this is a read operation—but since it takes
place inside the coordinated write block (and since write blocks are more
strict than read blocks), this is OK. We don’t need a separate read block.
If the directory does not exist, we ask the file manager to create the
Documents directory. Again, we’re using light error checking, in case
something unexpected happens, but this should almost never fail.
Also notice that our write block is performed synchronously. This lets us
create a success variable before we call the block and modify
success’s value inside the block, and it will have the correct value by the
time
coordinateWritingItemAtURL:options:error:byAccesso
r method returns.
If we cannot successfully create the directory, we just return nil.
Otherwise, we append our file name to the end of the Documents
directory and return the resulting URL.
Updating Our Start-up Sequence
Now, all the pieces are in place. We just need to modify our workflow. That
will be RootTabBarController’s job. Open
RootTabBarController.m and import CloudManager.h.
Add a new observer property to the class extension, as shown here:
Click here to view code image
@property (strong, nonatomic) id cloudUserChangeObserver;

--- Page 502 ---
And, of course, we need to add a dealloc method to unregister this
observer.
Click here to view code image
- (void)dealloc
{
    if (self.cloudUserChangeObserver)
    {
        [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
         removeObserver:self.cloudUserChangeObserver];
    }
}
Next, in viewDidLoad, add a call to a yet-undefined
setupNotifications method.
Click here to view code image
- (void)viewDidLoad
{
    [super viewDidLoad];
    [self setupNotifications];
    [self setupDocument];
    self.interactiveTransition =
    [[TabInteractiveTransition alloc]
initWithTabBarController:self];
    self.delegate = self.interactiveTransition;
    [self setupEdgePanGestureRecognizers];
}
Then, at the top of our private methods, implement
setupNotifications.
Click here to view code image
- (void)setupNotifications
{
    [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
     addObserverForName:CloudManagerUserChangedNotification
     object:[CloudManager sharedManager]
     queue:[NSOperationQueue mainQueue]
     usingBlock:^(NSNotification *note) {
         [self setupDocument];
     }];
}
Now, the obvious explanation for this code is that we’re registering for
the CloudManagerUserChangedNotification. When we receive
that notification, we call setupDocument to create a new document.

--- Page 503 ---
However, there’s a lot going on under the surface. This call to
[CloudManager sharedManager] should be the first time we
reference our shared cloud instance in this app. That means our
sharedManager method will alloc and init a new CloudManager
object. The init method will, in turn, check to see whether we have an
iCloud user logged in and set the CloudManager to observe changes to
the iCloud user.
Next, scroll down to the setupDocument method. This is where things
really start to change. Replace the current setupDocument method with
the following implementation:
Click here to view code image
- (void)setupDocument
{
    if (isCloudAvailable())
    {
        __weak RootTabBarController *_self = self;
        [WeightHistoryDocument setupCloudContainer:^(BOOL
success) {
            
            if (success)
            {
                [_self searchForCloudDocument];
            }
            else
            {
                NSLog(@"Unable to open the cloud container!");
                [_self searchForLocalDocument];
            }
        }];
    }
    else
    {
        [self searchForLocalDocument];
    }
}
The logic here should be relatively straightforward. We check to see
whether iCloud is available. If it is, we try to set up our cloud container.
Remember, this is an asynchronous call, so we don’t know how long it will
take. If everything is successful, we search for a document in iCloud.
Otherwise, we search for a local document.

--- Page 504 ---
Obviously, there are a number of new, private methods we need to add.
Let’s start by adding createWeightHistoryForURL: right after
setupDocument.
Click here to view code image
- (void)createWeightHistoryForURL:(NSURL *)fileURL
{
    self.weightHistoryDocument = [[WeightHistoryDocument alloc]
                                  initWithFileURL:fileURL];
    
    [self.weightHistoryDocument addSubscriber:self];
    [self passDocumentToViewControllers];
}
Most of this code was taken from our old setupDocument method.
Here, we simply instantiate a new document using the provided URL. Then
we add ourselves as a subscriber. Finally, we pass this document to all of
our child view controllers.
I think UIDocument’s handling of URLs is somewhat awkward. For
example, we can create a new document at any arbitrary URL, but we can
load documents only from the URL we provided when the document object
was first instantiated.
Additionally, we cannot use the same document object to open different
files. We must create a new document any time we want to open (or create)
a new file. Since we may be loading documents from different URLs (one
in the sandbox, one in the Ubiquity Container), and since we often need to
create new documents, breaking these out to their own method will help
save a lot of time and effort.
Next, let’s implement our searchForCloudDocument method.
Click here to view code image
- (void)searchForCloudDocument
{
    NSLog(@"Searching for cloud documents...");
    NSURL *localFileURL = [WeightHistoryDocument localFileURL];
    NSString *fileName = [localFileURL lastPathComponent];
    
    // Search for the file in the cloud
    NSMetadataQuery* query = [[NSMetadataQuery alloc] init];
    
    [query setSearchScopes:
     [NSArray

--- Page 505 ---
arrayWithObject:NSMetadataQueryUbiquitousDocumentsScope]];
    
    // get all files
    [query setPredicate:[NSPredicate predicateWithFormat:@"%K
like %@",
                         NSMetadataItemFSNameKey,
                         fileName]];
    
    __weak NSNotificationCenter *center =
    [NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter];
    __weak RootTabBarController *_self = self;
    __block id searchObserver =
    [center
     addObserverForName:NSMetadataQueryDidFinishGatheringNotific
ation
     object:query
     queue:[NSOperationQueue mainQueue]
     usingBlock:^(NSNotification *note) {
         [query disableUpdates];
         [center removeObserver:searchObserver];
         [_self processQuery:query];
         [query stopQuery];
     }];
    
    [query startQuery];
}
We start by grabbing the local file URL, and then we get the file name by
extracting the last path component from that URL.
Next, we instantiate our NSMetadataQuery. We set it to search our
Ubiquity Container, and we set the search predicate. In this case, we’re
using the predicate format string syntax to look for a file whose name
matches our data file’s name.
I’m not going to talk about predicates and the predicate format string
syntax here. We’ll cover it in detail in Chapter 7, “Core Data.”
Once we have the query ready to go, we register for the
NSMetadataQueryDidFinishGatheringNotification. When
we receive this notification, we will call the processQuery method.
This notification-handling code should look different from most of the
notifications we’ve created so far. In this case, we want the block to fire
only once. Then we want it to dispose of all its resources.
To do this, we’re keeping all of our resources strictly local. The observer
is a local, block variable. We let the notification block capture both the

--- Page 506 ---
observer and our query object, keeping them in memory until the
notification block is destroyed. Then, inside the block, we remove the
notification observer and stop our query. This will cause the notification
block to be deallocated, releasing the values that it had captured. Our
observer and query objects will then get deallocated as well.
The metadata query operates in two stages. First is the initial gathering
phase. This is relatively fast and looks for any existing files that match our
query. We might not have downloaded the file yet—but we will still have
access to its metadata.
Once this search is done, the query enters the live-update phase. Here, the
query will continue to monitor the file system and will alert us to any
additional matches.
In Health Beat, we’re interested only in the gathering phase. So, we
disable and dismiss the query as soon as that phase is complete.
Next, add the processQuery: method.
Click here to view code image
- (void)processQuery:(NSMetadataQuery*)query {
    
    NSUInteger fileCount = [query resultCount];
    id result;
    NSURL *cloudFileURL;
    
    switch (fileCount) {
        case 0:
            
            NSLog(@"No Cloud Documents found");
            [self searchForLocalDocument];
            break;
            
        case 1:
            
            NSLog(@"Loading a cloud document");
            
            result = [query resultAtIndex:0];
            cloudFileURL =
            [result valueForAttribute:NSMetadataItemURLKey];
            [self createWeightHistoryForURL:cloudFileURL];
            [self loadFile];
            break;
            
        default:

--- Page 507 ---
            
            // We should never have more than 1 file. If this
            // occurs, it's due to a bug in our code that needs
            // to be fixed.
            
            [NSException
             raise:NSInternalInconsistencyException
             format:@"NSMetadata should only find a "
             @"single file, found %@",
             @(fileCount)];
            break;
    }
}
Here, we determine how many files our query found, and then we pass
that value to a switch statement.
 If we found zero files, then we perform a local search.
 If we find one file, we get its URL, create our document, and load it.
 If we find more than one file, an error has occurred.
We should never find more than one file. Even if our document has
conflicts, it will return only a single file, containing the most current
version. So, if an error occurs, we throw an exception, which will kill our
application, forcing us to come back and find and fix the problem.
Next, implement searchForLocalDocument as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (void)searchForLocalDocument
{
    NSURL *fileURL = [WeightHistoryDocument localFileURL];
    [self createWeightHistoryForURL:fileURL];
    
    //    [self addMocData];    
    if ([WeightHistoryDocument localFileExists])
    {
        [self loadFile];
    }
    else
    {
        [self createNewFileAtURL:fileURL];
    }
}
This is, basically, the second half of our original setupDocuments
method. Here, we get the local file URL and create our document based on

--- Page 508 ---
that URL. Then we check to see whether the local file exists. If it does, we
load it; otherwise, we create a new file.
Now, modify loadFile as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (void)loadFile
{
    NSLog(@"Loading File");
    __weak RootTabBarController *_self = self;
    [self.weightHistoryDocument
     openWithCompletionHandler:^(BOOL success) {
        
        NSFileManager *fileManager = [NSFileManager
defaultManager];
        NSURL *fileURL = _self.weightHistoryDocument.fileURL;
        
        if (!success)
        {
            NSLog(@"*** Corrupt file at %@, "
                  @"attempting to delete it and try again. ***",
                  fileURL);
            
            NSFileCoordinator *coordinator =
            [[NSFileCoordinator alloc]
initWithFilePresenter:nil];
           
            [coordinator
             coordinateWritingItemAtURL:fileURL
             options:NSFileCoordinatorWritingForDeleting
             error:nil
             byAccessor:^(NSURL *newURL) {
                 [fileManager removeItemAtURL:newURL
                                        error:nil];
             }];
           
            [_self searchForLocalDocument];
            return;
        }
        else
        {
            NSLog(@"File Loaded");
            
            if (isCloudAvailable())
            {
                if (![fileManager
isUbiquitousItemAtURL:fileURL])
                {
                    [self.weightHistoryDocument migrateToCloud];
                }

--- Page 509 ---
            }
        }
    }];
}
Here, we delete the corrupted file using a coordinated write, since we
may be deleting the file from the Ubiquity Container. Then, instead of
calling setupDocument, we call searchForLocalDocument to
explicitly start looking for a local copy—if this fails, it will create a local
copy.
Additionally, once the file loads, we check to see whether iCloud is
enabled. If it is, we check to see whether our file is stored in the Ubiquity
Container. If it is not, we migrate it to the Ubiquity Container.
And finally, we need to make one small change to
createNewFileAtURL:. Add the following code:
Click here to view code image
else
{
    NSLog(@"File Created");
    if (isCloudAvailable())
    {
        [self.weightHistoryDocument migrateToCloud];
    }
}
Much like our loadFile method, once we successfully create the file,
we want to check and see whether iCloud is available. If it is, we want to
migrate our file to the cloud. This time, however, we don’t need to check
and see whether it’s already inside the Ubiquity Container, since we always
create our files in the local sandbox.
That’s it. You can test the syncing, if you want. Add or remove weights
and send the application to the background. That will force it to save the
changes, which will then be synced by the iCloud server.
However, we haven’t implemented any conflict resolution system yet—
so it may stop syncing correctly at any point. Let’s fix that next.

--- Page 510 ---
Resolving Conflicts
There’s a simple rule. If you’re using iCloud storage, then you must be
prepared to handle conflicts. Conflicts occur when the cloud storage
receives contradicting updates. This typically happens when one device
saves a change, and then a second device saves a different change before
receiving the first update.
In most cases, this should rarely occur. Sure, I want to have the same data
on my iPhone, my iPad, and my Mac—however, I’m probably not going to
run the same application on two different devices at the same time. If I
make a change on my phone, there should be plenty of time for the update
to reach my Mac before I open the file there.
However, remember how iCloud works. Each application saves and reads
to a local file. The system then syncs this file with the cloud. There may be
times when the system is unable to sync these changes—for example, if the
device is in airplane mode or if it’s located in the Wi-Fi–less sub-basement
of an office building. In both cases, the user can still access and edit any
documents on his device. Any changes he makes will be saved locally but
won’t be synced until he gets an active Internet connection. Furthermore,
devices can be shut off. They can run out of power. There are any number
of reasons why an update may be delayed, creating ample opportunities for
conflicts.
Most importantly, if it can happen, it will happen—guaranteed. So, we
have to be prepared to handle it.
There are three basic approaches to managing conflicts. The simplest is
to let the last change win. From a developer’s standpoint, this is by far the
easiest solution. We mark all the conflicting versions as resolved and then
delete them. Done and done. However, it has a rather large downside. While
this may work fine in many cases, we risk accidentally deleting some of our
user’s data. That would be a bad thing.
The second approach involves showing the users all the different versions
and let them select the one to use. This has one major advantage—the users
are in complete control. They get to decide exactly what happens to their
data. However, it has several significant problems as well. First, it’s much
harder to design. In some cases, it may be extremely difficult to display the
differences in a meaningful way. Also, it requires user intervention, and that
means our users are wasting their time getting our app to work, instead of

--- Page 511 ---
getting work done. Finally, we still risk losing user data. Anytime we pick
one version over another, something may get lost.
The best approach is to automatically merge all the conflicting versions
into a complete, final version. Unfortunately, this may not be possible for
all documents in all situations—but if you can do it, you probably should.
In our case, merging is relatively easy. We can simply take the union of all
the entries across all versions. Yes, this may cause a deleted weight entry to
reappear—but we’re not going to lose any information. The user can always
delete the data again.
Unfortunately, as we will soon see, relatively easy is not the same as
easy.
Open WeightHistoryDocument.m and navigate to the
setupDocumentNotifications method. Modify the code as shown
here:
Click here to view code image
- (void)setupDocumentNotifications
{
    __weak WeightHistoryDocument *_self = self;
    self.documentStateObserver =
    [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
     addObserverForName:UIDocumentStateChangedNotification
     object:self
     queue:[NSOperationQueue mainQueue]
     usingBlock:^(NSNotification *note) {
         
         if (_self.documentState == UIDocumentStateInConflict)
         {
             NSLog(@"*** Conflicting Documents found ***");
             [_self resolveConflicts];
         }
         
         for (id <WeightHistoryDocumentSubscriber> subscriber
              in _self.subscribers)
         {
             [subscriber weightHistoryDocument:_self
                                stateDidChange:_self.documentSta
te];
         }
         
     }];
}

--- Page 512 ---
Here, we check to see whether we’re in a conflicting state. If we are, we
call resolveConflicts. Now we just need to implement
resolveConflicts.
Resolving conflicts often requires a lot of file system work.
Unfortunately, UIDocument doesn’t provide automated support for us here,
so we need to create our own file coordinators. This makes the code a bit
more cumbersome than it would be otherwise.
Having said that, let’s add the resolveConflicts method to the end
of our private methods.
Click here to view code image
- (void)resolveConflicts
{
    NSURL *currentURL = self.fileURL;
    
    NSFileVersion *currentVersion =
    [NSFileVersion currentVersionOfItemAtURL:currentURL];
    
    NSMutableArray *currentHistory =
    [self loadHistoryArrayFromURL:currentVersion.URL];
    
    NSArray *unresolvedVersions =
    [NSFileVersion
unresolvedConflictVersionsOfItemAtURL:currentURL];
    
    for (NSFileVersion *version in unresolvedVersions)
    {
        NSMutableArray *oldHistory =
        [self loadHistoryArrayFromURL:version.URL];
        
        currentHistory =
        [self mergeCurrentHistory:currentHistory
                   withOldHistory:oldHistory];
    }
    
    self.weightHistory = currentHistory;
    __weak WeightHistoryDocument *_self = self;
    
    [self
     saveToURL:currentURL
     forSaveOperation:UIDocumentSaveForOverwriting
     completionHandler:^(BOOL success) {
         
      if (success)
      {
          [_self removeConflictedVersions];

--- Page 513 ---
      }
      else
      {
          NSLog(@"*** Unable to save resolved data ***");
      }
  }];
}
Here’s the basic idea. We get the current version of our document by
calling +[NSFileVersion currentVersionOfItemAtURL:].
Then we get an array containing all the unresolved, conflicting versions by
calling +[NSFileVersion
unresolvedConflictVersionsOfItemAtURL:].
We can get the URL for each version. This lets us load the weight history
array for each version directly. We then merge these all with our current
version.
Once we’re done, we set our weightHistory property to the merged
version, and we save the document. If the save is successful, we remove all
the conflicting versions.
Most of the real work is done in loadHistoryArrayFromURL:,
mergeCurrentHistory:withOldHistory: and
removeConflictedVersions. Let’s implement them next, starting
with loadHistoryArrayFromURL:.
Click here to view code image
- (NSMutableArray *)loadHistoryArrayFromURL:(NSURL *)url
{
    NSFileCoordinator *coordinator =
    [[NSFileCoordinator alloc] initWithFilePresenter:self];
    __block NSData *data = nil;
    NSError *coordinatorError = nil;
    
    [coordinator
     coordinateReadingItemAtURL:url
     options:0
     error:&coordinatorError
     byAccessor:^(NSURL *newURL) {
         data = [NSData dataWithContentsOfURL:url];
     }];
    
    if (coordinatorError)
    {
        NSLog(@"*** Unable to perform a coordinated read on %@:

--- Page 514 ---
%@ ***",
              url, [coordinatorError localizedDescription]);
        
        return nil;
    }
    
    return [NSKeyedUnarchiver unarchiveObjectWithData:data];
}
Most of this code is just setting up the coordinated read block. Now, we
know that our document data is just an NSData object containing our
weight history array. Therefore, inside the read block, we use +[NSData
dataWithContentsOfURL:] to create an NSData object from the
specified file.
Then, after the coordinated read has completed, we use +
[NSKeyedUnarchiver unarchiveObjectWithData:] to
convert our data back to a mutable array, and we return the results.
Next, let’s implement
mergeCurrentHistory:withOldHistory:.
Click here to view code image
- (NSMutableArray *)mergeCurrentHistory:(NSMutableArray
*)currentHistory
                         withOldHistory:(NSArray *)oldHistory
{
    
    NSUInteger currentIndex = 0;
    NSUInteger currentCount = [currentHistory count];
    NSUInteger oldIndex = 0;
    NSUInteger oldCount = [oldHistory count];
    
    NSMutableArray *mergedArray =
    [NSMutableArray arrayWithCapacity:currentCount + oldCount];
    
    while ((currentIndex < currentCount) && (oldIndex <
oldCount))
    {
        WeightEntry *current = currentHistory[currentIndex];
        WeightEntry *old = oldHistory[oldIndex];
        
        if ([current isEqual:old])
        {
            [mergedArray addObject:current];
            currentIndex ++;
            oldIndex ++;
        }

--- Page 515 ---
        else if ([current.date compare:old.date] ==
NSOrderedDescending)
        {
            [mergedArray addObject:current];
            currentIndex ++;
        }
        else
        {
            [mergedArray addObject:old];
            oldIndex ++;
        }
    }
    
    for (; currentIndex < currentCount; currentIndex++)
    {
        [mergedArray addObject:currentHistory[currentIndex]];
    }
    
    for (; oldIndex < oldCount; oldIndex ++)
    {
        [mergedArray addObject:oldHistory[oldIndex]];
    }
    
    return mergedArray;
}
Here, the logic gets a little more complex. We want to make sure our
merge code does the following:
1. We want the union of both arrays.
2. We don’t want any duplicate entries.
3. We want to make sure all the entries remain in descending order.
We could use the @distinctUnionOfObjects KVC collection
operator to quickly merge the arrays and then sort the final results. This
could be accomplished with very little code—however, it ignores the fact
that our code is already sorted. Sorting can be very expensive, so I prefer to
avoid it if possible.
If we just take the most recent object from the front of either array and
dispose of any duplicates, we should be able to very quickly and efficiently
merge the arrays without requiring a separate sort operation. Unfortunately,
there are a lot of corner cases that we need to take into account.
We start by creating variables to indicate our current position in both
arrays. We also grab the count of both arrays, since we will frequently use
those values.

--- Page 516 ---
Next, we create a mutable array that is large enough to hold all the
elements from both arrays.
Then, we perform our while loop as long as both the indices are lower
than their relative count. Inside the while loop, we grab the
WeightEntry at the current indices. If the weight entries are equal, we
add one copy to the new array and increment both indices. Otherwise, we
add the most recent entry to the new array and increment its index.
Once the while loop is done, we’ve reached the end of one or both of our
arrays. However, one of the arrays may have a few leftover values. So, we
simply check to see whether either array has any remaining entries. If it
does, we add those to the end of our new array in order.
When that is done, we can finally return the new array.
Finally, we need to implement removeConflictedVersions.
Click here to view code image
- (void)removeConflictedVersions
{
    NSURL *currentURL = self.fileURL;
    
    NSArray *unresolvedVersions =
    [NSFileVersion
unresolvedConflictVersionsOfItemAtURL:currentURL];
    
    for (NSFileVersion *version in unresolvedVersions)
    {
        NSLog(@"Resolving version %@", version);
        version.resolved = YES;
    }
    
    __block NSError *clearOldVersionsError = nil;
    NSError *coordinatedWriteError = nil;
    
    NSFileCoordinator *coordinator =
    [[NSFileCoordinator alloc] initWithFilePresenter:self];
    
    __block BOOL removed = NO;
    
    [coordinator
     coordinateWritingItemAtURL:currentURL
     options:NSFileCoordinatorWritingForDeleting
     error:&coordinatedWriteError
     byAccessor:^(NSURL *newURL) {
         removed = [NSFileVersion
                    removeOtherVersionsOfItemAtURL:currentURL

--- Page 517 ---
                    error:&clearOldVersionsError];
     }];
    
    if (coordinatedWriteError)
    {
        NSLog(@"*** unable to perform a coordinated write to %@
***",
              currentURL);
    }
    
    if (removed)
    {
        NSLog(@"All Conflicts Resolved");
    }
    else
    {
        NSLog(@"*** Unable to remove conflicting versions: %@
***",
              [clearOldVersionsError localizedDescription]);
    }
}
This looks like a lot of code, but it’s mostly the write coordinator and our
error handling. We start by getting all the unresolved conflicting versions,
just like we did in resolveConflicts. We then iterate over all the
conflicting versions, setting their resolved property to YES.
Next, we call +[NSFileVersion
removeOtherVersionsOfItemAtURL:error:]. Unfortunately,
this must be called from within a coordinated write block. Like much of our
file coordination code, we end up with multiple error objects: one for the
coordinated block and one for the actual write operation. This makes for
somewhat complicated error handling code.
Once this method has been added, our project should build without any
errors—but it’s not quite correct yet. In our merge code, we use isEquals
to compare our WeightEntry objects. Unfortunately, the default
implementation compares the object’s pointer values.
Obviously, objects that we loaded from separate data files will have
completely different pointers, but they might have the same underlying
data. We need to override WeightEntry’s isEqual: method so that it
compares the object’s date and weightInLbs properties instead.
Open WeightEntry.m and implement isEqual: right after the
description method.

--- Page 518 ---
Click here to view code image
- (BOOL)isEqual:(id)object
{
    if (![object isKindOfClass:[WeightEntry class]]) return NO;
    WeightEntry *test = object;
    
    return (self.weightInLbs == test.weightInLbs) &&
            [self.date isEqual:test.date];
}
This checks to make sure the object argument is a WeightEntry
instance (or a subclass of WeightEntry). If it’s not, it returns NO.
Then we check both the weightInLbs and the date properties. We’re
combining them using an AND operation. So, if they both match we return
YES; otherwise, we return NO.
However, we cannot override the isEqual: method without also
overriding the hash method.
Click here to view code image
- (NSUInteger)hash
{
    NSUInteger weight = (NSUInteger)floor(self.weightInLbs *
100);
    return ([self.date hash] << 12) ^ weight;
}
Good hash methods are hard to write. If two objects are equal, their hash
value needs to also be equal. Nonequal objects can have the same hash
value—but we should make that as rare as possible. Also, the performance
of data structures, like Dictionaries, can be impacted by the quality of the
hashes.
A full description of hash methods is well beyond the scope of this book;
however, the implementation shown here should be good enough. We take
the weight, shift it two decimal places, and convert it to an integer. Then we
combine this with the date’s hash value, shifting the date 12 spaces so the
two pieces of data don’t overlap. We’ll lose the top 12-bits of the date hash,
but—if Apple has implemented it reasonably—we will capture the most
significant bits. That should be more than sufficient.
That’s it. Run the app on two devices. Make changes to the content on
one device. Send the application to the background, and watch for the

--- Page 519 ---
changes to appear on the other. Changes can take several seconds to sync.
They shouldn’t take longer than 15 to 30 seconds over a good Wi-Fi and
will usually be much faster.
You also want to test the conflict resolution. The easiest way to generate
a conflict is to put one device in airplane mode. Make changes on both
devices. Put the app into the background on both devices, saving the
changes. Then take the device out of airplane mode. It should now try to
sync its changes.
One of the two devices will detect the conflict and will resolve it. The
other device will simply get an update message once the conflict is
resolved.
iCloud Document Syncing is very robust and stable. Apple uses it for its
iWork applications, so it has been well tested. However, implementing
document syncing is nontrivial. It’s easy to forget a minor detail (such as
file coordination) that can lead to odd and intermittent bugs.
I generally recommend that developers try to add Document Syncing to
their applications—but only once they understand how much work it is
likely to be.
Debugging iCloud Document Storage
As we have seen, iCloud Document Storage can be somewhat opaque.
Fortunately, with Xcode 5, Apple provides a great set of tools to help us see
exactly what’s going on, helping us find and fix problems.
When running Health Beat, either on a tethered device or on the
simulator, switch to the Debug navigator. In the Navigator area, you will see
three rows for each copy of the app that is currently being debugged: a CPU
row, a Memory row, and an iCloud row. In each row, there’s a bar graph
that shows a quick overview of that resource’s usage over time.
However, we can get more detailed information by clicking one of the
rows. If you click the iCloud row, it will bring up the iCloud Usage display
(Figure 6.7).

--- Page 520 ---
FIGURE 6.7 iCloud usage details
The detailed data can be divided into three sections. The top shows
general information: the Ubiquity Container ID, the amount of iCloud
storage space available, the amount used, and the length of time since the
last update.
The middle displays the actual transfers. Green bars show when the
iCloud service uploaded data to the cloud. Blue lines show when it
downloaded data.
Finally, the bottom shows the contents of our Ubiquity Container. It also
tells us the time and date of the file’s last update and its current status.
“Current” means the most recent version has been downloaded from
iCloud. “Stored in Cloud” means it has been uploaded successfully to the
cloud.
Note that the status messages represent the device’s understanding of its
own state. If another device has uploaded a change but this device has not
yet received the metadata, it will still list the file as “Current.” So, you
usually need to look at the modification date when considering the status.

--- Page 521 ---
 Note
While the iCloud Usage display is a fantastic tool with a lot
of promise, the Xcode 5.0 implementation still seems to get
confused or lost on occasion. If it’s showing clearly old or
outdated information—or if it’s not showing any useful
information at all—you may need to quit Xcode and relaunch
it. This seems to fix the problem.
Additionally, we can download the iCloud Logging Profile from
http://developer.apple.com/downloads. If we install this
profile on one of our test devices, that device will generate additional
iCloud logging data. This is primarily used when reporting a bug to Apple.
Install the profile, duplicate the bug, and attach the log file to your bug
report. This gives the Apple engineers a lot of additional information, which
can help them debug the problem.
Wrapping Up
In this chapter, we implemented both key-value and document syncing.
iCloud’s Key-Value Storage is easy to use but provides a limited set of
features. It works best as a technique for syncing user defaults between
devices.
iCloud Document Syncing has more features but is much harder to
implement. There is good news, however. In the next chapter we will look
at syncing Core Data documents using iCloud. With Core Data, Apple
automates away almost all of the issues we had to deal with here.
Of course, iCloud Core Data syncing has traditionally been a bit buggy
and unreliable. We will talk about that next chapter as well.
As difficult as it can be to set up correctly, when you have iCloud
syncing working, it’s almost like magic. You’re data just appears on all of
your devices, ready and waiting for you to use. In my opinion, it’s well
worth the effort.
Other Resources
 iCloud Design Guide

--- Page 522 ---
iOS Developer’s Library
This guide covers all three iCloud APIs. I would highly recommend
reading through it before implementing iCloud Document Storage.
It’s a complex enough topic, so it’s worth hearing more than just one
take on the subject.
 Storing Documents in iCloud Using iOS 5
WWDC 2011 Videos
Though a bit old, this is still one of the primary sources for iCloud
Document Storage. Honestly, iCloud Document Storage hasn’t really
changed at all since iOS 5—though some of the details have been
clarified in later documentation. Still, this presentation will give you a
good overview on using UIDocument. Its biggest problem is that it
over-simplifies the subject, ignoring several important steps that
developers must perform. Still, it’s well worth watching.
 Taking Advantage of File Coordination
WWDC 2011 Videos
File presenters and file coordinators were introduced for Mac OS 7
and iOS 5, and they have not changed substantially since then. This
video describes file coordination in detail. It is well worth watching,
especially if you have to do a lot of file system work in the Ubiquity
Container, or if you’re considering implementing your own file
presenter.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 523 ---
Chapter 7. Core Data
Core Data is, in many ways, a replacement for our application’s model
layer. It is much more than just storage; it also manages the life cycles of
our data objects, tracks and validates any changes to our data, provides
effortless undo support, and, yes, saves our data to disk. Furthermore, the
UIManagedDocument class simplifies and improves on Core Data by
automatically setting up our Core Data stack, performing file read and
writes on background threads, and adding simple iCloud Document
syncing.
In this chapter, we will look at the technologies underlying both Core
Data and UIManagedDocument. Then we will replace Health Beat’s
entire model layer with a UIManagedDocument-based model. As you
will see, this provides a much simpler model than our previous custom-built
approach.
Core Data Is Not a Database
Always remember that Core Data is not a relational database.
Yes, we can save and load our data. We can search through our
data using SQL-like fetch requests. We can even use SQLite to
persist this data. However, Core Data isn’t simply a front end to
SQLite. We cannot open arbitrary SQLite databases using Core
Data—it works only with its own files.
More importantly, Core Data represents a much broader set of
technologies. It really is a replacement for much (if not all) of
our model layer. After all, Core Data has a number of features
that have nothing to do with persisting data to disk. For example,
we can create an in-memory store and simply use Core Data to
manage the life cycles of our objects, including tracking,
managing, and validating any changes to those objects at
runtime.

--- Page 524 ---
Introducing Core Data
The Core Data framework provides support for automatically managing
many common model layer tasks. We have already seen how Xcode
simplifies our application’s view layer. With Interface Builder, we can draw
our application’s scenes. The built-in guidelines ensure that our application
follows Apple’s Human Interface Guidelines, but it goes beyond that. We
can draw connections between our view and controllers, linking objects to
outlets and events to actions. With storyboards, we can link scenes with
segues, letting us rapidly sketch out the entire application’s workflow. With
a few clicks of the mouse, Xcode helps us build complex structures that
would normally require a considerable amount of boilerplate code.
Core Data brings a similar magic to our model. For most applications, the
models share a number of features. This includes one or more object graphs.
These graphs define both the content and the relationships in our
application’s data. Applications need to manage the life cycles of these
object graphs, adding, modifying, and deleting objects in the graphs. They
also need to validate the graphs and save and load them to disk. Undo and
redo support would also be nice. Furthermore, if the format of our data
changes, we need to migrate our saved data from one schema to the next.
Core Data provides all of these features and more. In many cases, it can
perform these tasks automatically. In others, it presents a rich API for
expanding and customizing its behavior. It is also tightly integrated with
Xcode’s tool chain. Core Data is mature, well tested, and highly optimized.
It is used by millions of customers across thousands of applications. While
we could try to build a custom solution to better fit our specific needs, it
would require a considerable amount of effort to match the performance
and stability already provided by Core Data. In most cases, it’s more cost
effective to just use Core Data and to focus the developer effort on other
areas.

--- Page 525 ---
Using Multiple Models
Each persistent store coordinator must have one and only one
data model. For this reason, it’s generally best to create a single
model for each Core Data stack.
Of course, there are valid reasons to split up our model. We
might want to divide a large, complex model across several
submodels to make them easier to work with. We may want to
combine our application’s model with one defined by a third-
party library. Or, we may want to create multiple versions of
some subsection of our model and dynamically load the correct
version at runtime. Fortunately, NSManagedObjectModel
has a number of methods for merging models, allowing us to
unify our models before passing the combined version to the
persistent store.
And, yes, we can even graphically lay out our object graphs.
This chapter will start with a quick overview of Core Data’s architecture,
to give you an idea of how it works and how you might use it for other
projects. Then we will convert our Health Beat application from a custom
model to Core Data. Along the way, we will look at many of the tricks and
tips (and possible traps) involved in using Core Data.
Architecture Overview
Our Core Data model can be divided into two parts. The managed object
model defines our data’s schema, describing how our data is organized. We
also have the Core Data stack. This combines both the managed object
context (our application’s live data) and the persistence stack (for saving
and loading our entities to disk).

--- Page 526 ---
Managed Object Model
The NSManagedObjectModel object defines the structure of our data.
It describes what type of data we can store and how the individual pieces of
data relate. We do this by creating one or more entity descriptions. The
managed object model then maintains the mapping between these
descriptions and the corresponding NSManagedObject objects in our
Core Data stack.
We can create managed object models programmatically at runtime, but
we generally use Xcode’s Data Model Design tool to graphically lay out our
schema.
Entity Descriptions
Core Data uses the NSEntityDescription class to define our model’s
entities. At a minimum, this description includes a unique name for the
entity and the name of the managed object class that will be instantiated in
the Core Data stack (either NSManagedObject or a custom subclass).
Most entities also have one or more properties.
Properties represent the type of data stored in our entity. They become
our instance variables when we instantiate objects for our entities. All Core
Data properties are completely key-value compliant; Core Data
automatically defines the equivalent Objective-C properties for us. Finally,
Core Data supports three types of properties: attributes, relationships, and
fetched properties. Each specifies a different relationship between the entity
and its data.
Attributes are the simplest Core Data property. They represent values
stored within the entity itself. Unfortunately, we are somewhat limited in
the type of attributes that we can use. Table 7.1 shows the complete list of
Core Data attribute types and their corresponding Objective-C and scalar
data types.

--- Page 527 ---
TABLE 7.1 Core Data Attribute Types
Some of these deserve a little special attention. Let’s take the easiest one
first. Internally, Core Data saves date attributes as the number of seconds
since the reference date (January 1, 2001 GMT). It doesn’t store the time
zone. Internally, NSDate operates the same way—however, NSDate will
implicitly use the device’s default time zone. This means our date values
will appear in PST when saved in Los Angeles and in EST when read in
New York. If we need to save the time zone information, we must explicitly
create a separate attribute to store it.
Next, let’s look at the undefined attribute type. This type can be used
only with transient attributes (attributes that are not saved to the persistent
store but whose changes are monitored, allowing undo/redo support). Any
Objective-C object can be assigned to an undefined attribute. As we will see
in the “Managed Objects” section, undefined attributes are often used to
provide a friendly Objective-C wrapper around more primitive Core Data
types.
Finally, we have the transformable data type. This type uses an
NSValueTransformer object to convert the attribute to and from an

--- Page 528 ---
instance of NSData. By default, Core Data will use
NSKeyedUnarchiveFromDataTransformerName. In practice, this
means we can assign any Objective-C object that adopts the NSCoding
protocol to a transformable attribute, without requiring any additional work
on our part. Of course, if we’re feeling ambitious, we could always select a
different NSValueTransformer or even write our own custom
transformer to handle various special cases.
Attributes also have a number of settings. They can be optional, transient,
or indexed.
 Optional: The attribute can have a nil value. More specifically, if
the optional setting is turned off, we must assign a non-nil value
before we can save the entity.
 Transient: Core Data does not save or load the attribute’s value from
the persistent store. It will still track the value, however, for undo,
redo, and validation.
 Indexed: This attribute is important when searching through a list of
entities. Persistent stores may use indexed attributes to improve
search performance on fetch requests. This is particularly true of
SQLite-backed stores.
Additionally, each attribute type has a number of validation settings. For
numeric attributes, we can assign minimum, maximum, and default values.
For strings, we can set the minimum length, maximum length, default
value, and regular expression that the string must match.
Relationships represent the second property type. Core Data uses
relationships to define connections between entities. We will typically
define both sides of a relationship. For example, if our Department entity
has a Manager relationship, then the Manager entity should have a
matching Department relationship. Furthermore, the Manager’s relationship
should be assigned as the Department’s inverse relationship.

--- Page 529 ---
 Note
While inverse relationships are not required, they are highly
recommended. Core Data uses this information to ensure that
the object graph remains consistent as the application makes
changes. If we do not use inverse relationships, then we are
responsible for ensuring the consistency, tracking changes,
and managing the undo support. See the “Unidirectional
Relationships” section of the Core Data Programming Guide
for more information.
Relationships can be either to-one or to-many. To-one references are
modeled using a pointer to the target object. Most of the time, to-many
relationships are modeled using NSSets. The relationship did not have any
inherent order; however, it could be sorted based on any of the values from
the entities.
We can, optionally, use an NSOrderedSet for our to-many
relationships. This allows us to place our entities into any arbitrary order we
want without regard to the entities’ values. However, this is not generally
recommended. Ordered relationships often impose a heavy performance hit
on our application. In addition, ordered relationships are not supported by
iCloud Document syncing. In general, it is better to add an index attribute
to the entities and then sort them by their indices.

--- Page 530 ---
Many-to-Many Relationships
Relationships are implicitly either one-to-one or one-to-many.
It’s possible to create a many-to-many relationship—but this
requires a bit more work.
There are two recommended approaches. We can just make sure
both ends are set as to-many relationships and set them as the
inverse of each other. If we save these objects to an SQLite-based
store, Core Data will automatically build the join table for us.
Alternatively, we can explicitly build a join entity that represents
these relationships. See the “Many-to-Many Relationships”
section of the Core Data Programming Guide for more
information.
Like attributes, relationships support optional and transient settings. For
to-many relationships, we can also set the minimum and maximum number
of entities in the relationship. Finally, we can specify a delete rule. Delete
rules describe what happens to the relationship when we delete our entity.
The different options are listed here:
 Cascade: Deleting the source object also deletes all the objects at the
relationship’s destination. For example, deleting a Course object
also deletes all its Students.
 Deny: If there is at least one object at the relationship’s destination,
then the source object cannot be deleted. If we want to delete a
Course entity, we must first remove all its Students.
 Nullify: Sets the inverse relationship for any entities at the destination
to nil. Deleting the Course entity sets all the Students’ Course
relationship to nil.
 No Action: The entity at the other end remains unchanged. In general,
this should be used only for unidirectional relationships. If it has an
inverse relationship, that relationship now points to an entity that no
longer exists. For example, our Students will still think they’re
registered for the now-nonexistent Course.
Fetched properties are similar to relationships, but they are used to model
weak one-way connections between entities. As the name suggests, the

--- Page 531 ---
fetched property’s value is calculated using a fetch request. We will discuss
fetch requests in more detail later this chapter, but basically fetch requests
let us look up entities that match a given entity description. We can also
apply a predicate to filter our results and then sort them according to a set of
sort descriptors. For example, we could create a fetch request that returns
all students (entity description) who are taking more than 18 credit hours
(predicate), and then we could sort them by descending GPA (sort
description).
Fetched properties use lazy initialization. The actual fetch is not
performed until the property’s value is accessed. However, once the value is
calculated, it is cached for future use. Our system models fetch properties
using arrays, not sets, since fetched properties have a defined sort order.
Additionally, fetched properties are the only way to model cross-store
relationships. Normal relationship properties can refer only to objects saved
in the same persistent store.
In many ways, an entity description is similar to a class. It is a blueprint
used to instantiate managed objects—and, like classes, entity descriptions
support inheritance. If we have a number of similar entities, we can factor
out the common properties into a super-entity. We can even explicitly
declare abstract entities (something not explicitly supported by the
Objective-C object model).
However, there are a few important differences between entity
inheritance and object inheritance. Remember, the entities describe how our
data is organized. We use the entities to create objects—but the resulting
object inheritance tree is separate from our entity inheritance tree. For
example, we will often use NSManagedObjects for all of our entities—
superclasses and subclasses alike. If we are creating custom classes for our
entities, we probably want the model’s inheritance tree to match our entities
—but that’s not required, and it’s something we will have to manage by
hand.
Most importantly, however, entity inheritance can have unexpected
performance implications. If we save our entities in an SQLite-based store,
then the database will place our entire hierarchy in a single table. It will
create a column for each property, requiring a table large enough to contain
all the properties from all the different subentities.

--- Page 532 ---
If we have a large number of subentities and our subentities each add a
significant number of unique properties, we may end up with large, sparsely
populated tables. This can affect both the amount of disk space we need to
store our entities and the performance of our fetch requests.
Migrating Data
Changes to the schema may make the model incompatible with previously
created data stores. When this happens, we need to migrate the old stores
before we can open them. By default, Core Data manages this with a three-
step process:
1. Model versioning
2. Mapping model
3. Data migration
Core data lets us create multiple versions of our managed object model.
We can add a new version by selecting our managed object model and then
selecting Editor > Add Model Version.
The mapping model describes how to transform the data from one
version to the next. Typically, we add a new mapping model to our project
by selecting File > New File and then selecting iOS > Core Data > Mapping
Model (Figure 7.1). Xcode’s mapping model editor allows us to graphically
set the transformations between the source and destination models.

--- Page 533 ---
FIGURE 7.1 Adding a mapping model
Finally, we must migrate the existing data from our old model to our new
one. Most of the time, we will perform automatic migration by calling
addPersistentStoreWithType:configuration:URL:optio
ns:error: to open our persistent store. For the options: parameter,
pass in an NSDictionary containing the
NSMigratePersistentStoresAutomaticallyOption key with
an NSNumber object set to YES.
Click here to view code image
NSDictionary *options =
@{NSMigratePersistentStoresAutomaticallyOption:@YES};
if (![self.persistentStoreCoordinator
      addPersistentStoreWithType:NSSQLiteStoreType
      configuration:nil
      URL:storeURL
      options:options
      error:&error]) {
    
    NSLog(@"Unable to open persistent store at %@, %@: %@",
          storeURL, error, [error userInfo]);

--- Page 534 ---
    abort();
}
Lightweight Migration
In the simplest cases, we may not need a mapping model. Core
Data can often infer the differences between the source and
destination models and automatically migrate our data. In
particular, we can perform any of the following:
 Add, remove, or rename entities or properties
 Make a nonoptional property optional
 Make an optional property nonoptional as long as it has a
default value
 Make a to-one relationship a to-many relationship
 Change a nonordered relationship into an ordered relationship
 Create new parent or child entities
 Move entities up or down the entity hierarchy
In this case, open our persistent store by calling
addPersistentStoreWithType:configuration:UR
L:options:error: and setting both the
NSMigratePersistentStoresAutomaticallyOptio
n and NSInferMappingModelAutomaticallyOption
keys to YES.
Not surprisingly, data migration gets quite complex. To help manage this,
Core Data provides additional support for injecting custom code when
detecting version skew and while performing the actual data migration. See
Apple’s Core Data Model Versioning and Data Migration Programming
Guide for more information.
Remember, not all changes require migration. We can change an
attribute’s default value or validation constraints without altering the
existing stores. Additionally, we will want to test our data migration very
carefully. We don’t want to corrupt or lose our user’s data. If you’ve ever
updated an app only to have it erase all your data, you know exactly what I
mean.

--- Page 535 ---
Support Data
Our models can also contain two types of support data: fetch requests and
configurations. While the entities represent the actual data stored in Core
Data, the fetch requests and configurations represent different ways of
searching through or partitioning that data.
Fetch requests let us request all the entities that match a given
specification. While we often create our fetch requests at runtime, we may
want to build complex or commonly used fetch requests directly into our
model.
Xcode’s fetch request editor can be helpful when creating complex
requests. By default, we can create a list of expressions and return the
entities where All, Any, or None of the expressions are true. However, by
holding down the Option key, we can add a subconditional expression,
allowing us to specify a subgroup where All, Any, or None of those
subexpressions must be true (Figure 7.2).
FIGURE 7.2 Creating complex fetch requests
For each row, we can either select one of our attributes as the left
expression and then specify a comparison operator and a constant value or
select an expression type and provide a complex predicate expression,
including substitution variables, using the predicate format string syntax
(see the “Fetch Requests” section for more information on the predicate
syntax).
When adding fetch requests to our model, there are a few limitations. As
described earlier, we can include variables only in Expression lines.
Additionally, we cannot add a sort description using the graphic interface.
This isn’t a huge problem, though, since we can use the editor to build the

--- Page 536 ---
basic fetch request, and then we can add the sort descriptors at runtime, as
necessary.
On the plus side, building the fetch request into our model can provide a
significant performance increase over programmatically creating our
fetched requests.
Next, we have configurations. Configurations are just arrays of entity
descriptions. We access our configurations using
NSManagedObjectModel’s entitiesForConfiguration: and
setEntities:forConfiguration: methods. We can then use the
configurations to define subsets of our model. For example, a user logged in
as an administrator may have access to a broader set of entities than
someone logged in as a user.
Mostly, however, we use configurations when we want to split our model
across several persistent data stores. In this case, we need to partition our
model using configurations. Then we specify the correct configuration for
each store as we add them to our persistent store coordinator. Core Data
automatically saves each entity into the correct store.
Managed Object Context
We now move from defining our data to actually managing it. The managed
object context acts as a temporary scratch space. When we fetch objects
from a persistent store, they are placed in the context. We can then
manipulate them, change their properties, or even add or remove objects
from the context. The managed object context monitors these changes,
recording them and enabling undo/redo support. In addition, when we save
these changes back to our persistent store, the context validates our objects,
ensuring that everything remains in a valid state before committing the
changes.
Each manage object context should be accessed only from a single
thread. There are three different concurrency patterns that we can use to
access our contexts. These can be passed to
initWithConcurrencyType: when creating our context.
 NSConfinementConcurrencyType: This is the default
concurrency type and is primarily used for backward compatibility.
The developer is responsible for ensuring that the context is used only
in the same thread that it was created in.

--- Page 537 ---
 NSPrivateQueueConcurrencyType: The context is created on
a private queue. All access must be performed on that private queue.
 NSMainQueueConcurrencyType: The context is created on the
main queue and can be accessed on the main queue. This can greatly
simplify interactions between the context and the user interface.
Contexts using either private or main queue concurrency should be
accessed using the performBlock: or performBlockAndWait:
method. We call these methods on our context and pass in a block
containing any other method calls on that context. This guarantees that the
block of code will run on the correct queue.
We must use these block methods whenever we access a context with
private queue concurrency—since we have no way of accessing the queue
directly. If our context uses main queue concurrency and we’re sure that our
code will always run on the main queue, we can simply call the context’s
methods directly. However, it’s generally recommended that we access a
main queue context through the performBlock... methods as well.
We can open more than one managed object context at a time. In fact, an
object in our persistent store may be modified by multiple contexts
simultaneously. By default, the context will attempt to merge these changes,
causing an error if there are conflicts. We can further control the merge
process by changing the merge policy and by observing
NSManagedObjectContextObjectsDidChangeNotification
notifications. Note that the system may use its own managed object
contexts internally, so we want to make sure we specify the correct context
when we register as an observer. Otherwise, we may receive notifications
from these system-level sources.
We can also create nested managed contexts, where each parent context
may contain one or more child contexts. When connected this way, saving a
child context merely pushes the changes up to the parent context. Data is
not saved to the persistent store until the top-level context is saved. Fetch
requests will pull data down through every context level, while
objectWithID: will pull through the fewest number of contexts
possible.
Nested contexts can greatly simplify a number of complex problems,
including performing asynchronous saves on a background thread, sharing

--- Page 538 ---
unsaved changes between different contexts, and even simplifying
background fetching.
For example, to implement asynchronous saves, we simply need to create
two managed object contexts with a simple parent-child relationship. Our
application makes all its changes to the child context. When it wants to
save, we start by saving the child context on the main queue. This creates a
snapshot of our data—pushing our changes up to the parent context. Then
we save the parent context on a private queue. As we will see,
UIManagedDocument uses this technique when autosaving document
data.
When creating hierarchies of managed object contexts, all parent
contexts must use either private queue or main queue concurrency. The final
child contexts can use any concurrency model.

--- Page 539 ---
 Note
When creating a new project with Core Data enabled, the
template’s autogenerated code accesses the managed object
context directly from the app delegate. This is somewhat
unfortunate, since Apple’s documentation recommends
switching to a “pass the baton” approach, where the correct
context is handed from object to object along the view
controller hierarchy. This is especially true in any
applications using multilayer contexts.
The template also creates the managed object context using
confinement concurrency, instead of using the more modern
private queue or main queue concurrency.
For these reasons, I do not recommend using the current
Core Data templates unmodified. If you want to use the
template, I’d definitely change the context’s concurrency
type. I’d also consider moving the core data stack out of the
App Delegate.
Managed Objects
All Core Data entities are instantiated as an NSManagedObject or one of
its subclasses. Each managed object is associated with an entity description.
This includes both the object’s metadata and information about the
managed object context where our object resides.
In many cases, we can simply use raw managed objects in our project.
Each managed object will automatically generate both public and primitive
accessors for all the modeled properties. For attributes and other to-one
relationships, these follow the standard <key> and set<Key> naming
conventions.
For to-many relationships, these accessors can be used to get and set the
entire collection (as an NSSet or NSOrderedSet, depending on the type
of to-many relationship). We can also request a mutable set using the
mutableSetValueForKey: or
mutableOrderedSetValueForKey: method. We can then add or
remove entities from the mutable set—all changes will be made to the

--- Page 540 ---
managed object context’s object graph. Finally, we can use the dynamic
relationship accessors add<Key>Object: and
remove<Key>Object: (insertObject:in<Key>AtIndex: and
removeObjectFrom<Key>atIndex: for ordered to-many
relationships) to add or remove objects from the relationship directly.
NSManagedObject also creates primitive accessors. These take the
form primitive<Key> and setPrimitive<Key>:. Unlike the
public accessors, these do not trigger KVO notifications. We will typically
use the primitive accessors when writing our own custom accessors. We
will see some examples later.
While the autogenerated accessors are useful, they have a downside.
Unfortunately, the compiler does not know about these methods, so it will
generate warnings (and if you’re following my advice, these warnings will
be treated like errors, preventing your app from building successfully).
There are a couple of ways around this. First, we can always use key-value
coding to access data from raw managed objects. Alternatively, we could
create a category on NSManagedObject that declares the properties and
methods. Finally, we could create a custom subclass for our entity and
explicitly declare these properties.
Making a custom subclass is easy—and, in my opinion, best expresses
our intentions. Just select File > New > New File and select the iOS > Core
Data > NSManagedObject subclass template. Xcode will automatically
generate the properties for us and link our subclass to its entity in the
managed object model.
Custom subclasses are particularly important when we need to implement
custom accessors or validation methods, implement nonstandard attributes,
specify dependent keys, calculate derived values, or implement other
custom logic. However, there are a few points we should keep in mind
when subclassing NSManagedObject.
 Core Data relies on NSManagedObject’s implementation of these
methods to function properly: primitiveValueForKey:,
setPrimitiveValue:forKey:, isEqual:, hash,
superclass, class, self, zone, isProxy,
isKindOfClass:, isMemberOfClass:,
conformsToProtocol:, respondsToSelector:,

--- Page 541 ---
managedObjectContext, entity, objectID, isInserted,
isUpdated, isDeleted, and isFault. We should never
override any of these methods.
 We are discouraged from overriding the following methods:
description,
initWithEntity:insertIntoManagedObjectContext:,
valueForKey:, and setValue:forKeyPath:. If they are not
handled properly, they can cause unexpected results.
 We should invoke the superclass’s implementation before executing
our own code for the following methods: awakeFromInsert,
awakeFromFetch, and validation methods like
validateForUpdate:.
 We can override the awakeFromInsert and awakeFromFetch
methods to perform any custom initialization when a new object is
created or when an object is loaded from the persistent store,
respectively.
 We should not provide instance variables for any properties in the
model. Core Data will automatically manage the life cycles of these
objects.
 The declaration for any object properties should use (nonatomic,
retain). Alternatively, we can declare scalar properties for any data
types that support scalar types (the various integer and floating-point
numbers, as well as Booleans and Dates); these properties should be
declared using (nonatomic). In both cases, we should use the
@dynamic property implementation directive for all of these.
NSManagedObject will create the correct accessors based on our
declaration.
 If we create custom accessors for any modeled properties, we must
manually trigger KVO access and change notifications by calling
willAccessValueForKey:, didAccessValueForKey:,
willChangeValueForKey:, didChangeValueForKey:,
willChangeValueForKey:withSetMutation:usingObj
ects:, and didChangeValue
ForKey:withSetMutation:usingObjects:, as appropriate.

--- Page 542 ---
Core Data disables automatic KVO notification for any modeled
properties.
 Note
Even though we’re using ARC, we can use (nonatomic,
retain) to declare the properties generated by our
managed object context. Actually, (strong,
nonatomic) also works, but Xcode will use
(nonatomic, retain) in its autogenerated code.
Remember, Core Data manages the object’s life cycle, so we
don’t need to think too hard about what it’s doing behind the
scenes.
Nonstandard Attributes
We often create custom subclasses when we want to implement nonstandard
attributes. There are two ways of doing this. The first is to set the attribute’s
type to transformable and then assign an NSValueTransformer that
can convert the class to and from an NSData object. The vast majority of
the time, we can simply use the default transformer—just make sure the
properties adopt the NSCoding protocol. Everything will just work.
If we need more control, we can create custom accessors. Typically, we
declare two attributes. One is the nonstandard attribute. We declare this as
transient with an undefined type. The other attribute must be a standard,
concrete type—this will hold the actual data that is saved to our persistent
store. Then we write our accessor methods to convert our data back and
forth between the two attributes.
Let’s say we want to add a nonstandard NSTimeZone attribute to our
entity. NSTimeZone adopts the NSCoding protocol, so the simplest
approach is to just declare it as a transformable attribute. We can then
declare the property in our custom subclass, as shown here:
Click here to view code image
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSTimeZone* timeZone;
Then, in the @implementation block, declare the property as
dynamic. This tells the compiler that the accessors’ implementations will be

--- Page 543 ---
provided at runtime (if not earlier). Remember, NSManagedObject
automatically creates these accessors for us.
@dynamic timeZone;
That’s it. Core Data will automatically handle the conversion to and from
an NSData object.
Next, let’s look at implementing the same nonstandard attribute using
custom accessors. This time add both a transient, undefined timeZone
attribute and a string timeZoneName attribute. In our
NSManagedObject subclass’s @interface, declare the timeZone
property as shown in the previous example. However, in the
implementation file, start by declaring two private properties.
Click here to view code image
@interface MyManagedObject()
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * timeZoneName;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSTimeZone* primitiveTimeZone;
@end
Then, in the implementation block, declare the two private properties as
dynamic.
@dynamic timeZoneName;
@dynamic primitiveTimeZone;
Since we will be implementing our own custom accessors for the
timeZone property, we don’t need to call the @dynamic directive.
Instead, just implement the methods as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (NSTimeZone*)timeZone
{
    // Get transient value.
    [self willAccessValueForKey:@"timeZone"];
    NSTimeZone* timeZone = self.primitiveTimeZone;
    
    // If we have no transient value,
    // try to generate it from the persistent value.
    if (timeZone == nil)
    {
        // Get the persistent value.
        NSString* name = self.timeZoneName;
        if (name != nil)
        {

--- Page 544 ---
            timeZone = [NSTimeZone timeZoneWithName:name];
            // Set the transient value.
            self.primitiveTimeZone = timeZone;
        }
    }
    [self didAccessValueForKey:@"timeZone"];
    return timeZone;
}
- (void)setTimeZone:(NSTimeZone *)timeZone
{
    // Set transient value.
    [self willChangeValueForKey:@"timeZone"];
    self.primitiveTimeZone = timeZone;
    
    // Set persistent value.
    self.timeZoneName = [timeZone name];
    [self didChangeValueForKey:@"timeZone"];
}
The getter simply calls the autogenerated primitiveTimeZone
method to access our transient attribute’s current value. Remember, unlike
the other attributes, timeZone is transient. Its value is not loaded from the
persistent store. If we haven’t programmatically set it, its value defaults to
nil. In this case, we try to create a new NSTimeZone object using the
value stored in our private timeZoneName attribute. We then set the
timeZone’s value and return that value. The next time we call
timeZone, we will be able to pull the value directly from the timeZone
attribute.
The setter is even simpler. Here, we first set our timeZone attribute,
and then we set the underlying timeZoneName attribute. Remember, in
both accessors we need to send out the proper KVO notifications.
These are probably the simplest implementations, but there are other
possibilities. We could precalculate the timeZone attribute during the
awakeFromFetch method, or we could delay setting the
timeZoneName attribute until the willSave method is called. Both of
these approaches are shown in the “Nonstandard Persistent Attributes”
section of Apple’s Core Data Programming Guide.

--- Page 545 ---
 Note
Although we declared the timeZoneName attribute as
private in our sample NSManagedObject subclass, this is
not necessarily required. We could declare a public read-only
property for timeZoneName. We could even declare it as
publicly read/writeable—however, this complicates things.
We would need to make sure our timeZone value is
updated whenever the timeZoneName value is changed.
We would also need to make sure our implementation is
KVO compliant by declaring timeZone as a dependent
key.
A hybrid approach is sometimes useful when trying to save nonobject
values. This is especially true for structures that are supported by the
NSValue class (for example, CGPoint, CGRect, and CGSize). Here,
we simply define the attribute as a transformable type and then write
custom accessors to convert the structs to and from an NSValue object.
However, while these approaches can simplify the interface, they are not
generally recommended. Core Data tries to optimize its autogenerated
accessors. The performance advantages gained by letting Core Data manage
its own data usually outweigh any ease of use that is granted by dealing
directly with the structs. This is especially true in data-intensive
applications.
Fetch Requests
We access our managed objects using an NSFetchRequest. We can
create a fetch request in two basic ways: using +[NSFetchRequest
fetchRequestWithEntityName:] to programmatically create a
basic fetch of all the objects of a given entity type and then configuring and
fine-tuning our request or loading a fetch request by calling either -
[NSManagedObjectModel
fetchRequestTemplateForName:] or -
[NSManagedObjectModel
fetchRequestFromTemplateWithName:substitutionVaria
bles:].

--- Page 546 ---
 Note
fetchRequestTemplateForName: returns an
immutable fetch request. If we want to modify it further (for
example, adding sort descriptors), we need to copy it and
modify the copy.
Once we have our fetch request, we call the
executeFetchRequest:error:, which returns an array containing
all instances of the entities matching our request, including any subentities
of our named entity.
Formatting String Placeholders vs. Substitution Variables
When dealing with predicate strings, we have two different types
of variables. Substitution variables begin with a $. A predicate
with one or more substitution variables is called a predicate
template. We cannot use templates directly. Instead, we use it to
create an actual predicate with actual values by calling methods
like predicateWithSubstitutionVariables:.
We often use substitution variables when writing expressions in
the fetch request editor. The variables are replaced when we load
the fetch request from our model using
fetchRequestFromTemplateWithName:substituti
onVariables:.
Format string placeholders also let us pass data into a predicate at
runtime. They begin with a %. We use these placeholders when
creating predicates programmatically using formatting strings.
They are replaced immediately using the arguments that follow
the formatting string. The values are placed into the string first,
and the resulting string is parsed and converted to a predicate.
This produces a ready-to-use predicate, but the placeholder
values are now fixed and cannot be changed.
The fetch will return objects based on their state in the managed object
context—even if these changes have not yet been saved. This means a fetch

--- Page 547 ---
will return new objects added to the context and will not return any objects
deleted from the context. Likewise, the system will evaluate predicates
based on the object’s in-memory state—not its saved state. Of course, if we
haven’t yet loaded the objects into managed object context, then the fetch
request loads them from their persistent store.
We have a lot of control over which objects are returned and how they
are organized. By adding an NSPredicate to our fetch request, we can
set constraints on our request. Our fetch request will return only those
entities that match our predicate. An array of NSSortDescriptors
defines the order in which our objects are returned.
Predicates are a rich and complex topic. While Interface Builder’s fetch
request editor can help create complex fetch requests—we need to be
comfortable writing our own predicate expressions if we want to use it
effectively. This is particularly true, since the editor can be used only to
create stored fetch requests, not fetched properties. This means we still need
to learn how to write our own predicate expressions.
Predicates
Basically, a predicate is a logical operator. When the predicate is evaluated
on an object, it performs the specified comparison and then returns YES or
NO.
We can build our NSPredicate object using a combination of
NSComparisonPredicate, NSCompoundPredicate, and
NSExpression objects; however, it’s usually easier to create our
predicate using a formatting string. The NSPredicate class then parses
this string and builds a predicate to match.
The predicate parser is whitespace insensitive. It is also case insensitive
when it comes to keywords, and it supports nested parenthetical
expressions. The simplest predicates have three parts: the left expression, a
comparison, and the right expression.
These expressions can be constants, key paths, or variables. Most of the
time, we will compare one of the object’s key paths against a constant.
String constants can be typed directly into the formatting string, but they
must be surrounded by quotes (either double or single quotes work). Most
of the other values (for example, NSDate or NSNumber) are passed in

--- Page 548 ---
using the %@ formatting placeholder. We can even pass in string constants
using %@, and the parser will automatically quote them for us.
The comparison includes most of what we expect: ==, <, >, <=, >=, and
!=. The parser often understands common variations for these. For
example, the following comparisons are also valid: =, =<, =>, and <>. The
parser also adds the BETWEEN comparison—whose right side must be a
two-value array, though it seems to work only with numeric data.
For strings, we have the BEGINSWITH, CONTAINS, ENDSWITH,
LIKE, and MATCHES comparisons. Most of these should be relatively
straightforward. LIKE simply checks to see whether the left string is equal
to the right string. However, it supports the ? and * wildcards for matching
a single character or zero or more characters. MATCHES, on the other hand,
treats the right value as a regular expression. Appending [cd] to the end of
the comparison makes it case and diacritic insensitive.
A few sample predicates are shown here:
Click here to view code image
// Determines if the object's lastName attribute equals
@"Jones".
[NSPredicate predicateWithFormat:@"lastName LIKE 'Jones'"];
// Determines if the object's pubDate occurred before
// the given targetDate.
[NSPredicate predicateWithFormat:@"pubDate < %@", targetDate];
// Determines if the person is in our target demographics.
[NSPredicate predicateWithFormat:@"age BETWEEN %@",
 @[@18, @34]];
Note that we can also include literal array constants by placing a comma-
separated list of values inside curly braces. This means that the target
demographics example could also be written as shown here:
Click here to view code image
// Determines if the person is in our target demographics.
[NSPredicate predicateWithFormat:@"age BETWEEN {%@, %@}",
 @18, @34];
The key paths can even include to-many relationships. Often we will
prefix these expressions with one of the aggregate operators, ANY, ALL, or
NONE, as shown here:

--- Page 549 ---
Click here to view code image
// The target has at least one child under 18.
[NSPredicate predicateWithFormat:@"ANY children.age < 18"];
    
// All the target's children are under 18.
[NSPredicate predicateWithFormat:@"ALL children.age < 18"];
    
// None of the target's children are under 18.
[NSPredicate predicateWithFormat:@"NONE children.age < 18"];
We can also check the size of the to-many relationship by appending
[size] to the key path.
Click here to view code image
// Determines if the target has at least 3 children.
[NSPredicate predicateWithFormat:@"children[size] < 3"];
Finally, we can combine simple comparisons using AND, OR, or NOT.
Click here to view code image
// Determines if the target has at least 3 children
// and all their children are above the specified age
[NSPredicate predicateWithFormat:
 @"(children[size] < 3) AND (NONE children.age < %@)",
@(ageLimit)];
These formatting strings allow us to specify a wide range of predicates in
a relatively compact format. Unfortunately, it’s easy to accidentally misspell
a key path or inadvertently pass in the wrong type of object. These mistakes
will show up only as runtime errors. It is, therefore, important to test all our
predicates.
Additionally, not all data sources support all of NSPredicate’s
features. This is particularly important for Core Data, since the predicate’s
behavior can change when we switch from one type of persistent store to
another. This also means the behavior may change depending on whether
we use the predicate in a fetch request or use it to filter the returned
NSArray. We’ll talk about these differences more in the “Persistent
Stores” section, later in this chapter.

--- Page 550 ---
 Note
Each fetch request requires a round-trip to the persistent
store. Therefore, if we need to get a subset of objects, it may
be faster to filter an existing array than to perform a new
fetch request. Additionally, we cannot perform fetch requests
using predicates based on transient attributes, since these
attributes are not saved to the persistent store. We can,
however, use transient attributes when filtering arrays of
objects in memory.
Finally, iOS provides additional support for Core Data–driven table
views using the NSFetchedResultsController class. This class
analyzes the results of a fetch request (including any predicate or sorting
descriptors) and automatically maps the returned objects to their
corresponding index paths. We can even specify a key path that will be used
to partition the results into sections.
In addition, the NSFetchedResultsController monitors changes
to the objects in its managed object context and reports these changes to its
delegate. The controller also caches its results, improving performance if
the table is redisplayed.
Persistent Store Coordinator
Each managed object context has a single persistent store coordinator. This
coordinator sits between the context and the stores. Each managed object
context can have one and only one persistent store coordinator. The
coordinator, however, can support more than one context. It can also
connect to any number of persistent stores (Figure 7.3).

--- Page 551 ---
FIGURE 7.3 Persistent store coordinators in the Core Data stack
The persistent store coordinator primarily acts as a façade for a number
of stores. We could have just a single persistent store, or we could have a
hundred. As far as the managed object context is concerned, it doesn’t
matter. The persistent store coordinator provides a single, unified interface,
presenting the union of all the data in all the provided stores.
The persistent store coordinator also serializes access to its stores. If
multiple contexts are accessing the coordinator from different threads, they
must lock and unlock the coordinator. If we want true multithreaded access,
each thread should have its own persistent store coordinator. Therefore, we
often create a separate store coordinator (and its corresponding managed
object context) when we want to load or modify data in the background.
Persistent Stores
Persistent stores act as a wrapper for a data source (usually a file saved to
disk). The store is responsible for mapping objects in the managed object
context to the data in the data source—both saving objects to disk and
instantiating objects from disk. iOS supports three types of persistent stores:
atomic, in-memory, and SQLite.

--- Page 552 ---
All three stores are fast, especially when compared to plists or other
XML-based storage. The atomic format stores the object graph in a single
binary file. As a result, the persistent store must load the whole object graph
into memory at once. In most cases, however, this produces the smallest file
size of any data store. As the name suggests, atomic stores also write out
their data as an atomic action—either the entire file will be written or
nothing will be written. We will never get corrupted data from a half-written
file.
The in-memory store acts more like a virtual scratch space. It does not
store the objects to disk; rather, it keeps them in active memory. Objects
placed into an in-memory store benefit from Core Data features such as
validation, change tracking, and undo support; however, if we want to
persist this data, we would have to write additional code to load and save
these objects outside Core Data.
Most of the time we will use the SQLite persistent stores. This has a
significant advantage over the other stores: We do not need to load the
entire object graph into memory. We load only the objects we actually
intend to use.
By default, a fetch request to an SQLite-based store instantiates only the
objects it returns. All the relationships for those objects are represented by
faults. Basically, a fault is a placeholder for an object or array. If we access
the fault, it fires, and Core Data uses lazy initialization to instantiate an
actual copy of the object. Most of the time this occurs transparently behind
the scenes. The NSFetchRequest class includes a number of methods to
manage whether the request returns faults or objects, how many objects it
returns, and whether any of the objects’ relationships are also prefetched.
While faults help us save memory by letting us limit the number of
objects we need to load, firing faults can be inefficient, particularly if we
fire a number of faults in series. If we know we’re going to need a large
number of faulted objects, it is better to batch fire all the faults or prefetch
all the objects.
To batch fire a number of faults, we just need to create a fetch request to
load those objects. Of course, this means that all our faults must be of the
same entity type. Simply build an array containing the faulted relationships,
and then build a predicate using the IN operator as shown here:

--- Page 553 ---
Click here to view code image
NSArray* faults =@[fault1, fault2, fault3];
NSPredicate* predicate =
[NSPredicate predicateWithFormat:@"self IN %@", faults];
Alternatively, we can use NSFetchRequest’s
setRelationshipKeyPathsForPrefetching: method. This lets
us set an array of key paths. All the relationships represented by those key
paths are also instantiated as full objects when the fetch is executed. This
lets us prefetch objects that we know we are going to need.
We have to be careful with this, however. It is easy to accidentally grab
more memory than we originally intended. As always, it’s a good idea to
profile our code. Looking at actual performance numbers will help us find
the right balance between runtime performance and memory usage.
We can also reduce memory overhead by refaulting individual objects. To
do this, call the managed object context’s
refreshObject:mergeChanges: method. If the mergeChanges:
flag is set to NO, then the object is converted back into a fault, and all
pending changes are lost. In addition, all of the object’s relationships are
released—possibly trimming them from the in-memory object graph as
well.
Using SQLite Stores to Reduce Memory Usage
Remember that for SQLite stores, predicates and sort descriptors
are translated into SQL and executed in the database. While this
can be a bit of a pain, it also means we can filter and sort based
on relationships, but those relationships are still returned as
faults. We never have to instantiate the corresponding managed
objects into memory.
If we wanted to perform the same sorting or filtering in
Objective-C, we would need to instantiate all those relationships
as well—and then execute the sort descriptors and predicates.
This is just one of the ways an SQLite-based store helps improve
performance and reduces our application’s memory footprint.

--- Page 554 ---
Faulting is just one of many differences between SQLite and other stores.
With non-SQLite stores (and when working with NSArrays or other
collections), the system executes both predicates and search descriptors in
Objective-C. This means we have full access to NSStrings comparison
methods. We can even incorporate our own Objective-C code by providing
a custom selector or NSComparator block for our sort descriptor or by
creating a predicate using the predicateWithBlock: method.
When using SQLite stores, however, the predicates and sort descriptors
are translated into SQL and executed by the database. We cannot use
predicates or sort descriptors that incorporate custom Objective-C code.
SQLite supports only the following NSString sort selectors: compare:,
caseInsensitiveCompare:, localizedCompare:,
localizedCaseInsensitiveCompare:, and
localizedStandardCompare:. Finally, key paths in predicates can
include only a single to-many relationship. But we can string together any
number of to-one relationships and attributes with the to-many relationship
(Table 7.2).
TABLE 7.2 Sample Key Path Patterns
Remember that if we need additional features, we can always perform a
more general fetch request and then execute the custom sorting and filtering
on the resulting array. This wastes memory, but sometimes you just gotta do
what you gotta do.

--- Page 555 ---
 Note
I lied. There is one other type of persistent store, the custom
incremental stores. This lets us build our own stores. We
create a subclass of NSIncrementalStore and override
methods to support data access. This lets us build Core Data
wrappers to data storage technology of our choice. It can
provide a slick way to connect Core Data to a web service.
Data Protection
Persistent stores encrypt the data on disk. The persistent stores support a
range of encryption options.
 NSFileProtectionNone: Turns off encryption.
 NSFileProtectionComplete: Provides the tightest security.
The files can be accessed only after the device is authenticated and as
long as the device is unlocked. Unfortunately, this can prevent our app
from accessing the data while operating in the background.
 NSFileProtectionCompleteUnlessOpen: Prevents access
to files unless the device is authenticated and unlocked. Our
application can continue to access any open files while locked;
however, we cannot open new files.
NSFileProtectionCompleteUntilFirstUserAuthenti
cation: Prevents access to files while the device is booting and until
the user authenticates with her password. However, once the user
authenticates, the files remain accessible, even if the device is later
locked.
Core Data will use
NSFileProtectionCompleteUntilFirstUserAuthenticati
on by default. We can change the protection level by assigning a value to
the NSPersistentStoreFileProtectionKey when configuring
our persistent store.

--- Page 556 ---
UIManagedDocument
UIManagedDocument is a concrete subclass of UIDocument that is
specifically designed for managing Core Data. UIManagedDocument
greatly simplifies the setup of a Core Data model. It will automatically
merge all model objects in the application bundle and then use the
combined model to create and manage our complete Core Data stack. By
default, this stack includes an SQLite-based persistent store, a persistent
store coordinator, and a two-layer managed object context.
The two-level context helps support asynchronous background saves.
The child layer uses main queue concurrency, letting us interact with this
context directly on the main thread. UIManagedDocument monitors
changes made to this context and automatically saves the changes at a
convenient point during the application’s run cycle.
When it decides to save changes, it starts by making a snapshot of the
changes, by simply saving the child context. This pushes the current batch
of changes up to the parent context. Then, the document saves the parent
context on a private background queue. This actually saves the changes to
disk.
Much of the time, we can use UIManagedDocument without further
subclassing. We simply instantiate a new UIManagedDocument object
and then set the options for the persistent store. Finally, we call
openWithCompletionHandler: to open an existing document, or we
call saveToURL:forSaveOperation:completionHandler: to
create a new document. We will also want to listen for the document state
change notifications.
We can subclass UIManagedDocument to further modify its default
behaviors. For example, we can change the name of the persistent store in
our document package. We can change the type of persistent store or
modify how the document models or stores are created. We can even enable
support for saving and loading data from outside Core Data.
Apple recommends using UIManagedDocument for all document-
style Core Data applications. These are applications that can save or load
multiple Core Data documents.
I actually recommend using UIManagedDocument for all Core Data
applications, library- and document-style alike. It simplifies creating the

--- Page 557 ---
Core Data stack, and I like the automatic background saves. Furthermore,
as noted earlier, Xcode’s Core Data application templates still use
somewhat outdated code to set up and manage the Core Data stack.
UIManagedDocument provides a nice, concise alternative to the default
templates.
Core Data Performance
Core Data is a mature, efficient object graph management framework. Its
classes have been highly optimized. For example, NSManagedObject
instances use reflection to examine their internal data. The managed object
then leverages this information to optimize access to this data. Therefore,
accessing values from an NSManagedObject is often faster than
comparable accessors on generic Objective-C objects.
SQLite-based persistent stores help us minimize the number of objects
held in active memory, letting us fetch and hold only the objects we need.
This is especially important for iOS applications, since memory
management remains one of our key concerns.
Still, there are some key points to remember to avoid poor performance.
Fetch Requests
Fetch requests are expensive. They start by accessing the data from the
persistent store. Then they merge this data with the existing data in the
managed object context. Most of the time, we want to reduce the total
number of fetches. In general, this means combining groups of smaller
fetches into a single larger fetch.
However, there are times when we want to quickly return a small subset
of the data and then fill in the rest while the system is idle. We might do
this, for example, when filling in a table view.
We can restrict the number of objects loaded into memory by setting
either setFetchLimit: or setFetchBatchSize:. In both cases, the
full fetch is calculated, and all the other objects are returned as faults. When
calling setFetchLimit:, we can manually load the remaining objects
by calling setFetchOffset: to the first fault and then setting the fetch
limit to 0. A second fetch will then grab the remaining objects.
Setting the batch size, on the other hand, returns a proxy array that
automatically faults new batches as needed. Each time it performs a fetch, it

--- Page 558 ---
grabs another batch-sized group of objects.
Faulting
When a fault fires, it acts like a fetch request, except only a single object is
returned. This becomes very expensive if we accidentally iterate over an
array of faults, firing each one individually. Instead, we need to batch fault
or prefetch our data to reduce the total number of trips to the persistent store
(see “Persistent Stores” for more information).
Note that we can safely call the following methods on a fault without
causing it to fire: isEqual:, hash, superclass, class, self,
zone, isProxy, isKindOfClass:, isMemberOfClass:,
conformsToProtocol:, respondsToSelector:,
description, managedObjectContext, entity, objectID,
isInserted, isUpdated, isDeleted, and isFault.
Among other things, this means we can freely store faults into
collections. However, we must treat these collections carefully. It is easy to
accidentally trigger faults when calling the collection’s methods. Anything
that accesses the data stored in the collection or calls valueForKey: on
the collection’s objects will trigger faults—most likely triggering all the
faults in the entire array.
Reducing Memory Overhead
In general, unless we have a good reason to do otherwise, we should always
use an SQLite-based store. We should also avoid loading more objects into
memory than is absolutely necessary. I also recommend saving changes as
we go—rather than letting unsaved changes accumulate in the managed
object context. This also helps free up memory and can help avoid problems
with overly long save times.
By default, the Managed Object Context retains only the objects that
have unsaved changes. All other objects have weak references. This means
that just because we fetch an object doesn’t mean the object will stick
around. We need to make sure some other part of our application has a
strong reference to the object, if we want it to stay in memory. For example,
an NSFetchedResultsController will keep a strong reference to
the objects it has fetched.

--- Page 559 ---
Managed objects also create strong references to all the objects in their
relationships. Unfortunately, this can easily create retain cycles, which will
prevent objects from being released from memory. If we find that we’re
unexpectedly accumulating a large number of objects in memory, we can
break these cycles by refaulting the objects.
We can manually refault objects by calling the context’s
refreshObject:mergeChanges: method. We can also clear the
entire managed object context by calling its reset method.
 Note
Calling reset on the managed object context will invalidate
any objects currently in the context. Be sure to dispose of all
references we have to these objects before resetting.
Accidentally holding onto these references will produce
dangling pointers, leading to errors that are bizarre,
intermittent, and otherwise difficult to debug.
Large Data Objects
Adding large binary objects (that is, images, sounds, videos, and so on) to a
persistent store can severely affect performance. Here we get into an area
that’s more art than science. How large is large? Well, the answer really
depends on how our application uses the data. If we’re loading only one or
two objects into memory at a time, then large attributes may not be a
problem. If we’re loading hundreds or thousands, we really need to think
things through.
In general there are three approaches. We can store the object directly in
the Core Data store as an attribute. This is usually recommended only for
small binary objects.
Next, we can create a separate entity for the data and refer to it using a
to-one relationship. This can be particularly helpful if the binary data isn’t
always used. When our object is fetched, the to-one relationship will be a
fault. Core Data won’t load the binary data unless we actually need it. This
is recommended for modestly sized data objects.

--- Page 560 ---
Finally, we can store the data object directly in the device’s file system
and save the path in the database. We then manually load the data when
necessary. This is recommended for the largest objects.
As a rule of thumb, if your object is measured in kilobytes, it’s probably
modest; if it’s measured in megabytes, it’s large. However, this is an area
where we definitely want performance testing. Just remember, the end users
often use applications in unexpected ways. Don’t be surprised when they
add 100,000 entities to the persistent store or try to load a 10MB text file.
Try to test these extremes, if possible.
Fortunately, Core Data can help simplify this. Binary data attributes now
have an Allows External Storage checkbox. Simply select this when
configuring the attribute. The system will heuristically decide whether to
store our binary data directly in the database or to simply store a URL and
load the file as needed. All of this is transparently handled behind the
scenes. There is, however, one small restriction: Once external storage is
enabled, we cannot use the binary data in our fetch request’s predicate.
Tools
Performance testing is covered in more detail in the “Other Tools of the
Trade” bonus chapter, which can be found at
www.freelancemadscience.com/creating-ios-7-apps-
bonus-chap/. However, it’s worth noting that Instruments has a number
of tools to help troubleshoot Core Data performance issues. These include
instruments to track Core Data fetches, saves, faults, and cache misses. We
will want to use these in conjunction with the regular allocations, leaks, and
time profile when testing our application.
As always, we should focus on getting the application working properly
first and then try to optimize the code based on actual performance data.
Premature optimization often wastes time without producing any tangible
results.

--- Page 561 ---
iCloud Support
Core Data provides easy integration with iCloud. The iCloud support
focuses on managing many of the details that were dealt with in Chapter 6.
If we’re using a single centralized Core Data store—what the
documentation refers to as a library-style application—then setup is simple:
Set a single option when creating the persistent store coordinator and then
listen and respond to a few notifications, and we’re done. Everything else is
handled automatically. There’s no need to use NSMetadataQuery to
search for the file, Core Data will track the database’s location for us. Core
Data will also merge our conflicts automatically. We won’t even need to tell
the application how to save and load our data. Core Data handles it all.
 Note
If our application lets users save multiple documents and
each document is its own iCloud store, things get a tad bit
more difficult. We will need NSMetadataQuery to search
for DocumentMetadata.plist. This file will be inside
each document package. We can then use
NSPersistentStoreUbiquitousContentNameKey
to request the content name for our store—and then use that
value to open the store.
When using Core Data with SQLite stores, each application manages its
own local database, and the database is never uploaded into iCloud storage.
Instead, each database saves transaction log files and uploads the log files.
Other copies of the application can then identify and download these log
files, using them to update their local database. This also means the file is
only uploading deltas—the differences between the files on a per-entry
basis. This greatly minimizes the amount of data that Core Data transmits
between the app and iCloud.
iCloud also uses three-way merges to automatically resolve conflicts on a
per-entry basis. Here, the system compares both of the conflicting copies
with the original. This allows for a much more accurate and autonomous
merging.

--- Page 562 ---
For example, look at the two-way merge we implemented in Chapter 6.
Imagine a case where a WeightEntry object is present in version A but
missing from version B. Our two-way merge had no way of telling whether
this entry had been added to A or deleted from B. So, we erred on the side
of caution, always choosing to keep the mismatched entry.
A three-way merge, on the other hand, can positively identify whether the
entry had been added or deleted. This means it can take the proper steps
when merging. If the object had been added to A, it should be included in
the merged version. If it had been deleted from B, it should be removed.
Core Data also manages our data’s versions for us. It will only sync data
between apps running the same model version. That means, if we change
our data model in an app update, users won’t be able to sync until they
update all their devices. While that’s a little inconvenient, it’s actually much
better than the alternative—which is having our devices pass two different
versions of the data back and forth.
Setting Up iCloud Syncing
To set up a centralized Core Data store, we simply set the
NSPersistentStoreUbiquitousContentNameKey. This is
roughly equivalent to the store’s file name. Each store, for each application,
must have its own, unique name.
Next, we need to listen to the following notifications:
NSPersistentStoreCoordinatorStoresWillChangeNotifi
cation,
NSPersistentStoreCoordinatorStoresDidChangeNotific
ation, and
NSPersistentStoreDidImportUbiquitousContentChanges
Notification.
NSPersistentStoreCoordinatorStoresWillChangeNotif
ication is sent when the user logs out of iCloud, disables iCloud
Document Storage, or logs in as a different user. At this point, we still have
access to the old persistent store—but it is going away soon. We must save
any changes and reset our managed object contexts.
Note that these saves are stored locally. We no longer have access to the
Ubiquity Container, so they cannot be synced. However, the next time the
account becomes available, they will be transferred and synced as normal.

--- Page 563 ---
Also, this notification is sent on a background thread, and everything we
do must be done synchronously to guarantee that we will still have access to
our old persistent store. The store will be deallocated once this method
returns.
NSPersistentStoreCoordinatorStoresDidChangeNotifi
cation is sent once the new store is available. We can use this method to
update our user interface, if necessary.
Finally,
NSPersistentStoreDidImportUbiquitousContentChanges
Notification is sent after importing updates from iCloud. We need to
update our managed object context so that it has a current copy of the
correct data.
iCloud and the Fallback Store
Creating a persistent store and linking it to the Ubiquity Container can take
a considerable amount of time. As we saw in the previous chapter, access to
the Ubiquity Container could be blocked temporarily. In addition, the
system will try to connect to the iCloud servers and make sure everything is
in a valid state before setting up the final, iCloud store.
To solve this problem, iOS 7 will start by creating a fallback store. This is
a purely local store that the user can interact with while the iCloud store is
being set up. Then, once the Ubiquity Container is ready, it will
automatically switch to the iCloud store.
You may recognize this design pattern. It’s the same basic pattern that we
used (some might say, stole) in the previous chapter. However, Core Data is
able to integrate and manage things much more effectively under the hood.
For example, Core Data automatically manages the user’s ID for us. It
will create a separate fallback and iCloud store pair for each ID.
Furthermore, if the user isn’t logged into iCloud or if document storage is
disabled, it will use a default “local” ID. We no longer need to worry about
checking and tracking the IDs ourselves.
The fallback store is used only the first time the application is launched
and in response to changes to the user ID. Otherwise, the iCloud store will
open immediately.

--- Page 564 ---
 Note
The iCloud store is a local SQLite database saved inside our
application’s sandbox. Only the transaction logs get synced
to the Ubiquity Container. Unfortunately, this approach is
considerably different from the recommended best practices
for previous versions of iOS. For example, in iOS 6, Apple’s
documentation recommended saving the SQLite store inside
a .nosync directory in our Ubiquity Container. You may
still see this recommendation in online tutorials, and even in
Apple’s documentation. However, unless you are explicitly
supporting iOS 6, it is no longer recommended. Instead, we
should just let Core Data manage both the fallback and the
iCloud store for us.
The first time we run the application on a device, we will see the
following:
1. The Store Did Change notification is sent, indicating that our fallback
store is available and ready to use.
2. The system will print a message to the console. It will look
something like the following:
Click here to view code image
-[PFUbiquitySwitchboardEntryMetadata setUseLocalStorage:]
(754): CoreData: Ubiquity:  mobile~C9C8554A-BD44-43C3-AC54-
603046EF0162:com~freelancemadscience~HealthBeat
Using local storage: 1
The most important part of the message is the last line. Using
local storage: 1 means we’re currently running on the
fallback store.
3. The system will set up the iCloud store in the background. This can
take several minutes, especially if the system has a lot of cleanup
work to do.
4. The persistent store coordinator sends a Store Will Change
notification, letting us know we need to save all the changes to our
fallback store.

--- Page 565 ---
5. The coordinator sends a Store Did Change notification, letting us
know we can update our UI with the complete contents of our new
iCloud store.
6. Finally, the system will print another message to the console. This
time it will say Using local storage: 0, indicating that we
are now running on the iCloud store.
The next time the application launches, we will just get a single Store
Did Change notification, followed by the two log messages to the console,
one right after the other. However, if the user logs out, disables iCloud
Document Storage, or logs into a different account, we will see the
following:
1. The system prints Using local storage: 1, indicating that
we’re back on our fallback store.
2. We get a Store Will Change notification, letting us save changes to
the fallback store.
3. We get a Store Did Change notification, letting us know the old store
is gone.
4. Then the system sets up our new store. If iCloud is not available, we
will simply get a second Store Did Change notification, and we’re up
and running on a local store. If iCloud is available, we go through the
entire first launch procedure again (setting up a fallback store and
then switching to the iCloud store).
iCloud Limitations
Now for the bad news. Using Core Data on iCloud imposes the following
restrictions:
 No support for ordered relationships.
 We cannot use mapping models to migrate our schema. Lightweight
migration is still OK.
 When creating a new store, we should not populate it with a
preexisting database file. If we need to seed some initial data, we
should either programmatically create the data in code or use
NSPersistentStoreCoordinator’s
migratePersistentStore:toURL:options:withType:
error: to move the data from an existing store to our iCloud store.

--- Page 566 ---
iCloud’s Reliability
Over the past two years, iCloud has received a lot of bad press in the Apple
developer community. Most of this has focused on using iCloud to sync
Core Data documents.
One of the biggest problems has been the system’s opacity. It’s hard to
tell what’s going on behind the scenes. As a result, when things don’t work
as expected, it’s difficult to determine whether the problem is developer
error or an actual bug in the framework. Worse yet, the more complex the
data, the more likely the developers were to run into suspicious problems.
However, over the last few years Apple’s engineers have worked hard to
improve the system. They’ve removed a number of bugs, and they’ve tried
to make the entire system more streamlined and more transparent. All of
this hard work definitely shows.
The iOS 7 implementation of Core Data iCloud syncing is a lot easier to
set up and is much more robust than any of the earlier versions—but does
that mean it’s good enough?
I’ve heard a lot of mixed reviews from developers. Many are using Core
Data and iCloud with no problems. Others are still having issues—though
again, the reports about the issues have been sketchy at best. So, it’s hard to
tell where the problems lie.
We probably won’t know for sure, until big applications with complex
data and hundreds of thousands of users try implementing Core Data’s
iCloud syncing. But, I’m tentatively hopeful.
In my own testing, I’ve found three issues that I’m going to label as bugs.
These are either documentation bugs (meaning, there is an important step
that will solve these issues but that has not been properly documented yet),
or they are honest bugs in the framework. Fortunately, they are all easy to
work around.
 If we use the default merge policy, then deleting an entity will cause a
conflict when that change syncs to other devices. The delete operation
will appear to sync successfully, but the next time the other device
tries to save, we get an error.
 The system often seems to have trouble processing multiple delete
operations at the same time. This is particularly true when it tries to
merge large, conflicting changes that include multiple delete

--- Page 567 ---
operations. Some of the deleted entities will still appear, even after the
sync completes. However, they have been removed from the
persistent store, and they will be properly deleted the next time the
app runs.
 If the user deletes the application and then reloads and relaunches it,
the application will take a long time to switch from the fallback store
to the iCloud store. This, by itself, isn’t a bug. Honestly, it’s a good
sign. It shows that the framework is dealing with all the old
transaction logs in the Ubiquity Container before it tries to create a
new iCloud store. However, when it does create the iCloud store, it
may not update any fetched results controllers correctly. Again,
everything works fine the next time the application launches.
We will look at the workarounds when we implement our Core Data
model for Health Beat. However, I wouldn’t let these “bugs” worry you too
much. While I don’t recommend using Core Data and iCloud when
supporting iOS 5 and I hesitate to use it with iOS 6, it looks like a viable
solution for iOS 7 and beyond. I threw some pretty nasty tests at it, and it
rolled with the punches quite nicely. Of course, it may still require a bit of
tweaking to get everything working just right. But, it’s no longer a lost
cause.
Converting Health Beat
We’re going to replace Health Beat’s current model with one based on Core
Data. At the same time, we will enable iCloud syncing, since it’s relatively
trivial once we have Core Data in place. Fortunately, our
WeightHistoryDocument is fairly modular. We can replace it with
few changes to our code. Most of those changes will be focused in the code
that loads or creates our document in our RootTabBarController.
Ironically, our new code to load or create the document will more closely
resemble the pre-iCloud code from Chapter 5, “Loading and Saving Data.”
The rest of the project will remain largely unchanged. We will have to
listen to a couple of additional notifications, there’s a new header to import,
and one method call is altered—but no significant modifications to existing
code.

--- Page 568 ---
Defining the Managed Object Model
Let’s start by creating our managed object model. In the Project navigator,
Control-click the Model group and select New File.... In the template
chooser, select iOS > Core Data > Data Model. Save it as
HealthBeatModel. This will create a
HealthBeatModel.xcdatamodeld file. Select that file to bring up
Xcode’s manage object model editor (Figure 7.4).
FIGURE 7.4 The manage object model editor
Our data model is very simple. We have only one type of entity, our
WeightEntry. Click the Add Entity button to add a new entry to our
model. This will add an entry named Entity. Double-click its name, and
change the name to WeightEntry.
Now we need to add our attributes. Make sure the editor is using the
Table view (the 
 button). Then click the Add Attribute button. For the
name, type in weightInLbs, and hit the Return key. Then click the type and
set it to Float. Select the weightInLbs attribute, and open the Data
Model Inspector (the 
 tab). In the Attributes settings, uncheck the

--- Page 569 ---
Optional box. In the Validation settings, give it a Minimum of 0 and
uncheck Default. This will force us to provide a valid date before saving.
Next, add a second attribute. This should be named date with the type set
to Date. We will be searching for weight entries based on this property, so
make sure its Indexed attribute is checked and its Optional attribute is not
checked. We also don’t need a default value. Again, this will force us to
provide a valid date before saving.
We need to be a little careful when adding attributes. As soon as we
finish typing the name, the editor will alphabetically reorganize the
attributes. It’s important, therefore, to always hit Tab or Return after we’re
done typing the name. This triggers the reordering. If we simply use the
mouse to click the Type setting without reordering the attributes first, the
editor may reorder them out from under us. Eventually we will end up
modifying the wrong attribute.
That’s it for our entry. It should now match Figure 7.5.
FIGURE 7.5 The completed WeightEntry entity
Next, let’s add a fetch request. We want to fetch all the
WeightEntries between any two given dates, inclusively.
Click and hold the Add Entity button, and then select Add Fetch Request
from the pop-up menu. Name the request EntriesBetweenDates. In the

--- Page 570 ---
fetched request editor, make sure the “Fetch all” setting is set to
WeightEntry (it should be our only choice). Next, make sure the Table
view is selected and the first row says “All of the following are true.”
Click the plus button at the end of the first row. This will add a new row
to our request. Make sure it’s an Expression and type date >= $StartDate
in the text field. Then create a second Expression row and type date <=
$EndDate in its text field. The EntriesBetweenDates request should
now match Figure 7.6.
FIGURE 7.6 The completed EntriesBetweenDates fetch request
Here, we are using predicate syntax expressions. We’re just saying that
our object’s date attribute will be equal to or after the StartDate
variable and our date will be equal to or earlier than the EndDate
variable. When we load this request from the managed object model, we
will need to provide both variables.
And that’s it. We don’t need any configurations or additional entities or
fetched requests. Our model is very simple, just a collection of
WeightEntries.

--- Page 571 ---
Creating a New WeightEntry Class
Now that we have a model, we need to create a new WeightEntry class.
This will be a subclass of NSManagedObject. Let’s start by getting rid
of our old WeightEntry class. However, we don’t want to delete it just
yet. We’ll be scavenging some methods from it.
Instead, in the Project navigator click and hold slightly on
WeightEntry.h’s name. This should select the name and let us edit it.
Change it to WeightEntry_old.h. Do the same thing for
WeightEntry.m. Rename it WeightEntry_old.m. Also, for
WeightEntry_old.m, open the File inspector and uncheck the Target
Membership for Health Beat. That way, the old class will no longer be built
into our application.
Now, let’s generate our new WeightEntry class. Control-click the
Model group and select New File.... Then select iOS > Core Data >
NSManagedObject subclass and click Next. The next page should list all
the models we can select from. We have only one, our
HealthBeatModel. Make sure it is selected and click Next.
In the next page, we have a list of all the available entities. Again, we
have only one choice, our WeightEntry. Check it and click Next.
Now, we have a choice to make. We can either turn the “Use scalar
values for primitive data types” option on or off. If we turn it on, it will
create simple C scalar accessors for many of our attributes. Unfortunately, it
will do this for all the data types that have a C-scalar equivalent, including
Date. That’s not what we want. I wish there was a way to selectively choose
which properties used objects and which used scalar types—but it’s an all-
or-nothing operation.
Fortunately, we can always modify the properties by hand, so let’s just
leave the box unchecked. In my opinion, it’s slightly easier to turn objects
in to scalars. Simply click Create to generate the class.
Now select WeightEntry.h. Our WeightEntry class is now a
subclass of NSObject. It has only two properties, our weightInLbs
and date. Also, for whatever reason, the generated code labels these as
retain, not strong. I suspect this makes the generated code compatible
with both ARC and non-ARC projects. However, I wouldn’t be surprised if
it changed sometime soon.

--- Page 572 ---
We want to tweak these properties slightly. First, we want
weightInLbs to use a C scalar value. Second, we want them both to be
read-only. Modify the code as shown here:
Click here to view code image
@property (nonatomic, readonly) float weightInLbs;
@property (nonatomic, retain, readonly) NSDate * date;
Now, let’s look at WeightEntry.m. The implementation is empty
except for the two @dynamic directives. These tell the compiler that
someone (in this case, Core Data) will provide the accessor methods at
runtime. They basically pat the compiler on its head and tell it not to worry
about the missing accessor methods.
Now, we want to copy over many of the methods from our old
WeightEntry class; however, we have a small problem.
When working with Core Data, we often end up making changes to the
managed object model. When we do, we often need to regenerate our
custom NSManagedObject subclasses. Unfortunately, if we just create
new subclasses, they will overwrite the existing files, deleting any custom
changes that we’ve made.
Alternatively, we can make the modifications to our
NSManagedObject subclass by hand, but this gets tedious and can be
error prone, especially if we have a large number of changes.
The best solution involves creating a class category for our
NSManagedObject subclass and placing our custom methods in that
category. That way, we can freely update the class without touching our
custom code. Yes, we will still need to tweak the properties each time,
modifying the scalars and making them all read-only. However, that’s
relatively minor in comparison.
Let’s create a category for our WeightEntry class. Control-click the
Model group and select iOS > Cocoa Touch > Objective-C category. In the
next sheet, make the Category addons and the “Category on”
WeightEntry.
Create the category and then open WeightEntry+addons.h. Make
sure both WeightEntry.h and WeightUnits.h are imported. Add the
following method declarations to the @interface block.

--- Page 573 ---
Click here to view code image
+ (instancetype)entryWithWeight:(float)weight
                     usingUnits:(WeightUnit)unit
                        forDate:(NSDate *)date
                          inMOC:(NSManagedObjectContext *)moc;
+ (float)convertLbsToKg:(float)lbs;
+ (float)convertKgToLbs:(float)kg;
+ (NSString*)stringForUnit:(WeightUnit)unit;
+ (NSString*)stringForWeight:(float)weight ofUnit:
(WeightUnit)unit;
+ (NSString*)stringForWeightInLbs:(float)weight inUnit:
(WeightUnit)unit;
- (float)weightInUnit:(WeightUnit)unit;
- (NSString*)stringForWeightInUnit:(WeightUnit)unit;
We’re adding an extra argument to entryWithWeight..., but other
than that, all of these can be copied directly from WeightEntry_old.h.
 Note
It looks like we’re breaking the rules here. I previously
recommended that we always prefix all the methods in a
category; however, that really applies only to categories on
classes that we don’t control. Here, we’re creating a category
on our own class, so we know exactly what methods it
defines, including all its private methods. We also know that
there are no other categories on this class. Bottom line,
defining methods in this category is no different from
defining the methods directly in WeightEntry itself, so
there’s no need to worry about prefixing these methods.
Now, let’s switch to WeightEntry+addons.m. We’re going to start
by creating a private category that will redeclare our properties as read-
write. Add the following code just after the #import directive:
Click here to view code image
@interface WeightEntry(private)
@property (nonatomic, assign, readwrite) float weightInLbs;

--- Page 574 ---
@property (nonatomic, retain, readwrite) NSDate * date;
@end
We’re naming this category private, indicating that it’s a collection of
private methods. Note that we never actually implement any of these
accessors. Core Data is already going to create them for us. This category
simply declares them so that the compiler won’t give us warnings when we
try to use these properties.
Next, copy our constants from WeightEntry_old.m. Place them
after the private category but before the @implementation block.
Click here to view code image
static const float LBS_PER_KG = 2.20462262f;
static NSNumberFormatter* formatter;
static NSString * const WeightEntryWeightInLbsKey =
@"WeightEntryWeightInLbsKey";
static NSString * const WeightEntryDateKey =
@"WeightEntryDateKey";
Now, at the top of the @implementation block, let’s set up our
number formatter. In our old code, we did this in the initialize
method. However, we shouldn’t override initialize in a category. We
should use load instead.
Click here to view code image
+ (void)load
{
    @autoreleasepool {
        if (self == [WeightEntry class])
        {
            formatter = [[NSNumberFormatter alloc] init];
            [formatter
setNumberStyle:NSNumberFormatterDecimalStyle];
            [formatter setMinimum:[NSNumber
numberWithFloat:0.0]];
            [formatter setMaximumFractionDigits:2];
        }
    }
}
As mentioned earlier, load runs very early—before our application is
properly set up. Therefore, we need to provide our own autorelease pool.
See the “Formatting Weight Strings” section of Chapter 3, “Developing

--- Page 575 ---
Views and View Controllers,” for more information on load and
initialize.
Next, let’s implement our new
entryWithWeight:usingUnits:forDate:inMOC: method just
after our load.
Click here to view code image
+ (instancetype)entryWithWeight:(float)weight
                     usingUnits:(WeightUnit)unit
                        forDate:(NSDate *)date
                          inMOC:(NSManagedObjectContext *)moc
{
    NSEntityDescription *description =
    [NSEntityDescription entityForName:NSStringFromClass(self)
                inManagedObjectContext:moc];
    
    WeightEntry *entry = [[WeightEntry alloc]
initWithEntity:description
                              insertIntoManagedObjectContext:moc
];
    
    if (unit == LBS)
    {
        entry.weightInLbs = weight;
    }
    else
    {
        entry.weightInLbs = [self convertKgToLbs:weight];
    }
    
    entry.date = date;
    
    return entry;
}
Creating a new NSManagedObject (or subclass) is somewhat
complex. First, we need to get a copy of our entity’s description. The entity
descriptions store the name, properties, and classes of each entity in our
managed object model.
We can request the description given the class name and a managed
object context. While we could hard-code the class name as an NSString,
here we’re dynamically generating the class name. This is basically the
same trick we saw in the main() function in Chapter 1, “Hello, iOS.” It’s

--- Page 576 ---
a little more typing, but it also has a major advantage. If we refactor our
code and change our class’s name, this will automatically pick up on that
change.
Once we have the description, we can alloc and init the class using
initWithEntity:insertIntoManagedObjectContext:. This
will create the WeightEntry object and place it in the provided managed
object context. This will also automatically create an undo event, which will
trigger UIManagedDocument’s automatic save.
Once we’ve created our WeightEntry, we set its weightInLbs and
date properties, converting the weight argument if necessary.
That’s it for new code. Now we just need to copy over the
implementation for all the following methods: convertLbsToKg:,
convertKgToLbs:, stringForUnit:,
stringForWeight:ofUnit:,
stringforWeightInLbs:inUnit:, weightInUnit:, and
stringForWeightInUnit:.
 Note
Do not copy over any of the init... methods, the
NSCoding methods or description, isEqual:, or
hash. We need to use NSManagedObject’s init
methods to properly initialize our class. Also, Core Data will
handle saving and loading the entities for us, and we are
specifically forbidden from overriding isEqual: or hash
and strongly discouraged from overriding description.
That’s it. Our new WeightEntry is complete. Of course, we still have
a ton of errors and warnings. Let’s fix a few of those before we move on.
First, delete WeightEntry_old.h and WeightEntry_old.m and
then clean and build the application. Then, at the top of
HistoryTableViewController.m,
EntryDetailViewController.m,
AddEntryViewController.m, and GraphView.m, import
WeightEntry+addons.h.

--- Page 577 ---
Now, if we build the application again, we should have only a single
error. The call to entryWithWeight... in
HistoryTableViewController’s addEntrySaved: method.
Unfortunately, before we can fix that, we need to replace our
WeightHistoryDocument class.
Creating a New WeightHistoryDocument Class
Again, let’s start by renaming our WeightHistoryDocument to
WeightHistoryDocument_old. Be sure to change both the .h and
.m files and then remove the .m file from the target, so it won’t get
compiled into our build.
Next, create a new Objective-C class in Model group. This class should
be named WeightHistoryDocument (no surprise there). This time, make it
a subclass of UIManagedDocument.
Since our WeightHistoryDocument is now a
UIManagedDocument, it will create the complete Core Data stack for us.
We can access the stack through UIManageDocument’s
managedObjectContext and managedObjectModel properties.
There’s still a lot of work to do, though. We have a lot of custom code to
go through before we successfully switch our model over to Core Data.
Fortunately, most of the code is simple, and a lot can be copied from our old
document class. However, let’s break it up into chunks, starting with the
header file.
Header File
We need to copy most of the old .h file over to the new .h file. In fact, it’s
probably easiest to copy everything and then make the following changes:
 Delete the CallbackHandler typedef.
 Change UIDocument to UIManagedDocument in the
@interface line.
 Delete the migrateToCloud: method declaration.
 Delete the setupCloudContainer: method declaration.
 Add a
WeightHistoryDocumentRefreshAllNotification
string constant.

--- Page 578 ---
 Replace the addEntry: method declaration with
addEntryWithWeightInLbs:units:date:.
The finished header file should look like this:
Click here to view code image
#import <UIKit/UIKit.h>
#import "WeightUnits.h"
@class WeightEntry;
@protocol WeightHistoryDocumentSubscriber;
typedef void (^EntryEnumeratorBlock) (WeightEntry *entry);
// Use to register for update notifications
extern NSString * const
WeightHistoryDocumentBeginChangesNotification;
extern NSString * const
WeightHistoryDocumentInsertWeightEntryNotification;
extern NSString * const
WeightHistoryDocumentDeleteWeightEntryNotification;
extern NSString * const
WeightHistoryDocumentChangesCompleteNotification;
extern NSString * const
WeightHistoryDocumentRefreshAllNotification;
// Use to access data in the notifications
extern NSString * const
WeightHistoryDocumentNotificationIndexPathKey;
@interface WeightHistoryDocument : UIManagedDocument
@property (nonatomic, readonly) NSUInteger count;
- (WeightEntry *)entryAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath;
- (NSIndexPath *)indexPathForEntry:(WeightEntry *)weightEntry;
- (void)addEntryWithWeightInLbs:(float)weightInLbs
                          units:(WeightUnit)units
                           date:(NSDate *)date;
- (void)deleteEntryAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath;
- (void)enumerateEntriesAscending:(BOOL)ascending
                        withBlock:(EntryEnumeratorBlock)block;
- (NSArray*)weightEntriesAfter:(NSDate *)startDate
                        before:(NSDate *)endDate;
- (NSArray *)allEntries;

--- Page 579 ---
- (void)addSubscriber:(id
<WeightHistoryDocumentSubscriber>)subscriber;
- (void)removeSubscriber:(id
<WeightHistoryDocumentSubscriber>)subscriber;
+ (NSURL *)localFileURL;
+ (BOOL)localFileExists;
@end
@protocol WeightHistoryDocumentSubscriber <NSObject>
- (void)weightHistoryDocument:(WeightHistoryDocument *)document
               stateDidChange:(UIDocumentState)state;
@end
The Implementation File
Now, let’s switch to WeightHistoryDocument.m. We’re going to
copy over most of the imports and the constant declarations; however, we
are making a few changes.
 We need to import WeightEntry+addons.h.
 We need to define our
WeightHistoryDocumentRefreshAllNotification
constant.
 We need to change our file name to
WeightHistoryCoreDataDocument. This isn’t strictly
necessary, but it will help prevent odd bugs if our new code tries to
open an old file.
 We need to define a new WeightHistoryDocumentCountKey
constant.
 We need to create a new CompletionHandler typedef.
 Finally, we can delete our
WeightHistoryDocumentBackgroundQueue static variable.
 The final code is shown here:
Click here to view code image
#import "WeightHistoryDocument.h"
#import "WeightEntry.h"
#import "WeightEntry+addons.h"
#import "CloudManager.h"

--- Page 580 ---
#import <CoreData/CoreData.h>
// Use to register for update notifications
NSString * const WeightHistoryDocumentBeginChangesNotification =
@"WeightHistoryDocumentBeginChangesNotification";
NSString * const
WeightHistoryDocumentInsertWeightEntryNotification =
@"WeightHistoryDocumentInsertWeightEntryNotification";
NSString * const
WeightHistoryDocumentDeleteWeightEntryNotification =
@"WeightHistoryDocumentDeleteWeightEntryNotification";
NSString * const
WeightHistoryDocumentChangesCompleteNotification =
@"WeightHistoryDocumentChangesCompleteNotification";
// Use to access data in the notifications
NSString * const WeightHistoryDocumentNotificationIndexPathKey =
@"WeightHistoryDocumentNotificationIndexPathKey";
NSString * const WeightHistoryDocumentRefreshAllNotification =
@"WeightHistoryDocumentRefreshAllNotification";
// Used to create our file URLs
static NSString * const WeightHistoryDocumentFileName =
@"WeightHistoryCoreDataDocument";
static NSString * const WeightHistoryDocumentCountKey =
@"count";
typedef void (^CompletionHandler) (void);
Next, we need to add a class extension to hold our private data. Most of
this is new.
Click here to view code image
@interface WeightHistoryDocument ()
<NSFetchedResultsControllerDelegate>
@property (strong,nonatomic) NSFetchedResultsController
*resultsController;
@property (strong, nonatomic)NSHashTable *subscribers;
@property (strong, nonatomic) id documentStateObserver;
@property (strong, nonatomic) id storeWillChangeObserver;
@property (strong, nonatomic) id storeDidChangeObserver;
@property (strong, nonatomic) id iCloudUpdateObserver;
@end

--- Page 581 ---
Here, we’re adopting the
NSFetchedResultsControllerDelegate. Then we declare a
resultsController property to hold an
NSFetchedResultsController. This will fetch, sort, and monitor all
of our WeightEntries and notify us of any changes to the fetched
objects.
We can copy the subscribers and documentStateObserver
properties directly from our old class. However, we do need to add three
new observers: storeWillChangeObserver,
storeDidChangeObserver, and iCloudUpdateObserver.
Init and Dealloc Methods
With the preliminary work done, we can begin implementing methods.
Let’s start with our init and dealloc methods. As always, these go
inside the @implementation block.
Click here to view code image
@implementation WeightHistoryDocument
- (id)initWithFileURL:(NSURL *)url
{
    self = [super initWithFileURL:url];
    if (self) {
        _subscribers = [NSHashTable hashTableWithOptions:
                        NSHashTableWeakMemory];
        
        [self setupNotifications];
    }
    return self;
}
- (void)dealloc
{
    [self removeNotifications];
}
In initWithFileURL:, we set up our subscribers’ hash table
and then call setupNotifications. In dealloc, we just call
removeNotifications.
Accessor Methods
Now, let’s add a couple of custom accessor methods, starting with our
count virtual property.

--- Page 582 ---
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Accessor Methods
- (NSUInteger)count
{
    NSArray *sections = self.resultsController.sections;
    id<NSFetchedResultsSectionInfo> sectionInfo = sections[0];
    return [sectionInfo numberOfObjects];
}
We start by grabbing the sections array from our results controller. This
array contains opaque objects that adopt the
NSFetchedResultsSectionInfo protocol. We should have one
section info object per section in our results controller, and since we are not
partitioning our data into multiple sections, there should be only one in this
array.
We grab that object out of the array and then call its
numberOfObjects method. This gives us the total number of entities in
that section.
Unlike before, our count property is not directly dependent upon any
other properties. It’s loosely dependent upon the results controller; however,
instead of trying to specify a reasonable set of dependent key paths, let’s
just manually call the KVO update methods whenever our underlying data
changes.
Next, let’s create a custom getter for our resultsController
property.
Click here to view code image
- (NSFetchedResultsController *)resultsController
{
    if (_resultsController == nil)
    {
        [self setupResultsController];
    }
    return _resultsController;
}
Here we use lazy initialization to create our results controller. When the
getter is called, we check to see whether we have a valid
resultsController. If we don’t, then we call
setupResultsController to create one. Then we return our results
controller.

--- Page 583 ---
This is conceptually similar to the singleton class code we used in the
previous chapter. However, this version is a little simpler, since we’re not
using dispatch_once(). This has two important implications for our
code. First, we can reset our resultsController by calling
self.resultsController = nil. This will clear out the old results
controller, and the next time we try to access this property, our code will
create a new controller for us. Second, our lazy initialization code is no
longer thread safe. But, that’s OK. We declared our
resultsController property as nonatomic, so it doesn’t have to be
thread safe.
Public Methods
Now let’s start implementing our public methods. Let me tell you a little
secret. When I designed WeightHistoryDocument’s public interface, I
based much of it on the NSFetchedResultsController. This means
many of our public methods will be thin wrappers around our
resultsController property.
NSFetchedResultsController was clearly designed to work
hand-in-hand with a UITableViewController. In fact, people often
make the NSFetchedResultsController a property of their
UITableViewController subclass and let the table view
communicate directly with the fetched results. This works well, especially
since the fetched results controller supports shared caches, so we could
have multiple view controllers, each with their own fetched results
controller, all looking at the same data, without requiring separate fetch
requests.
However, I like pulling the fetched results controller back inside my
model. I feel that adding it directly to the view controller tightly binds that
view controller to Core Data. Putting the fetched results controller inside
the model encourages a more modular design. This will make it easier to
replace the Core Data model, if something better comes along.
Like all software engineering, this comes at a cost. We have to build a
slightly more complex communication channel between our model and our
view controllers; however, since we’ve already built that in previous
chapters, there’s no reason not to reuse it now.

--- Page 584 ---
Let’s start by implementing our entryAtIndexPath: and
indexPathForEntry: methods.
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Public Methods
- (WeightEntry *)entryAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath
{
    return [self.resultsController objectAtIndexPath:indexPath];
}
- (NSIndexPath *)indexPathForEntry:(WeightEntry *)weightEntry
{
    return [self.resultsController
indexPathForObject:weightEntry];
}
As you can see, these are simply wrappers around the corresponding
NSFetchedResultsController methods.
Our addEntryWithWeightInLbs:units:date: method, on the
other hand, requires a little more effort.
Click here to view code image
- (void)addEntryWithWeightInLbs:(float)weightInLbs
                          units:(WeightUnit)units
                           date:(NSDate *)date
{
    [self willChangeValueForKey:WeightHistoryDocumentCountKey];
    WeightEntry *entry =
    [WeightEntry entryWithWeight:weightInLbs
                      usingUnits:units
                         forDate:date
                           inMOC:self.managedObjectContext];
    [self didChangeValueForKey:WeightHistoryDocumentCountKey];
    
    [self.undoManager setActionName:
     [NSString stringWithFormat:@"Do you want to remove the
%@.",
      entry]];
}
Here, we call the
entryWithWeight:usingUnits:forDate:inMOC: convenience
method that we defined in our WeightHistory class. This returns an
entry object—but we use that object only locally—we never save it or pass
it on to the rest of our application. This is because

--- Page 585 ---
entryWithWeight... also adds the entity to our managed object
context. Our fetched results controller will notice this addition and will
update our user interface.
The rest of the code is simply infrastructure. We bracket the creation of a
new entry with the KVO notification methods. Core Data automatically
adds the undo action, but we still need to set the undo action name for our
previous shake-to-undo code to function properly.
In normal Core Data code, we would also have to save our managed
object context here. However, since we are using a
UIManagedDocument, it will detect the undo action and automatically
save our data for us.
Next, let’s look at deleteEntryAtIndexPath:. Deleting is
similarly simple, and again, most of our code goes to supporting KVO and
our shake-to-undo.
Click here to view code image
- (void)deleteEntryAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath
{
    WeightEntry *entry = [self entryAtIndexPath:indexPath];
    NSManagedObjectContext *moc =self.managedObjectContext;
    __weak WeightHistoryDocument *_self = self;
    
    [moc performBlock:^{
        NSString *undoString =
        [NSString stringWithFormat:
         @"Do you want to restore the %@.", entry];
        
        [_self
willChangeValueForKey:WeightHistoryDocumentCountKey];
        [_self.managedObjectContext deleteObject:entry];
        [_self
didChangeValueForKey:WeightHistoryDocumentCountKey];
        
        [_self.undoManager setActionName:undoString];
    }];
}
We start by grabbing local copies of our entry, our managed object
context, and a weak reference to self. Then we call performBlock: on
our managed object context. This guarantees that the code inside the block
will be called on the context’s queue. The context is on the main thread, and
this method should always be called from the main thread—so this isn’t

--- Page 586 ---
actually required. However, it’s easy to have a notification method called
from a background queue that accidentally triggers other methods
unexpectedly. Better safe than sorry.
We create our undo action name. Next, we delete the entry, bracketing
this call with the proper KVO notification methods. And, finally, we set the
undo action name.
Now, let’s look at enumerateEntriesAscending:withBlock:.
Click here to view code image
- (void)enumerateEntriesAscending:(BOOL)ascending
                        withBlock:(EntryEnumeratorBlock)block
{
    NSUInteger options = 0;
    if (ascending)
    {
        options = NSEnumerationReverse;
    }
    
    [[self allEntries]
     enumerateObjectsWithOptions:options
     usingBlock:^(id obj, NSUInteger idx, BOOL *stop) {
        block(obj);
    }];
}
This is almost the same as our old implementation. The only change is
that we’re calling [self allEntries], not self.weightHistory.
Next, let’s look at weightEntriesAfter:before:. This method
has some serious new code.
Click here to view code image
- (NSArray*)weightEntriesAfter:(NSDate *)startDate before:
(NSDate *)endDate
{
    NSParameterAssert(startDate != nil);
    NSParameterAssert(endDate != nil);
    
    NSDictionary *variables =
    @{@"StartDate":startDate,
      @"EndDate":endDate};
    
    NSFetchRequest *fetchRequest =
    [self.managedObjectModel
     fetchRequestFromTemplateWithName:@"EntriesBetweenDates"
     substitutionVariables:variables];

--- Page 587 ---
    
    NSSortDescriptor *descendingByDate =
    [NSSortDescriptor sortDescriptorWithKey:@"date"
ascending:NO];
    
    fetchRequest.sortDescriptors = @[descendingByDate];
    
    __block NSArray *results;
    NSManagedObjectContext *moc = self.managedObjectContext;
    [moc performBlockAndWait:^{
        NSError *fetchError;
        
        results = [moc executeFetchRequest:fetchRequest
                                     error:&fetchError];
        
        if (!results)
        {
            // We will want more-thorough error checking;
however,
            // at this point, the main cause for errors tends to
be
            // invalid keys in the sort descriptor. Let's fail
fast
            // so we're sure to catch that during development.
            
            [NSException
             raise:NSGenericException
             format:@"An error occurred when performing our
fetch %@",
             [fetchError localizedDescription]];
        }
    }];
    
    return results;
}
This method performs a fetch request, grabbing all the weight entries
between the two dates. We start by getting the EntriesBetweenDates
fetch request from our managed object model. Note that we pass in a
dictionary containing the substitution data for our request. This dictionary’s
keys need to match the variables’ names (without the dollar sign). The
dictionary’s values will be placed into the request, replacing the
corresponding variables.
Next, we create a sort descriptor. Sort descriptors let us sort collections of
objects. We can use them to compare two objects
(compareObject:toObject), to generate sorted copies of an array or

--- Page 588 ---
a set (sortedArrayUsingDescriptors:), or to sort a mutable array
(sortUsingDescriptors:). We also use them to sort the results of a
fetch request.
At their most basic, sort descriptors specify the property to use when
comparing objects and the order (ascending or descending). We can
optionally specify the selector to use when comparing as well. However, by
default, the sort descriptor can compare C scalar data such as BOOL,
NSInteger, or CGFloat. It will also use the compare: selector when
comparing objects. This means it can compare many common objects,
including NSDate, NSString, and NSIndexPath. Still, when we are
comparing strings, we will often want to use a more-specific selector like
caseInsensitiveCompare: or localizedCompare:. The
localized compare methods are particularly important, since they take into
account the current locale’s sorting order for case and diacritics. Also note,
if the objects being sorted do not have the specified property or do not
respond to the specified comparison selector, the sort descriptor will throw
an exception.
By themselves, sort descriptors are somewhat interesting but not life
changing. However, they really start becoming powerful when we begin
combining them. Most of the methods that take sort descriptors actually
take arrays of descriptors. We can provide as many as we want. The system
will apply the first descriptor from the array. If there are any ties, it will
then apply the second descriptor to break those ties. If there are still ties, it
moves on to the third, and so forth. This lets us define complex sort orders
for our objects.
To get back to our fetch request, we want to sort the entries by date in
descending order. The entities returned by a fetch request are unordered by
default. If we want them in a particular order, we need to sort them.
Once our fetch request is ready, we call performBlockAndWait:.
Like performBlock: this guarantees that our block’s code is run on the
context’s queue. However, unlike performBlock: this method runs
synchronously. That is important, since our calling method needs to return
the result of this fetch.
Inside the block, we execute our fetch request and check for errors. If we
find an error, we throw an exception—however, as the comment suggests,
most errors during development are because of misspelled keys. We want

--- Page 589 ---
our code to fail fast, so we can find and fix these mistakes. However, we’ll
probably want to replace this code with more-thorough error checking
during beta testing.
Finally, if everything goes as expected, we return the array of
WeightEntry objects.
 Note
Since our context is on the main queue, all of our fetch
requests will block the main thread. Most of the time, the
request should be fast, so we shouldn’t notice any lag or
delays in our user interface. However, if we start noticing
performance issues, we may want to fine-tune the fetch
request—for example, setting a batch size. Of course, we
should always profile the application before and after making
any changes, just to make sure we’re actually improving
performance. Returning faults usually seems like a good
idea, however, if we end up triggering a number of individual
fetch requests, it could actually hurt performance.
Now let’s get back to something a bit easier:
Click here to view code image
- (NSArray *)allEntries
{
    return self.resultsController.fetchedObjects;
}
Again, this is just a thin wrapper around our
NSFetchedResultsController. Its fetchedObjects property
returns a snapshot of all the objects currently returned by the controller’s
fetch request. Note, however, that this array is not updated as managed
objects are inserted or deleted.
Finally, the addSubscriber:, removeSubscriber:,
localFileURL, and localFileExists methods are copied exactly
from WeightHistoryDocument_old.m. I am including them here as
a reference.

--- Page 590 ---
Click here to view code image
- (void)addSubscriber:
(id<WeightHistoryDocumentSubscriber>)subscriber
{
    [self.subscribers addObject:subscriber];
}
- (void)removeSubscriber:
(id<WeightHistoryDocumentSubscriber>)subscriber
{
    [self.subscribers removeObject:subscriber];
}
#pragma mark - Public Class Methods
+ (NSURL *)localFileURL
{
    NSArray *urls = [[NSFileManager defaultManager]
                     URLsForDirectory:NSDocumentDirectory
                     inDomains:NSUserDomainMask];
    
    NSURL *documentURL = [urls lastObject];
    return [documentURL URLByAppendingPathComponent:
            WeightHistoryDocumentFileName];
}
+ (BOOL)localFileExists
{
    NSFileManager *manager = [NSFileManager defaultManager];
    return [manager fileExistsAtPath:[[self localFileURL]
path]];
}
NSFetchedResultsControllerDelegate Methods
Our WeightHistoryDocument will act as our fetched results
controller’s delegate. This means we will receive updates whenever a
change occurs. However, to receive these updates, we must implement the
corresponding delegate method.
Most of the time, we’re just going to turn around and post our
corresponding notification. Anyone listening to our notification will then be
able to update their state as appropriate.
Let’s start with controllerWillChangeContent: and
controllerDidChangeContent:. These are called before and after
our actual changes. If a large number of changes occur at once (for
example, because of an incoming iCloud sync), Will Change is called,

--- Page 591 ---
followed by each actual change, one at a time, and then Did Change is
called.
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - NSFetchedResultsControllerDelegate methods
- (void)controllerWillChangeContent:
(NSFetchedResultsController *)controller
{
    [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
     postNotificationName:WeightHistoryDocumentBeginChangesNotif
ication
     object:self];
}
- (void)controllerDidChangeContent:
(NSFetchedResultsController *)controller
{
    [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
     postNotificationName:WeightHistoryDocumentChangesCompleteNo
tification
     object:self];
}
In both cases, we simply post our corresponding notification.
Next, let’s implement
controller:didChangeObject:atIndexPath:forChangeTy
pe:newIndexPath:. This method is called once for each object that
changes. It also requires a little more work. We need to determine what type
of change it is, before we can post the correct notification.
Click here to view code image
- (void)controller:(NSFetchedResultsController *)controller
   didChangeObject:(id)anObject
       atIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath
     forChangeType:(NSFetchedResultsChangeType)type
      newIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)newIndexPath
{
    NSNotificationCenter *center = [NSNotificationCenter
defaultCenter];
    
    switch (type) {
        case NSFetchedResultsChangeDelete:
            
            [center
             postNotificationName:
             WeightHistoryDocumentDeleteWeightEntryNotification

--- Page 592 ---
             object:self
             userInfo:@{WeightHistoryDocumentNotificationIndexPa
thKey:
                            indexPath}];
            
            break;
            
        case NSFetchedResultsChangeInsert:
            
            [center
             postNotificationName:
             WeightHistoryDocumentInsertWeightEntryNotification
             object:self
             userInfo:@{WeightHistoryDocumentNotificationIndexPa
thKey:
                            newIndexPath}];
            
            break;
            
        default:
            
            [NSException
             raise:NSGenericException
             format:@"Invalid change type: %@",
             @(type)];
            
            break;
    }
}
Here, we create a switch statement for the different types. There are
actually four different types of changes: insert, delete, move, and update.
However, since our entities are immutable, they cannot change. Also, since
their order is defined by their date property, they cannot move. That means
we need to respond to only two of the four.
In both cases, we post our corresponding notification. However, in these
cases, we also need to pass the index of the object that was inserted or
deleted in the userInfo dictionary.
Just to make things confusing, this method takes two index path
arguments. This is necessary when an object is moving, since we need to
know their original location and their destination. However, for the other
changes, it’s often hard to know which index path to use. I usually can’t
remember from project to project, so I ran a quick test to see. It turns out
that delete uses the old index path while insert uses the new one.

--- Page 593 ---
Private Methods
Now, we just need to implement the private methods that we’ve been
calling in our earlier code. Let’s start with setupNotifications. This
is a long method, but it follows the same basic pattern that we’ve seen
before. First, we gather together all the local variables that we’ll need. Then
we set up each of our notifications.
Most of the notifications are relatively simple. Many of them just call out
to other private methods to do the real work.
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Private Methods
- (void)setupNotifications
{
    NSNotificationCenter *center = [NSNotificationCenter
defaultCenter];
    NSOperationQueue *mainQueue = [NSOperationQueue mainQueue];
    NSManagedObjectContext *moc = self.managedObjectContext;
    NSManagedObjectContext *parent = moc.parentContext;
    
    NSPersistentStoreCoordinator *storeCoordinator =
    [moc persistentStoreCoordinator];
    
    [moc setMergePolicy:NSOverwriteMergePolicy];
    [parent setMergePolicy:NSOverwriteMergePolicy];
    __weak WeightHistoryDocument *_self = self;
    
    self.documentStateObserver =
    [center
     addObserverForName:UIDocumentStateChangedNotification
     object:self
     queue:mainQueue
     usingBlock:^(NSNotification *note) {
         for (id <WeightHistoryDocumentSubscriber> subscriber
              in _self.subscribers)
         {
             [subscriber weightHistoryDocument:_self
                                stateDidChange:_self.documentSta
te];
         }
     }];
    
    self.storeWillChangeObserver =
    [center
     addObserverForName:
     NSPersistentStoreCoordinatorStoresWillChangeNotification

--- Page 594 ---
     object:storeCoordinator
     queue:nil
     usingBlock:^(NSNotification *note) {
         NSLog(@"*** Store Will Change ***");
         [_self resetMocs];
     }];
    
    self.storeDidChangeObserver =
    [center
     addObserverForName:
     NSPersistentStoreCoordinatorStoresDidChangeNotification
     object:storeCoordinator
     queue:mainQueue
     usingBlock:^(NSNotification *note) {
         NSLog(@"*** Store Did Change ***");
         [_self refreshAll];
     }];
    
    self.iCloudUpdateObserver =
    [center
     addObserverForName:
    
NSPersistentStoreDidImportUbiquitousContentChangesNotification
     object:storeCoordinator
     queue:mainQueue
     usingBlock:^(NSNotification *note) {
         NSLog(@"*** Importing Data from iCloud ***");
         NSSet *deleted = note.userInfo[@"deleted"];
         NSUInteger initialCount = [[moc deletedObjects] count];
         [_self updateMOCFromNote:note completionHandler:^{
             if ([deleted count] !=
                 [[moc deletedObjects] count] - initialCount)
             {
                 [_self refreshAll];
             }
         }];
     }];
}
Before we begin looking at the notifications themselves, there are a
couple of lines I want to draw attention to. After we create local variables
for our managed object context and its parent context, we then set both
context’s merge policy to NSOverwriteMergePolicy.
This is important, because it solves one of the three iCloud bugs I
identified earlier. In fact, these lines of code solve what I consider the most
serious of the three bugs.

--- Page 595 ---
As I’m writing this, if we delete an entity on one device and then sync
the change to a second device, the next time the second device saves, it will
throw a merge conflict error. By using the NSOverwriteMergePolicy,
we’re saying that the entities in the context should overwrite the entities in
the persistent store when there’s a conflict. This lets Core Data
automatically resolve these conflicts.
Alternatively, we could use
NSMergeByPropertyObjectTrumpMergePolicy, which will
overwrite the store on a property-by-property basis. However, since our
objects are all immutable, there’s no reason to use fine-grained conflict
resolution. Merging object-by-object is sufficient.
Next, let’s look at the notifications.
 UIDocumentStateChangedNotification: This notification
was copied exactly from our old document. Just to remind you, when
we receive the notification, we call the
weightHistoryDocument:statedidChange: method on all
our subscribers.
NSPersistentStoreCoordinatorStoresWillChangeNo
tification: This notification is sent just before our Core Data
stack switches from one persistent store to another. Our code appears
deceptively simple. We just call a resetMocs private method.
However, there’s one subtle but interesting point. Notice that we’re
passing nil for the queue. That means our block will run on
whatever thread the notification was posted from.
This is important, because we must perform a synchronous save and
reset on our managed object contexts from that background thread. As
long as our code is blocking that thread, we can safely make calls to
our managed object context. However, once we stop blocking the
thread, the system will begin tearing down and rebuilding our Core
Data stack, and the contents of our context will become invalid.
NSPersistentStoreCoordinatorStoresDidChangeNot
ification: This notification is sent once our Core Data stack has
successfully moved to the new persistent store. This is our chance to

--- Page 596 ---
update our user interface. We do this by calling refreshAll, which
performs a new fetch, grabbing all the WeightEntry objects from
our persistent store. Then it tells our view controllers to update their
contents.
This is actually a little heavy-handed. Most of the time the fetched
request controller will automatically reload its data when the store
changes. However, explicitly reloading the fetched request controller
fixes one of the iCloud bugs I discussed earlier.
If the user deletes and then reloads the application, the fetched request
controller won’t pick up any existing iCloud data during its first
launch. By explicitly forcing the request controller to fetch new data,
we make sure that the user always gets the correct data from the
persistent store—even in these somewhat rare corner cases.
NSPersistentStoreDidImportUbiquitousContentCha
ngesNotification: Finally, this notification is sent whenever we
receive an update from iCloud. At this point, the persistent store has
been updated, but we still need to merge these changes with our
managed object context.
In theory, we should need to call only
mergeChangesFromContextDidSaveNotification: on
our context, and we’d be done. However, I’ve added some extra code
to deal with an apparent delete bug.
This is the last of the iCloud bugs that I mentioned earlier. Basically,
if an update is deleting more than one entity, sometimes not all of the
deletes are processed properly.
To work around this, we grab the set of IDs for all the entities that will
be deleted. We also count the number of deleted entities in the
context. These represent objects that we’ve already deleted but whose
changes have not been saved yet.
Next, we call updateMOCFromNote:completionHandler:.
This will update our contexts asynchronously and call our completion
handler when it’s done. In the completion handler, we check and see
whether our update actually deleted the number of items we expected

--- Page 597 ---
it to delete. If not, we call refreshAll. This will re-fetch all our
WeightEntry objects from the persistent store.
Again, this is a bit heavy-handed, but it also guarantees that the data
we’re displaying is correct and up to date.
Whenever we set up notification observers, we also need to tear them
down again. Since we now have a number of observers to remove, let’s
create a removeNotifications method to handle it all.
Click here to view code image
- (void)removeNotifications
{
    NSNotificationCenter *center = [NSNotificationCenter
defaultCenter];
    
    if (self.documentStateObserver)
    {
        [center removeObserver:self.documentStateObserver];
    }
    
    if (self.storeWillChangeObserver)
    {
        [center removeObserver:self.storeWillChangeObserver];
    }
    
    if (self.storeDidChangeObserver)
    {
        [center removeObserver:self.storeDidChangeObserver];
    }
    
    if (self.iCloudUpdateObserver)
    {
        [center removeObserver:self.iCloudUpdateObserver];
    }
}
We’ve seen this pattern before. There shouldn’t be anything surprising
here.
Next, we need a method to set up our fetched request controller.
Click here to view code image
- (void)setupResultsController
{
    if (self.documentState != UIDocumentStateNormal) return;
    NSManagedObjectContext *moc = self.managedObjectContext;
    

--- Page 598 ---
    NSFetchRequest *fetchRequest =
    [NSFetchRequest fetchRequestWithEntityName:
     NSStringFromClass([WeightEntry class])];
    
    [fetchRequest setFetchBatchSize:15];
    
    NSSortDescriptor *descendingByDate =
    [NSSortDescriptor sortDescriptorWithKey:@"date"
ascending:NO];
    
    fetchRequest.sortDescriptors = @[descendingByDate];
    
    self.resultsController =
    [[NSFetchedResultsController alloc]
     initWithFetchRequest:fetchRequest
     managedObjectContext:moc
     sectionNameKeyPath:nil
     cacheName:@"Document Data"];
    
    self.resultsController.delegate = self;
    [self fetchAllEntries];
}
We start by making sure our document is in a normal state. If it’s not in a
normal state (for example, if it hasn’t finished loading yet), then there’s no
point in performing the fetch request.
Next, we need to create the fetch request that our controller will use. This
time we’re programmatically creating our fetch request. We want all of our
WeightEntries, but we want to grab only the first 15. All the others
should be returned as faults.
We call fetchRequestWithEntityName: to create the basic fetch
request. By default, it will return all the entities of the given name (and their
subentities). Again, we use the NSStringFromClass() trick to avoid
hard-coding in the class name.
Then we set the batch size to 15. This will be more than enough to fill a
screen full of information. It will then download the others in 15-entry
chunks when they are needed.
We also provide a sort descriptor. Just like before, we want to sort our
WeightEntry objects in descending order by their date property.
Once the fetch request is ready, we instantiate our
NSFetchedResultsController and assign our
WeightHistoryDocument as its delegate. Then we call

--- Page 599 ---
fetchAllEntries to perform the fetch. We’re breaking the actual fetch
out to its own method, since we will also call fetchAllEntries when
refreshing our user interface.
Click here to view code image
- (void)fetchAllEntries
{
    NSError *fetchError = nil;
    
    if (![self.resultsController performFetch:&fetchError])
    {
        [NSException
         raise:NSGenericException
         format:@"An error occurred when performing our fetch
%@",
         [fetchError localizedDescription]];
    }
}
This method is fairly straightforward. We simply call our fetched results
controller’s performFetch: method, and then we check for errors. If an
error occurred, we throw an exception. Again, this is geared toward
catching misspelled keys during development. We will undoubtedly want to
replace it as we get closer to releasing the application.
Next, let’s implement the resetMocs method.
Click here to view code image
- (void)resetMocs
{
    NSManagedObjectContext *moc = self.managedObjectContext;
    NSManagedObjectContext *parent = moc.parentContext;
    __block NSError *saveError;
    
    [moc performBlockAndWait:^{
        if ([moc hasChanges])
        {
            if (![moc save:&saveError])
            {
                [NSException
                 raise:NSGenericException
                 format:@"Unable to save the chld moc: %@ (%@)",
                 [saveError localizedDescription],
                 saveError.userInfo];
            }
            else
            {

--- Page 600 ---
                [parent performBlockAndWait:^{
                    if (![parent save:&saveError])
                    {
                        [NSException
                         raise:NSGenericException
                         format:@"Unable to save the parent moc:
%@ (%@)",
                         [saveError localizedDescription],
                         saveError.userInfo];
                    }
                }];
            }
        }
        
        [moc reset];
    }];
    
    [parent performBlockAndWait:^{
        [parent reset];
    }];
}
As mentioned earlier, this method needs to run synchronously. Therefore,
we use performBlockAndWait: to do all our work on our managed
object contexts. Additionally, we want to save and then refresh things in a
particular order.
First we want to save our child context. This pushes all our changes up to
the parent context. Then we want to save the parent context. Once both
contexts are saved, we want to reset them both.
To get everything to work out right, we have a number of nested blocks.
But, don’t let the blocks confuse you. If you strip everything else away,
we’re just saving and resetting our contexts.
Now, let’s implement
updateMOCFromNote:CompletionHandler:. Our notification
code calls this whenever we receive an update from iCloud.
Click here to view code image
- (void)updateMOCFromNote:(NSNotification *)note
        completionHandler:(CompletionHandler)completionHandler
{
    NSManagedObjectContext *moc = self.managedObjectContext;
    NSManagedObjectContext *parent =
self.managedObjectContext.parentContext;
    
    [parent performBlock:^{

--- Page 601 ---
        [parent
mergeChangesFromContextDidSaveNotification:note];
        
        [moc performBlock:^{
            [self
willChangeValueForKey:WeightHistoryDocumentCountKey];
            [moc
mergeChangesFromContextDidSaveNotification:note];
            [self
didChangeValueForKey:WeightHistoryDocumentCountKey];
            
            if (completionHandler)
            {
                [[NSOperationQueue mainQueue]
                 addOperationWithBlock:completionHandler];
            }
        }];
    }];
}
Like resetMocs, we’re trying to do something quite simple. We just
want to merge the incoming changes with our managed object contexts.
This time we start with the parent and then merge the child.
Also, this time we are using the asynchronous API. So, we will pass our
block to the parent context’s private queue, and it will update the parent
context in the background. When this is done, we pass the next block back
to the main queue so we can update our child context. We also call the KVO
notification methods, just in case someone is observing our count
property.
Finally, once both updates are complete, we check to see whether we
have a completion handler. If we do, we execute it on the main queue.
 Note
Our child context already performs its blocks on the main
queue, so passing the completion handler to the main queue
is a bit redundant. We could simply execute the block and be
done. However, this is a little bit of defensive coding. If we
change our child context so that it uses a private queue, this
code will still run as expected.
One last method to go. Implement refreshAll as shown here:

--- Page 602 ---
Click here to view code image
- (void)refreshAll
{
    if (_resultsController)
    {
        [self fetchAllEntries];
        
        [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
         postNotificationName:WeightHistoryDocumentRefreshAllNot
ification
         object:self];
    }
}
This method is called whenever we switch to a new persistent store. It
checks to see whether we have a valid results controller. Notice that we
need to directly access the instance variable here. If we use the accessor, it
will try to instantiate the controller, if one didn’t already exist.
If we do have a controller, we simply re-fetch all its data. Then we post
our WeightHistoryDocumentRefreshAllNotification, telling
any listening view controllers to update their content.
That’s it. Our document now uses Core Data, and it’s ready to use
iCloud. We just need to specify the correct options when loading and
creating our document.
Loading or Creating Our Document
We need to make a number of changes to our RootTabBarController
to properly load and create our Core Data document. Open
RootTabBarController.m. Let’s start at the top of the file and work
our way down. We need to make only six changes.
1. Replace setupDocument with the following implementation:
Click here to view code image
- (void)setupDocument
{
    NSURL *fileURL = [WeightHistoryDocument localFileURL];
    [self createWeightHistoryForURL:fileURL];
    
    //    [self addMocData];
    if ([WeightHistoryDocument localFileExists])
    {
        [self loadFile];
    }

--- Page 603 ---
    else
    {
        [self createNewFileAtURL:fileURL];
    }
}
As you can see, we’re moving back to a much simpler setup
procedure. We start by creating our WeightHistoryDocument
object. Then we check to see whether we have a copy of the document
on disk. If we do, we load it. Otherwise, we create a new file.
2. Replace createWeightHistoryForURL:.
Click here to view code image
- (void)createWeightHistoryForURL:(NSURL *)fileURL
{
    self.weightHistoryDocument = [[WeightHistoryDocument
alloc]
                                  initWithFileURL:fileURL];
    
    self.weightHistoryDocument.persistentStoreOptions =
    @{NSPersistentStoreUbiquitousContentNameKey:
          @"com~freelancemadscience~HealthBeat",
      NSMigratePersistentStoresAutomaticallyOption:@YES,
      NSInferMappingModelAutomaticallyOption:@YES};
    
    [self.weightHistoryDocument addSubscriber:self];
    [self passDocumentToViewControllers];
}
Here, we instantiate our WeightHistoryDocument property.
Then we set its persistent store options. We’re setting three options, as
described here:
 NSPersistentStoreUbiquitousContentNameKey: This
key tells Core Data to sync via iCloud. The value of this key is the
unique identifier for this particular persistent store inside our
Ubiquity Container. If an application uses multiple documents, each
one must have their own, unique content name.
 NSMigratePersistentStoresAutomaticallyOption:
If this option is set to YES, then when we try to load a persistent
store that is from an older version of our model, Core Data will
attempt to automatically migrate the store. Note that because we are

--- Page 604 ---
using iCloud, we cannot use a mapping model to migrate from one
version to the next.
 NSInferMappingModelAutomaticallyOption: If this
option is set to YES, Core Data will attempt to infer the mapping
between versions when automatically migrating from one version to
the next. Inferred mapping supports only a limited range of changes.
For example, we can add a new attribute to an entity. However, it’s
easy to use, and iCloud supports inferred mapping between versions.
Once the options are done, we set our RootTabBarController
as a subscriber, and we pass the document on to all of our child view
controllers.
3. Delete the following methods: searchForCloudDocument,
processQuery:, and searchForLocalDocument.
4. Replace loadFile with the following implementation:
Click here to view code image
- (void)loadFile
{
    NSLog(@"Loading File");
    __weak RootTabBarController *_self = self;
    [self.weightHistoryDocument
     openWithCompletionHandler:^(BOOL success) {
        
        if (!success)
        {
            NSLog(@"*** Corrupt file at %@, "
                  @"attempting to delete it and try again.
***",
                  _self.weightHistoryDocument.fileURL);
            
            [self rebuildFromiCloud];
            return;
        }
        else
        {
            NSLog(@"File Loaded");
        }
    }];
}
Again, this is considerably simpler than our previous version. We just
call openWithCompletionHandler: to load our persistent

--- Page 605 ---
store. If that’s not successful, we call rebuildFromiCloud to try
to rebuild the persistent store.
5. Delete the following code from the end of
createNewFileAtURL:.
Click here to view code image
if (isCloudAvailable())
{
    [self.weightHistoryDocument migrateToCloud];
}
6. Implement the following new method:
Click here to view code image
- (void)rebuildFromiCloud
{
    NSURL *fileURL = [WeightHistoryDocument localFileURL];
    self.weightHistoryDocument = [[WeightHistoryDocument
alloc]
                                  initWithFileURL:fileURL];
    
    self.weightHistoryDocument.persistentStoreOptions =
    @{NSPersistentStoreUbiquitousContentNameKey:
          @"com~freelancemadscience~HealthBeat",
      NSPersistentStoreRebuildFromUbiquitousContentOption:@YE
S,
      NSMigratePersistentStoresAutomaticallyOption:@YES,
      NSInferMappingModelAutomaticallyOption:@YES};
    [self.weightHistoryDocument addSubscriber:self];
    [self passDocumentToViewControllers];
    
    NSLog(@"Rebuilding File");
    [self.weightHistoryDocument
     openWithCompletionHandler:^(BOOL success) {
         
         if (!success)
         {
             [NSException
              raise:NSGenericException
              format:@"Unable to rebuild the Core Data "
              @"database from iCloud"];
         }
         else
         {
             NSLog(@"File Rebuilt");
         }

--- Page 606 ---
     }];
}
We call this method whenever we run into errors while trying to load our
persistent store. We’re going to try to create the store again, but instead of
loading the local data, we want to delete the local store and rebuild
everything from iCloud.
We start by creating a new WeightHistoryDocument object. This
time we set an additional option:
NSPersistentStoreRebuildFromUbiquitousContentOptio
n. This tells Core Data to delete the local persistent store and rebuild it
using data from iCloud.
Next, we subscribe to the document and pass it on to the children view as
normal. Then we try to open the document.
That’s it, our document is ready to use both Core Data and iCloud—and
with considerably less code than the previous version. We just need to
update a couple of view controllers, and we’re ready to run.
Updating our View Controllers
Let’s start with our HistoryTableViewController. Open
HistoryTableViewController.m, and in the class extension, add
the following property:
Click here to view code image
@property (strong, nonatomic) id documentRefreshAllObserver;
Next, we can finally get rid of our last compilation error. Modify
addNewEntrySaved: as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (IBAction)addNewEntrySaved:(UIStoryboardSegue *)segue
{
    AddEntryViewController *controller =
segue.sourceViewController;
    
    [self.weightHistoryDocument
addEntryWithWeightInLbs:controller.weight
                                                  units:getDefau
ltUnits()
                                                   date:controll
er.date];
    

--- Page 607 ---
    [self dismissViewControllerAnimated:YES completion:nil];
    [self becomeFirstResponder];
}
This just replaces the old code to create our WeightEntry object and
adds it to the document with our new (and somewhat longer named)
method.
Next, add the following code to the bottom of
setupNotifications:
Click here to view code image
self.documentRefreshAllObserver =
[center
 addObserverForName:WeightHistoryDocumentRefreshAllNotification
 object:doc
 queue:mainQueue
 usingBlock:^(NSNotification *note) {
     [_self.tableView reloadData];
 }];
This reloads our entire table view whenever we receive a refresh
notification.
Finally, we need to remove our new observer. Add the following code to
the bottom of removeNotifications:
Click here to view code image
if (self.documentRefreshAllObserver)
{
    [center removeObserver:self.documentRefreshAllObserver];
    self.documentRefreshAllObserver = nil;
}
That’s it. Delete WeightHistoryDocument_old.h and
WeightHistoryDocument_old.m, and then clean the project. Run
the application. Try adding and deleting weights. Navigate to the history
view, and shake to undo. Everything should work as expected.
Launch it on a second device; all the weights should transfer. Put the first
device on the graph view. Then enter a new weight on the second device,
and put that app into the background. Within a minute or so, the first
device’s screen should change.
Try disabling iCloud Document Storage. All the weight entries that we
saved to the cloud should disappear. Reenable document storage, and they

--- Page 608 ---
will reappear again.
Next, put one device into airplane mode, and then create conflicting
changes on both devices. Force-save the changes by putting the app
temporarily in the background. Then take the device out of airplane mode.
Everything should sync, and the conflicts should resolve properly.
And, one final test. Shut down the app, and then delete it from one
device. Rerun the app. It will take a long time, sometimes five minutes or
more, but eventually it will download and display all the old data from
iCloud.
 Note
There is one other odd bit about Core Data and iCloud. If we
delete the data from iCloud (either in the Settings app or
from System Preferences) and re-launch one of our
applications, it will actually repopulate the cloud data from
its local store. If we want to erase all the iCloud data, we
need to delete the data from the cloud and remove the
application from all our devices. Then we can reload and
relaunch our devices with a clean slate.
Alternatively, we can call
removeUbiquitousContentAndPersistentStore
AtURL:options:error: and wait for the changes to
sync to all our devices. This method deletes the local store
and then deletes the iCloud data, providing us with a fresh,
clean slate.
Wrapping Up
We just finished what amounts to open-heart surgery on our application,
gutting and replacing its entire model. It was a long haul with a lot of code,
but none of the individual parts was terribly complicated. Most importantly,
we could rebuild it. We could make it better than it was before. Better.
Stronger. Faster.
Core Data is a complex framework with a number of very powerful
features, and we’re only scratching the surface here. Unfortunately, Health

--- Page 609 ---
Beat’s data model is so simple, you get only a smallest taste of what Core
Data has to offer. Still, this chapter should give you a strong understanding
of the fundamentals and enough hands-on experience to build a solid
foundation for your own explorations.
Next up, we’re going to go back to the user interface. We’re going to use
a few of iOS 7’s flashiest new features to spice things up a bit.
Other Resources
 Core Data Programming Guide
iOS Developer’s Library
Core Data is a deep, rich topic. Unfortunately, there is only so much
that we can cover in one chapter. If you want to learn more, I highly
recommend reading through the Core Data Programming Guide. It
provides in-depth explanations on every aspect of Core Data.
 Predicate Programming Guide
iOS Developer’s Library
This guide covers a number of advanced topics on both creating and
using predicates. If you would like to learn how to programmatically
create predicates, or how to dynamically set key paths, this is your
guide. It also includes a full description of the predicate format string
syntax.
 What’s New in Core Data and iCloud
WWDC 2013 Videos
Unfortunately, it looks like Apple has not yet updated their
documentation on iCloud and Core Data. The existing documentation
continues to refer to techniques used in iOS 6, which are no longer
recommended when building iOS 7 apps. For now, this WWDC
session remains the best resource for learning about syncing Core
Data with iCloud.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 610 ---
Chapter 8. Advanced User Interfaces
A lot of digital ink has been spent discussing Apple’s move away from
skeuomorphism in iOS 7. In this context, skeuomorphism refers to a style of
user interface design where digital objects retain characteristics of their
physical ancestors. Most famously, previous versions of Apple’s Calendar
was designed to look like a physical calendar, down to its stitched leather
trim and the torn remains of previous pages along the top edge.
When the iPhone first came out, it was a new type of device. Those
skeuomorphic queues often helped orient new users. The calendar felt
familiar, which made it easier to understand and use.
Unfortunately, this also limited what we, as developers, could do with
our user interfaces. As purely digital constructs, our applications are really
limited only by our imaginations. There are any number of designs and
features we could explore that have no analog in the real world. So, while
pursuing skeuomorphic designs, we often sacrificed functionality for
familiarity.
iOS 7 has abandoned this type of skeumorphic design. Partially this is a
pragmatic response to the changes in its users. The iPhone is now a mature
technology. Users understand how to manipulate the world under the glass
screen. They no longer need the handholding that skeumorphic design
provided. Partially this change reflects current trends and styles. We can
argue about what had the biggest effect, but in iOS 7 the flatter, simpler
interface dominates.
Or does it? If you take a snapshot of the user interface, it appears flatter.
However, if you actually use the device, there’s a lot going on. iOS 7
emphasizes motion and animation. Some of these are playful, like the
parallax effect on the home screen or the slight bounce and wiggle in
Messages’ conversation bubbles. Some are informative, such as the
zooming transitions in Calendar, as we drill down from year to month to
day.
Ironically, these motion effects mean that we may have simply moved
from one type of skeumorphic design to another. Instead of trying to build
interfaces that look like real objects, we’re now trying to build interfaces
that move like real objects. Even Calendar’s zoom has a natural feeling of

--- Page 611 ---
acceleration and deceleration to the effect. In its own applications, Apple
has worked hard to create a sense of motion that feels right. More
importantly, it has given us the tools to do the same thing in our own apps.
In Chapter 4, “Custom Views and Custom Transitions” we learned how
to make custom transitions using Core Animation. In this chapter, we will
focus on techniques for making those animations and transitions feel more
alive and real.
We will start with UIMotionEffect. This is the technology behind
the parallax effect on the home screen. We will use it to add a similar effect
to our Add Entry view. Then we will dig into UIKit Dynamics. UIKit
Dynamics lets us design animation sequences using a 2D physics engine.
This lets us easily design transitions that appear physically real.
Creating Motion Effects
iOS devices contain a wide range of sensors that let them respond to user
motion. On the small scale, they contain accelerometers, gyroscopes, and a
magnetic compass. This lets the system detect changes in the device’s
orientation, shake gestures, and more.
On the large scale, it can both triangulate its location based on cell towers
and known Wi-Fi hot-spots and use its GPS. In both cases, iOS integrates
information from multiple sensors, letting it calculate its position and
orientation with more precision than using a single sensor alone.
The iPhone 5s further expands these capabilities with its M7 motion
coprocessor. This lets the iPhone monitor, process, and store data from the
accelerometers, gyroscopes, and compass outside its main CPU. This
greatly reduces the amount of power needed to handle these motions,
enabling continual monitoring of the device’s motion even when the device
is asleep.
It’s important to note that we could duplicate the parallax effect, even in
previous versions of iOS, using the CMMotionManager class. We
register for device motion updates and then adjust our user interface based
on these updates. Of course, we’d have to handle a lot of the low-level
details—and a lot of the math—on our own.
While this fine-grained approach is great if we want to create a tilt-based
game control or a Fitbit-like fitness tracker, if we just want to have our

--- Page 612 ---
views react to our device’s motion, there’s a much simpler way.
UIMotionEffect is an abstract class designed to automatically
respond to changes in the device’s motion and update our user interface. We
cannot instantiate this class directly; instead, we must subclass it, overriding
its keyPathsAndRelativeValuesForViewerOffset: method.
When this method is called, the system hands us a UIOffset. This
structure contains the horizontal and vertical rotation information. Each of
these is rated from -1.0 to 1.0. An offset value of {0.0, 0.0} means
the device is facing directly toward the user. A value of {1.0, 0.0}
means it’s rotated 90° to the right, and {-1.0, 0.0} is 90° to the left. A
value of {0.0, 1.0} is face down, while {0.0, -1.0} is face up.
Given these offsets, we calculate and return a dictionary containing a
number of key-value pairs for properties that we want to change. The keys
must be key paths to animatable properties in our view, its layer, or a
subview that is accessible through our view’s properties. The value is the
new value for the property.
While this gives us a lot of flexibility, it still involves a lot of work. If we
want something even simpler, we can use its concrete subclass
UIInterpolatingMotionEffect.
Here, we just create an instance of
UIInterpolatingMotionEffect. In the
initWithKeyPath:type: method we specify both the key path we
want to modify and the type—whether the effect is based on horizontal or
vertical motion. Note that we can affect only one key path in one direction
with a single UIInterpolatingMotionEffect. This means we
usually need at least two motion effects to create the desired visual effect.
Once we have our motion effect, we still need to set its
minimumRelativeValue and its maximumRelativeValue. These
measure the amount the key path’s value will change relative to its starting
value. For example, when modifying the view’s center.x property with a
horizontal motion effect, the minimumRelativeValue would be the
distance that the center would shift when the view was rotated completely
to the left. The maximumRelativeValue would be the distance that the
center would shift when the view was rotated completely to the right.

--- Page 613 ---
Once configured, we add the motion effect to our view by calling –
[UIView addMotionEffect:]. The system will handle everything
else.
 Note
Users can disable motion effects using the Settings app. Just
go to General > Accessibility > Reduce Motion. Turning this
setting on will automatically disable all UIMotionEffect
subclasses.
This is one of the major advantages of using
UIMotionEffects. While we could duplicate the basic
behaviors using custom code, we couldn’t tie ourselves into
the accessibility settings like this.
Adding Motion Effects to Add Entry View
Many of the built-in pop-up views automatically respond to device motion.
Alert views, for example, will wiggle around as you rotate the device. We
want to duplicate this behavior with our Add Entry View.
Let’s start by opening AddEntryViewController.m. At the top of
the file, declare the following constant variable:
Click here to view code image
static const CGFloat MaximumMotion = 15.0;
This defines the maximum range of motion. Our view will shift up to 15
points to the right, left, up, or down. We can then modify this value to
increase or decrease the amount of motion.

--- Page 614 ---
 Note
Fifteen may be a bit high for a production app. I picked a
value large enough to make the effect easy to see, ideally
without being overwhelming. Still, you might want to use a
slightly subtler range of motion in your final app.
Next, at the bottom of the class extension, add the following two
properties:
Click here to view code image
@property (strong, nonatomic) UIInterpolatingMotionEffect
*horizontalMotionEffect;
@property (strong, nonatomic) UIInterpolatingMotionEffect
*verticalMotionEffect;
When using the UIInterpolatingMotionEffect, we must create
a separate effect for each axis. Therefore, we almost always create two
effects (unless we’re just animating changes along one axis, of course).
Now, scroll down to viewDidLoad. Modify it as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (void)viewDidLoad
{
    [super viewDidLoad];
    self.date = [NSDate date];
    self.weight = 0.0;
    [self setupInputAccessories];
    [self setupNotifications];
    [self setupMotionEffects];
}
We’re just adding a call to our yet-undefined setupMotionEffects
method. So far so good; however, now things get complicated. Remember,
our Add Entry View is displayed as part of a custom modal view transition.
As you may remember from Chapter 4, the container view does not rotate
for modal transitions. This means we need to programmatically adjust for
any difference between our Add Entry View’s orientation and the container
view’s orientation. For more information about this issue, refer to Chapter
4. We will handle this by rebuilding our motion effects after each rotation.

--- Page 615 ---
Navigate to
willAnimateRotationToInterfaceOrientation:toInterf
aceOrientation: and modify the method as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (void)willAnimateRotationToInterfaceOrientation:
(UIInterfaceOrientation)toInterfaceOrientation
duration:(NSTimeInterval)duration
{
    [self centerViewInParent];
    
    if ([self.view.motionEffects count] > 0)
    {
        [self setupMotionEffects];
    }
}
Here, we just check to see whether we have any active motion effects. If
we do, we rebuild them for the new orientation.
Also, much of the time the keyboard covers our Add Entry View. We
don’t really want the view to move around while the keyboard is displayed
—that just looks odd. Therefore, we should disable the motion when the
keyboard appears and reenable it when the keyboard disappears. We will do
this by adding and removing the motion events in response to our keyboard
notifications.
Scroll down to the setupNotifications method. Add the following
code to the top of the UIKeyboardWillShowNotification block
(right before _self.keyboardIsShown = YES;):
Click here to view code image
[self.view removeMotionEffect:self.horizontalMotionEffect];
[self.view removeMotionEffect:self.verticalMotionEffect];
This removes our motion effects, disabling them.
We also need to enable them when the keyboard appears. Again, we want
to make sure they are set up correctly for the current orientation, so let’s
rebuild them again. Add the following line to the top of the
UIKeyboardWillHideNotification block:
[self setupMotionEffects];

--- Page 616 ---
Now we just need to set up our motion effects. Add the following to the
bottom of our private methods:
Click here to view code image
- (void)setupMotionEffects
{
    if ([self.view.motionEffects count] > 0)
    {
        [self.view
removeMotionEffect:self.horizontalMotionEffect];
        [self.view
removeMotionEffect:self.verticalMotionEffect];
    }
    
    NSString *horizontalKeyPath;
    NSString *verticalKeyPath;
    NSNumber *horizontalMax;
    NSNumber *horizontalMin;
    NSNumber *verticalMax;
    NSNumber *verticalMin;
    
    switch (self.interfaceOrientation) {
        case UIInterfaceOrientationPortrait:
            horizontalKeyPath = @"center.x";
            verticalKeyPath = @"center.y";
            horizontalMin = @(-MaximumMotion);
            horizontalMax = @(MaximumMotion);
            verticalMin = @(-MaximumMotion);
            verticalMax = @(MaximumMotion);
            break;
            
        case UIInterfaceOrientationLandscapeLeft:
            horizontalKeyPath = @"center.y";
            verticalKeyPath = @"center.x";
            horizontalMin = @(MaximumMotion);
            horizontalMax = @(-MaximumMotion);
            verticalMin = @(-MaximumMotion);
            verticalMax = @(MaximumMotion);
            break;
            
        case UIInterfaceOrientationLandscapeRight:
            horizontalKeyPath = @"center.y";
            verticalKeyPath = @"center.x";
            horizontalMin = @(-MaximumMotion);
            horizontalMax = @(MaximumMotion);
            verticalMin = @(MaximumMotion);
            verticalMax = @(-MaximumMotion);
            break;

--- Page 617 ---
        default:
            [NSException
             raise:NSGenericException
             format:@"Invalid orientation %@",
             @(self.interfaceOrientation)];
    }
    
    self.horizontalMotionEffect =
    [[UIInterpolatingMotionEffect alloc]
     initWithKeyPath:horizontalKeyPath
     type:UIInterpolatingMotionEffectTypeTiltAlongHorizontalAxis
];
    
    self.horizontalMotionEffect.minimumRelativeValue =
horizontalMin;
    self.horizontalMotionEffect.maximumRelativeValue =
horizontalMax;
    
    self.verticalMotionEffect =
    [[UIInterpolatingMotionEffect alloc]
     initWithKeyPath:verticalKeyPath
     type:UIInterpolatingMotionEffectTypeTiltAlongVerticalAxis];
    
    self.verticalMotionEffect.minimumRelativeValue =
verticalMin;
    self.verticalMotionEffect.maximumRelativeValue =
verticalMax;
    
    [self.view addMotionEffect:self.horizontalMotionEffect];
    [self.view addMotionEffect:self.verticalMotionEffect];
}
That’s a large chunk of code. Most of the time it’s not nearly this hard. In
an ideal world (basically anything other than a modal custom transition), we
would just create a horizontal motion effect that modified our view’s
center.x and create a vertical motion effect that modified its
center.y. For both effects, we set the minimum relative value to –
MaximumMotion and the maximum to MaximumMotion. Notice that
we must assign objects to these properties, not C scalar values. Then we
would just add the motion effects to our views.
Unfortunately, we’re not in that world. Instead, we create a bunch of
local variables to hold all the values that could change based on the
orientation. Basically, that’s the key path and both the minimum and
maximum relative values for each axis. Then, in a switch statement, we set

--- Page 618 ---
those values based on our current orientation. Only then can we create our
motion effects and assign them to our views.
That’s it. Build and run the application. You will need to test it on an
actual iOS device—the simulator does not simulate motion effects. When
you bring up the Add Entry View, it should have the keyboard displayed
above it. Notice that the view does not move as you tilt the device. Dismiss
the keyboard. Notice how the view now moves. Try rotating the device into
different orientations and verify that the motion effects still work by tilting
it. You can also try changing the MaximumMotion value, and observe
how that changes the application’s look and feel.
Creating Physically Real Animations
UIKit Dynamics is a physics-based, declarative animation and interaction
system. It is designed to be composable. We will create complex behaviors
by combining multiple low-level behaviors. Furthermore, the behavior’s
tree-like structure lets us easily add or remove an entire subtree of
behaviors at once. This makes it easy to design and reuse custom behaviors.
UIKit Dynamics is not a replacement for Core Animation. In fact, it is
built upon Core Animation and is designed to work well within custom
transitions. Instead, UIKit Dynamics lets us create animation effects that
would be difficult, if not impossible, to build with Core Animation directly.
There are three main components to UIKit Dynamics:
UIDynamicItem, UIDynamicBehavior, and
UIDynamicAnimator.
UIDynamicItem defines a protocol for items that can be modified by
UIKit Dynamics. The protocol simply declares a bounds, center, and
transform property. Both UIView and
UICollectionViewLayoutAttributes adopt this protocol, but we
are free to create our own custom objects. This is particularly useful if we
want to have “invisible” objects on the screen that respond to or affect other
UIDynamicItems.
UIDynamicBehaviors define a single type of behavior inside our 2D
physics world. The UIDynamicBehavior class is the parent class for a
number of low-level behaviors: UIAttachmentBehavior,
UICollisionBehavior, UIDynamicItemBehavior,

--- Page 619 ---
UIGravityBehavior, UIPushBehavior, and UISnapBehavior.
We will often create custom UIDynamicBehavior classes that combine
multiple low-level behaviors into a single effect. For example, combining
gravity and collisions to create a bounce effect. We will assign one or more
UIDynamicItems to each behavior, and the behavior will animate those
items.
Each behavior also has an action property that takes a simple block.
The animator will call these blocks during each update step. This lets us
inject our own code into the animation.
The UIDynamicAnimator runs our physics-based animations. We
instantiate an animator and then provide it with one or more dynamic
behaviors. These behaviors, in turn, hold the dynamic items that they affect.
The dynamic animator also has a reference view, which provides the
coordinate system for our animations.
As long as the animator exists, it will run its behaviors. We can cancel or
disable a behavior either by removing the behavior from the animator or by
deallocating the animator.
 Note
Make sure you have a strong reference to your
UIDynamicAnimator instance somewhere in your code.
If you ever set up UIKit Dynamics and nothing happens, it’s
probably because your animator was not retained and was
therefore automatically deallocated, canceling the
animations.
Exploring UIDynamicBehavior
The UIDynamicBehavior subclasses are where the digital tires meet the
electronic super highway. As we have seen, iOS provides a number of pre-
defined, low-level behaviors that we can combine into more complex
effects. In fact, most of our UIKit Dynamics code focuses on creating,
configuring, and combining behaviors. However, before we can do that, we
need to understand the existing, primitive behaviors.

--- Page 620 ---
 UIAttachmentBehavior: This behavior defines a connection
between two dynamic items or between an item and an anchor point.
By default, the attachment connects to the center of each item, though
we can modify that if we want. Attachments can act either as fixed
rods or as springs. We can configure both its frequency and its
damping, letting us control the amount of bounce. Attachments also
provide a convenient way to add interactivity to our layout. We can
use a gesture recognizer to move the anchor point, letting us drag
items around the screen.
 UICollisionBehavior: This behavior lets its items collide with
each other and with the collision’s boundaries. Items that belong to
the same collision behavior cannot overlap each other. Collisions are
often the basis for letting one view bounce off, push, or stack on top
of another view.
We can define a collision delegate, allowing us to programmatically
respond to collisions. We also have a number of methods to set the
collision’s boundaries—either by setting them relative to the dynamic
animator’s reference view’s bounds or by explicitly defining them
using a UIBezierPath.
Many of the properties that define collision (especially density,
elasticity, and allowsRotation) are actually defined using
UIDynamicItemBehavior.
 UIDynamicItemBehavior: This behavior lets us customize the
physical properties of our dynamic items, thus letting us modify other
behaviors. The dynamic item behavior includes properties for our
object’s angularResistance, density, elasticity,
friction, and resistance. Other properties may be calculated
using these. For example, a dynamic item’s bounds and density
determine its mass. We can also use this item to directly get or set the
angular and linear velocity of our object.
We have to be a little careful when using multiple dynamic item
behaviors within a behavior hierarchy. If more than one behavior has
a given property, the last behavior wins. Behavior order is determined
using a pre-order depth-first walk of the tree. This is not necessarily
the order in which behaviors were created and added to the tree.

--- Page 621 ---
 UIGravityBehavior: All items included in the gravity behavior
will accelerate along the gravity’s vector. By default, the vector is
{0.0, 1.0}, indicating that all items will accelerate at 1000 pt/s2
down. We can adjust this by modifying the angle, magnitude, or the
gravity vector.
 UIPushBehavior: This behavior lets us apply force to our items,
moving them around the screen. We can either apply an instantaneous
or continuous force. Just like gravity, we can set the angle,
magnitude, or pushDirection. However, unlike gravity, the
acceleration will vary depending on the item’s mass. Applying a
continuous force of magnitude 1.0 to a 100 pt x 100 pt item with a
density of 1.0 will accelerate it by 100 pt/s2.
By default, the force is applied to the center of the item; however, we
can specify an offset—letting us spin or wrench our items around.
 UISnapBehavior: This behavior lets us move an item to a point
with a spring-like behavior. We specify a single dynamic item and a
point. We can also set the behavior’s damping, which will affect the
number of oscillations before the animation comes to rest.
While this can be useful as part of a more complex behavior, if you
just want to move something with a spring-like bounce, consider
using +[UIView animateWithDuration:
delay:usingSpringWithDamping:initialSpringVelo
city:options:animations: completion] instead.
Performance Notes
While generally well behaved, there are a few points to consider when
implementing a dynamic system.
 The UIDynamicAnimator will continue processing the behaviors
for all the items in the behavior hierarchy until the system comes to
rest. Once all items are resting, the animator will pause.
 Not all systems will come to rest. We may need to explicitly cancel
some animations after a fixed duration, or after its items leave the
screen.
 The animator will continue to process items that are not on the screen.

--- Page 622 ---
 Collision behaviors can be quite costly, especially if you define a
large number of items that can all interact with each other. Try to limit
the number of colliding items or possible combinations.
 Since UIKit Dynamics modifies a view’s position by modifying its
bounds or center, it may not play nicely with Auto Layout. If
we’re working with views that are part of a custom transition or views
that we programmatically add to the view hierarchy, then we
shouldn’t have any problems. If we are trying to animate and move
items that are part of our existing layout and that have explicit Auto
Layout constraints, we may need to remove the constraints before we
animate the object and then add new constraints after we’re done.
Making Our Add Entry View Bounce
Currently, our Add Entry View fades in and out. Let’s have it drop from the
top of the screen and bounce slightly, like it landed on a hard surface. Then,
when the view’s dismissed, we want it to accelerate upward, matching the
acceleration of its fall. While we’re at it, let’s let the user dismiss the view
by dragging it upward.
We will implement some, but not all, of this using UIKit Dynamics. That
is probably the most important lesson here. Don’t feel the need to use UIKit
Dynamics for everything. We can freely mix and match it with other
animation or gesture-based techniques.
Building Our Behaviors
Let’s start by building our behaviors. We need two separate, complex
behaviors: a bounce behavior for when the view appears and a lift behavior
for when it disappears. However, in both cases we will want to be able to
set an initial velocity. Additionally, since these behaviors will run during a
custom transition, we need to track the device’s orientation. That’s a lot of
common behaviors between the two classes. Let’s extract all of that out to
an abstract superclass.
Create a new Objective-C class in the Animators group. Name it
AbstractBehavior, and set its superclass to UIDynamicBehavior. Now open
AbstractBehavior.h and modify it as shown here:

--- Page 623 ---
Click here to view code image
#import <UIKit/UIKit.h>
@interface AbstractBehavior : UIDynamicBehavior
@property (strong, nonatomic, readonly) id<UIDynamicItem> item;
@property (assign, nonatomic, readonly) UIInterfaceOrientation
orientation;
- (id)initWithItem:(id<UIDynamicItem>)item
          velocity:(CGPoint)velocity
       orientation:(UIInterfaceOrientation)orientation;
- (void)setupBehaviors;
@end
We’re simply declaring two read-only properties. The first will let us
access the dynamic item that we’re animating. The second lets us access the
current user interface. Then we declare a custom init method that takes
three arguments: our item, our item’s current velocity, and our orientation.
Finally, we declare a setupBehaviors method. Our subclasses will
have to override this method to set up their behaviors.
Switch to AbstractBehavior.m. Let’s start by declaring a class
extension containing three properties.
Click here to view code image
@interface AbstractBehavior ()
@property (strong, nonatomic, readwrite) id<UIDynamicItem> item;
@property (assign, nonatomic, readwrite) UIInterfaceOrientation
orientation;
@property (assign, nonatomic) CGPoint velocity;
@end
We start by redeclare the item and orientation properties as read-
write. Then we declare a private velocity property. With those in place,
let’s move on to the methods. Define our init methods as shown here:
Click here to view code image
// Designated Initializer
- (id)initWithItem:(id<UIDynamicItem>)item
          velocity:(CGPoint)velocity
       orientation:(UIInterfaceOrientation)orientation
{
    self = [super init];
    if (self) {

--- Page 624 ---
        _item = item;
        _velocity = velocity;
        _orientation = orientation;
        [self setupPrivateBehaviors];
        [self setupBehaviors];
    }
    return self;
}
- (id)init
{
    [self doesNotRecognizeSelector:_cmd];
    return nil;
}
initWithItem:velocity:orientation: is our new designated
initializer. It sets our properties’ initial values and then calls the
setupPrivateBehaviors and setupBehaviors methods.
setupPrivateBehaviors will set up the common behaviors shared by
all subclasses, while setupBehaviors will be overridden by each
individual subclass to set up their individual behaviors.
Since we’re creating a custom init method, we also need to override
our superclass’s designated initializer. In this case, that’s just init. Here,
we simply call doesNotRecognizeSelector:. By default this will
throw an exception if init is called. This forces us to always create our
classes using the designated initializer.
Next, let’s implement setupBehaviors. This ends up looking similar
to our init method, though it has a very different meaning.
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Abstract Methods
- (void)setupBehaviors
{
    [self doesNotRecognizeSelector:_cmd];
}
Like init, this will throw an exception if called. However, with init,
we were trying to prevent developers from calling init, forcing them to
use initWithItem:velocity:orientation:. Here, we’re forcing
the developers to override setupBehaviors in their subclasses. This

--- Page 625 ---
method will be automatically called when the behavior is instantiated. If we
forget to override setupBehaviors, our application will crash.
Finally, let’s implement setupBehaviors.
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Private Methods
- (void)setupPrivateBehaviors
{
    UIDynamicItemBehavior *itemBehavior =
    [[UIDynamicItemBehavior alloc] initWithItems:@[self.item]];
    
    [itemBehavior addLinearVelocity:self.velocity
                            forItem:self.item];
    
    [self addChildBehavior:itemBehavior];
}
In this method, we instantiate a dynamic item behavior. We typically use
item behaviors to configure an item’s physical characteristics for the 2D
physics engine such as its density, the amount of bounce it has in collisions,
and the amount of friction it has while sliding along another item or
boundary. In our case, we’re adding a linear velocity to our item. We will
use this to match our pan gesture’s velocity when implementing the
interactive code.
After we create the item behavior, we add it as a child of the current
behavior. And that’s it. We’re done with our abstract class.
Now we need to create our concrete subclasses. Let’s start with the
bounce behavior. We will use this to animate the Add Entry View’s
appearance. We will also use it when the pan gesture is canceled to return
the view to its original position.
Add another Objective-C class to the Animators group. This time name it
BounceBehavior and make it a subclass of AbstractBehavior.
Open BounceBehavior.m. Let’s declare a class extension with a
single property.
Click here to view code image
@interface BounceBehavior ()
@property (weak, nonatomic) UICollisionBehavior *collision;
@end

--- Page 626 ---
Here, we’re just creating a property to store our collision behavior. We
will be modifying this behavior programmatically, so we need to hold onto
a reference.
Next, inside the @implementation block, override
willMoveToAnimator: as shown. This method will be called
whenever our behavior is added to a dynamic animator. This is important
because we need access to the dynamic animator’s reference view before
we can properly set up our collision boundary.
Click here to view code image
- (void)willMoveToAnimator:(UIDynamicAnimator *)dynamicAnimator
{
    [super willMoveToAnimator:dynamicAnimator];
    CGRect containerBounds =
dynamicAnimator.referenceView.bounds;
    
    CGFloat itemHeight = CGRectGetHeight(self.item.bounds);
    
    CGFloat top = 0.0;
    CGFloat bottom = 0.0;
    CGFloat left = 0.0;
    CGFloat right = 0.0;
    
    switch (self.orientation)
    {
        case UIInterfaceOrientationPortrait:
            top = -1000.0;
            bottom = CGRectGetMidY(containerBounds) -
            itemHeight / (CGFloat)2.0;
            break;
            
        case UIInterfaceOrientationLandscapeLeft:
            left = -1000.0;
            right = CGRectGetMidX(containerBounds) -
            itemHeight / (CGFloat)2.0;
            break;
            
        case UIInterfaceOrientationLandscapeRight:
            right = CGRectGetMaxX(containerBounds) +
            (CGFloat)1000.0;
            left = CGRectGetMidX(containerBounds) -
            itemHeight / (CGFloat)2.0;
            break;
            
        default:
            [NSException
             raise:NSGenericException

--- Page 627 ---
             format:@"Invalid orientation %@",
             @(self.orientation)];
    }
    
    UIEdgeInsets insets = UIEdgeInsetsMake(top, left, bottom,
right);
    [self.collision
     setTranslatesReferenceBoundsIntoBoundaryWithInsets:insets];
}
While this looks complex, it’s mostly just the extra code to support our
different orientations between our Add Entry View and the transition’s
container view.
We want our collision boundary to roughly match our reference view’s
bounds—however, we don’t really want a top. While I could create an
open-topped UIBezierPath, it’s easier to just offset the top by 1,000
points—that’s high enough that it won’t matter. We also want our bottom to
be slightly below the center of the reference view—half our Add Entry
View’s height, to be precise. This way when our Add Entry View is resting
on the boundary, it will be centered in the reference view.
The rest of the code is dedicated to calculating the correct insets given
our current orientation. Remember, we pass the orientation as one of the
arguments to our abstract superclass’s designated initializer. The superclass
saved it in a property and exposed the public property as read-only. That
means we can access (but not modify) the orientation here in our subclass.
Once we have the correct inset values, we create our insets and call
setTranslatesReferenceBoundsIntoBoundaryWithInsets
: to create our collision boundary.
Next, we need to implement the setupBehaviors method. Here,
we’re going to create three behaviors. A gravity behavior will cause our
view to accelerate downward. A collision behavior will cause our view to
bounce off and then settle into position atop the bottom boundary. Finally,
an item behavior lets us set our view’s elasticity, controlling how
much it bounces. It also lets us disable rotations—guaranteeing that the
view falls and bounces straight up and down.
The only tricky part is defining what up and down mean.
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - AbstractBehavior Methods

--- Page 628 ---
- (void)setupBehaviors
{
    NSArray *items = @[self.item];
    UIGravityBehavior *gravity =
    [[UIGravityBehavior alloc] initWithItems:items];
    
    CGVector gravityDirection;
    switch (self.orientation)
    {
        case UIInterfaceOrientationPortrait:
            gravityDirection = CGVectorMake(0.0, 2.0);
            break;
        case UIInterfaceOrientationLandscapeLeft:
            gravityDirection = CGVectorMake(2.0, 0.0);
            break;
        case UIInterfaceOrientationLandscapeRight:
            gravityDirection = CGVectorMake(-2.0, 0.0);
            break;
        default:
            [NSException
             raise:NSGenericException
             format:@"Invalid orientation %@",
             @(self.orientation)];
    }
    
    gravity.gravityDirection = gravityDirection;
    
    UICollisionBehavior *collision =
    [[UICollisionBehavior alloc] initWithItems:items];
    
    UIDynamicItemBehavior *itemBehavior =
    [[UIDynamicItemBehavior alloc] initWithItems:@[self.item]];
    itemBehavior.elasticity = 0.4;
    itemBehavior.allowsRotation = NO;
    
    
    [self addChildBehavior:gravity];
    [self addChildBehavior:collision];
    [self addChildBehavior:itemBehavior];
    
    self.collision = collision;
}
We start by creating our gravity behavior. Then we set the gravity’s
direction based on our orientation. Note that we’re using 2.0 for the vector’s
length. This means our gravity will be twice as strong as the default 1000
pt/s2. The default gravity felt a little too slow for my tastes, but feel free to
fine-tune the value on your own.

--- Page 629 ---
Next, we create our collision behavior; however, we delay its
configuration until willMoveToAnimator:.
After that we instantiate our item behavior. Here, we set the elasticity to
0.4. An elasticity of 0.0 means there will be no bounce at all. A 1.0
means the item will be perfectly elastic. After a collision it will leave the
boundary going the same speed but in the opposite direction. Here, we are
giving our view a fair bit of bounce, but it still settles down relatively
quickly. Again, you can fine-tune this value to better suit your own tastes.
We also disable rotation by setting allowsRotation to NO.
With all our behaviors are ready, we add them as child behaviors. This
lets us simply add our BounceBehavior to—or remove it from—the
dynamic animator. Its entire subtree comes along for the ride.
Finally, we assign our collision behavior to the collision property.
This lets us access and configure it during willMoveToAnimator:.
Our LiftBehavior class is similar, but even simpler, since we don’t
need to create the collision boundary. Start by creating a new class named
LiftBehavior that subclasses AbstractBehavior, placing it inside the
Animators group. Then open LiftBehavior.m. We just need to
implement one method, setupBehaviors.
Click here to view code image
- (void)setupBehaviors
{    
    UIPushBehavior *push =
    [[UIPushBehavior alloc] initWithItems:@[self.item]
                                     mode:UIPushBehaviorModeCont
inuous];
    
    CGFloat area = CGRectGetHeight(self.item.bounds) *
    CGRectGetWidth(self.item.bounds);
    
    CGFloat magnitude =  area / (CGFloat)1000.0 * (CGFloat)2.0;
    CGFloat angle;
    
    switch (self.orientation)
    {
        case UIInterfaceOrientationPortrait:
            angle = (CGFloat)-M_PI_2;
            break;
            
        case UIInterfaceOrientationLandscapeLeft:

--- Page 630 ---
            angle = (CGFloat)M_PI;
            break;
            
        case UIInterfaceOrientationLandscapeRight:
            angle = 0.0;
            break;
            
        default:
            [NSException
             raise:NSGenericException
             format:@"Invalid orientation %@",
             @(self.orientation)];
    }
    
    [push setAngle:angle magnitude:magnitude];
    
    [self addChildBehavior:push];
}
This time we need to create only a single behavior, a continuous push
behavior. However, we want to match the acceleration from our push
behavior to the acceleration from gravity. We do that by finding the area of
our view, dividing that by 1000.0, and multiplying it by the magnitude of
our gravity. Unfortunately, that means if we modify the gravity in our
BounceBehavior, we will also need to modify this as well.
Next, we want to determine the correct angle for our push. It should be
up—but up varies depending on our orientation. Once we have both the
magnitude and the angle, we can call setAngle:magnitude: and then
add our behavior as a child.
Our behaviors are ready to use. Now we just need to create new
animation transition controllers to set up and kick off these animations.
Animation Transition Controllers
Currently, we’re using a single animation controller for both the push and
the dismiss animation. I cleverly named it AddEntryAnimator. Now,
we’re going to replace it with two separate controllers: a
BouncePresentationController and a
LiftDismissalController.
This eliminates some of the complications we saw when using a single
class to perform both roles. However, this comes at a cost—it uses twice as
many classes. In this case, I think splitting the animation into two separate
classes works better, since the actual animation code is very different.

--- Page 631 ---
However, there is a lot of setup and management code that can be shared
between the two. Again, we can create an abstract superclass to handle all
the common code.
Create a new class named AbstractTransitionController and make it a
subclass of NSObject. Then open
AbstractTransitionController.h and modify the header file as
shown here:
Click here to view code image
#import <Foundation/Foundation.h>
@interface AbstractTransitionController : NSObject
<UIViewControllerAnimatedTransitioning>
@property (strong, nonatomic) UIDynamicAnimator *animator;
// Must Override and call super before the subclass's
implementation
- (void)animateTransition:
(id<UIViewControllerContextTransitioning>)
transitionContext;
// Must Override
- (NSTimeInterval)horizontalAnimationDuration;
- (NSTimeInterval)verticalAnimationDuration;
// Call to cancel the animation
- (void)cancelAnimation;
@end
We start by adopting the controller transitioning protocol, and then we
declare a single property, our dynamic animator. Once that’s done, we
declare a few other methods. Abstract classes typically have a few methods
that its subclasses need to override. Here, we’re redeclaring
animateTransition: just to document that it must be overridden and
that our implementation must call super before it does any work. The
horizontalAnimationDuration and
verticalAnimationDuration methods must also be overridden;
however, they should not call super.
Now, switch to AbstractTransitionController.m and create a
class extension with a single property declaration.

--- Page 632 ---
Click here to view code image
@interface AbstractTransitionController ()
<UIDynamicAnimatorDelegate>
@property (strong, nonatomic)
id<UIViewControllerContextTransitioning>context;
@end
We start by adopting the UIDynamicAnimatorDelegate property.
This will let us receive updates from the animator. We also need to save a
copy of our context so we can call completeTransition: when our
animation sequence has finished.
 Note
Animations created using UIKit Dynamics do not necessarily
have a set end point. Instead, we declare the properties for
our dynamic system, and then we let it run. Sometimes it will
come to rest and the animator will pause. Other times it
won’t. We need to define what finished means for our
particular system, so we can call
completeTransition:. There are three common
options: end the transition once our animation pauses, end
the transition after a specified duration, or end the transition
once our item leaves the screen.
Next, we need to implement our methods. Let’s start with the
UIViewControllerAnimatedTransitioning methods.
Implement transitionDuration: as shown here:
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - UIViewControllerAnimatedTransitioning Methods
- (NSTimeInterval)transitionDuration:
(id<UIViewControllerContextTransitioning>)transitionContext
{
    UIViewController *modalController =
    [transitionContext viewControllerForKey:
     UITransitionContextToViewControllerKey];
    
    UIInterfaceOrientation orientation =
    modalController.interfaceOrientation;

--- Page 633 ---
    
    if (UIInterfaceOrientationIsPortrait(orientation))
    {
        return [self verticalAnimationDuration];
    }
    
    return [self horizontalAnimationDuration];
}
Here, we get our pop-up view controller from our context. Then we ask
the pop-up controller for its current orientation. We use that to return the
correct duration value. Each concrete subclass will implement
verticalAnimationDuration and
horizontalAnimationDuration to return the correct value based
on their particular animation sequence.
Next, let’s implement animateTransition:. We’re not going to
actually set up the animation in this implementation. Our concrete subclass
will need to override this method to do that. Instead, we’re going to set up
some of the background infrastructure.
Click here to view code image
- (void)animateTransition:
(id<UIViewControllerContextTransitioning>)
transitionContext
{
    self.context = transitionContext;
    
    UIDynamicAnimator *animator =
    [[UIDynamicAnimator alloc] initWithReferenceView:
     [transitionContext containerView]];
    
    animator.delegate = self;
    self.animator = animator;
    
    __weak AbstractTransitionController *_self = self;
    __weak NSNotificationCenter *notificationCenter =
    [NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter];
    
    __block id observer =
    [notificationCenter
     addObserverForName:UIDeviceOrientationDidChangeNotification
     object:[UIDevice currentDevice]
     queue:nil
     usingBlock:^(NSNotification *note) {
         
         if (_self.animator.running)

--- Page 634 ---
         {
             [_self cancelAnimation];
         }
         [notificationCenter removeObserver:observer];
     }];
}
We start by assigning the incoming transitionContext to our
context property.
Next, we instantiate a UIDynamicAnimator object. We use the
transition context’s container view as our reference view, since all the
animation will occur within that view. Then we assign ourselves as the
animator’s delegate and assign the animator to our animator property.
Finally, we set up a one-shot notification. Once we receive the
notification, we’re going to remove our observer, preventing us from
receiving it a second time. Therefore, if the device is rotated during our
animation, we will cancel the animation. Otherwise, we do nothing.
This is important since the user may rotate the device immediately after
triggering our animation. We want to make sure our system responds
reasonably. If we don’t cancel the animation, the animation will run to
completion, and then the user interface will rotate. This makes our
application feel sluggish and nonresponsive—and we don’t want that.
Now, let’s implement our UIDynamicAnimator methods.
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - UIDynamicAnimatorDelegate Methods
- (void)dynamicAnimatorDidPause:(UIDynamicAnimator *)animator
{
    NSLog(@"Animation took %0.2f seconds",
          [self.animator elapsedTime]);
    
    [self cancelAnimation];
}
- (void)dynamicAnimatorWillResume:(UIDynamicAnimator *)animator
{
    // doesn't do anything.
}
These methods will be called in response to changes in our dynamic
animator. Both methods are required, but we’re really interested only in

--- Page 635 ---
dynamicAnimatorDidPause:. Here, we log the amount of time the
animator took to complete, and then we call cancelAnimation to end
the transition.
This means our animation will automatically end whenever the system
comes to rest. This won’t work for all our animations, but it provides a
reasonable default finished state.
Next, let’s implement our horizontal and vertical duration methods.
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Abstract Methods
- (NSTimeInterval)horizontalAnimationDuration
{
    [self doesNotRecognizeSelector:_cmd];
    return 0.0;
}
- (NSTimeInterval)verticalAnimationDuration
{
    [self doesNotRecognizeSelector:_cmd];
    return 0.0;
}
These methods need to be overridden by our concrete subclasses, so we
simply call doesNotRecognizeSelector:. We’ve seen this design
before. If we forget to override these methods (or if we call super in our
subclass’s implementation), this will throw an exception.
Finally, let’s implement our cancelAnimation method.
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Public Methods
- (void)cancelAnimation
{
    self.animator = nil;
    [self.context completeTransition:YES];
}
Here, we set our animator to nil. This will deallocate the animator,
canceling any animations that are currently running. Then we call
completeTransition: to finish our transition.

--- Page 636 ---
 Note
While the animation may be canceled, the transition will not.
This is not an interactive transition; we will always move
from the from-controller to the to-controller. Therefore, we
must always pass YES to the completeTransition:
method.
With the backend infrastructure in place, we can implement our concrete
subclasses. Let’s start with the presentation controller. Create a new class
named BouncePresentation Controller. It should be a subclass of
AbstractTransitionController.
Now, open BouncePresentationController.m and import
BounceBehavior.h. Let’s start by overriding
animateTransition:.
Click here to view code image
- (void)animateTransition:
(id<UIViewControllerContextTransitioning>)
transitionContext
{
    [super animateTransition:transitionContext];
    
    UIViewController *modalController =
    [transitionContext viewControllerForKey:
     UITransitionContextToViewControllerKey];
    
    UIView *modalView = modalController.view;
    UIView *containerView = [transitionContext containerView];
    
    UIInterfaceOrientation orientation =
    modalController.interfaceOrientation;
    
    [self calculateFrameForModalView:modalView
                    inContainerView:containerView
                         orientation:orientation];
    
    [containerView addSubview:modalView];
    
    
    BounceBehavior *bounceBehavior =
    [[BounceBehavior alloc] initWithItem:modalView

--- Page 637 ---
                              velocity:CGPointZero
                           orientation:orientation];
    
    [self.animator addBehavior:bounceBehavior];
}
We start by calling super. This performs the background setup from our
abstract class, including setting up our dynamic animator. Then we proceed
to set up our animation. We start by grabbing our to-controller, our to-
controller’s view, and our context’s container view.
Next, we need to calculate the proper starting position for our incoming
view. It should be positioned just above the screen. Unfortunately, as we
have seen already, the definition of above varies depending on our device’s
orientation. Therefore, we grab the current orientation, call a helper method
to set up our frame, and then add the to-view to our container view.
We also need to instantiate our bounce behavior. It’s going to start from a
complete rest, so we set the initial velocity to {0.0, 0.0}, and we pass
along our current orientation. Finally, we add the bounce behavior to our
animator. This will start the animation. The animation ends when the
system comes to rest and the animator pauses.
Next, we need to implement our duration methods, as shown here:
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Public Methods
- (NSTimeInterval)horizontalAnimationDuration
{
    return 1.62;
}
- (NSTimeInterval)verticalAnimationDuration
{
    return 1.86;
}
Since we’re animating a view dropping from the top of our screen, the
duration will vary depending on the device’s orientation and the screen size.
The farther the object must move, the longer the animation takes.
Fortunately, this does not need to be super precise. The system just uses
this value if it needs to sync other animations with ours. To determine these
values, I simply ran the animation and looked at the duration values that it

--- Page 638 ---
printed to the console. Also, I used the 4-inch phone for both of these. We
might want to modify the vertical animation duration—having it check the
screen size before determining the duration. However, that’s probably more
complicated than is absolutely necessary. Instead, let’s simply use the
longer value unless we discover that it causes problems.
One last method: Implement
calculateFrameForModalView:inContainerView: as shown
here:
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Private Methods
- (void)calculateFrameForModalView:(UIView *)modalView
                   inContainerView:(UIView *)containerView
                       orientation:
(UIInterfaceOrientation)orientation
{
    CGFloat containerViewWidth =
CGRectGetWidth(containerView.bounds);
    CGPoint center;
    
    switch (orientation)
    {
        case UIInterfaceOrientationPortrait:
            modalView.frame = CGRectMake(0.0, -170.0, 280.0,
170.0);
            center = modalView.center;
            center.x = CGRectGetMidX(containerView.bounds);
            break;
        case UIInterfaceOrientationLandscapeLeft:
            modalView.frame = CGRectMake(-170.0, 0.0, 170.0,
280.0);
            center = modalView.center;
            center.y = CGRectGetMidY(containerView.bounds);
            break;
        case UIInterfaceOrientationLandscapeRight:
            modalView.frame =
            CGRectMake(containerViewWidth, 0.0, 170.0, 280.0);
            center = modalView.center;
            center.y = CGRectGetMidY(containerView.bounds);
            break;
        default:
            [NSException raise:NSGenericException
                        format:@"Invalid orientation %@",
@(orientation)];
    }
    

--- Page 639 ---
    modalView.center = center;
}
This code is similar to the code to set the to-view’s frame in -
[AddEntryAnimator
presentAddEntryViewController:overParentViewContro
ller:usingContainerView: transitionContext:].
However, there are two important differences. First, we’re centering the
view only horizontally, not vertically. Next, we need to move the view
above the top of its superview. Unfortunately, this means we need to
calculate a different frame for each of the three different orientations.
When aligning views, I often find that it’s easier to create an initial frame
and then modify the center. That’s what we’re doing here. We create a
frame that is left aligned and just above the superview. Then we grab our
center value, modify its horizontal component (x for portrait and y for
landscape orientations), and then reassign it to our view.
That’s it for the presentation controller; however, we still need our
dismissal controller. Create yet another new class. Name this one
LiftDismissalController and make it a subclass of
AbstractTransitionController. Then open
LiftDismissalController.h and declare a custom init method
as shown here:
Click here to view code image
@interface LiftDismissalController :
AbstractTransitionController
- (id)initWithVelocity:(CGPoint)velocity;
@end
Next, open LiftDismissalController.m and import
LiftBehavior.h. Then declare a class extension with a single
velocity property.
Click here to view code image
@interface LiftDismissalController ()
@property (assign, nonatomic) CGPoint velocity;
@end
And then implement our init methods. We need both our custom
initWithVelocity: method and our superclass’s designated

--- Page 640 ---
initializer.
Click here to view code image
- (id)initWithVelocity:(CGPoint)velocity
{
    self = [super init];
    if (self) {
        _velocity = velocity;
    }
    return self;
}
- (id)init
{
    return [self initWithVelocity:CGPointZero];
}
There’s nothing surprising going on here. We simply assign the
velocity argument to our property. For the init method, we default to
a velocity of {0.0, 0.0}.
Now we just need to override our three methods. Let’s start with
animateTransition:.
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - UIViewControllerAnimatedTransitioning Methods
- (void)animateTransition:
(id<UIViewControllerContextTransitioning>)
transitionContext
{
    [super animateTransition:transitionContext];
    
    UIViewController *modalController =
    [transitionContext viewControllerForKey:
     UITransitionContextFromViewControllerKey];
    
    UIView *modalView = modalController.view;
    UIView *containerView = [transitionContext containerView];
    LiftBehavior *lift =
    [[LiftBehavior alloc]
      initWithItem:modalView
      velocity:self.velocity
      orientation:modalController.interfaceOrientation];
    
    __weak LiftDismissalController *_self = self;
    lift.action = ^{

--- Page 641 ---
        CGRect intersection =
        CGRectIntersection(modalView.frame,
containerView.bounds);
        
        if (CGRectIsEmpty(intersection))
        {
            NSLog(@"Duration = %0.2f", [_self.animator
elapsedTime]);
            [_self cancelAnimation];
        }
    };
    
    [self.animator addBehavior:lift];
}
Again, we grab a reference to our pop-up view controller, its view, and
the container view. Remember, the to- and from-controllers are reversed. In
the presentation controller our pop-up controller was the to-controller. In
the dismiss, our pop-up is the from-controller.
Next, we create or lift behavior, setting its initial velocity and orientation.
Unlike our bounce behavior, this will never come to rest. Our view will
continue to accelerate upward. Therefore, we need some way to stop the
animation once we’re finished. In this case, finished means our pop-up view
is no longer on the screen.
To do this, we need to add an action to our behavior. The system will call
our action’s block during each update step. Here, we simply take the
intersection of our pop-up view’s frame and our container view’s bounds. If
the intersection is empty, the two views no longer overlap. We log out the
duration and cancel the animation, ending the transition.
With everything done, we add our behavior to the animator. This starts
the animation.
Finally, let’s add our duration methods as shown here:
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - Public Methods
- (NSTimeInterval)horizontalAnimationDuration
{
    return 0.51;
}
- (NSTimeInterval)verticalAnimationDuration
{

--- Page 642 ---
    return 0.62;
}
Again, I calculated these values by running the code and looking at the
duration messages printed to the console. If you change the animation
parameters, you may need to change these as well.
And that’s it. Now we just need to use these transition controllers during
our modal segue and then add a bit of interactivity.
Modifying HistoryTableViewController
Switching our animation controllers is easy. We just need to change the
controllers returned by HistoryTableViewController’s
animationControllerForPresentedController:presenti
ngController:sourceController and
animationControllerForDismissedController:. However,
before we get there, let’s add some infrastructure to support a bit
interactivity as well.
Let’s start by opening HistoryTableViewController.m and
importing both BouncePresentationController and
LiftDismissalController. Then add the following property to the
class extension:
Click here to view code image
@property (assign, nonatomic) CGPoint addEntryDismissVelocity;
We will use this to hold our Add Entry View Controller’s velocity when it
is dismissed using a gesture.
We also need to modify viewDidLoad as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (void)viewDidLoad
{
    [super viewDidLoad];
    self.addEntryDismissVelocity = CGPointZero;
    self.navigationItem.leftBarButtonItem = self.editButtonItem;
}
We’re just setting our dismiss velocity to {0.0, 0.0}. We will also
need to set our dismiss velocity whenever our view is saved or canceled.
Navigate down to addNewEntrySaved: and modify these methods as
shown here:

--- Page 643 ---
Click here to view code image
- (IBAction)addNewEntrySaved:(UIStoryboardSegue *)segue
{
    self.addEntryDismissVelocity = CGPointZero;
    AddEntryViewController *controller =
segue.sourceViewController;
    
    [self.weightHistoryDocument
addEntryWithWeightInLbs:controller.weight
                                                units:getDefault
Units()
                                                 date:controller
.date];
    
    [self dismissViewControllerAnimated:YES completion:nil];
    [self becomeFirstResponder];
}
Again, we just set our dismiss velocity to {0.0, 0.0}. We don’t save
our entry as part of a dismiss gesture. We save only when the user explicitly
presses the Save button. This means our corresponding dismiss animation
will always start from a dead stop.
Next, modify addNewEntryCanceled:.
Click here to view code image
- (IBAction)addNewEntryCanceled:(UIStoryboardSegue *)segue
{
    AddEntryViewController *controller =
segue.sourceViewController;
    self.addEntryDismissVelocity = controller.velocity;
    [self dismissViewControllerAnimated:YES completion:nil];
    [self becomeFirstResponder];
}
Unlike the save action, we will provide a gesture for canceling the Add
Entry View. This means the dismiss action might actually have an initial
velocity. If it does, we want to grab it so we can use it in our animation.
Now, we can finally modify the
UIViewControllerTransitioningDelegate methods. Navigate
to
animationControllerForPresentedController:presenti
ngController:sourceController: and replace the current
implementation with the following:

--- Page 644 ---
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - UIViewControllerTransitioningDelegate Methods
- (id<UIViewControllerAnimatedTransitioning>)
animationControllerForPresentedController:(UIViewController
*)presented
presentingController:(UIViewController *)presenting
sourceController:(UIViewController *)source
{
    return [[BouncePresentationController alloc] init];
}
Here, we just instantiate and return our
BouncePresentationController. The dismiss controller is similar.
The only difference is that we pass our dismiss velocity to its init
method. Also replace the current implementation of
animationControllerForDismissed Controller with the following:
Click here to view code image
- (id<UIViewControllerAnimatedTransitioning>)
animationControllerForDismissedController:(UIViewController
*)dismissed
{
    return [[LiftDismissalController alloc]
            initWithVelocity:self.addEntryDismissVelocity];
}
That’s it. Our new animation is ready to go. Unfortunately, we still have
an error in addNewEntryCanceled:. However, we need that only for
the interactive dismissals. If you comment out the top two lines of that
method, you can build and run the application. Tap the + button. The Add
Entry View should drop and bounce into place. It will then zoom out of the
way when you tap either Save or Cancel.
Now, we just need to add the interactive bit. Uncomment the two lines in
addNewEntryCanceled: and let’s add our dismiss gesture.

--- Page 645 ---
Implementing the Dismiss Gesture
We could implement the dismiss gesture in a number of ways. We could
create an interactive transition controller, like we did in Chapter 4.
However, that would be overkill. We don’t need the extra framework to
sync our gesture and our animation. Our lift behavior will work from any
starting position. We just need to know its initial velocity, and we’re good to
go.
Similarly, we could implement everything using UIKit Dynamics. In this
case, we add an attachment behavior to our view, and then we could move
the attachment’s anchor point with our gesture. However, UIKit Dynamics
is also overkill. Our view doesn’t interact with any other dynamic elements,
so we don’t need to use an attachment point to move it. We can just move it
directly. Then, when our gesture is done, we create a new bounce or lift
behavior to move it to the correct final position.
Let’s start by opening AddEntryViewController.h. Create a read-
only velocity property. This will let outside code access our gesture’s
final velocity.
Click here to view code image
@property (assign, nonatomic, readonly) CGPoint velocity;
Now, switch to AddEntryViewController.m and import our
BounceBehavior.h. Then, at the top of the file, declare the following
constant:
Click here to view code image
static const CGFloat DismissTriggerVelocity = 100.0;
We will use this value to determine whether our gesture should dismiss
our view. If, when the gesture ends, our view is moving upward at a
velocity greater than 100 pt/s we will dismiss the view. Otherwise, we’ll
just return it to its starting position.
Next, in the class extension, adopt the
UIDynamicAnimatorDelegate protocol as shown here:
Click here to view code image
@interface AddEntryViewController ()
<UITextFieldDelegate, UIDynamicAnimatorDelegate>

--- Page 646 ---
We also need to declare two additional properties inside the class
extension.
Click here to view code image
@property (assign, nonatomic, readwrite)CGPoint velocity;
@property (strong, nonatomic) UIDynamicAnimator *animator;
The velocity property simply redeclares our velocity property as
read-write. Then we create a property to hold a dynamic animator.
Next, navigate down to viewDidLoad and modify it as shown here:
Click here to view code image
- (void)viewDidLoad
{
    [super viewDidLoad];
    self.date = [NSDate date];
    self.weight = 0.0;
    self.velocity = CGPointZero;
    [self setupInputAccessories];
    [self setupNotifications];
    [self setupMotionEffects];
}
Here, we just set our default velocity to {0.0, 0.0}.
Now, let’s implement the gesture itself. Let’s start with an action. We will
eventually connect a gesture recognizer to this action, but for now just
implement the drag method at the bottom of our action methods.
Click here to view code image
- (IBAction)drag:(UIPanGestureRecognizer *)sender {
    
    // ignore drag events if the keyboard is showing
    if (self.keyboardIsShown) return;
    
    static CGPoint originalCenter;
    
    UIView *superview = self.view.superview;
    CGPoint translation = [sender translationInView:superview];
    CGPoint velocity = [sender velocityInView:superview];
    
    switch (sender.state) {
        case UIGestureRecognizerStateBegan:
            [self weightEditingDone];
            originalCenter = self.view.center;
            break;
            

--- Page 647 ---
        case UIGestureRecognizerStateChanged:
            [self updateCenterUsingTranslation:translation
                                originalCenter:originalCenter];
            
            break;
            
        case UIGestureRecognizerStateEnded:
        case UIGestureRecognizerStateCancelled:
            [self endDragWithVelocity:velocity];
            break;
            
        default:
            [NSException
             raise:NSGenericException
             format:@"Invalid Gesture State: %@",
             @(sender.state)];
    }
}
We will move our view using a pan gesture recognizer, so we type the
sender appropriately. Next, we check to see whether our keyboard is being
displayed. If it is, we shouldn’t respond to gestures, so we simply return.
Next we declare a static variable to hold our original center position.
We’ve used static variables before. They are created when the application is
compiled, not at runtime. Local static variables can be accessed only inside
the method in which they are declared. They will hold their value, even
after the method returns.
In this case, we’re using a static local variable instead of using an
instance variable. As I have said before, I dislike using instance variables
for values that really need to be shared only temporarily among a handful of
methods. It feels like we’re leaking implementation details about those
methods to the entire class.
The static local variable solves that problem, but it has its own problems.
Every version of our class will share the same static local variable. This
means if we ever had more than one AddEntryViewController class,
they might set conflicting values to the same variable.
A static local variable works here, because we will only ever have one
instance of AddEntryViewController at a time. However, you really
need to think through all the possible edge cases before you use them.
Next, we grab our current superview, which should be our transition
context’s container view. We also grab our gesture’s current translation.

--- Page 648 ---
That is the distance our finger has moved from the original point of contact.
Finally, we grab our velocity—or how fast our finger is moving.
With the data in hand, we check the gesture’s state. Again, we need to
respond to four different states: UIGestureRecognizerStateBegan,
UIGestureRecognizerStateChanged,
UIGestureRecognizerStateEnded, and
UIGestureRecognizerStateCancelled.
For UIGestureRecognizerStateBegan, we just record our
view’s current center in the originalCenter static variable. For
UIGestureRecognizerStateChanged we call
updateCenterUsingTransition:originalCenter:. For both
UIGestureRecognizerStateEnded and
UIGestureRecognizerStateCancelled, we call
endDragWithVelocity:.
Next, just below this method, let’s implement our
UIDynamicAnimatorDelegate methods. When we’re dismissing the
view, we can simply use our dismissal controller. However, when we want
to bounce the view back into place, we cannot use the presentation
controller—our view is already being presented as part of a modal
transition. Instead, we will create a dynamic animator and a bounce
behavior directly. Unfortunately, this means we also need to monitor the
dynamic animator’s delegate methods to cancel the animation once
everything comes to rest.
Click here to view code image
#pragma mark - UIDynamicAnimatorDelegate Methods
- (void)dynamicAnimatorDidPause:(UIDynamicAnimator *)animator
{
    [self.animator removeAllBehaviors];
    self.animator = nil;
}
- (void)dynamicAnimatorWillResume:(UIDynamicAnimator *)animator
{
    
}
Now, we just need to add our private methods. Let’s start with
updateCenterUsingTranslation:originalCenter:.

--- Page 649 ---
Click here to view code image
- (void)updateCenterUsingTranslation:(CGPoint)translation
                      originalCenter:(CGPoint)originalCenter
{
    CGPoint center = self.view.center;
    
    switch (self.interfaceOrientation)
    {
        case UIInterfaceOrientationPortrait:
            center.y = MIN(originalCenter.y + translation.y,
                           CGRectGetMidY(self.view.superview.bou
nds));
            break;
            
        case UIInterfaceOrientationLandscapeLeft:
            center.x = MIN(originalCenter.x + translation.x,
                           CGRectGetMidX(self.view.superview.bou
nds));
            break;
            
        case UIInterfaceOrientationLandscapeRight:
            center.x = MAX(originalCenter.x + translation.x,
                           CGRectGetMidX(self.view.superview.bou
nds));
            break;
            
        default:
            [NSException
             raise:NSGenericException
             format:@"Invalid orientation %@",
             @(self.interfaceOrientation)];
    }
    
    self.view.center = center;
}
Here, we want to offset our original center by the translation distance.
However, things get a bit tricky. We only want to let the user move the view
vertically, not horizontally. Also, we don’t want the view to move down,
below its starting position. The code here will accomplish both of those
tasks.
Now, let’s implement endDragWithVelocity:.
Click here to view code image
- (void)endDragWithVelocity:(CGPoint)velocity
{
    switch (self.interfaceOrientation)

--- Page 650 ---
    {
        case UIInterfaceOrientationPortrait:
            velocity.x = 0.0;
            if (velocity.y < -DismissTriggerVelocity)
            {
                self.velocity = velocity;
                [self performSegueWithIdentifier:
                 @"Dismiss Popup" sender:self];
            }
            else
            {
                [self bounceBackToCenter:velocity];
            }
            
            break;
            
        case UIInterfaceOrientationLandscapeLeft:
            velocity.y = 0.0;
            if (velocity.x < -DismissTriggerVelocity)
            {
                self.velocity = velocity;
                [self performSegueWithIdentifier:
                 @"Dismiss Popup" sender:self];
            }
            else
            {
                [self bounceBackToCenter:velocity];
            }
            break;
            
        case UIInterfaceOrientationLandscapeRight:
            velocity.y = 0.0;
            if (velocity.x > DismissTriggerVelocity)
            {
                self.velocity = velocity;
                [self performSegueWithIdentifier:
                 @"Dismiss Popup" sender:self];
            }
            else
            {
                [self bounceBackToCenter:velocity];
            }
            break;
            
        default:
            [NSException
             raise:NSGenericException
             format:@"Invalid orientation %@",
             @(self.interfaceOrientation)];

--- Page 651 ---
    }
}
Again, the fact that we need to treat each orientation differently obscures
the actual intent of this code. Basically, we check to see whether the
velocity is greater than our trigger in the correct direction (up, in whichever
orientation the device happens to be in). If the velocity is greater, we clear
out the velocity in the other coordinate, and we assign it to our velocity
property. Then we call performSegueWithIndentifier: to dismiss
our Add Entry View Controller.
We still need to go into Interface Builder and set the correct unwind
segue’s identifier. But, eventually, this will trigger the Cancel button’s
unwind segue, which will dismiss our view.
If our velocity is not greater than our trigger value, we call
bounceBackToCenter: to bounce the view back into position.
bounceBacktoCenter: is also the last method we need to implement.
Click here to view code image
 - (void)bounceBackToCenter:(CGPoint)velocity
{
    UIDynamicAnimator *animator =
    [[UIDynamicAnimator alloc]
     initWithReferenceView:self.view.superview];
    
    animator.delegate = self;
    
    BounceBehavior *bounce =
    [[BounceBehavior alloc]
     initWithItem:self.view
     velocity:velocity
     orientation:self.interfaceOrientation];
    
    [animator addBehavior:bounce];
    self.animator = animator;
}
Here, we’re just creating a new bounce behavior to return our view to its
original position. We start by instantiating a dynamic animator, using our
view’s superview as its reference view. Again, this should still be our
transition’s container view. Then we set our
AddEntryViewController object as the animator’s delegate.

--- Page 652 ---
Once that’s done, we instantiate our bounce behavior, passing in our
view, the gesture’s velocity, and our current orientation. Then we add the
behavior to the animator. That starts the animation.
Finally, we need to make sure our animator remains in memory until the
animation is finished. Therefore, we assign it to our animator property.
That’s it for the code. A couple quick changes in Interface Builder, and
our project will be ready to run.
Open Main.storyboard and zoom in on the Add Entry View
Controller Scene. Then, in the Document Outline, expand the Add Entry
View Controller Scene, and select “Unwind segue from Cancel to Exit.” In
the Attributes inspector, change the Identifier to Dismiss Popup. This must
match the segue identifier we used in endDragWithVelocity:.
Next, drag a Pan Gesture Recognizer from the Object library and drop it
on our Add Entry view. Select the gesture recognizer from the Document
Outline, and in the Attributes inspector, change the Maximum touches to 1.
Finally, Control-drag from the gesture recognizer to the Add Entry View
Controller, and select Drag: from the pop-up HUD.
That’s it. Run the application. Bring up the Add Entry View, and then
dismiss the keyboard. You should now be able to drag the view upward.
You have to be careful to avoid the text fields or buttons, but there’s still
plenty of space you can drag from.
Notice, if you bring your finger to a stop before letting go, the view drops
back down into place. If your finger is still moving up when you let go, the
view zooms away. It starts at the same speed as your finger and accelerates
from there. In this case, we’re triggering the same segue as the Cancel
button, but our animation code properly takes the view’s velocity into
account.
Finally, you can lift the view and throw it down toward the bottom of the
screen. Here, we’re passing our view’s velocity to our bounce behavior.
Notice that our view bounces off the boundary considerably higher. You can
actually get it to bounce completely off the screen, though it will eventually
come back and settle into place.

--- Page 653 ---
Wrapping Up
In this chapter, we looked at two, very different ways of animating objects
on the screen. We began with UIMotionEffects. This provides an easy
API for accessing the device motion (combined data from the
accelerometers, gyroscopes, and compass). It is primarily used for building
parallax effects, though we can use it to modify any animatable property of
our view, its layers or its subview.
Next, we looked at UIKit Dynamics. This lets us simulate 2D physics-
based animations with our views. It’s worth repeating, UIKit Dynamics is
really designed to create physically realistic-looking animations. It’s not
intended to be a full-featured game engine. Most of the time we will use it
in limited ways—like the lift and bounce behaviors in this chapter.
If you’re trying to build a game, Sprite Kit presents a much better option.
It is interesting to note, however, that both Sprite Kit and UIKit Dynamics
share the same underlying physics engine.
The end of the chapter also marks the end of development on our Health
Beat application. All the features have been implemented. All the code is
complete. We’re not quite done, however. In the next chapter, we will look
at all the little tasks remaining before we can submit our application to the
App Store.
Other Resources
Unfortunately, there are no programming guides that I can point you toward
for this chapter. Most of the existing documentation is limited to the
individual class references. However, there are a few other resources worth
looking at.
 Event Handling Guide for iOS: Motion Events
IOS Developer’s Library
I’ve recommended the Event Handling Guide before. This time,
however, I wanted to highlight the section on motion events. This
covers a number of different ways we can detect and respond to
device’s motion. This includes low-level motion detection using the
Core Motion framework.
 Getting Started with UIKit Dynamics

--- Page 654 ---
WWDC 2013 Session Videos
This session provides an initial overview of UIKit Dynamics,
covering the basics in how the behaviors and animators work.
 Advanced Techniques with UIKit Dynamics
WWDC 2013 Session Videos
This goes into more depth in UIKit Dynamics, covering a number of
advanced topics and recommended best practices. I highly
recommend watching both the Getting Started and the Advanced
Techniques videos.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 655 ---
Chapter 9. The Last Mile
This chapter covers additional tasks needed to get our app ready for sale in
the App Store. We’ll look at the details that go into a finished app, from
icons and start-up screens to localization and build settings. Finally, we’ll
examine the process of building the app for distribution—both for ad hoc
distribution and for sale.
The Final Touches
This is a grab bag of additional features and settings. Some are required
before we can submit our application, others are strongly recommended,
and a few merely add a touch of convenience to our apps.
Application Artwork
Our application expects a number of icons and other images. These are not
functional parts of the application itself. Rather, they are used by the system
to represent our application in a variety of circumstances.
Icons
We should provide at least four icons for our device: Application, Spotlight,
Settings, and iTunesArtwork. Application is used on our devices home
screen, Spotlight appears inside search results, Settings identifies our app
inside the Settings application, and iTunesArtwork is displayed in the App
Store and iTunes.
All the icons must be a PNG format image. They should fill the full
rectangle without any transparent or translucent areas. The system will
automatically apply the rounded corner effect.
Each icon is a different size. Additionally, these sizes may differ between
the iPhone and the iPad. On the iPad we also need to provide both Retina
and standard versions for each icon. Fortunately, all of the iPhones and iPod
touches that support iOS 7 are Retina devices. This means we need only one
version of each icon on the phone. Table 9.1 gives details about the icon
sizes.

--- Page 656 ---
TABLE 9.1 Icon Sizes
iTunesArtwork is somewhat different from the rest. Its size does not
depend on the device or the device’s resolution. Apple recommends that we
provide two versions of this icon, a 512 x 512 version and a 1024 x 1024
version. We will upload both of these icons to iTunes Connect when we
submit our application; however, I recommend including them in the project
as well. When included in the project, the 512 x 512 version should be
named iTunesArtwork. Notice there’s no file extension. The 1024 x
1024 version should be named iTunesArtwork@2x. This allows iTunes
to properly display our application’s icon when we create ad hoc builds (for
example, during beta testing).
The Application icon and iTunesArtwork are required. All other
icons can be derived from the Application icon. However, for best results,
you should custom design an icon for each resolution.
We can easily add the icons to our application using the assets catalog.
Our application’s assets catalog should already have an AppIcon collection.
If we select this, we will see the various icon sizes required by our
application. Figure 9.1 shows the AppIcon collection for a universal
application; therefore, it requires both iPhone and iPad icons. Note that all
sizes are shown in points, not pixels.

--- Page 657 ---
FIGURE 9.1 Placeholders for our icons in the assets catalog
To add an icon, simply drag correctly sized PNG files from the Finder
and drop them in the appropriate place. For the iTunesArtwork icon,
Control-click an appropriate group (for example, the Supporting Files
group), and select the Add Files To “<Project Name>”... menu item.
 Note
If you are supporting older versions of iOS, you will need to
provide both the Retina and the standard resolution icons for
the iPhone. Also, some of the icon sizes have changed with
iOS 7. Most importantly, however, we cannot use the assets
catalog for older versions of iOS. This means we need to add
the icons directly to the project and identify them in our
project’s info.plist file.
Launch Images
The system displays our application’s launch image while the application
loads. Many developers use this as an opportunity to display a splash screen
or advertisement, but Apple’s Human Interface Guidelines actively
discourage this.
Instead, we should provide a streamlined version of the application’s
main interface as the launch image. We want to strip out anything that

--- Page 658 ---
might change. Obviously, this includes date fields and table view contents,
but it also includes button titles and other labels that need to be localized. In
fact, it’s often best to remove the buttons entirely. When in doubt, go for the
simplest possible launch image. For example, Figure 9.2 is an excellent
launch image for our Health Beat application. I created this by taking a
screen shot from the simulator and then editing it to remove the status bar,
navigation bar contents, and tab bar contents.
FIGURE 9.2 Health Beat’s launch image
Displaying only a partial user interface has a psychological advantage.
The user won’t accidentally try to use it until all the details are filled in.

--- Page 659 ---
Furthermore, it creates the illusion that our application is launching faster.
Our app seems snappier, and the users appreciate being able to get to work
immediately.
For iPhone projects, we need two launch images: a 640 x 960 image for
the 3.5-inch screens and a 640 x 1136 image for the 4-inch screens. iPhone
always launches into the portrait orientation.
For iPad projects, we need both portrait and landscape images. We also
need them in both standard and Retina resolution. That means we need four
versions: 768 x 1024, 1024 x 768, 1536 x 2048, and 2048 x 1536.
We can add the launch images using the assets catalog. Simply select the
LaunchImage collection and drag the images to the correct placeholders.
However, don’t spend too much time on the launch image. It will be used
only the first time the application launches. After that, our application will
take a snapshot of its user interface when the app goes to the background.
The next time the app launches, it will use that snapshot.
This snapshot is also displayed in the application switcher (the row of
icons and views that appear when you double-tap the home button). This
means we need to make sure we don’t accidentally take a snapshot of any
confidential or sensitive information. As a result, we may need to hide items
like passwords in our app delegate’s
applicationDidEnterBackground: method. We can also call
ignoreSnapshotOnNextApplicationLaunch to prevent our app
from using the snapshot on its next lunch.
Our application will also update its snapshot whenever it downloads data
using a background fetch. This keeps the image of our application up-to-
date, both when it relaunches and when it’s in the application switcher.
Required Capabilities
We must declare any special capabilities that our application requires (or
explicitly prohibits). Most of the defined capabilities are hardware-based,
but some (like Game Center or Location Services) have a software
component.
The iOS system will not launch the application if the device does not
meet its required capabilities. Furthermore, the iTunes App Store will use

--- Page 660 ---
this information to generate its device requirements—preventing users from
downloading applications that they cannot run.
To set the required capabilities, add a
UIRequiredDeviceCapabilities key to the application’s
Info.plist file. Set this key to either an array or a dictionary. If we use
an array, then simply adding a feature’s key to the array means that the
feature is required. If it’s not listed, the app can manage without it.
 Note
Your app may be rejected from the App Store if it needs a
capability but does not properly declare that requirement in
Info.plist.
If you use a dictionary, you should give each feature in the dictionary a
true or false Boolean value. If it’s true, the app requires the
capability. If it’s false, the app explicitly prohibits the capability. If the
feature is not included in the dictionary, it’s optional.
All the capability keys are listed here. For more information about these
keys, refer to the “App-Related Resources” section of the iOS App
Programming Guide. Some of these may be set automatically by our
project’s Capabilities settings; however, most will need to be set by hand.
 accelerometer
 armv6
 armv7
 auto-focus-camera
 bluetooth-le
 camera-flash
 front-facing-camera
 gamekit
 gps
 gyroscope
 location-services

--- Page 661 ---
 magnetometer
 microphone
 opengles-1
 opengles-2
 peer-peer
 sms
 still-camera
 telephony
 video-camera
 wifi
Deployment Target
There are two build settings that determine which SDK our application uses
to compile and which version of the OS it supports: the base SDK and the
iOS deployment target.
The base SDK should always be set to the latest version of iOS. In fact,
each version of Xcode includes only the latest SDK—so we typically
cannot change it to anything lower.
The deployment target, on the other hand, lets us specify the earliest
version of the OS that can still run our app. To see the deployment target,
click the project icon and select the General tab. By default, new projects
are set with the deployment target equal to the base SDK. We can change
this to support any version of iOS 6.0 and above. Actually, we can support
anything down to iOS 4.3, but to support anything lower than 6.0, we need
to turn off 64-bit support.
Just to be clear, the application is compiled using the latest SDK, but it
may still run on earlier devices. This works through the magic of weak
linking.
The compiler will compare the symbols in the frameworks of the base
SDK and the deployment target SDK. Anything that’s available in the base
SDK but not available in the deployment target will be weak linked. This
means that when the process is running, the symbol does not need to be
present. As long as a missing symbol isn’t actually called, the application

--- Page 662 ---
will continue to run normally. Of course, calling a missing symbol will
crash the app.
This lets us include iOS 7-only features in an app targeting iOS 6.0. We
just need to perform runtime checks before calling any iOS 7–only code
and degrade gracefully when those features are not available.
To check whether a class is available, we simply call [<class name>
class]. If this returns nil, the class is not available. To see whether a
method is available, we call the object’s respondsToSelector:
method. To see whether a function is available, check to see whether the
function’s name evaluates to NULL.
Click here to view code image
if ([UIInterpolatingMotionEffect class]) {
    // We can use motion effects.
}
if ([self respondsToSelector:
     @selector(setTransitionCoordinator)]) {
    // We can set a custom transition
}
if (UIStatusBarStyleLightContent != NULL) {
    // we can use the new light content status bar setting
}
On the surface, this is amazing. It means we can have our cake and eat it
too. We can support old iOS 4.3 phones while also enabling all the latest
and greatest features on the most recent devices. However, there is one huge
problem here. There is no way to check the code at compile time and verify
that we aren’t accidentally calling something above the deployment target
in a generally reachable branch.
Things aren’t so bad when you’re just adding a new feature to an existing
app. You know that the code you’re adding is above the deployment target,
and you can take care to isolate it properly. The real problem comes in
when you’re doing general coding or debugging. It’s so easy to
unknowingly use parts of the SDK that are above the deployment target—
especially when using autocomplete.
Some third-party tools can help. AppCode from JetBrains will search for
and identify code that’s above the deployment target. However, the only
real solution is testing.

--- Page 663 ---
OK, I like testing; I’m a huge fan of testing. Unfortunately, testing alone
is not a sufficient solution for this problem. Here’s the hard, cold truth: It’s
hard (I would say impractical if not impossible) to make sure we actually
execute every possible branch of our code during our test cycles. And if we
don’t test every branch, we don’t really know if we’re safe. Above-
deployment API calls may be scattered throughout any part of our code,
laying around like little land mines, just waiting to kill our apps.
So, if you go down this route, test your code. Test it hard and test it often.
If possible, find a bunch of beta testers who still run older versions of iOS.
Otherwise, you’re just asking for a bunch of bad reviews when your app
starts crashing on older devices.
Finally, there are also some important limitations that weak linking just
cannot work around. Storyboards are available only on iOS 5 and later.
Auto Layout and unwinding segues are available only on iOS 6 and later.
The assets catalog is available only for iOS 7.
Localization
Localization involves adapting our application for two or more culturally
distinct markets. People often think about localization in terms of
translating written text, and it can involve a lot of translation. However, it
also involves a wide range of other cultural aspects that have nothing to do
with language. For example, we’ve already used NSNumberFormatter
to create locally formatted numbers. In that case, it’s not about language—
we’re not translating the number; we’re simply choosing the best
representation based on our user’s locale. Similarly, a stop sign icon should
look very different in Japan than it does in the United States. Both of these
are prime examples of localization.
Localization affects a wide range of application features, including the
following:
 Storyboards and nibs
 Static text
 Icons and graphics
 Sounds and spoken words
 Dynamically generated text
 Text editing

--- Page 664 ---
 Sorting orders
Xcode supports localization by creating localized bundles. These bundles
are represented by directories ending in .lproj. The localized bundles
can be used to distinguish between different languages or, in some cases,
even different regional dialects. iOS will try to select the best match, based
on the device’s settings; however, it’s generally best to use the most general
location specifiers possible.
When we load a resource from our application bundle, the system starts
searching in the general bundle. If it cannot find a match, it begins
searching through the localized bundles. The actual search order is based on
the user’s preferences. By placing localized resources in the correct
bundles, we ensure that our application loads the correct versions at
runtime.
We have a number of tools to help ease the internationalization effort,
especially when it comes to finding and translating string values.
 ibtool: This command-line utility can be used to extract strings
from a nib file. The resulting string file can then be translated into
another language. Once that is done, ibtool can merge the
translated strings back with the original nib to create a translated nib.
 NSLocalizedString(): This method and its siblings will return
a localized string value for a given key. NSLocalizedString()
is the simplest. It takes two parameters: the key and a comment. It
searches the bundle for the Localizable.strings file, and then
it searches that file for the key. If a match is found, it returns the string
associated with the key; otherwise, it returns the key itself. The other
variants let us search different files, return different default values, or
otherwise modify the search. Also note that the comment argument is
not used at runtime. Instead, it is used by genstrings when
creating our .strings files.
 genstrings: This command-line utility can parse C and Objective-
C files and can find all the keys declared using one of the
NSLocalizedString() methods. It will then build the
.strings files containing all the unique values it found. This file
can then be sent to translators, and the translated versions can be
placed in the appropriate language bundles.

--- Page 665 ---
Additionally, we don’t need to translate every single string in our
application. We only need to localize the strings that the user actually sees.
Strings used as internal keys or as the names of notifications should be left
alone.
Accessibility
Recently, iOS has received a lot of praise and press for its excellent
accessibility features. Out of the box, iOS provides a wide range of
alternate input and output settings to assist people with low vision or
blindness, hearing disabilities, and motor or physical disabilities. For the
most part, these features are available to our application for free. We may
need to be a little careful when creating custom gestures, since assistive
touch won’t support them, but other than that, most of the work is done for
us.
In fact, when developers talk about accessibility, we’re really talking
about supporting VoiceOver. VoiceOver helps visually impaired users
navigate through our application. It tells them about the contents of the
screen and assists with performing actions such as pressing buttons or
selecting links.
Fortunately, VoiceOver is easy to use. For most standard controls, we just
need to set the Accessibility settings in Interface Builder. These can be
found in the Identity inspector. The Label is a string that succinctly
identifies the control. For example, “Units” or “Enter Weight.” The Hint is a
brief string that describes the effect of performing an action on the control.
This should avoid mentioning either the control or the action. For example,
“enter a new weight” not “select this text field to enter a new weight.”
This, however, is just the beginning. iOS accessibility support provides a
number of methods to help truly customize and refine the interface for
visually impaired users.
Sharing Files with Other Applications
We have already seen that the cloud lets us share our files across multiple
devices—but what if we want to share one file among many applications?
Unfortunately, the application sandbox really gets in our way here. If we
want to open the file in another application, we must copy it into that
application’s sandbox. We do this using the “Open in” menu.

--- Page 666 ---
To transfer a document to other applications, create an instance of
UIDocumentInteraction Controller. Then call either
presentOpenInMenuFromBarButtonItem:animated: or
presentOpenInMenuFromRect:inView:animated:, depending
on whether you want to anchor the menu to an arbitrary rectangle or to a bar
button.
For example, the following code will display the “Open in” menu when
the attached button is pressed. The system will then dynamically create a
menu, listing all the applications that have registered support for the given
document type.
Click here to view code image
- (IBAction) exportButtonPressed:(id)sender {
    // Open file in other apps.
    UIDocumentInteractionController *controller =
    [UIDocumentInteractionController
interactionControllerWithURL:
     fileURL];
    [controller presentOpenInMenuFromBarButtonItem:sender
                                        animated:YES];
}
To receive documents from other applications, we must register all the
documents that our application supports. This requires two steps. First, add
an appropriate document type to the target’s Document Types list. Click the
project icon and select the Info tab. Next, expand the Document Types list.
Click the + button to add a new document type.
In the Name field, give the document a name. Then, in the Types field
enter its UTI. You can find a complete list of system-supported UTIs in the
“System-Declared Uniform Type Identifiers” section of the Uniform Type
Identifiers Reference. For example, to register text files, set the document
Types field to public.text.
Next, in application:didFinishLaunchingWithOptions:,
we need to check the options argument for the
UIApplicationLaunchOptionsURLKey. If this key is present, we
need to try to open the file at the corresponding URL.
Click here to view code image
NSURL *url =
[launchOptions objectForKey:UIApplicationLaunchOptionsURLKey];

--- Page 667 ---
if (url != nil) {
    // Open the file from the URL.
}
Building for Distribution
Once everything’s ready, it’s time to build our application for distribution.
There are two ways to do this. First, we can build an ad hoc distribution.
This allows us to distribute our application to up to 100 devices. We often
do this as part of our application’s testing, letting us send the application out
to a select group of beta testers. Once that’s done, we can build and submit
to the iOS App Store.
 Note
There’s actually a third option. If you have an enterprise
developer license, you can build and distribute applications
internally. This lets large corporations create proprietary tools
for use within the company.
Creating Ad Hoc Builds
Before we can create an ad hoc build, we need to create a distribution
provisioning profile containing the UDIDs of all our test devices. Log into
your account at Apple’s Developer site
(http://developer.apple.com/iphone), and click the
Certificates, Identifiers & Profiles link in the upper-right corner.
Before creating a new profile, be sure to add all of your test devices. In
the left column, select Devices, and then click the “+” button to add a new
device. You will need the unique device identifier (UDID) from each
device. Your testers can get their UDID by viewing the device’s summary in
iTunes. Click the serial number to view the UDID. It’s also best if they
Control-click the UDID and copy/paste it. Trying to copy it by hand is a
recipe for disaster.
We can have up to 100 test devices at any time. With all the test devices
in place, select Provisioning Profiles from the left column and select the
Distribution tab. Then click the + button, and then select the Ad Hoc
distribution. Then click Continue.

--- Page 668 ---
In the next screen, select the appropriate App ID. If you haven’t created a
specific App ID for your application, you should just choose the Generic
ID. Then select the developer certificate to use. Unless you have installed
multiple developer certificates, there will be only one option here. In the
next screen, select the devices that can run this application. In many cases,
you can just check the Select All box.
Finally, give the profile a name and click the Generate button. Once it’s
done creating the profile, we can download the profile. Simply double-click
the file to install it into Xcode.
Now we can create the ad hoc build. Make sure you have either iOS
Device or an actual, tethered test device selected in the active schema and
then select the Product > Archive menu item. This will build and save a
release version of your app. When it’s finished, it automatically opens the
Archive tab in Xcode’s Organizer.
Select the most recent archived file, and click the Distribute button. Then
select Save for Enterprise or Ad Hoc Deployment and click Next. Finally
select the deployment profile we created earlier and click Export. This
creates an IPA file for your application. Email this file to your beta testers.
They can load it into iTunes and sync it to their devices.
Submitting to the App Store
Finally, we can submit our application to the App Store for distribution. The
procedure is similar. We need to create a distribution profile for the App
Store. We also need to sign up for an iTunes Connect account. Finally, we
need to gather all the required information for our app.
 Description
 Categories
 Parental control rating
 Keywords
 SKU number
 Application URL
 Support URL
 Screen shots
 Support email address

--- Page 669 ---
 End user license agreement
 The iTunesArtwork icons
 Price
 Availability date
 Available territories
Once we have everything we need, we can log into iTunes Connect and
set up our application. When iTunes Connect is ready, we archive and
distribute our application for the App Store. Xcode will automatically
upload it to iTunes Connect.
Remember that all applications submitted to the iTunes App Store must
follow both the App Store Review Guidelines and the Human Interface
Guidelines. Reviews are typically performed within seven days, and you
can monitor the status from iTunes Connect. You will also receive email
updates about the status as it moves through the review process.
While some applications have notoriously had trouble getting through
Apple’s review process, most applications pass without any issues. The best
thing is to be prepared. Test your application. Make sure it doesn’t crash.
You’ll also want to review Apple’s policies and make sure you’re not
violating anything. If you’ve done your job correctly, you shouldn’t have
any problems. Good luck!
Wrapping Up
This chapter covered a broad range of topics. If it didn’t answer all your
questions, I hope it at least pointed you in the right direction and helped you
find the solutions you need.
This is also the end of the book. I hope the information has proven
useful. However, the fun doesn’t end here. Check out the book’s website at
www.freelancemadscience.com/books/ for bonus chapters—
additional material that we just couldn’t squeeze in between this book’s
covers.
 “Objective-C” provides a detailed rundown on the Objective-C
programming language. It covers the fundamental building blocks of
Objective-C, objects and object-oriented programming, new

--- Page 670 ---
Objective-C syntax like dot notation and the literal syntax, memory
management, and common design patterns.
 “Overview of iOS Notification Techniques” reviews all the
notification techniques available to an iOS application, discussing the
advantages and disadvantages of each approach.
 “State Persistence and Restoration” discusses saving the user
interfaces state so that we can relaunch the application exactly where
they last left off.
 “From iPhone to iPad” covers the differences in developing for the
iPad.
 “Other Tools of the Trade” discusses the tools, tips, and techniques
behind source control, unit testing, performance testing, and
debugging.
Others material may be added as we go along.
The website also hosts the book’s FAQs and errata, as well as a forum for
discussion. Please stop by and leave your questions or comments. I look
forward to continuing the conversation with you online.
Other Resources
 Asset Catalog Help
iOS Developer’s Library
This provides additional information on using the asset catalog,
including information about migrating app icons and launch images
from older projects, and using the asset catalog to specify the
resizable area of an image.
 iOS Human Interface Guidelines
iOS Developer’s Library
While this document contains a wealth of information about all
aspects of app design, it is particularly helpful when creating app
icons and launch images. It contains details about the requirements,
along with helpful suggestions, hints, and tips. Unfortunately, the
information is somewhat scattered through the document—so you
should probably just read the whole thing.
 Supporting Multiple iOS Versions and Devices

--- Page 671 ---
http://www.raywenderlich.com/42591/supporting-multiple-ios-
versions-and-devices
This tutorial walks you through the process of building an app with a
deployment target lower than the base SDK. If you’re thinking about
going that route, this should give you an idea of what to expect. Just
remember, it can be a long and difficult road.
 Internationalization Programming Topics
iOS Developer’s Library
This is the go-to guide when internationalizing your application. I
cannot stress internationalization enough. The iOS App Store provides
easy access to a truly global marketplace. You should do everything
you can to take full advantage of the global market.
 Accessibility Programming Guide for iOS
iOS Developer’s Library
This is the complete guide for making accessible apps. In an ideal
world, all apps would be accessible. It’s just the right thing to do, and
it’s not terribly difficult. If nothing else, start with the basics, and then
add new features as needed.
 Accessibility for iPhone and iPad Apps
http://mattgemmell.com/2010/12/19/accessibility-for-iphone-and-
ipad-apps/
This is a quick overview of accessibility on iOS. It provides a strong
motivation for adding accessibility to all applications, covers some of
the common misconceptions about visually impaired users, and gives
a brief run-through over the different types of accessibility. It’s a few
years out of date at this point, but still well worth reading.
 App Distribution Guide
iOS Developer’s Library
This guide contains detailed information on all aspects of distributing
applications using Xcode 5. I’m not sure that I’d recommend reading
it cover-to-cover, but it’s definitely worth keeping in your back
pocket, in case you run into trouble.
 iTunes Connect Developer Guide

--- Page 672 ---
iOS Developer’s Library
This also falls into the “most of the time you shouldn’t need it”
category. It has extensive information on submitting and managing
applications in iTunes Connect. If you ever have any questions when
working with iTunes Connect, this is the first place you should look.
 App Store Review Guidelines
https://developer.apple.com/appstore/resources/approval/guidelines.ht
ml
We are playing in Apple’s sandbox, so we must abide by their rules. I
would highly recommend reading this document before you begin
each iOS project. Apple’s policies change—and if you’re going to run
up against their policies, it’s best to know before you invest months in
an idea. Also remember, this isn’t an exhaustive list—creative
developers can always find new ways to get rejected. But, it will
highlight the most common issues and pitfalls.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 673 ---
Index
A
accessibility
resource, 483
support, 479
accessor methods
using with WeightHistoryDocument, 75
WeightHistoryDocument for Core Data, 404–405
Accounts preferences, 16
ad hoc builds, creating, 481
Add Entry button, outlet for, 299–300
Add Entry scene, updating fonts for, 183–184
Add Entry View. See also bouncing Add Entry View
adding motion effects to, 434–438
animator object, 229
bringing up, 168
custom transition, 225
laying out, 157–161
addEntry: method, adding to WeightHistoryDocument, 76
addSubview:, 116
aligning
labels, 39
views, 456
animateTransition:, 227–228
animation methods for UIView, 222–223
animation transition controllers
AbstractTransitionController, 449
aligning views, 456
animateTransition:, 451
calling super, 454

--- Page 674 ---
cancelAnimation method, 453
controller transitioning protocol, 449
duration methods, 458
horizontal duration method, 452–453
init methods, 457
instantiating bounce behavior, 454–455
lift behavior, 458
overriding animateTransition:, 453–454, 457–458
transitionContext, 451–452
UIDynamicAnimator methods, 452
velocity property, 456
vertical duration method, 452–453
animations
length of, 238
UIKit Dynamics, 438
animator, deallocating, 453
animator object
Add Entry View, 229
completeTransition:’s argument, 229
from- and to- controllers, 228
for custom transition, 226–230
interactive transitions, 242–246
positioning views, 229
App Store
number of apps in, 4
submitting to, 481–482
App Store Review Guidelines, 484
AppDelegate, 31, 57
Apple’s Developer site, 481
application artwork. See also Health Beat project
accessibility, 479
deployment target, 476–477
file sharing with applications, 479–480

--- Page 675 ---
icons, 472–473
launch images, 474–475
localization, 478–479
required capabilities, 475–476
applications. See also best practices
organizing, 53
presented controllers, 53
upgrading, 264–265
apps
bootstrapping, 30
distribution resource, 484
Music, 52
array, filtering in Entry Detail View, 154–155
Asset Catalog Help, 483
assets catalog, contents, 57
Assistant editor, 11, 40–41
attributes, 119
Attributes inspector, 14, 28
Auto Layout. See also Health Beat UI layout; layout guides
aligning views, 132
alignment rect, 133
attributes, 119
constraint API, 122–126
constraints, 119
constraints for table view cells, 138–139
declaring constraints, 120
default constraints, 122
defining constraints, 124–126
detecting ambiguous layouts, 133–134
detecting conflicts, 134–135
editing constraints, 129–132
Editor>Canvas menu, 131–132
explained, 118

--- Page 676 ---
inequalities, 120
intrinsic sizes, 121
introduced, 112
layout guides, 123
Leading Edge, 119
nonscrolling scenes, 124
*Not An Attribute*, 119
overriding methods, 132–133
priority constants, 121
pseudo-code examples, 119–120
selecting constraints, 132
shouldBeArchived property, 133
Size inspector, 132
size of controls, 120
specifying constraints, 122
timing layouts, 135–136
Trailing Edge, 119
using, 119–120
visual formatting syntax, 126–129
autoresizing masks, 117–118
awakeFromNib, calling, 193
B
background color
setting, 38
setting to clear, 194
background saves, automating, 303–305
background view
Core Graphics, 219
displaying, 200
extending behind bars, 201
grid and path, 200
redrawing, 202

--- Page 677 ---
rotating, 201
stretched and rotated, 201
UIBezierPath, 200
use by storyboard, 200
BackgroundView class
creating, 192
default values, 192
drawing grid, 195
initWithCoder:, 193
scale factor, 195
setDefaults method, 193
setting view to opaque, 194–195
backing up data, 263–264
bars, handling, 201
Behaviors preferences, 16
best practices. See also applications
closing apps, 103
low memory warnings, 103
opening apps, 102
bitmapped images, using, 220
bitmaps versus custom drawing, 219
bootstrapping apps, 30
bouncing Add Entry View. See also Add Entry View
AbstractBehavior class, 441
addNewEntryCanceled:, 460
angle for push, 448
animation transition controllers, 449–459
BounceBehavior class, 444
BouncePresentationController, 460
child behaviors, 445
collision behavior, 444–445
collision property, 445
defining up and down, 446–447

--- Page 678 ---
disabling rotation, 445, 447
dismiss gesture, 461–468
dynamic item behavior, 443
gravity behavior, 447
HistoryTableViewController, 459
init, 443
initializer, 442–443
insets for orientation, 445
item behavior, 447
LiftBehavior class, 445–446
read-only properties, 441
read-write properties, 442
setupBehaviors, 443
setupBehaviors method, 445
subclasses, 444
bounds property, 114–115
Breakpoint tab in Navigator, 12
bringSubviewToFront:, 116
building for distribution, 480–482
buttons, resizing, 160
C
Cancel button, adding to bottom of screen, 160
center property, 114–115
center vertically constraint, adding, 39
classes, adding to Health Beat, 63
Clear Button attribute, setting, 47
closing apps, best practices for, 103
code, refactoring, 287
Code Snippet library, 14
collection operators, using, 151
companion file, selecting, 41. See also files
concurrency resource, 311

--- Page 679 ---
concurrent programming, 290–291
Connections inspector, 14, 25
constraints
Auto Layout, 119–120
center vertically, 39
defining in Auto Layout, 124–126
editing in Interface Builder, 129–132
line graph, 202
selecting in Auto Layout, 132
shouldBeArchived property, 133
specifying in Auto Layout, 122
for text field and navigation bar, 43–44
container controllers, 52
container view, rotating, 239
containers, nesting, 54
content controllers, 52
contentsForType:Error:, overriding, 289
control states, adding to Units button, 174
controllers
collection view, 54
container, 52
content, 52
table view, 53
conversion methods, implementing, 68–69
coordinate systems
considering, 114
OS X versus iOS, 115
core animation resource, 257
Core Data. See also Health Beat conversion to Core Data
accessing contexts, 372–381
adding versions, 369
attribute settings, 367
attribute types, 366

--- Page 680 ---
Binary Data attribute, 366
Boolean attribute, 366
Cascade delete rule, 368
comparing to databases, 364
configurations, 372
creating document, 423–426
Date attribute, 366
Decimal attribute, 366
delete rules, 368
Deny delete rule, 368
Double attribute, 366
entity connections, 367
entity descriptions, 366, 369
fetch requests, 371–372
fetched properties, 368–369
Float attribute, 366
formatting string placeholders, 379
iCloud and fallback store, 390–391
iCloud limitations, 392–393
iCloud syncing, 390
Indexed attribute setting, 367
inheritance, 369
instantiating entities, 374
Integer attributes, 366
integration with iCloud, 389
loading document, 423–426
managed object context, 372–381
managed object model, 365–372
managed objects, 374–375
many-to-many relationships, 368
mapping model, 370
migrating data, 369–371
models, 365

--- Page 681 ---
No Action delete rule, 368
NSOrderedSet, 368
Nullify delete rule, 368
to-one relationships, 368
Optional attribute setting, 367
overview, 364–365
persistent stores, 382–385
predicate strings, 379
relationships, 367–368
reliability, 392–393
resources, 429
String attribute, 366
support data, 371–372
Transformable attribute, 366–367
Transient attribute setting, 367
UIManagedDocument, 385–386
Undefined attribute, 366–367
updating view controllers, 426–427
using with SQLite stores, 389
validation settings, 367
Core Data performance
faulting, 387
fetch requests, 386
large binary objects, 388
memory overhead, 387
tools, 388
Core Graphics
data types, 113
explained, 219
functions, 219
count public property
explained, 71–72
getter for, 74

--- Page 682 ---
making KVO compliant, 74
using, 94
createCloudURL method, 340–341
createNewFileATURL: method, 289
custom table view cells. See also table view controllers
Auto Layout constraints, 138–139
changing font, 137
connecting outlets, 139–140
displaying weights, 145–146
editing content, 137
formatting weight strings, 140–145
revising Weight label, 137
stretching Date label, 139
custom transitions. See also view presentation
Add Entry View controller, 225
animation methods for UIView, 222–223
Auto Layout and core animation, 223–224
core animation, 222–224
modal segues, 221
resource, 257
view presentation, 224
D
data
backing up, 263–264
migrating via Core Data, 369–371
passing to scenes, 36
data detector, entering for dates, 170
data objects, 282. See also objects
date arithmetic, substituting with NSCalendar, 155
Date label, stretching to fit, 139
dates
alert for changes, 171

--- Page 683 ---
creating, 105
data detector, 170
delegate for text field, 171
Done button text, 171
entering in Health Beat, 169–172
generating objects from, 105
text color, 171
dealloc method
document state changes, 297
user preferences, 275–276
WeightHistoryDocument for Core Data, 404
Debug area, 11
Debug navigator, 12, 359
defaults database, accessing, 270
delegate methods
calling, 37
implementing, 230–231
delegates, 31
deleting
controllers from storyboards, 58
derived data, 287
entries from Health Beat, 155–157
log messages, 110
deployment target, 476–477
detail view cell, laying out, 148
dictionary, required capability, 475
dismiss gesture
bounceBacktoCenter:, 467
checking state, 463
endDragWithVelocity:, 465–466
gesture recognizers, 467–468
implementing, 461–463
offset center, 465

--- Page 684 ---
private methods, 464–465
static variable, 463
superview, 463
UIDynamicAnimatorDelegate, 464
viewDidLoad:, 462
display resolutions, supporting, 195
distribution, building for, 480–482
Document Outline. See also UIDocument subclass
collapsing, 40
hiding and showing, 22
document start-up sequence
createCloudURL method, 340–341
expanding sandbox, 337–339
loadFile, 348–350
metadata query, 346
migrating document, 339–342
modifying, 333–334
monitoring iCloud users, 334–337
processQuery: method, 347–348
searchForCloudDocument method, 345–346
searching Ubiquity Container, 346
updating, 343–350
document state changes. See also UIDocument subclass
automatic background saves, 303–305
checking state, 298–299, 301
dealloc method, 297
delegate approach, 295
graph view controller, 302
implementing subscriber method, 302–303
initWithCoder:, 306
NSCoding, 305–307
NSHashTable, 296
NSKeyedUnarchiver, 305

--- Page 685 ---
outlet for Add Entry button, 299–300
registering for notifications, 297–298
removing observer, 297
responding to, 294–303
setupDocument method, 299
subscriber notification method, 297
subscribers, 295–296
UIActionSheet, 299
UIAlertView, 299
undo action, 307–310
updateAddButton method, 300–301
Document Storage API. See also sandbox
best practices, 319
debugging, 359–360
extended sandbox, 317
file coordinators, 320–321
file presenters, 321
file versioning, 321–322
flow of data, 317
flow of metadata, 317
implementation, 318–319
Ubiquity Container, 317–318
document storage strategies, 322–323
documentation comments
adding, 66
displaying, 67
documentReady method, 287
Done button, 36
done: method
connecting Return key to, 47
navigating to, 45
doneEditing action, creating, 166
Double Click Navigation preferences, 16

--- Page 686 ---
Downloads preferences, 16
Doxygen-formatted comments, adding, 66
drawing
background view, 192
versus bitmaps, 219
dots for line graph, 213
line graph, 209
rectangle for text, 216
subpixel, 198
views, 198
drawRect: method, 217, 219
Dynamic Type
categories, 178
current state, 178
default implementation, 179
font for Caption 1 style, 215
font size, 180
function of, 177
notification, 180–181
E
editing style, checking, 156
Editor, 11
Editor areas, displaying side by side, 41
editors, stacking vertically, 41
entries
adding to Health Beat, 155–157
deleting from Health Beat, 155–157
Entry Detail scene
adding color to, 187
updating fonts for, 184–185
Entry Detail View
collection operators, 151

--- Page 687 ---
creating, 154–155
creating outlets, 149–150
filtering array, 152, 154–155
KVC operators, 152
NSCalendar object, 155
updating, 150–152
error messages, providing, 292. See also warnings
event handling resource, 257, 469
events, responding to, 164
exchangeSubviewAtIndex:withSubviewAtIndex:, 116
F
fetch requests
performance, 386
WeightHistoryDocument for Core Data, 409–410
file coordinators
Document Storage API, 320–321
resource, 360
File inspector, 13
file presenters, 321
file sharing with applications, 479–480
file system
manipulating, 267
resource, 311
File Template library, 14
file versioning. See also iCloud
Document Storage API, 321–322
in Health Beat, 332–333
files. See also companion file
creating for Health Beat, 63
opening, 12
saving, 318
sharing with applications, 479–480

--- Page 688 ---
Find tab in Navigator, 12
First Responder
becomeFirstResponder, 164
explained, 23
resignFirstResponder, 164
flipside view controller, 26
FlipsideViewController.h, 36
font size, determining with Dynamic Type, 180
fonts
setting, 40
updating, 277
updating for Entry Detail scene, 184–185
updating in History Table, 181–182
Fonts & Colors preferences, 16
frame property, 114–115
frameworks, 5
from- controller, 228
G
General preferences, 15
gesture recognizers. See also touch events
calculating percentage, 254
creating, 252
getting translation from, 253–254
parameter assert, 251
UILongPressGestureRecognizer, 250
UIPanGestureRecognizer, 250
UIPinchGestureRecognizer, 250
UIRotationGestureRecognizer, 250
UIScreenEdgePanGestureRecognizer, 250
UISwipeGestureRecognizer, 250
UITapGestureRecognizer, 250
graph

--- Page 689 ---
drawing, 209
with four entries, 214
graph tab icon, adding to Health Beat, 61
graph view
completing, 218
observer, 220–221
outlet, 203
resetting weight entry, 221
resizing, 202–203
updating when data changes, 220–221
viewDidLoad:, 220
graph view controller, adding, 302
GraphViewController.h, 91
groups, adding to Health Beat, 58
H
handleError:userInteractionPermitted:, 293
hash methods, using with iCloud, 358–359
hash table, creating, 296
Health Beat conversion to Core Data. See also Core Data
fetch request, 395
managed object model, 393–395
predicate syntax expressions, 395
WeightEntry class, 396–400
WeightEntry entity, 395
Health Beat project. See also application artwork; projects; storyboard for
Health Beat
accessory view, 168
Add Entry View, 157–161
adding classes to, 63
adding entries, 155–157
adding groups, 58
adding images, 60–61

--- Page 690 ---
assets catalog, 57
Cancel button, 160, 176
checking editing style, 156
cleaning up, 57–58
creating, 55–57
creating dates, 105
creating files, 63–64
custom preferences, 280
customizing appearance, 186–187
Debug navigator, 359
deleting controllers from storyboard, 58
deleting entries, 155–157
deleting log messages, 110
deleting rows, 157
Dynamic Type, 177–182
editing mode, 156
entering dates, 169–172
entries, 105
Entry Detail View, 147–152, 154–155
file versioning, 332–333
fonts for Add Entry, 183–184
fonts for Entry Detail, 184–185
fonts in History Table, 181–182
generating objects from dates, 105
graph tab icon, 61
implementing WeightUnit, 64
inputAccessoryView, 164–168
key-value syncing, 323–332
launch image, 474–475
making room for keyboard, 159
model, 52
modules, 52
preference page, 280

--- Page 691 ---
responder chain, 164
Root.plist, 279, 281
running template, 57
Save button, 160, 176
saving, 56
searching workspace, 110
segue unwinding, 176–177
selecting location for, 56
setting options, 56
setting warnings, 58–60
tasks, 55
testing architecture for, 104–106
tintColor: method, 186
// TODO: comments, 110
UIAppearance, 186
UIDocument subclass, 284–286
UINib object, 168
Units button, 172–174
updateDateText, 163
updateUI method, 163
updateWeightText method, 162–163
updating text fields, 161–164
user preferences, 271–282
view controllers, 52
view hierarchies, 52
Weight Entry scene, 106
weight management, 55
WeightEntry, 65–69
WeightHistoryDocument, 70–79
Health Beat project model
EntryDetailViewController.h, 92
GraphViewController.h, 91
HistoryTableViewController, 92–100

--- Page 692 ---
modifying RootTabBarController.h, 89
modifying viewDidLoad, 90
setWeightHistoryDocument: method, 90
Health Beat UI layout. See also Auto Layout
adding views, 116
autoresizing asks, 117–118
change in size, 116–117
coordinate system, 114
interface elements, 112
main screen and window, 114
removing views, 116
reordering views, 116
size, 114–115
view geometry, 113
view hierarchy, 113
Health Beat user preferences
dealloc method, 275–276
explicit, 270
fixing warnings, 273
Health Beat in Settings app, 280
history view, 274
implicit, 270
implicit property, 272
managing, 270–271
NSUserDefaults, 270–272
passing selector, 275
removing observer, 275–276
resource, 311
saving, 270
saving defaults, 271–272
setDefaultUnits(), 272
Settings application, 271
settings bundle, 278

--- Page 693 ---
system settings support, 278–282
updateUI method, 277
updating fonts, 277
Hello World object graph, 37
Hello World-Info.plist file, 18
History Table, updating fonts in, 181–182
history view, updating, 274
HistoryTableViewController. See also table view controllers
count property, 94
data source methods, 92
Health Beat project model, 92–100
listening for notifications, 96–100
passing data across segues, 95–96
properties in class extensions, 93
recycling cells, 94
reloading data, 92–93
return entries to history, 93
returning cells, 94
I
iCloud. See also file versioning
checking for conflicting state, 352
delayed updates, 351
document storage strategies, 322–323
fallback store, 390–391
hash methods, 358–359
integration with Core Data, 389
Logging Profile, 360
merging conflicting versions, 351
merging history, 354–356
migrating documents to, 339–342
moving files back from, 323
removeConflictedVersions, 356–358

--- Page 694 ---
resolveConflicts method, 352–353
resolving conflicts, 350–359
resources, 360, 429
showing versions to users, 351
three-way merges, 389
usage details, 360
iCloud APIs
Document Storage, 316–323, 359–360
Key-Value Storage, 314–316
saving files, 318
iCloud best practices
device bit size, 316
device-specific data, 316
passwords, 316
SQLite databases, 316
“sync storms,” 316
iCloud syncing, 314, 390
iCloud users, monitoring, 334–337
icons
iTunesArtwork, 473
placeholders, 473
providing, 472–473
sizes, 472–473
Identity inspector, 14
images, adding to Health Beat, 60–61
info button, 28–29, 31, 36
init method
creating for WeightHistoryDocument, 73
using with line graph, 204
WeightHistoryDocument for Core Data, 404
initialization methods, adding to WeightEntry, 68
initWithCoder:, 193, 306
insertSubview:*, 116

--- Page 695 ---
inspectors, 13–14
interactive property, 247
interactive transitions
animator object, 242–246
canceling, 256
explained, 241
gesture recognizers, 249–256
percent-driven, 242
TabInteractiveTransition, 246–247
testing custom animation, 248
interactivity, adding, 248–249
Interface Builder
Align tool, 130–131
custom table view cells, 137
Dock, 23
Document Outline, 23
editing constraints, 129–132
explained, 21
Pin tool, 130–131
Resizing Behavior, 130–131
Resolve Auto Layout Issues, 130–131
segue, 23
interfaces, custom drawn, 219
internationalization, 483. See also localization tools
iOS
concurrent programming, 290–291
human interface guidelines, 483
versions and devices, 483
iOS 7, handling of bars, 201
iOS App Programming Guide, 49
iOS apps, state preservation and restoration, 311
iOS Developer Program, cost to join, 6
iOS devices, running and testing, 62

--- Page 696 ---
iOS file system
directories, 265–270
sandbox, 260–266
iOS Utility Application. See also projects
actions, 25
adding outlet, 40–42
adding project to workspace, 9
adding text field, 43–45
aligning label, 39
AppDelegate, 31
Assistant editor, 40
background color, 38
bootstrapping, 30
center vertically constraint, 39
Class Prefix field, 8
Clear Button attribute, 47
collapsing Document Outline, 40
Company Identifier field, 8
connections, 27
Connections inspector, 25
constraints, 27–28
creating, 7–9
declaring window property, 31–33
delegate methods, 35, 37
delegates, 31
displaying connection, 26
Done button, 36
done: method, 45
examining classes in scenes, 25
Exit, 24
files, 18–19
First Responder, 23
fixing navigation bar, 43

--- Page 697 ---
flipside view, 48
flipside view controller, 26
FlipsideViewController.h, 36
functional code, 34–35
git repository, 9
Hello World object graph, 37
Hello World-Info.plist file, 18
implementation, 34
info button, 28, 31
jump bar, 45
label and constraints, 39
landscape orientation, 29
layer of indirection, 20
layout guides, 25
main(), 20
main view, 48
main.m file, 18–20
Main.storyboard file, 18
MainViewController, 34
method stubs, 34
methods, 25
modal view, 29
modifying main view, 38–40
passing data to scenes, 36
prefixes for class names, 8–9
Prefix.pch file, 18–19
pressing info button, 36
preventing naming conflicts, 8
refining interface, 46–48
relationships, 25
Return key and done: method, 47
running, 17
Save sheet, 9

--- Page 698 ---
scenes, 23
segue attributes, 29
segue identifiers, 35
segues, 25, 29
selecting project options, 9
setting font, 40
showAlternate segue, 29
source control, 9
Supporting Files subgroup, 18
text property, 45
UIApplication object, 21
UIApplicationMain() function, 20, 31
user interface, 21
view controller, 23–25
iPhone apps, default behavior, 111
Issue tab in Navigator, 12
iTunes, sharing with, 264
iTunes Connect Developer Guide, 484
iTunesArtwork, 473
J
jump bar, 45
K
Key Bindings preferences, 16
keyboard
avoiding in view presentation, 233–238
making room for, 159
keychain data, 265
keychain services resource, 311
keyed archives, using, 283
Key-Value Storage API, 314–316
key-value syncing, file versioning, 332–333

--- Page 699 ---
KVC operators, using, 152
L
label
aligning, 39
changing text for, 44
with constraints, 39
editing, 39
resizing, 39
layout guides, using, 25, 123. See also Auto Layout
layout timing
Display phase, 136
Layout phase, 135–136
Update Constraints phase, 135
libraries, 13–14
line graph. See also passing data for line graph
adding, 202–203
adding properties to class, 203–204
bitmaps, 219
constraints, 202
drawRect: method, 217, 219
init methods, 204
resizing, 202–203
setDefaults method, 205
listening for notifications, 96–100
loadFile, modifying, 348–350
loadFileAtURL:, 288
localization, 483
localization tools
genstrings, 478
ibtool, 478
NSLocalizedString(), 478
localized string, creating for WeightEntry, 69

--- Page 700 ---
Locations preferences, 16
log messages, deleting, 110
Logging Profile, downloading for iCloud, 360
low memory warnings, best practices for, 103
M
main() file, 20
main view, modifying, 38–40
main.m file, 18
Main.storyboard file, 18
MainViewController, 34
managed object context
asynchronous saves, 373–374
calling reset, 386
concurrency patterns, 373
creating projects, 374
fetch requests, 378–381
hierarchies, 374
nesting, 373
nonstandard attributes, 376–378
NSPredicate, 379–381
opening, 373
predicates, 379–381
managed objects
accessing, 378
accessors, 374–375
custom accessors, 375
custom subclasses, 375
declaring object properties, 375
NSFetchRequest, 378
NSManagedObject, 375
overriding methods, 375
masks, autoresizing, 117–118

--- Page 701 ---
methods
declaring for WeightHistoryDocument, 71
defining for WeightHistoryDocument.m, 72–73
migrating data via Core Data, 369–371
modal view, 29
model, 52
model layer tasks. See Core Data
modules
explained, 18–19
model, 52
view controllers, 52
view hierarchies, 52
motion effects
adding to Add Entry View, 434–438
adding to views, 433
creating, 432–433
disabling, 433
minimum relative value, 437
removing, 435
setting up, 436–437
setupMotionEffects, 435
UIInterpolatingMotionEffect, 434
UIMotionEffect, 433
motion events resource, 469
Music app, 52
N
navigation bar
button, 82
fixing, 43
navigation items, adding to storyboard, 85–88
Navigation preferences, 16
navigation techniques, 83

--- Page 702 ---
Navigator, 11
Navigator tabs
Breakpoint, 12
Debug, 12
Find, 12
Issue, 12
Log, 12
Project, 12
Symbol, 12
Test, 12
nesting
containers, 54
managed object contexts, 373
.nib extension, 21
nib file
creating UINib object for, 168
using, 30
nibs
explained, 86
function, 86–87
loading, 86
loading objects from, 193
notifications
Dynamic Type, 180–181
listening for, 96–100
private methods, 414–422
NSCalendar object, using, 155
NSCoder, 282
NSCoding, 282, 305–307
NSFetchedResultsControllerDelegate, 412–414
NSFileManager():, 269
NSHipster, 188
NSKeyedArchiver, 282–283

--- Page 703 ---
NSKeyedUnarchiver, 282–283, 305
NSUserDefaults, 270–272
O
Object library, 14
Objective-C, 5, 75
objects, loading from nibs, 193. See also data objects
observer
removing, 275–276
removing observer, 297
opaque views, 194–195
opening apps, best practices for, 102
opening files, 12
OpenWithCompletionHandler:, 288
Option-clicking, 34
outlets
Add Entry button, 299–300
adding, 40–42
connecting, 139–140
creating for Entry Detail View, 149–150
graph view, 203
overriding loadFromContents:ofType:error:, 292–294
P
PaintCode, 257
passing data for line graph. See also line graph
adding guidelines, 214–217
calculating x-coordinate, 211–212
calculating y-values, 212–213
checking for entries, 211, 217
copying history array, 207
drawing graph, 209
Dynamic Type font, 215

--- Page 704 ---
GraphView.m, 207
method for drawing dots, 213
overriding HBT_updateFonts, 218
private drawGraph method, 210–211
rectangle for text, 215
textRect, 216
weight history document, 206
weight values, 217
weightEntries property, 208–209
passing data to scenes, 36
paths, exploring in sandbox, 267–268
persistent stores
custom incremental, 384
encryption options, 385
faults, 383
in-memory, 383
reducing memory overhead, 383–384
speed, 382–383
PNG files, using, 220
predicates
key paths, 380–381, 384
resource, 429
using in managed object contexts, 379–381
preference page, 280
preferences
dealloc method, 275–276
explicit, 270
fixing warnings, 273
Health Beat in Settings app, 280
history view, 274
implicit, 270
implicit property, 272
managing, 270–271

--- Page 705 ---
NSUserDefaults, 270–272
passing selector, 275
removing observer, 275–276
resource, 311
saving, 270
saving defaults, 271–272
setDefaultUnits(), 272
Settings application, 271
settings bundle, 278
system settings support, 278–282
updateUI method, 277
updating fonts, 277
prefixes
using with class names, 8–9
using with shared code, 9
private methods
fetchAllEntries, 419
refreshAll, 422
removeNotifications, 417–418
resetMocs, 420–421
setupNotifications, 414
setupResultsController, 418–419
updateMOCFromNote:CompletionHandler:, 421
processQuery: method, 347–348
programming
concurrency, 290–291, 311
file system, 311
keychain services, 311
preferences and settings, 311
state preservation and restoration, 311
programming guides
Core Data, 429
iOS app, 49

--- Page 706 ---
key-value coding, 107, 188
predicates, 429
Quartz 2D, 257
resources, 107
view controllers, 107, 188
Project tab in Navigator, 12
projects. See also Health Beat project; iOS Utility Application
adding to workspace, 9
walking through, 37
properties, declaring for WeightHistoryDocument, 71
push segue, selecting, 87
Q
Quick Help inspector, 13
R
rectangle, drawing for text, 216
refactoring code, 287
relationships
explained, 25
versus segues, 26
remove FromSuperview:, 116
removeConflictedVersions, 356–358
required capabilities
deployment target, 476–477
keys, 476
resolveConflicts method, 352–353
resources
accessibility, 483
app distribution, 484
App Store Review Guidelines, 484
Asset Catalog Help, 483
Auto Layout, 188

--- Page 707 ---
concurrency, 311
core animation programming, 257
Core Data, 429
custom transitions, 257
event handling, 257, 469
file coordination, 360
file system, 311
iCloud, 360, 429
internationalization, 483
iOS App Programming Guide, 49
iOS Human Interface Guidelines, 483
iOS versions and devices, 483
iTunes Connect Developer Guide, 484
keychain services, 311
key-value coding, 107
motion events, 469
NSHipster, 188
PaintCode, 257
predicate programming, 429
preferences and settings, 311
state preservation and restoration, 311
storyboard techniques, 107
UIKit Dynamics, 469
view controllers, 107, 188
warnings, 107
WWDC Videos, 188
Xcode, 49
responder chain, 164
Retina displays
drawing for, 196–197
support for, 195
Return key, connecting to done: method, 47
Root.plist, 279, 281

--- Page 708 ---
RootTabBarController.h, modifying, 89
rotations, defaults, 111
rows, deleting from screen, 157
running iOS devices, 62
S
sample project. See projects
sandbox. See also Document Storage API
accessing, 261
accessing directories, 265–270
backing up data, 263–264
expanding, 337–339
exploring, 269
extending, 265
keychain data, 265
manipulating file system, 267
NSBundle():, 266
NSFileManager():, 266, 269
NSHomeDirectory():, 265
NSTemporaryDirectory():, 265
NSURLs, 265
paths, 266–270
Security framework, 265
sharing with iTunes, 264
URLsForDirectory():, 266
sandbox directories
Application Bundle, 262
Application Support, 263
Caches, 263
Documents, 262
Documents/Inbox, 262
Library, 262
Preferences, 263

--- Page 709 ---
Temporary (tmp), 262–263
Save button
adding to bottom of screen, 160
advice against use of, 304–305
saving
approaches toward, 304–305
files, 318
Health Beat project, 56
and loading data objects, 282
searchForCloudDocument method, 345–346
searching
Ubiquity Container, 346
workspace, 110
Security framework, 265
segue identifiers, checking, 35
segue unwinding, 176–177
segues
adding to storyboard, 85–88
explained, 25
modal, 221
passing data across, 95–96
versus relationships, 26
selector, passing, 275
sendSubviewToBack:, 116
Settings application, 271, 280
settings bundle, adding, 278
settings resource, 311
Settings.bundle file, 278
setupDocument method, 299
setupMotionEffects, 435
setWeightHistoryDocument: method, 90
shared code, using prefixes with, 9
sharing

--- Page 710 ---
files with applications, 479–480
with iTunes, 264
showAlternate segue, 29
simulator, using, 17
size, responding to change in, 116–117
Size inspector, 14, 28
sort descriptors, 409–410
Source Control preferences, 16
SQLite stores, 384, 389
start-up sequence. See document start-up sequence
state and UI controls, 175
state preservation and restoration, 311
static table, configuring, 82. See also table view controllers
storage. See iCloud APIs
stores. See persistent stores
Storyboard editor
Document Outline region, 22
Interface Builder, 22
storyboard for Health Beat. See also Health Beat project
adding weight entries, 82
application workflow, 88
configuring static table, 82
connecting controllers, 81
custom view controllers, 84–85
graph view, 81
history view controller, 80
navigation bar button, 82
navigation items, 85–88
navigation techniques, 83
push segue, 87
scene layout, 83
segues, 85–88
tab bar items, 85–88

--- Page 711 ---
table view controller, 81
table view controller subclasses, 84
tabs, 80
UIViewController subclasses, 84
use of background view, 200
storyboards
contents, 21
deleting controllers from, 58
initial scenes, 24
opening, 22
setting, 22
using, 30
subpixel drawing, 198
subscriber method, implementing, 302–303
subscriber notification method, 297
supportedInterfacedOrientations method, 111–112
Supporting Files subgroup, 18
Symbol tab in Navigator, 12
“sync storms,” 316
system settings support, 278
T
tab bar controller, adding, 84
tab bar items, adding to storyboard, 85–88
tabbed application, creating, 56
TabInteractiveTransition
animation methods, 247
interactive property, 247
table view controllers. See also custom table view cells;
HistoryTableViewController; static table
configuring contents, 92
high performance, 94
subclasses, 84

--- Page 712 ---
template
app delegate, 57
running for Health Beat, 57
Test tab in Navigator, 12
testing
architecture for Health Beat, 100–102
custom animation, 248
iOS devices, 62
Text Editing preferences, 16
text fields
adding, 43–45
updating, 161–164
text property, using, 45
textRect, 216
tintColor: method, 186
to- controller, 228
// TODO: comments, 110
toolbar in Xcode
active scheme, 10–11
Assistant Editor, 10–11
hiding and showing, 12
Run button, 10–11
setting destination, 10–11
Standard Editor, 10–11
Status window, 10–11
Stop button, 10–11
toggles, 11–12
Version Editor, 10–11
touch events. See also gesture recognizers
handling, 249
responding to, 164
transitions. See custom transitions; interactive transitions

--- Page 713 ---
U
Ubiquity Container, 317–318, 346
UI controls and state, 175
UI layout for Health Beat. See also Auto Layout
adding views, 116
autoresizing asks, 117–118
change in size, 116–117
coordinate system, 114
interface elements, 112
main screen and window, 114
removing views, 116
reordering views, 116
size, 114–115
view geometry, 113
view hierarchy, 113
UIActionSheet, avoiding use of, 299
UIAlertView, avoiding use of, 299
UIAppearance, 186
UIApplicationMain() function, 20, 31
UIBezierPath, 200
UiCollectionViewController, 53
UIDocument subclass. See also Document Outline; document state
changes
adding to Health Beat, 284–286
concurrent programming, 290–291
createNewFileATURL: method, 289
creating document, 286–290
documentReady method, 287
error messages, 292
explained, 282, 284
loadFileAtURL:, 288
loading document, 286–290

--- Page 714 ---
localFileExists method, 285–286
OpenWithCompletionHandler:, 288
overriding contentsForType:Error:, 289–290
overriding handleError:userInteractionPermitted:, 293
overriding loadFromContents:ofType:error:, 292–294
URL, 285–286
UIDynamicBehaviors
UIAttachmentBehavior, 439
UICollisionBehavior, 439
UIDynamicItemBehavior, 439–440
UIGravityBehavior, 440
UIPushBehavior, 440
UISnapBehavior, 440
UIInterpolatingMotionEffect, 434
UIKit Dynamics
end points for animations, 450
performance notes, 440
resources, 469
UIDynamicAnimator, 439–440
UIDynamicBehaviors, 438–439
UIDynamicItem, 438
UILongPressGestureRecognizer, 250
UIManagedDocument, 385–386
UIMotionEffect, 433
UINavigationController, 53
UINib object, creating for nib file, 168
UIPanGestureRecognizer, 250
UIPinchGestureRecognizer, 250
UIRotationGestureRecognizer, 250
UIScreenEdgePanGestureRecognizer, 250
UISwipeGestureRecognizer, 250
UITabBarController, 53

--- Page 715 ---
UITableViewController, 53–54
UITapGestureRecognizer, 250
UIView, animation methods for, 222–223
undo action, adding, 307–310
Units button
adding to Health Beat, 172–174
control states, 174
updateAddButton method, 300–301
updateDateText method, 163
updateUI method, 163, 277
updateWeightText method, 162–163
upgrading applications, 264–265
user preferences
dealloc method, 275–276
explicit, 270
fixing warnings, 273
Health Beat in Settings app, 280
history view, 274
implicit, 270
implicit property, 272
managing, 270–271
NSUserDefaults, 270–272
passing selector, 275
removing observer, 275–276
resource, 311
saving, 270
saving defaults, 271–272
setDefaultUnits(), 272
Settings application, 271
settings bundle, 278
system settings support, 278–282
updateUI method, 277
updating fonts, 277

--- Page 716 ---
Utilities area
Attributes inspector, 14
Code Snippet library, 14
Connections inspector, 14
File inspector, 13
File Template library, 14
Identity inspector, 14
inspectors, 13–14
libraries, 13–14
locating, 11
Media library, 14
Object library, 14
Quick Help inspector, 13
Size inspector, 14
V
Version editor, 11
versioning. See file versioning
versions, adding in Core Data, 369
view controllers
from- and to-, 228
collection, 54
container view, 226
customizing, 84–85
explained, 52
flipside, 26
performing checks, 95–96
presenting, 55, 226, 228
selecting, 25
tab bar controller, 84
using in scenes, 23
view geometry
bounds property, 114–115

--- Page 717 ---
center property, 114–115
Core Graphics data types, 113
frame property, 114–115
view hierarchies, 52, 113
view presentation. See also custom transitions
ambiguous layout, 232
animator object, 226–230
avoiding keyboard, 233–238
cleaning up, 231–233
delegate methods, 230–231
fixing rotation, 233
length of animations, 238
making modal, 240
modifying appearance, 232–233
modifying text fields, 232
viewDidAppear: method, 153
viewDidLoad:, 220
views
adding, 116
addSubview:, 116
aligning, 456
bringSubviewToFront:, 116
caching content, 195
drawing, 198
exchangeSubviewAtIndex:withSubviewAtIndex:, 116
insertSubview:*, 116
redrawing, 198–199
remove FromSuperview:, 116
removing, 116
reordering, 116
sendSubviewToBack:, 116
width and height from bounds, 199
viewWillAppear: method, 153

--- Page 718 ---
visual formatting syntax, 126–129
W
warnings. See also error messages
fixing, 273
refactoring code, 287
renaming selections, 287
setting for Health Beat, 58–60
website resources
accessibility, 483
app distribution, 484
App Store Review Guidelines, 484
Asset Catalog Help, 483
Auto Layout, 188
concurrency, 311
core animation programming, 257
Core Data, 429
custom transitions, 257
event handling, 257, 469
file coordination, 360
file system, 311
iCloud, 360, 429
internationalization, 483
iOS App Programming Guide, 49
iOS Human Interface Guidelines, 483
iOS versions and devices, 483
iTunes Connect Developer Guide, 484
keychain services, 311
key-value coding, 107
motion events, 469
NSHipster, 188
PaintCode, 257
predicate programming, 429

--- Page 719 ---
preferences and settings, 311
state preservation and restoration, 311
storyboard techniques, 107
UIKit Dynamics, 469
view controllers, 107, 188
warnings, 107
WWDC Videos, 188
Xcode, 49
weight entries, adding, 82. See also passing data for line graph
Weight Entry scene, transitioning to, 106
weight history document
keyed archives, 283
UIDocument subclass, 282, 284
Weight label, revising, 137
weight loss. See Health Beat project
weight strings, formatting, 140–145
weight values, creating strings for, 217
WeightEntry class
for conversion to Core Data, 396–400
documentation comments, 66
implementing, 65–69
implementing conversion methods, 68–69
initialization methods, 68
localized string, 69
WeightHistoryDocument
accessor methods, 75
addEntry: method, 76
block enumeration method, 77–78
count public property, 71–72
custom init method, 73
declaring methods, 71
declaring properties, 71
deleteEntryAtIndexPath: method, 77

--- Page 720 ---
getter for count, 74
index to index path, 76–77
insertionPointForDate: method, 78
overriding description method, 79
string contents for notification names, 70
WeightHistoryDocument for Core Data
accessor methods, 404–405
fetch request, 409–410
header file, 401–402
implementation file, 402–404
init and dealloc methods, 404
NSFetchedResultsControllerDelegate, 412–414
private methods, 414–422
public methods, 405–411
sort descriptors, 409–410
WeightHistoryDocument.m, 72–73
weights, displaying, 145–146
WeightUnit, implementing, 64
window property, declaring, 31–33
workspace
adding projects to, 9
creating, 7
searching, 110
WWDC Videos, 188
X
Xcode
Debug area, 11, 14–15
Editor, 11, 14–15
Navigator, 12
preferences, 15–16
storyboards, 21
toolbar, 10–12

--- Page 721 ---
using, 6
Utilities area, 11, 13–14
Xcode 5.0, downloading, 62
Xcode preferences
Accounts, 16
Behaviors, 16
Double Click Navigation, 16
Downloads, 16
Fonts & Colors, 16
General, 15
Key Bindings, 16
Locations, 16
Navigation, 16
Source Control, 16
Text Editing, 16
Xcode User Guide, 49
.xib extension, 21
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 722 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 739 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 789 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 879 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 958 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 1029 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 1083 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 1138 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 1193 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 1196 ---
OceanofPDF.com