--- Page 2 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 3 ---
DIGITAL ELECTRONICS AND
DESIGN WITH VHDL
Volnei A. Pedroni
Morgan Kaufmann
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 4 ---
Table of Contents
Cover image
Title page
Copyright
Dedication
Preface
Chapter 1: Introduction
1.1 Historical Notes
1.2 Analog versus Digital
1.3 Bits, Bytes, and Words
1.4 Digital Circuits
1.5 Combinational Circuits versus Sequential Circuits
1.6 Integrated Circuits
1.7 Printed Circuit Boards
1.8 Logic Values versus Physical Values
1.9 Nonprogrammable, Programmable, and Hardware
Programmable
1.10 Binary Waveforms
1.11 DC, AC, and Transient Responses
1.12 Programmable Logic Devices

--- Page 5 ---
1.13 Circuit Synthesis and Simulation with VHDL
1.14 Circuit Simulation with SPICE
1.15 Gate-Level versus Transistor-Level Analysis
Chapter 2: Binary Representations
2.1 Binary Code
2.2 Octal and Hexadecimal Codes
2.3 Gray Code
2.4 BCD Code
2.5 Codes for Negative Numbers
2.6 Floating-Point Representation
2.7 ASCII Code
2.8 Unicode
2.9 Exercises
Chapter 3: Binary Arithmetic
3.1 Unsigned Addition
3.2 Signed Addition and Subtraction
3.3 Shift Operations
3.4 Unsigned Multiplication
3.5 Signed Multiplication
3.6 Unsigned Division
3.7 Signed Division
3.8 Floating-Point Addition and Subtraction
3.9 Floating-Point Multiplication
3.10 Floating-Point Division

--- Page 6 ---
3.11 Exercises
Chapter 4: Introduction to Digital Circuits
4.1 Introduction to MOS Transistors
4.2 Inverter and CMOS Logic
4.3 AND and NAND Gates
4.4 OR and NOR Gates
4.5 XOR and XNOR Gates
4.6 Modulo-2 Adder
4.7 Buffer
4.8 Tri-State Buffer
4.9 Open-Drain Buffer
4.10 D-Type Flip-Flop
4.11 Shift Register
4.12 Counters
4.13 Pseudo-Random Sequence Generator
4.14 Exercises
Chapter 5: Boolean Algebra
5.1 Boolean Algebra
5.2 Truth Tables
5.3 Minterms and SOP Equations
5.4 Maxterms and POS Equations
5.5 Standard Circuits for SOP and POS Equations
5.6 Karnaugh Maps
5.7 Large Karnaugh Maps

--- Page 7 ---
5.8 Other Function-Simplification Techniques
5.9 Propagation Delay and Glitches
5.10 Exercises
Chapter 6: Line Codes
6.1 The Use of Line Codes
6.2 Parameters and Types of Line Codes
6.3 Unipolar Codes
6.4 Polar Codes
6.5 Bipolar Codes
6.6 Biphase/Manchester Codes
6.7 MLT Codes
6.8 mB/nB Codes
6.9 PAM Codes
6.10 Exercises
Chapter 7: Error-Detecting/Correcting Codes
7.1 Codes for Error Detection and Error Correction
7.2 Single Parity Check (SPC) Codes
7.3 Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC) Codes
7.4 Hamming Codes
7.5 Reed-Solomon (RS) Codes
7.6 Interleaving
7.7 Convolutional Codes
7.8 Viterbi Decoder
7.9 Turbo Codes

--- Page 8 ---
7.10 Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Codes
7.11 Exercises
Chapter 8: Bipolar Transistor
8.1 Semiconductors
8.2 The Bipolar Junction Transistor
8.3 I-V Characteristics
8.4 DC Response
8.5 Transient Response
8.6 AC Response
8.7 Modern BJTs
8.8 Exercises
Chapter 9: MOS Transistor
9.1 Semiconductors
9.2 The Field-Effect Transistor (MOSFET)
9.3 I-V Characteristics
9.4 DC Response
9.5. CMOS Inverter
9.6 Transient Response
9.7 AC Response
9.8 Modern MOSFETs
9.9 Exercises
Chapter 10: Logic Families and I/Os
10.1 BJT-Based Logic Families
10.2 Diode-Transistor Logic

--- Page 9 ---
10.3 Transistor-Transistor Logic (TTL)
10.4 Emitter-Coupled Logic
10.5 MOS-Based Logic Families
10.6 CMOS Logic
10.7 Other Static MOS Architectures
10.8 Dynamic MOS Architectures
10.9 Modern I/O Standards
10.10 Exercises
Chapter 11: Combinational Logic Circuits
11.1 Combinational versus Sequential Logic
11.2 Logical versus Arithmetic Circuits
11.3 Fundamental Logic Gates
11.4 Compound Gates
11.5 Encoders and Decoders
11.6 Multiplexer
11.7 Parity Detector
11.8 Priority Encoder
11.9 Binary Sorter
11.10 Shifters
11.11 Nonoverlapping Clock Generators
11.12 Short-Pulse Generators
11.13 Schmitt Triggers
11.14 Memories
11.15 Exercises

--- Page 10 ---
11.16 Exercises with VHDL
11.17 Exercises with SPICE
Chapter 12: Combinational Arithmetic Circuits
12.1 Arithmetic versus Logic Circuits
12.2 Basic Adders
12.3 Fast Adders
12.4 Bit-Serial Adder
12.5 Signed Adders/Subtracters
12.6 Incrementer, Decrementer, and Two’s
Complementer
12.7 Comparators
12.8 Arithmetic-Logic Unit
12.9 Multipliers
12.10 Dividers
12.11 Exercises
12.12 Exercises with VHDL
12.13 Exercises with SPICE
Chapter 13: Registers
13.1 Sequential versus Combinational Logic
13.2 SR Latch
13.3 D Latch
13.4 D Flip-Flop
13.5 Master-Slave D Flip-Flops
13.6 Pulse-Based D Flip-Flops

--- Page 11 ---
13.7 Dual-Edge D Flip-Flops
13.8 Statistically Low-Power D Flip-Flops
13.9 D Flip-Flop Control Ports
13.10 T Flip-Flop
13.11 Exercises
13.12 Exercises with SPICE
Chapter 14: Sequential Circuits
14.1 Shift Registers
14.2 Synchronous Counters
14.3 Asynchronous Counters
14.4 Signal Generators
14.5 Frequency Dividers
14.6 PLL and Prescalers
14.7 Pseudo-Random Sequence Generators
14.8 Scramblers and Descramblers
14.9 Exercises
14.10 Exercises with VHDL
14.11 Exercises with SPICE
Chapter 15: Finite State Machines
15.1 Finite State Machine Model
15.2 Design of Finite State Machines
15.3 System Resolution and Glitches
15.4 Design of Large Finite State Machines

--- Page 12 ---
15.5 Design of Finite State Machines with Complex
Combinational Logic
15.6 Multi-Machine Designs
15.7 Generic Signal Generator Design Technique
15.8 Design of Symmetric-Phase Frequency Dividers
15.9 Finite State Machine Encoding Styles
15.10 Exercises
15.11 Exercises with VHDL
Chapter 16: Volatile Memories
16.1 Memory Types
16.2 Static Random Access Memory (SRAM)
16.3 Dual and Quad Data Rate (DDR, QDR) SRAMs
16.4 Dynamic Random Access Memory (DRAM)
16.5 Synchronous DRAM (SDRAM)
16.6 Dual Data Rate (DDR, DDR2, DDR3) SDRAMs
16.7 Content-Addressable Memory (CAM) for Cache
Memories
16.8 Exercises
Chapter 17: Nonvolatile Memories
17.1 Memory Types
17.2 Mask-Programmed ROM (MP-ROM)
17.3 One-Time-Programmable ROM (OTP-ROM)
17.4 Electrically Programmable ROM (EPROM)
17.5 Electrically Erasable Programmable ROM
(EEPROM)

--- Page 13 ---
17.6 Flash Memory
17.7 Next-Generation Nonvolatile Memories
17.8 Exercises
Chapter 18: Programmable Logic Devices
18.1 The Concept of Programmable Logic Devices
18.2 SPLDs
18.3 CPLDs
18.4 FPGAs
18.5 Exercises
Chapter 19: VHDL Summary
19.1 About VHDL
19.2 Code Structure
19.3 Fundamental VHDL Packages
19.4 Predefined Data Types
19.5 User Defined Data Types
19.6 Operators
19.7 Attributes
19.8 Concurrent versus Sequential Code
19.9 Concurrent Code (WHEN, GENERATE)
19.10 Sequential Code (IF, CASE, LOOP, WAIT)
19.11 Objects (CONSTANT, SIGNAL, VARIABLE)
19.12 Packages
19.13 Components
19.4 Functions

--- Page 14 ---
19.15 Procedures
19.16 VHDL Template for FSMs
19.17 Exercises
Chapter 20: VHDL Design of Combinational Logic Circuits
20.1 Generic Address Decoder
20.2 BCD-to-SSD Conversion Function
20.3 Generic Multiplexer
20.4 Generic Priority Encoder
20.5 Design of ROM Memory
20.6 Design of Synchronous RAM Memories
20.7 Exercises
Chapter 21: VHDL Design of Combinational Arithmetic
Circuits
21.1 Carry-Ripple Adder
21.2 Carry-Lookahead Adder
21.3 Signed and Unsigned Adders/Subtracters
21.4 Signed and Unsigned Multipliers/Dividers
21.5 ALU
21.6 Exercises
Chapter 22: VHDL Design of Sequential Circuits
22.1 Shift Register with Load
22.2 Switch Debouncer
22.3 Timer
22.4 Fibonacci Series Generator

--- Page 15 ---
22.5 Frequency Meters
22.6 Neural Networks
22.7 Exercises
Chapter 23: VHDL Design of State Machines
23.1 String Detector
23.2 “Universal” Signal Generator
23.3 Car Alarm
23.4 LCD Driver
23.5 Exercises
Chapter 24: Simulation with VHDL Testbenches
24.1 Synthesis versus Simulation
24.2 Testbench Types
24.3 Stimulus Generation
24.4 Testing the Stimuli
24.5 Testbench Template
24.6 Writing Type I Testbenches
24.7 Writing Type II Testbenches
24.8 Writing Type III Testbenches
24.9 Writing Type IV Testbenches
24.10 Exercises
Chapter 25: Simulation with SPICE
25.1 About SPICE
25.2 Types of Analysis
25.3 Basic Structure of SPICE Code

--- Page 16 ---
25.4 Declarations of Electronic Devices
25.5 Declarations of Independent DC Sources
25.6 Declarations of Independent AC Sources
25.7 Declarations of Dependent Sources
25.8 SPICE Inputs and Outputs
25.9 DC Response Examples
25.10 Transient Response Examples
25.11 AC Response Example
25.12 Monte Carlo Analysis
25.13 Subcircuits
25.14 Exercises Involving Combinational Logic Circuits
25.15 Exercises Involving Combinational Arithmetic
Circuits
25.16 Exercises Involving Registers
25.17 Exercises Involving Sequential Circuits
A: ModelSim Tutorial
B: PSpice Tutorial
References
Index
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 17 ---
Copyright
Publishing Director Chris Williams
Publisher Denise E.M. Penrose
Acquisitions Editor Charles B. Glaser
Publishing Services Manager George Morrison
Senior Production Editor Dawnmarie Simpson
Assistant Editor Matthew Cater
Production Assistant Lianne Hong
Cover Design Alisa Andreola
Cover Illustration Gary Raglia
Composition diacriTech
Copy Editor Jeanne Hansen
Proofreader Phyllis Coyne et al. Proofreading
Indexer Joan Green
Interior printer Sheridan Books, Inc.
Cover printer Phoenix Color, Inc.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers is an imprint of Elsevier.
30 Corporate Drive, Suite 400, Burlington, MA 01803, USA
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
© 2008 by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are
often claimed as trademarks or registered trademarks. In all
instances in which Morgan Kaufmann Publishers is aware of a
claim, the product names appear in initial capital or all capital

--- Page 18 ---
letters. Readers, however, should contact the appropriate
companies for more complete information regarding trademarks
and registration.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means—
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, scanning, or otherwise—
without prior written permission of the publisher.
Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier’s Science &
Technology Rights Department in Oxford, UK: phone: (+44)
1865 843830, fax: (+44) 1865 853333, E-mail:
permissions@elsevier.com. You may also complete your request
online via the Elsevier homepage (http://elsevier.com), by
selecting “Support & Contact” then “Copyright and Permission”
and then “Obtaining Permissions.”
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Pedroni, Volnei A.
Digital electronics and design with VHDL / Volnei Pedroni.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-12-374270-4 (pbk. : alk. paper) 1. VHDL (Computer
hardware description language)
2. Digital integrated circuits—Design and construction—Data
processing. I. Title.
TK7885.7.P44 2008
621.39′2–dc22
2007032518
ISBN: 978-0-12-374270-4
For information on all Morgan Kaufmann publications, visit our
Web site at www.mkp.com or www.books.elsevier.com
Printed in the United States
08 09 10 11 12          5 4 3 2 1

--- Page 19 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 20 ---
Dedication
Dedicated to Claudia, Patricia, Bruno, and Ricardo, who are my
north, my sun, and my soul.
To professors and students: This book resulted from years of hard
work as a professor and designer in EE. My deepest wish is to
have it help in making your own work a little easier, which shall
indeed be the only real measure of its success.
“As the builders say, the larger stones do not lie well without the
lesser.”
Plato (428–348 bc)
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 21 ---
Preface
The book carefully and diligently covers all three aspects related
to the teaching of digital circuits: digital principles, digital
electronics, and digital design. The starting point was the
adoption of some fundamental premises, which led to a detailed
and coherent sequence of contents. Such premises are
summarized below.

--- Page 22 ---
Book Premises
 The text is divided into two parts, with the theory
in Chapters 1–18 and the lab components in
Chapters 19–25 plus Appendices A and B. These
parts can be taught in parallel if it is a course with
lectures and lab, or they can be used separately if it
is a lecture-only or lab-only course.
 The book provides a clear and rigorous
distinction between combinational circuits and
sequential circuits. In the case of combinational
circuits, further distinction between logic circuits
and arithmetic circuits is provided. In the case of
sequential circuits, further distinction between
regular designs and state-machine-based designs
is made.
 The book includes new, modern digital
techniques, related, for example, to code types and
data protection used in data storage and data
transmission, with emphasis especially on Internet-
based applications.
 The circuit analysis also includes transistor-level
descriptions (not only gate-level), thus providing
an introduction to VLSI design, indispensable in
modern digital courses.
 A description of new, modern technologies
employed in the fabrication of transistors (both
bipolar and MOSFET) is provided. The fabrication
of memory chips, including promising new
approaches under investigation, is also presented.

--- Page 23 ---
 The book describes programmable logic devices,
including a historical review and also details
regarding state of the art CPLD/FPGA chips.
 Examples and exercises are named to ease the
identifi cation of the circuit/design under analysis.
 Not only are VHDL synthesis examples included
in the experimental part, but it also includes a
summary of the VHDL language, a chapter on
simulation with VHDL testbenches, and also a
chapter on simulation with SPICE.
 Finally, a large number of complete experimental
examples are included, constructed in a rigorous,
detailed fashion, including real-world applications,
complete code (not only partial sketches),
synthesis of all circuits onto CPLD/FPGA chips,
simulation results, and general explanatory
comments.

--- Page 24 ---
Book Contents
The book can be divided into two parts, with the theory
(lectures) in Chapters 1–18 and experimentations
(laboratory) in Chapters 19–25 plus Appendices A and B.
Each of these parts can be further divided as follows.
 Part I Theory (Lectures)
 Fundamentals: Chapters 1–5
 Advanced fundamentals: Chapters 6–7
 Technology: Chapters 8–10
 Circuit design: Chapters 11–15
 Additional technology: Chapters 16–18
 Part II Experiments (Laboratory)
 VHDL summary: Chapter 19
 VHDL synthesis: Chapters 20–23
 VHDL simulation: Chapter 24 and
Appendix A
 SPICE simulation: Chapter 25 and
Appendix B
The book contains 163 enumerated examples, 622 figures,
and 545 exercises.
Audience
This book addresses the specifi c needs of undergraduate and
graduate students in electrical engineering, computer
engineering, and computer science.
Suggestions on How to Use the Book

--- Page 25 ---
The tables below present suggestions for the lecture and lab
sections. If it is a lecture-only course, then any of the three
compositions in the fi rst table can be employed, depending
on the desired course level. Likewise, if it is a lab-only
course, then any of the three options suggested in the second
table can be used. In the more general case (lectures plus
lab), the two parts should be taught in parallel. In the tables
an ‘x’ means full content, a slash ‘/’ indicates a partial
(introductory sections only) content, and a blank means that
the chapter should be skipped. These, however, are just
suggestions based on the author’s own experience, so they
should serve only as a general reference.
Companion Web Site and Contacts
Book Web site:
books.elsevier.com/companions/9780123742704.
Author’s email: Please consult the Web site above.
Acknowledgments

--- Page 26 ---
I would like to express my gratitude to the reviewers Don
Bouldin, of University of Tennessee, Robert J. Mikel, of
Cleveland State University, Mark Faust, of Portland State
University, Joanne E. DeGroat, of Ohio State University, and
also to the several anonymous reviewers for their insightful
comments and suggestions, which where instrumental in
shaping the book’s fi nal form.
I am also grateful to Gert Cauwenberghs, of University of
California at San Diego, and David M. Harris, of Harvey
Mudd College, for advice in the early stages of this project. I
am further indebted to Bruno U. Pedroni and Ricardo U.
Pedroni for helping with some of the exercises.
I wish to extend my appreciation to the people at Elsevier for
their outstanding work. In particular, I would like to
recognize the following persons: Charles B. Glaser,
acquisitions editor, for trusting me and providing wise and at
the same time friendly guidance during the whole review
process and fi nal assembly/production of the manuscript;
Dawnmarie E. Simpson, production editor, for patiently and
competently leading the production process; and Jeanne
Hansen, copy editor, who so diligently revised my writings.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 27 ---
1
Introduction
Chapter Contents
1.1 Historical Notes
1.2 Analog versus Digital
1.3 Bits, Bytes, and Words
1.4 Digital Circuits
1.5 Combinational Circuits versus
Sequential Circuits
1.6 Integrated Circuits
1.7 Printed Circuit Boards
1.8 Logic Values versus Physical Values
1.9 Nonprogrammable, Programmable, and
Hardware Programmable
1.10 Binary Waveforms
1.11 DC, AC, and Transient Responses
1.12 Programmable Logic Devices
1.13 Circuit Synthesis and Simulation with
VHDL
1.14 Circuit Simulation with Spice

--- Page 28 ---
1.15 Gate-Level versus Transistor-Level
Analysis
Objective:
This chapter introduces general notions about the digital electronics field. It
also explains some fundamental concepts that will be useful in many
succeeding chapters. In summary, it sets the environment for the digital circuit
analysis and designs that follow.
1.1 Historical Notes
The modern era of electronics started with the invention of
the transistor by William Shockley, John Bardeen, and
Walter Brattain at Bell Laboratories (Murray Hill, New
Jersey) in 1947. A partial picture of the original experiment
is shown in Figure 1.1(a), and a popular commercial
package, made out of plastic and called TO-92, is depicted in
Figure 1.1(b). Before that, electronic circuits were
constructed with vacuum tubes (Figure 1.1(c)), which were
large (almost the size of a household light bulb), slow, and
required high voltage and high power.

--- Page 29 ---
FIGURE 1.1  (a) The first transistor (1947); (b) A popular
commercial encasing (called TO-92); (c) A vacuum tube.
The first transistor was called a point-contact transistor
because it consisted of two gold foils whose tips were
pressed against a piece of germanium. This can be observed
in Figure 1.1(a) where a wedge with a gold foil glued on
each side and slightly separated at the bottom is pressed
against a germanium slab. Any transistor has three terminals
(see Figure 1.1(b)), which, in the case of Figure 1.1(a),
correspond to the gold foils (called emitter and collector)
and the germanium slab (called base).
Germanium was later replaced with silicon, which is
cheaper, easier to process, and presents electrical properties
that are also adequate for electronic devices.
Despite the large acclaim of the transistor invention, which
led the three authors to eventually share the Nobel Prize in
Physics in 1956, Shockley was very dissatisfied with Bell
Laboratories (among other reasons because his name was not

--- Page 30 ---
included in the transistor patent because the final experiment
was conducted without his participation). So he eventually
left to start his own company, initially intending to mass
produce low-cost transistors.
The birth of silicon valley (or “Had Shockley
gone elsewhere…”)
The most common material used in electronic
devices is Si (silicon), followed by GaAs (gallium
arsenide), Ge (germanium), and others (all used
much less frequently than Si). However, in their
original form, these materials are of very little
interest. What makes them useful is a process
called doping, which consists of adding an
impurity (called dopant) to them that creates either
free electrons or free holes (the latter means a
“space” where an electron is missing; the space
does not have a fixed position, causing it to be
controlled by an external electrical field that
results in an electric current). Depending on
whether the dopant generates free electrons
(negative charges) or free holes (positive charges),
the doped semiconductor is classified as n-type or
p-type, respectively. For Si, popular n-type dopants
are P (phosphorous) and As (arsenic), while p-type
dopants include B (boron) and Al (aluminum).
The point-contact approach used in the first
transistor was not adequate for mass production, so
Shockley diligently searched for another approach,
eventually leading to a very thin region (base) of
type n (or p) sandwiched between two other
regions (emitter and collector) of type p (or n).

--- Page 31 ---
Because of its two-junction construction, this type
of transistor is called BJT (bipolar junction
transistor).
Shockley did his undergraduate studies at the
California Institute of Technology and earned his
PhD at MIT. In 1955 he returned to the West Coast
to set up his company, Shockley Semiconductor, in
Mountain View, California, which is south of San
Francisco.
The subsequent events are nicely described by
Gordon Moore in a speech he gave at the
groundbreaking ceremony for the new engineering
building at Caltech in 1994 ([Moore94], available
at the Caltech Archives; also available at
http://nobelprize.org under the title “The
Accidental Entrepreneur”). Very briefly, the events
are as follows. Because of Shockley’s difficult
personality, eight of his employees, including
Gordon Moore and Robert Noyce, decided to leave
Shockley Semiconductor in 1957 and start a new
company, called Fairchild Semiconductor, with a
little capital of their own and the bulk of the
financing from Fairchild Camera, an East Coast
corporation. The new company, like many other
spin-offs that followed, established itself in the
same region as Shockley’s company. Fairchild
Semiconductor turned out to be a very successful
enterprise with nearly 30,000 employees after a
little over 10 years. However, due to management
problems and other conflicts between the West
Coast (Fairchild Semiconductor) and East Coast
(Fairchild Camera) operations, in 1968 Moore and
Noyce left and founded their own company, Intel.

--- Page 32 ---
One of Intel’s first great achievements was the
development of MOS transistors with polysilicon
gates instead of metal gates, a technology that took
several years for other companies to catch up with.
The first integrated microprocessor, called 4004
and delivered in 1971, was also developed by Intel
(see Figure 1.2(a)). It was a 4-bit processor with
nearly 2300 transistors that was capable of
addressing 9.2 k of external memory, employed
mainly in calculators. Even though Intel’s major
business in the 1980s was the fabrication of
SRAM and DRAM memories, its turning point
was the advent of personal computers, for which
Intel still manufactures most of the
microprocessors (like that shown in Figure 1.2(b)).
FIGURE 1.2  (a) Intel 4004, the first
microprocessor (1971, 10 μm nMOS technology,
∼ 2300 transistors, 108 kHz); (b) Pentium 4
microprocessor (2006, 90 nm CMOS technology, > 3
GHz, 180 million transistors).
(Reprinted with permission of Intel.)

--- Page 33 ---
Even though the development of the first
integrated circuit in 1958 is credited to Robert
Noyce (while still at Fairchild) and Jack Kilby
(working independently at Texas Instruments), the
2000 Nobel Prize in Physics for that development
was awarded only to the latter.
In summary, many spin-offs occurred after
Shockley first decided to establish his short-lived
company south of San Francisco (Shockley went
on to become a professor at Stanford University).
Because most of these companies dealt with
silicon or silicon-related technologies, the area was
coined “Silicon Valley” by a journalist in 1971, a
nickname that rapidly became well known
worldwide. So, one might wonder, “Had Shockley
decided to go elsewhere…”
But not only of memories and microprocessors is
electronics made. There are many other companies
that specialize in all sorts of electronic devices. For
example, some specialize in analog devices, from
basic applications (operational amplifiers, voltage
regulators, etc.) to very advanced ones (wireless
links, medical implants and instrumentation,
satellite communication transceivers, etc.). There
are also companies that act in quite different parts
of the digital field, like those that manufacture
PLDs (programmable logic devices), which
constitute a fast-growing segment for the
implementation of complex systems. As a result,
chips containing whole systems and millions of
transistors are now commonplace.
Indeed, today’s electronic complexity is so vast
that probably no company or segment can claim

--- Page 34 ---
that it is the most important or the most crucial
because none can cover alone even a fraction of
what is being done. Moreover, companies are now
spread all over the world, so the actual
contributions come from all kinds of places,
people, and cultures. In fact, of all aspects that
characterize modern electronic technologies, this
worldwide congregation of people and cultures is
probably what best represents its beauty.
1.2 Analog versus Digital
Electronic circuits can be divided into two large groups
called analog and digital. The first deals with continuous-
valued signals while the second concerns discrete-valued
signals. Roughly speaking, the former deals with real
numbers while the latter deals with integers.
Many quantities are continuous by nature, like temperature,
sound intensity, and time. Others are inherently discrete, like
a game’s score, the day of the month, or a corporation’s
profit. Another example is a light switch, which has only two
discrete states (digital) versus a light dimmer, which has
innumerous continuous states (analog).
From a computational point of view, however, any signal can
be treated as digital. This is made possible by a circuit called
analog- to-digital converter (A/DC), which converts the
analog signal into digital, and by its counterpart, the digital-
to-analog converter (D/AC), which reconverts the signal to
its original analog form when necessary.
This process is illustrated in Figure 1.3. A sample and hold
(S&H) circuit periodically samples the incoming signal,
providing static values for the A/DC, which quantizes and

--- Page 35 ---
represents them by means of bits (bits and bytes will be
defined in the next section). At the output of the digital
system, binary values are delivered to the D/AC, which
converts them into analog but discontinuous values, thus
requiring a low-pass filter (LPF) to remove the high
frequency components, thus “rounding” the signal’s corners
and returning it approximately to its original form.
FIGURE 1.3  Interface between a digital system and the
analog world.
To illustrate the importance of this method, consider the
recording and playing of music. The music captured by the
microphones in a recording studio is analog and must be
delivered in analog form to the human ear. However, in
digital form, storage is easier, cheaper, and more versatile.
Moreover, the music can be processed (filtered, mixed,
superimposed, etc.) in so many ways that would be simply
impossible otherwise. For those reasons, the captured sound
is immediately converted from analog to digital by the
A/DC, then processed, and finally recorded on a CD. The

--- Page 36 ---
CD player does the opposite, that is, it reads the digital
information from the CD, processes it, then passes it through
the D/AC circuit, and finally amplifies the analog
(reconstituted) signal for proper loudspeaker reproduction.
Even though the introduction of quantization errors in the
conversion /deconversion process described above is
inevitable, it is still viable because a large enough number of
bits can be employed in it so that the resulting error becomes
too small to be perceived or too small to be relevant. As an
example, let us say that the analog signal to be converted
ranges from 0 V to 1 V and that 8 bits are used to encode it.
In this case, 28 = 256 discrete values are allowed, so the
analog signal can be divided into 256 intervals of 3.9 mV
each (because 1 V/256 = 3.9 mV) with a binary word used to
represent each interval. One option for the encoding would
then be (0 V to 3.9 mV) = “00000000”, (3.9 mV to 7.8 mV)
= “00000001”, …, (996.1 mV to 1 V) = “11111111”. More
bits can be used, and other encoding schemes also exist, like
the use of nonuniform intervals, so the maximum error can
be tailored to meet specific applications. In standard digital
music for CDs, for example, 16 bits are employed in each
channel.
Another important aspect in analog/digital (A/D) conversion
is the sampling rate, which is the number of times the
incoming signal is sampled per second (see the S&H stage in
Figure 1.3). The Nyquist theorem determines that it has to be
greater than twice the signal’s largest frequency. In the case
of standard digital music, the rate is 44.1 ksamples/s, which
therefore allows the capture of signals over 20 kHz. This is
enough because the human ear can detect audio signals from
50 Hz to approximately 20 kHz.
1.3 Bits, Bytes, and Words

--- Page 37 ---
Even though multilevel logic has been investigated for a
long time, two-level logic (called binary) is still more
feasible. Each component is called a bit, and its two possible
values are represented by ‘0’ and ‘1’. Even though the actual
(physical) signals that correspond to ‘0’ and ‘1’ are of
fundamental importance to the technology developers, they
are irrelevant to the system users (to a programmer, for
example).
While a single ‘0’ or ‘1’ is called a bit, a group of 4 bits is
called a nibble, a group of 8 bits is called a byte, a group of
16 bits is called a word, and a group of 32 bits is called a
long word. In the VHDL language (Chapters 19–24), the
syntax is that a single bit has a pair of single quotation marks
around it, such as ‘0’ or ‘1’, while a group of bits (called a
bit vector) has a pair of double quotation marks, such as
“00010011”. This syntax will be adopted in the entire text.
The leftmost bit of a bit vector is normally referred to as the
most significant bit (MSB), while the rightmost one is called
least significant bit (LSB). The reason for such designations
can be observed in Figure 1.4; to convert a binary value into
a decimal value, each bit must be multiplied by 2k−1, where k
is the bit’s position in the codeword from right to left (so the
right end has the lowest weight and the left end has the
highest). For example, the decimal value corresponding to
“10011001” (Figure 1.4) is 153 because 1 · 27 + 0 · 26 + 0 ·
25 + 1 · 24 + 1 · 23 + 0 · 22 + 0 · 21 + 1 · 20 = 153.


--- Page 38 ---
FIGURE 1.4  A byte and the weights employed to convert it
into a decimal number.
A popular set of codewords is the ASCII (American Standard
Code for Information Interchange) code, which is employed
to represent characters. It contains 128 7-bit codewords,
which are listed in Figure 1.5. To encode the word “bit,” for
example, the following sequence of bits would be produced:
“1000010 1001001 1010100”.
FIGURE 1.5  ASCII code.
In summary, bits are used for passing information between
digital circuits. In other words, they constitute the language
with which digital circuits communicate. For example, the
clock on a microwave oven is digital, and it must light each
digit in the proper order during the right amount of time. For
it to work, a clock generator must create a time base, which
it communicates to the next circuit (the decoder/driver),
where proper signals for driving the digits are created, and

--- Page 39 ---
which are then communicated to the final unit (the display)
where a proper representation for time is finally created.
These communications consist exclusively of bits.
1.4 Digital Circuits
Each digital circuit can be described by a binary function,
which is ultimately how it processes the bits that it receives.
Say, for example, that a and b are two bits received by a
certain circuit, which produces bit y at the output. Below are
some examples of very popular binary functions.
y = NOT a (also represented by y = a′)
y = a OR b (or y = a + b, where “+” represents
logical OR; not to be confused with the
mathematical summation sign for addition)
y = a AND b (or y = a · b, where “·” represents
logical AND; not to be confused with the
mathematical product sign for multiplication)
The first function (y = NOT a) is called inversion or
negation because y is the opposite of a (that is, if a = ‘0’,
then y = ‘1’, and vice versa). The second (y = a OR b) is
called OR function because it suffices to have one input high
for the output to be high. Finally, the third function (y = a
AND b) is called AND function because the output is high
only when both inputs are high. Circuits that implement such
basic functions are called gates, and they are named in
accordance with the function that they implement (OR,
AND, NOR, NAND, etc.).
There are several ways of representing digital circuits, which
depend on the intended level of abstraction. Such levels are

--- Page 40 ---
illustrated in Figure 1.6, where transistor-level is the lowest
and system-level is the highest.


--- Page 41 ---
FIGURE 1.6  Representation of digital circuits according to
the level of abstraction. The lowest level is the transistor-level,
followed by gate-level representation, all the way up to a complete
device.
When using a transistor-level description, elementary
components (transistors, diodes, resistors, capacitors, etc.)
are explicitly shown in the schematics. In many cases,
transistor-level circuits can be broken into several parts, each
forming a gate (OR, AND, etc.). If gates are used as the
lowest level of abstraction, it is said to be a gate-level
description for the design. After this point, nonstandard
blocks (subsystems) are normally employed, which are
collections of gate-level blocks that the designer creates to
ease the visualization of the whole system. This is called
subsystem-level description. Finally, by interconnecting the
subsystem blocks, the complete system can be represented
(system-level representation). At the top of Figure 1.6, an
integrated circuit (IC) is shown, which is one of the
alternatives that might be considered when physically
implementing the design.
The most fundamental logic gates are depicted in Figure 1.7.
Each has a name, a symbol, and a truth table (a truth table is
simply a numeric translation of the gate’s binary function).
The corresponding binary functions are listed below (the
functions for three of them have already been given).

--- Page 42 ---
FIGURE 1.7  Fundamental logic gates (name, symbol, and
truth table).
Inverter: Performs logical inversion.
y = a′ or y = NOT a
Buffer: Provides just the necessary currents and/or
voltages at the output.
y = a
AND: Performs logical multiplication.
y = a · b or y = a AND b
NAND: Produces inverted logical multiplication.
y = (a · b)′ or y = NOT (a AND b)
OR: Performs logical addition.
y = a + b or y = a OR b
NOR: Produces inverted logical addition.

--- Page 43 ---
y = (a + b)′ or y = NOT (a OR b)
XOR: The output is ‘1’ when the number of inputs
that are ‘1’ is odd.
y = a⊕b, y = a XOR b, or y = a · b′ + a′ · b
XNOR: The output is ‘1’ when the number of
inputs that are ‘1’ is even.
y = (a⊕b)′, y = a XNOR b, y = NOT (a XOR b), or
y = a′ · b′ + a · b
The interpretation of the truth tables is straightforward. Take
the AND function, for example; the output is ‘1’ only when
all inputs are ‘1’, which is exactly what the corresponding
binary function says.
The circuits described above, collectively called digital
gates, have a very important point in common: None of them
exhibits memory. In other words, the output depends solely
on the current values of the inputs. Another group of
elementary circuits, collectively called digital registers, is
characterized by the opposite fact, that is, all have memory.
Therefore, the output of such circuits depends on previous
circuit states.
Of all types of digital registers, the most commonly used is
the D-type flip-flop (DFF), whose symbol and truth table are
depicted in Figure 1.8. The circuit has two inputs, called d
(data) and clk (clock), and two outputs, called q and q′
(where q′ is the complement of q). Its operation can be
summarized as follows. Every time the clock changes from
‘0’ to ‘1’ (positive clock edge), the value of d is copied to q;
during the rest of the time, q simply holds its value. In other
words, the circuit is “transparent” at the moment when a
positive edge occurs in the clock (represented by q+ = d in

--- Page 44 ---
the truth table, where q+ indicates the circuit’s next state),
and it is “opaque” at all other times (that is, q+ = q).
FIGURE 1.8  Symbol and truth table for a positive-edge
triggered D-type flip-flop.
Two important conclusions can be derived from Figure 1.8.
First, the circuit does indeed exhibit memory because it
holds its state until another clock edge (of proper polarity)
occurs. Second, registers are clocked, that is, need a signal,
to control the sequence of events.
As will be described in detail in succeeding chapters,
registers allow the construction of innumerous types of
digital circuits. As an illustration, Figure 1.9 shows the use
of a single DFF to construct a divide-by-2 frequency divider.
All that is needed is to connect an inverted version of q back
to the circuit’s input.


--- Page 45 ---
FIGURE 1.9  Application of a register (DFF) in the
construction of a frequency divider.
The circuit of Figure 1.9 operates as follows. The clock
signal (a square wave that controls the whole sequence of
events), shown in the upper plot of the timing diagram, is
applied to the circuit. Because this is a positive-edge DFF,
arrows are included in the clock waveform to highlight the
only points where the DFF is transparent. The circuit’s initial
state was assumed to be q = ‘0’, so d = ‘1’, which is copied
to q at the next positive clock edge, producing q = ‘1’ (after a
little time delay, needed for the signal to traverse the flip-
flop). The new value of q now produces d = ‘0’ (which also
takes a little time to propagate through the inverter). Then, at
the next positive clock transition, d is again copied to q, this
time producing q = ‘0’ and so on. Comparing the waveforms
for clk and q, we observe that indeed the frequency of the
latter is one-half that of the former.
In summary, the importance of registers is that they allow the
construction of sequential logic circuits (defined below).
1.5 Combinational Circuits versus Sequential
Circuits
Throughout this book, a rigorous distinction is made
between combinational logic circuits and sequential logic
circuits. This is because distinct analysis and design
techniques can (and should) be adopted.
By definition, a combinational circuit is one in which the
output depends solely on its present input, while a sequential
circuit is one in which the output depends also (or only) on
previous system states. Consequently, the former is

--- Page 46 ---
memoryless, while the latter requires storage elements
(normally flip-flops).
The gates seen in Figure 1.7 are examples of combinational
circuits, while the frequency divider of Figure 1.9 is an
example of a sequential circuit. The clock on the microwave
oven mentioned earlier is also a sequential circuit because its
next state depends on its present state. On the other hand,
when we press the “+” sign on a calculator, we perform a
combinational operation because the result is not affected by
previous operations. However, if we accumulate the sum, the
circuit operates in a sequential fashion because now the
result is affected by previous sums.
One important point to observe, however, is that not all
circuits that posses memory are sequential. For example, a
regular computer memory (SRAM or DRAM), from a
memory-read perspective, is indeed a combinational circuit
because a data retrieval is not affected by previous data
retrievals.
To conclude, it is important to mention that digital circuits
can be also classified as logical and arithmetic depending on
the type of function they implement. For example, an AND
gate (logical multiplier) is an example of a logical circuit,
while a regular (arithmetic) multiplier is an example of an
arithmetic circuit.
1.6 Integrated Circuits
Digital ICs (also referred to as “chips”) are constructed with
transistors. Because there are two fundamental types of
transistors, called bipolar junction transistor (BJT, Chapter
8) and metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistor
(MOSFET, or MOS transistor, Chapter 9), digital ICs can be
classified as BJT-based or MOS-based. Moreover, the

--- Page 47 ---
power-supply voltage used to bias such circuits (that is, to
provide the energy needed for their operation) is called VCC
in the former and VDD in the latter. These parameters are
very important because the lower they are, the less power the
circuit consumes (recall that power is proportional to V2).
Typical values for these parameters will be presented in the
next section, but briefly speaking they go from 5 V (old BJT-
and MOS-based chips) down to 1 V (newest MOS-based
chips). However, the supply voltage is not the only factor
that affects the power consumption; another fundamental
factor is the dynamic current (that is, the current that
depends on the speed at which the circuit is operating),
which is particularly important in MOS-based circuits.
For any digital architecture to be of practical interest, it must
be “integrateable”; that is, it must allow the construction of
very dense (millions of gates) ICs with adequate electrical
parameters, manageable power consumption, and reasonable
cost. As will be described in Chapter 10, only after the
development of the TTL (transistor-transistor logic) family
in the 1970s, digital integration became viable, giving origin
to the very successful 74-series of BJT-based logic ICs (now
almost obsolete), which operates with VCC = 5 V.
Starting in the late 1970s, MOS-based ICs began to
gradually replace BJT-based circuits. The main reasons for
that are the much smaller silicon space required by the
former and especially their much lower power consumption.
Indeed, the main MOS-based logic family, called CMOS
(which stands for complementary MOS because the gates are
constructed with a combination of n- and p-type MOS
transistors), exhibits the lowest power consumption of all
digital families.

--- Page 48 ---
CMOS technology is normally referred to by using the
smallest dimension that can be fabricated (shortest transistor
channel, for example), also called technology node, and it is
expressed in micrometers or nanometers. This parameter was
8 μm in the beginning of the 1970s, and it is now just 65 nm,
with 45 nm devices already tested and expected to be
shipped in 2008. For example, the first integrated
microprocessor (Intel 4004, mentioned earlier) was delivered
in 1971 using 10 μm nMOS technology.
Currently, all digital ICs are fabricated with MOS transistors,
with BJTs reserved for only very specific applications, like
ECL and BiCMOS logic (both described in Chapter 10). In
analog applications (like radio-frequency circuits for
wireless communication), however, the BJT still is a major
contender.
Examples of digital chips fabricated using 65 nm CMOS
technology include the top performance FPGAs (field
programmable gate arrays) Virtex 5 (from Xilinx) and Stratix
III (from Altera), both described in Chapter 18. These
devices can have millions of transistors, over 200,000 flip-
flops, and over 1000 user I/O pins. Indeed, the number of
pins in digital ICs ranges from 8 to nearly 2000.
Current ICs are offered in a large variety of packages whose
main purposes are to provide the necessary heat dissipation
and also the number of pins needed. Such packages are
identified by standardized names, with some examples
illustrated in Figure 1.10, which include the following:
DIP: Dual in-line package
PLCC: Plastic leaded chip carrier
LQFP: Low-profile quad flat pack
TQFP: Thin quad flat pack

--- Page 49 ---
PQFP: Plastic quad flat pack
FBGA: Fine-pitch ball grid array
FBGA Flip-Chip: FBGA constructed with flip-chip
technology (the chip is “folded”)
PGA2 Flip-Chip: Pin grid array constructed with
flip-chip technology and cooler incorporated into
the package

--- Page 50 ---
FIGURE 1.10  Examples of IC packages, each
accompanied by name, number of pins, and typical range of pins
(between parentheses) for that package type. When the number of
pins is not too large (< 300), they can be located on the sides of

--- Page 51 ---
the IC, while in larger packages they are located under the chip. In
the latter, two main approaches exist, called BGA (ball grid array,
shown in the third row) and PGA (pin grid array, shown in the last
row).
Pentium 4 microprocessor reprinted with permission of Intel.
In Figure 1.10, the typical minimum and maximum numbers
of pins for each package are also given. Note that when this
number is not too large (typically under 300), the pins can be
located on the sides of the IC (upper two rows of Figure
1.10). However, for larger packages, the pins are located
under the chip.
In the latter case, two main approaches exist. The first is
called BGA (ball grid array), which consists of small spheres
that are soldered to the printed circuit board; BGA-based
packages can be observed in the third row of Figure 1.10.
The other approach is called PGA (pin grid array) and
consists of an array of pins instead of spheres, which can be
observed in the last row of Figure 1.10, where the top and
bottom views of one of Intel’s Pentium 4 microprocessors
are shown.
Finally, note in Figure 1.10 that most packages do not
require through holes in the printed circuit board because
they are soldered directly on the copper stripes, a technique
called SMD (surface mount device).
1.7 Printed Circuit Boards
A printed circuit board (PCB; Figure 1.11(a)) is a thin board
of insulating material with a copper layer deposited on one
or both sides on which electronic devices (ICs, capacitors,
resistors, diodes, etc.) and other components (connectors,
switches, etc.) are soldered. These devices communicate
with each other through wires that result after the copper

--- Page 52 ---
layers are properly etched. Figure 1.11(b) shows examples of
PCBs after the devices have been installed (soldered).
FIGURE 1.11  (a) A PCB; (b) Examples of assembled
PCBs.
The most common material used in the fabrication of PCBs
is called FR-4 (flame resistant category 4), which is a woven
fiberglass mat, reinforced with an epoxy resin with a
greenish appearance. In summary, a common PCB is
fiberglass, resin, and copper.
The wires that are created on the PCB after the copper layer
is etched are called traces, which can be very narrow and
close to each other. Standard processes require a minimum
width and spacing of 0.25 mm (or 10 mils; one mil is one-
thousandth of an inch). More advanced processes are capable
of handling traces with width and spacing as low as 0.1 mm
(4 mils) and holes with a minimum diameter of 0.1 mm.
When ICs with a large number of pins are used, multilayer
PCBs are normally required to provide sufficient

--- Page 53 ---
interconnections (wires). In that case, the PCB is fabricated
with several sheets glued on top of each other with the total
number of layers commonly ranging between two and eight,
though many more layers (greater than 30) can also be
manufactured.
The standard thickness of a single-layer PCB is 1.6 mm
(1/16 in.), but thinner boards also exist. For example,
individual layers in a multilayer PCB can be thinner than 0.3
mm.
1.8 Logic Values versus Physical Values
We know that the digital values in binary logic are
represented by ‘0’ and ‘1’. But in the actual circuits, they
must be represented by physical signals (normally voltages,
though in some cases currents are also used) with
measurable magnitudes. So what are these values?
First, let us establish the so-called reference physical values
for ‘0’ and ‘1’. The power-supply voltages for circuits
constructed with bipolar junction transistors (Chapter 8) are
VCC (a constant positive value) and GND (ground, 0 volts).
Likewise, for circuits constructed with MOS transistors
(Chapter 9), they are VDD (a constant positive value) and
GND. These are generally the reference values for ‘1’ and
‘0’, that is, ‘1’ = VCC or ‘1’ = VDD and ‘0’ = GND. This
means that when a ‘0’ or ‘1’ must be applied to the circuit, a
simple jumper to GND or VCC/VDD, respectively, can be
made.
Now let us describe the signal values for ‘0’ and ‘1’. In this
case, ‘0’s and ‘1’s are not provided by jumpers to the power-
supply rails but normally by the output of a preceding gate,
as illustrated in Figure 1.12(a). VOL represents the gate’s

--- Page 54 ---
maximum output voltage when low, VOH represents its
minimum output voltage when high, VIL is the maximum
input voltage guaranteed to be interpreted as ‘0’, and finally
VIH is the minimum input voltage guaranteed to be
interpreted as ‘1’. In this particular example, the old 5 V HC
CMOS family, employed in the 74-series of digital ICs
(described in Chapter 10), is depicted, which exhibits VOL =
0.26 V, VOH = 4.48 V, VIL = 1 V, and VIH = 3.5 V (at 25°C
and IO = |4 mA|).
FIGURE 1.12  (a) Analysis of the physical values for ‘0’
and ‘1’, which are ranges of values; (b) Min-max values of
input/output parameters and corresponding noise margins for the
old HC logic family; (c) Supply voltages and min-max
input/output parameters for all standardized low-voltage CMOS
logic families (drawn approximately to scale).

--- Page 55 ---
The first conclusion from Figure 1.12(a) is that the physical
values for ‘0’ and ‘1’ are not values, but ranges of values.
The second conclusion is that they are not as good as the
reference values (indeed, those are the best-case values).
Another very important piece of information extracted from
these parameters is the family’s noise margin. In the case of
Figure 1.12(a), the following noise margins result when low
and when high: NML = VIL − VOL = 0.74 V, NMH = VOH −
VIH = 0.98 V (these values are listed in Figure 1.12(b)).
Hence, we conclude that when using ICs from this family,
any noise whose peak amplitude is under 0.74 V is
guaranteed not to corrupt the data.
To conclude, Figure 1.12(c) shows the same kind of
information for the complete LVCMOS (low-voltage
CMOS) series of standard I/Os, which are among the most
popular in modern designs, and will be described in detail in
Chapter 10. As can be seen, the supply voltages are (from
older to newer) 3.3 V, 2.5 V, 1.8 V, 1.5 V, 1.2 V, and 1 V.
1.9 Nonprogrammable, Programmable, and
Hardware Programmable
Another important separation that can be made between
logic ICs pertains to their programmability, as described
below.
 Nonprogrammable ICs: Integrated circuits with a
fixed internal structure and no software-handling
capability. This is the case, for example, of the 74
series mentioned earlier (TTL and HC families,
described in detail in Chapter 10).
 Programmable ICs: Integrated circuits with
software-handling capability. Even though their

--- Page 56 ---
physical structure is fixed, the tasks that they
perform can be programmed. This is the case with
all microprocessors, for example.
 Hardware programmable ICs: Integrated circuits
with programmable physical structures. In other
words, the hardware can be changed. This is the
case of CPLD/FPGA chips, which will be
introduced in Section 1.12 and described in detail
in Chapter 18. Any hardware-programmable IC
can be a software-programmable IC, depending on
how the hardware is configured (for example, it
can be configured to emulate a microprocessor).
In the beginning of the digital era, only the first category of
ICs was available. Modern designs, however, fall almost
invariably in the other two. The last category, in particular,
allows the construction of very complex systems with many
different units all on the same chip, a type of design often
referred to as SoC (system-on-chip).
1.10 Binary Waveforms
Figure 1.13 shows three idealized representations for binary
waveforms, where the signal x is assumed to be produced by
a circuit that is controlled by clk (clock).

--- Page 57 ---
FIGURE 1.13  Common idealized representations of binary
waveforms. (a) Completely idealized view with vertical
transitions and no time delays; (b) With time delays included; (c)
With time delays and nonvertical transitions (the delays are
measured at the midpoint between the two logic voltages).
The view shown in Figure 1.13(a) is completely idealized
because, in practice, the transitions are not perfectly vertical.
More importantly, because x depends on clk, some time

--- Page 58 ---
delay between them is inevitable, which was also neglected.
Nevertheless, this type of representation is very common
because it illustrates the circuit’s functional behavior.
The plots in Figure 1.13(b) are a little more realistic because
they take the propagation delay into account. The low-to-
high propagation delay is called tpLH, while the high-to-low
is called tpHL.
A third representation is depicted in Figure 1.13(c), this time
including the delay and also the fact that the transitions are
not instantaneous (though represented in a linear way). The
time delays are measured at 50% of the logic voltages.
In continuation, a nonidealized representation will be shown
in the next section when describing the meaning of “transient
response.”
Another concept that will be seen several times is presented
in Figure 1.14. It is called duty cycle, and it represents the
fraction of time during which a signal remains high. In other
words, duty cycle = TH/T, where T = TH + TL is the signal’s
period. For example, the clock in Figure 1.13 exhibits a duty
cycle of 50%, which is indeed the general case for clock
signals.
FIGURE 1.14  Illustration of duty cycle (TH/T).
1.11 DC, AC, and Transient Responses

--- Page 59 ---
The signal produced at the output of a circuit when a certain
stimulus is applied to its input is called circuit response.
There are several kinds of such responses, which depend on
the type of stimulus applied to the circuit. Together they
allow a thorough characterization of the circuit performance.
The two main types of responses for analog linear circuits
are DC response and AC response. Similarly, the two main
responses for digital circuits are DC response and transient
response. Even though these types of behaviors will be
discussed in later chapters and also in the simulation
examples using SPICE, a brief description of each one
follows.
DC response
DC response is the response of a circuit to a large
amplitude slowly varying stimulus. DC stands for
direct current, meaning a constant electric current
of voltage. The name “DC response” therefore
indicates that each output value is measured for a
fixed input value. In other words, the input signal
is varied a little, then enough time is given for the
output signal to completely settle, and only then
are the measurements taken. During the tests, a
large range is covered by the input signal. This
type of analysis will be studied in Sections 8.4 (for
BJT-based circuits) and 9.4 (for MOS-based
circuits).
An example of DC response is presented in Figure
1.15, which shows the voltage at the output of a
CMOS inverter (Section 9.5) when its input is
subject to a slowly varying voltage ranging from
GND (0 V) to VDD (5 V in this example). When

--- Page 60 ---
the input is low, the output is high, and vice versa.
However, there is a point somewhere between the
two extremes where the circuit changes its
condition. This voltage is called transition voltage
(VTR) and is measured at the midpoint between the
two logic voltages (GND and VDD). In this
example, VTR≈2.2 V.
FIGURE 1.15  DC response of a CMOS
inverter.
Transient response
Transient response represents the response of a
circuit to a large-amplitude fast-varying stimulus.
This type of analysis, also called time response,
will be seen several times in subsequent chapters,
particularly in Sections 8.5 (for BJT-based circuits)
and 9.6 (for MOS-based circuits).
An example is shown in Figure 1.16. It is indeed a
continuation of Figure 1.13, now with a more
realistic representation. The transient response is
specified by means of a series of parameters whose
definitions are presented below.

--- Page 61 ---
tr (rise time): Time needed for the output
to rise from 10% to 90% of its static
values
tf (fall time): Time needed for the output
to fall from 90% to 10% of its static
values
tpLH (low-to-high propagation delay):
Time delay between the input crossing
50% and the output crossing 50% when
the output rises
tpHL (high-to-low propagation delay):
Time delay between the input crossing
50% and the output crossing 50% when
the output falls
ton (turn-on delay): Time delay between
the input crossing 10% and the output
crossing 90% when the switch closes
(rising edge when displaying current)
toff (turn-off delay): Time delay between
the input crossing 90% and the output
crossing 10% when the switch opens
(falling edge when displaying current)

--- Page 62 ---
FIGURE 1.16  Transient response parameters.
Note in Figure 1.16 that the first two parameters, tr
and tf, represent local measurements (they concern
only one signal, the output), while the others are
transfer parameters (they relate one side of the
circuit to the other, that is, input-output). For that
reason, the latter are more representative, so they
are more commonly used. For simple gates,
however, tpLH and tpHL are normally dominated by
tr and tf, so tpLH ≈tr/2 and tpHL ≈tf/2.
AC response
AC response is the response of a circuit to a small-
amplitude sinusoidal stimulus whose frequency is
swept between two limits. AC stands for alternate

--- Page 63 ---
current, like the 60 Hz sinusoidal electric current
(voltage) available from traditional wall outlets.
The name “AC response” therefore indicates that
the input stimulus is sinusoidal, hence it is proper
for testing linear analog circuits. Even though it is
not related to digital circuits, a brief introduction to
AC response will be given in Sections 8.6 (for
BJT-based circuits) and 9.7 (for MOS-based
circuits).
1.12 Programmable Logic Devices
CPLD (complex programmable logic device) and FPGA
(field programmable gate array) chips play an increasingly
important role in modern electronic design. As mentioned
earlier, these chips exhibit a unique feature that consists of
having hardware that is programmable. Consequently, they
can literally implement any kind of digital circuit.
Because of their very attractive features, like high gate and
register count, wide range of I/O standards and supply
voltages, large number of user I/O pins, easy ISP (in-system
programming), high speed, decreasing cost, and particularly
the short time to market and modifiability of products
developed with such devices, their presence in modern,
complex designs has grown substantially over the years.
Additionally, the ample adoption of VHDL and Verilog in
the engineering curriculum, plus the high quality and low
cost of current synthesis and simulation tools, have also
contributed enormously to the widespread use of such
technology.
These devices will be studied in detail in Chapter 18.
However, just to illustrate their potentials, the table in Figure

--- Page 64 ---
1.17 summarizes the main features of two top-performance
FPGAs (Xilinx Virtex 5 and Altera Stratix III). The
technology used in both is 65 nm CMOS (which is the most
advanced at the time of this writing), with a supply voltage
in the 1 V range. The number of equivalent logic gates is in
the millions, and the number of flip-flops is over 200,000.
They also provide a large amount of SRAM memory and
DSP (digital signal processing—essentially multipliers and
accumulators) blocks for user-defined applications along
with several PLL (phase locked loop) circuits for clock
filtration and multiplication. The number of user I/O pins can
be over 1000.
FIGURE 1.17  Summary of features for two top
performance FPGAs.
1.13 Circuit Synthesis and Simulation with VHDL
Modern large digital systems are normally designed using a
hardware description language like VHDL or Verilog. This
type of language allows the circuit to be synthesized and

--- Page 65 ---
fully simulated before any physical implementation actually
takes place. It also allows previously designed codes and IP
(intellectual property) codes to be easily incorporated into
new designs.
Additionally, these languages are technology and vendor
independent, so the codes are portable and reusable with
different technologies. After the code has been written and
simulated, it can be used, for example, to physically
implement the intended circuit onto a CPLD/FPGA chip or
to have a foundry fabricate a corresponding ASIC
(application-specific integrated circuit).
Due to the importance of VHDL, its strong presence in any
digital design course is indispensable. For that reason, six
chapters are dedicated to the matter. Chapter 19 summarizes
the language itself, Chapters 20 and 21 show design
examples for combinational circuits, Chapters 22 and 23
show design examples for sequential circuits, and finally
Chapter 24 introduces simulation techniques using VHDL
testbenches.
All design examples presented in the book were synthesized
and simulated using Quartus II Web Edition version 6.1 or
higher, available free of charge at www.altera.com. The
designs simulated using testbenches were processed with
ModelSim-Altera Web Edition 6.1 g, also available free of
charge at the same site. A tutorial on ModelSim is included
in Appendix A.
1.14 Circuit Simulation with SPICE
SPICE (Simulation Program with Integrated Circuit
Emphasis) is a very useful simulator for analog and mixed
(analog-digital) circuits. It allows any circuit to be described

--- Page 66 ---
using proper component models from which a very realistic
behavior is determined.
The SPICE language provides a means for modeling all sorts
of electronic devices, including transistors, diodes, resistors,
capacitors, etc., as well as common integrated circuits, which
can be imported from specific libraries. All types of
independent and dependent signal sources (square wave,
sinusoid, piecewise linear, etc.) can be modeled as well, so
complete circuits, with proper input stimuli, can be
evaluated.
In the case of digital circuits, SPICE is particularly useful for
testing the DC and transient responses (among others) of
small units, like basic gates, registers, and standard cells. For
that reason, Chapter 25 is dedicated to the SPICE language,
where several simulation examples are described.
Additionally, a tutorial on PSpice, which is one of the most
popular SPICE softwares, is presented in Appendix B.
1.15 Gate-Level versus Transistor-Level Analysis
As seen in Figure 1.6, digital circuits can be represented at
several levels, starting from the transistor-level all the way
up to the system-level. Books on digital design usually start
at gate-level (though some might include a few trivial
transistor-level implementations) with all sorts of circuits
constructed using only gates (AND, NAND, NOR, etc.). As
an example, Figure 1.18 shows a common implementation
for a D latch, which uses NAND gates and an inverter.

--- Page 67 ---
FIGURE 1.18  Gate-level D latch implementation.
Even though this type of representation is indispensable to
more easily describe the circuit functionalities, analysis of
internal details (at transistor-level) allows the readers to gain
a solid understanding of a circuit’s real potentials and
limitations and to develop a realistic perspective on the
practical design of actual integrated circuits.
To illustrate the importance of including transistor-level
analysis (at least for the fundamental circuits), Figure 1.19
shows some examples of how a D latch is actually
constructed (this will be studied in Chapter 13). As can be
seen, Figures 1.18 and 1.19 have nothing in common.

--- Page 68 ---
FIGURE 1.19  Examples of actual (transistor-level) D latch
implementations (Chapter 13).
In summary, although large circuits are depicted using gate-
level symbols, the knowledge of how the fundamental gates
and register are actually constructed is necessary to develop
a solid understanding of the circuit function.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 69 ---
2
Binary Representations
Chapter Contents
2.1 Binary Code
2.2 Octal and Hexadecimal Codes
2.3 Gray Code
2.4 BCD Code
2.5 Codes for Negative Numbers
2.6 Floating-Point Representation
2.7 ASCII Code
2.8 Unicode
2.9 Exercises
Objective:
This chapter shows how bits can be used to represent numbers and characters.
The codes presented for integers are sequential binary, octal, hexadecimal,
Gray, and BCD. The codes for negative integers are sign-magnitude, one’s
complement, and two’s complement. The codes for real numbers are single and
double-precision floating-point. And finally, the codes for characters are
ASCII and Unicode.
2.1 Binary Code

--- Page 70 ---
When we press a number, such as 5, in a calculator’s keypad,
two things happen: On one hand, the number is sent to the
display so the user can be assured that the right key was
pressed; on the other hand, the number is sent to the circuit
responsible for the calculations. However, we saw in Section
1.3 that only two-valued (binary) symbols are allowed in
digital circuits. So how is the number 5 actually represented?
The most common way of representing decimal numbers is
with the sequential binary code, also referred to as positional
code, regular binary code, or simply binary code (one must
be careful with this type of designation because all codes
that employ only two-valued symbols are indeed binary).
This is what happens to the number 5 mentioned above.
Even though a different code is normally used to represent
the keys in the keypad (for example, in the case of
computers with a PS/2 keyboard a code called Scan Code Set
2 is employed), the vector that actually enters the processor
(to perform a sum, for example) normally employs
sequential binary encoding.
This type of encoding was introduced in Section 1.3 and
consists of using a bit vector where each bit has a different
weight, given by 2k−1, where k is the bit’s position in the
binary word from right to left (Figure 2.1(a)). Consequently,
if 8 bits (one byte) are used to represent the number 5, then
its equivalent binary value is “00000101” because 0 · 27 + 0 ·
26 + 0 · 25 + 0 · 24 + 0 · 23 + 1 · 22 + 0 · 21 + 1 · 20 = 5. For
obvious reasons, the leftmost bit is called MSB (most
significant bit), while the rightmost one is called LSB (least
significant bit).

--- Page 71 ---
FIGURE 2.1  (a) Regular one-byte representation for the
decimal number 5; (b) General relationship between an W-bit
binary word and its corresponding decimal value.
Another example is shown below, where decimals are
encoded using 4-bit codewords.
Decimal Binary
0 0000
1 0001
2 0010
3 0011
4 0100
5 0101
… …
14 1110
15 1111
The relationship between decimal and binary numbers can
then be summarized by the following equation:
    (2.1)
where y is a decimal number and a = aN−1…a1a0 is its
corresponding regular binary representation (Figure 2.1(b)).

--- Page 72 ---
Some additional examples are given below (note that again,
whenever appropriate, VHDL syntax is employed, that is, a
pair of single quotes for single bits and a pair of double
quotes for bit vectors).
It is easy to verify that the range of unsigned (that is,
nonnegative) decimals that can be represented with N bits is:
    (2.2)
Some examples showing the largest positive integer (max) as
a function of N are presented below.
Equation 2.1 allows the conversion of a binary number into a
decimal number. To do the opposite, that is, to convert a
decimal number y into an N-bit binary string a = aN−1…
a1a0, the successive-approximation algorithm can be used
(depicted in Figure 2.2). It consists of the following three
steps.

--- Page 73 ---
Step 1: If y ≥ 2N − 1, then aN−1 = ‘1’ and subtract
2N−1 from y. Else, aN−1 = ‘0’ and y remains the
same.
Step 2: Decrement N.
Step 3: If N = 0, then done. Else, return to step 1.
FIGURE 2.2  Flowchart for the successive-approximation
algorithm.
EXAMPLE 2.1 DECIMAL-TO-BINARY
CONVERSION
Convert into binary, with N = 5 bits, the decimal number 26.
SOLUTION
1st iteration: 26 > 24, so a4 = ‘1’ new y and N are y =
26 − 16 = 10 and N = 5 − 1 = 4.
2nd iteration: 10 > 23, so a3 = ‘1’ new y and N are y
= 10 − 8 = 2 and N = 4 − 1 = 3.

--- Page 74 ---
3rd iteration: 2 < 22, so a2 = ‘0’ new y and N are y =
2 and N = 3 − 1 = 2.
4th iteration: 2 = 21, so a1 = ‘1’ new y and N are y =
2 − 2 = 0 and N = 2 − 1 = 1.
5th iteration: 0 < 20, so a0 = ‘0’ new y and N are y =
0 and N = 1 − 1 = 0 (done).
Therefore, a = a4a3 a2 a1 a0 = “11010”.
2.2 Octal and Hexadecimal Codes
Octal is a code whose main usage is to more compactly
represent binary vectors. It consists simply of breaking the
binary word in groups of 3 bits, from right to left, and then
encode every group using the regular binary code described
above. Some examples follow where the subscript 8 is used
to indicate its octal base (to avoid confusion with decimal
values, for which the base, ten, is omitted by default). For
example:
The same type of purpose and the same procedure occurs in
the hexadecimal code, which is much more popular than
octal. In it, groups of 4 bits are encoded instead of 3, hence
with base 16. Because 4-bit numbers range from 0 to 15, the
characters A through F are employed to represent numbers
above 9, that is, 10 = A, 11 = B, 12 = C, 13 = D, 14 = E, 15 =
F. For example:


--- Page 75 ---
The procedure above allows the conversion from binary to
hexadecimal and vice versa. To convert from hexadecimal
directly to decimal, the equation below can be used, where h
= hM−1 … h1h0 is an M-digit hexadecimal number, and y is
its corresponding decimal value:
    (2.3)
EXAMPLE 2.2 HEXADECIMAL-TO-
DECIMAL CONVERSION
Convert F012A16 to decimal.
SOLUTION
Using Equation (2.3), we obtain:
2.3 Gray Code
Another popular code is the Gray code (common in
mechanical applications). It is a UDC (unit-distance code)
because any two adjacent codewords differ by just one bit.
Moreover, it is an MSB reflected code because the
codewords are reflected with respect to the central words and
differ only in the MSB position.

--- Page 76 ---
To construct this code, we start with zero and then simply
flip the rightmost bit that produces a new codeword. Two
examples are given below, where 2- and 3-bit Gray codes are
constructed.
2-bit Gray code: “00” → “01” → “11” → “10”
3-bit Gray code: “000” → “001” → “011” →
“010” → “110” → “111” → “101” → “100”
2.4 BCD Code
In the BCD (binary-coded decimal) code, each digit of a
decimal number is represented separately by a 4-bit regular
binary code. Some examples are shown below.
EXAMPLE 2.3 NUMBER SYSTEMS #1
Write a table with the regular binary code, octal code,
hexadecimal code, Gray code, and BCD code for the decimals
0 to 15.
SOLUTION
The solution is presented in Figure 2.3.

--- Page 77 ---
FIGURE 2.3  Codes representing decimal
numbers from 0 to 15 (Example 2.3).
EXAMPLE 2.4 NUMBER SYSTEMS #2
Given the decimal numbers 0, 9, 99, and 999, determine:
a. The minimum number of bits needed to represent
them.
b. Their regular binary representation.
c. Their hexadecimal representation.
d. Their BCD representation.
SOLUTION
The solution is shown in the table below.


--- Page 78 ---
2.5 Codes for Negative Numbers
There are several codes for representing negative numbers.
The best known are sign-magnitude, one’s complement, and
two’s complement. However, the hardware required to
perform arithmetic operations with these numbers is simpler
when using two’s complement, so in practice this is basically
the only one used for integers.
2.5.1 Sign-Magnitude Code
In this case, the MSB represents the sign (‘0’ = plus, ‘1’
= minus). Consequently, it does not take part in the
sequential (weighted) binary encoding of the number,
and two representations result for 0. Some examples are
given below.
The range of decimals covered by an N-bit signed-
magnitude code is given below, where x is an integer:
    (2.4)
2.5.2 One’s Complement Code

--- Page 79 ---
If the MSB is ‘0’, then the number is positive. Its
negative counterpart is obtained by simply
complementing (reversing) all bits (again, a ‘1’ results
in the MSB position when the number is negative). Like
sign-magnitude, two representations result for 0, called
+0 (“00 … 0”) and −0 (“11 … 1”). Some examples are
shown below.
“0000” = +0 (regular binary code)
“1111” = −0 (because its complement is
“0000” = 0)
“0111” = +7 (regular binary code)
“1000” = −7 (because its complement is
“0111” = 7)
“01000001” = +65 (regular binary code)
“10111110” = −65 (because its complement is
“01000001” = 65)
Formally speaking, this code can be represented in
several ways. Say, for example, that a is a positive
number, and we want to find its reciprocal, b. Then the
following is true:
    (2.5)
    (2.6)
    (2.7)

--- Page 80 ---
Equation 2.5 is the definition of one’s complement in
the binary domain, while Equation 2.6 is the definition
of negation for signed numbers (thus equivalent to
one’s complement in this case) in the decimal domain.
Equation 2.7, on the other hand, determines the value of
b as if it were unsigned (that is, as if the numbers rang
ed from 0 to 2N – 1).
To check Equation 2.7, let us take a = 7. Then b = 24 –
1 – a = 8, which in unsigned form is represented as 8 =
“1000”, indeed coinciding with the representation of −7
just seen above.
The range of decimals covered by an N-bit one’s
complement-based code is also given by Equation 2.4.
2.5.3 Binary Addition
To explain the next code for negative numbers, called
two’s complement, knowledge of binary addition is
needed. Because binary arithmetic functions will only
be seen in the next chapter, an introduction to binary
addition is here presented.
Binary addition is illustrated in Figure 2.4, which shows
the simplest possible case, consisting of two single-bit
inputs. The corresponding truth table is presented in (a),
where a and b are the bits to be added, sum is the result,
and carry is the carry-out bit. Analogously to the case
of decimal numbers, in which addition is a modulo-10
operation, in binary systems it is a modulo-2 operation.
Therefore, when the result reaches 2 (last line of the
truth table), it is diminished of 2, and a carry-out
occurs. From (a) we conclude that sum and carry can be

--- Page 81 ---
computed by an XOR and an AND gate, respectively,
shown in (b).
FIGURE 2.4  Two-input binary addition: (a) Truth
table; (b) Sum and carry computations.
The general case (three inputs) in depicted in Figure
2.5, in which a carry-in bit (cin) is also included. In (a),
the traditional addition assembly is shown, with a = a3
a2 a1 a0 and b = b3 b2 b1 b0 representing two 4-bit
numbers to be added, producing a 5-bit sum vector, sum
= 4 s3 s2 s1 s0, and a 4-bit carry vector, carry = c4 c3 c2
c1. The algorithm is summarized in the truth table
shown in (b) (recall that it is a modulo-2 operation). In
(c), an example is presented in which “1101” (=13) is
added to “0111” (=7), producing “10100” (=20) at the
output. The carry bits produced during the additions are
also shown.
FIGURE 2.5  Three-input binary addition: (a)
Traditional addition assembly; (b) Truth table; (c) Addition
example.

--- Page 82 ---
We can now proceed and introduce the two’s
complement code for negative numbers.
2.5.4 Two’s Complement Code
Due to the simplicity of the required hardware
(described in Chapter 12), this is the option for
representing negative numbers adopted in practically all
computers and other digital systems. In it, the binary
representation of a negative number is obtained by
taking its positive representation and complementing
(reversing) all bits then adding one to it. For example,
to obtain the 5-bit representation of −7 we start with +7
(“00111”), then flip all bit values (→ “11000”) and add
‘1’ to the result (→ “11001”).
EXAMPLE 2.5 TWO’S
COMPLEMENT
Using 8-bit numbers, find the two’s complement
representation for the following decimals: −1, −4, and
−128.
SOLUTION
For −1: Start with +1 (“00000001”), complement it
(“11111110”), then add 1 (“11111111”). Observe that
signed −1 corresponds to unsigned 255.
For −4: Start with +4 (“00000100”), complement it
(“11111011”), then add 1 (“11111100”). Note that signed
−4 corresponds to unsigned 252.
For −128: Start with +128 (“10000000”), complement it
(“01111111”), then add 1 (“10000000”). Note that signed
−128 corresponds to unsigned 128.

--- Page 83 ---
An interesting conclusion can be drawn from the
example above: The sum of the magnitude of the signed
number with its unsigned value always adds to 2N,
where N is the number of bits. Hence, a set of equations
similar to (2.5)−(2.7) can be written for two’s
complement systems.
    (2.8)
    (2.9)
    (2.10)
The relationship between two’s complement and signed
decimal representations is further illustrated in Figure
2.6, which shows that indeed only a minus sign must be
appended to the MSB. Therefore, another way of
converting a two’s complement number to a decimal
signed number is the following:
FIGURE 2.6  Relationship between two’s
complement and decimal representations.

--- Page 84 ---
    (2.11)
For example, say that a = “100010”. Then the
corresponding signed decimal value obtained with
Equation 2.11 is x = −a525 + a424 + a323 + a222 + a121
+ a020 = −32 + 2 = −30.
EXAMPLE 2.6 SIGNED AND
UNSIGNED DECIMALS
Given a 3-bit binary code, write the corresponding
unsigned and signed decimals that it can represent. For
the signed part, consider that two’s complement has been
employed.
SOLUTION
The solution is shown in Figure 2.7.
FIGURE 2.7 Solution of Example 2.6.
The range of decimals covered by an N-bit two’s
complement-based code is given below, where x is an
integer. Note that this range is asymmetrical and is

--- Page 85 ---
larger than that in Equation 2.4 because now there is
only one representation for zero.
    (2.12)
As with any other binary representation, an N-bit two’s
complement number can be extended (more bits) or
truncated (less bits). To extend it from N to M (> N)
bits, the sign bit must be repeated M − N times on the
left (this operation is called sign extension). To truncate
it from N down to M (< N) bits, the N − M leftmost bits
must be removed; however, the result will only be valid
if the N − M + 1 leftmost bits are equal. These
procedures are illustrated in the example below.
EXAMPLE 2.7 TWO’S
COMPLEMENT EXTENSION AND
TRUNCATION
Say that a = “00111” (= 7) and b = “11100”(= −4) are
binary values belonging to a two’s complement-based
signed system. Perform the operations below and verify
the correctness of the results.
a. 5-to-7 extension of a and b.
b. 5-to-4 truncation of a and b.
c. 5-to-3 truncation of a and b.
SOLUTION
Part (a):
5-to-7 extension of a: “00111” (= 7) →
“0000111” (= 7)

--- Page 86 ---
5-to-7 extension of b: “11100” (=−4) →
“1111100” (=−4)
Sign extensions always produce valid results.
Part (b):
5-to-4 truncation of a: “00111” (= 7) →
“0111” (= 7) Correct.
5-to-4 truncation of b: “11100” (=−4) →
“1100” (=−4) Correct.
Part (c):
5-to-3 truncation of a: “00111” (= 7) → “111”
(=−1) Incorrect.
5-to-3 truncation of b: “11100” (=−4) → “100”
(=−4) Still correct.
As mentioned earlier, because of the simpler hardware,
the two’s complement option for representing negative
numbers is basically the only one used in practice. Its
usage will be illustrated in detail in the next chapter,
when studying arithmetic functions, and in Chapter 12,
when studying physical implementations of arithmetic
circuits (adders, subtracters, multipliers, etc.).
2.6 Floating-Point Representation
Previously we described codes for representing unsigned and
signed integers. However, in many applications it is
necessary to deal with real-valued numbers. To represent
them, the IEEE 754 standard is normally employed, which
includes two options that are shown in Figure 2.8.

--- Page 87 ---
FIGURE 2.8  (a) Single- and (b) double-precision floating-
point representations (IEEE 754 standard).
2.6.1 IEEE 754 Standard
The option in Figure 2.8(a) is called single-precision
floating-point. It has a total of 32 bits, with one bit
devoted to the sign (S), 8 bits to the exponent (E), and
23 bits devoted to the fraction (F). It is assumed to be
represented using normalized scientific notation, that is,
with exactly one nonzero digit before the binary point.
The corresponding decimal value (y) is determined by
the expression below, where E is the biased exponent,
while e is the actual exponent (e = E − 127).
Single precision:
    (2.13)
Where, for normalized numbers:
    (2.14)
The option in Figure 2.8(b) is called double-precision
floating-point. It has a total of 64 bits, with 1 bit for the
sign, 11 bits for the exponent, and 52 bits for the

--- Page 88 ---
fraction. The corresponding decimal value (y) is
determined by the expression below, where again E is
the biased exponent, while e is the actual exponent
(now given by e = E − 1023).
Double precision:
    (2.15)
Where, for normalized numbers:
    (2.16)
The exponent is biased because the actual exponent
must be signed to be able to represent very small
numbers (thus with a negative exponent) as well as very
large numbers (with a positive exponent). Because the
actual binary representation of E is unsigned, a bias is
included, so e can indeed be positive or negative. The
allowed ranges for E and e (for normalized numbers)
were shown in Equations 2.14 and 2.16.
Note that, contrary to the representation for negative
integers, which normally employs two’s complement, a
negative value is represented in a way similar to the
sign-magnitude option described in the previous
section, that is, a negative number has exactly the same
bits as its positive counterpart, with the only difference
in the sign bit.
The (1 + F) term that appears in the equations above is
the significand. Note that the ‘1’ in this term is not
included in the actual binary vector because it is
assumed that the number is stored using normalized

--- Page 89 ---
scientific notation, that is, with exactly one nonzero
digit before the binary point. Therefore, because the
only nonzero element in binary systems is 1, there is no
need to store it. Consequently, the significand’s actual
resolution is 24 bits in single precision and 53 bits in
double precision.
One limitation of floating-point is that the equations do
not produce the value zero, so a special representation
must be reserved for it, which consists of filling the
whole E and F fields with zeros. This case is shown in
the table of Figure 2.9 (first line). Note that there are
two mathematically equivalent zeros, called +0 and −0,
depending on the value of S.
FIGURE 2.9  Set of possible representations with the
IEEE 754 floating-point standard.
The second line in Figure 2.9 shows the representation
for infinity, which consists of filling E with ‘1’s and F
with ‘0’s, with the sign determined by S. The third line
shows a representation that does not correspond to a
number (indicated by NaN = Not a Number), which
occurs when E is maximum (filled with ‘1’s) and F ≠ 0;
this case is useful for representing invalid or
indeterminate operations (like 0 ÷ 0,∞ − ∞, etc.). The
fourth line shows the representation for denormalized
numbers, which occurs when E = 0 and F ≠ 0. Finally,

--- Page 90 ---
the fifth line shows the regular representation for
normalized numbers, whose only condition is to have 0
< E < max, where max = 255 for single precision and
max = 2047 for double precision (that is, E = “11 …
1”).
The numeric values that can be represented using
floating-point notation is then as follows:
Single precision:
    (2.17)
Double precision:
    (2.18)
EXAMPLE 2.8 FLOATING-POINT
REPRESENTATION #1
Determine the decimal values corresponding to the
binary single-precision floating-point vectors shown in
Figure 2.10. (Note that to make the representations
cleaner, in all floating-point exercises we drop the use of
quotes for bits and bit vectors.)


--- Page 91 ---
FIGURE 2.10 Floating-point
representations for Example 2.8.
SOLUTION
a. S = 1, E = 127, and F = 0.5. Therefore, y =
(−1)1 (1+0.5)2127−127 = −1.5.
b. S = 0, E = 129, and F = 0.25. Therefore, y =
(−1)0(1 + 0.25)2129 − 127 = 5.
EXAMPLE 2.9 FLOATING-POINT
REPRESENTATION #2
Determine the binary single-precision floating-point
representations for the following decimals:
a. 0.75
b. −2.625
c. 37/32
SOLUTION
a.
Therefore, S = 0, F = 1000 … 0, and E =
01111110 (because E=e + 127=−1 + 127 = 126).
Note: The subscript ‘2’ used above to distinguish
a binary value from a decimal (default) value will
be omitted in all representations that follow.
b.
Therefore, S = 1, F = 0010100 … 0, and E =
10000000 (because E = e + 127 = 1 + 127 =
128).
c.


--- Page 92 ---
Therefore, S = 0, F = 0010100 … 0, and E =
01111111 (because E = e + 127 = 0 + 127 = 127).
2.6.2 Floating-Point versus Integer
Floating-point has a fundamental feature that integers
do not have: the ability to represent very large as well
as very small numbers. For example, when using
single-precision floating point we saw that the range is
±2−126 to near ±2128, which is much wider than that
covered with 32-bit integers, that is, −231 to 231 − 1.
However, there has to be a price to pay for that, and that
is precision.
To illustrate it, the example below shows two 32-bit
representations: the first (y1) using integer format and
the second (y2) using floating-point format. Because the
fraction in the latter can only have 23 bits, truncation is
needed, suppressing the last 8 bits of y1 to construct y2.
In this example, the case of minimum error (within the
integer range) is illustrated, in which only the last bit in
the last 8-bit string of y1 is ‘1’.
Representation of a 32-bit integer:
Corresponding single-precision floating-point
representation (F has 23 bits):
Consequently, the following error results:

--- Page 93 ---
The differences between integer and floating-point
representations are further illustrated in the hypothetical
floating-point system described in the example below.
EXAMPLE 2.10 HYPOTHETICAL
FLOATING-POINT SYSTEM
Consider the 6-bit floating-point (FP) representation
shown in Figure 2.11(a), which assigns 1 bit for the sign,
3 bits for the exponent, and 2 bits for the fraction, having
the exponent biased by 1 (that is, e = E − 1; see the
equation in Figure 2.11(a)).
a. List all values that this system can produce.
b. How many values are there? Is this quantity
different from that in a 6-bit integer
representation?
c. Which system can represent smaller and
larger numbers? Comment on the respective
resolutions.

--- Page 94 ---
FIGURE 2.11  Hypothetical 6-bit floating-
point system for Example 2.10.
SOLUTION
a. Using the expression given in Figure
2.11(a), the values listed in Figure 2.11(b) are
obtained, which range from ±0.5 to ±112.
b. There are 64 values, which is the same
quantity as for a 6-bit integer system, that is,
26 = 64. This was expected because that is the
total amount of information that 6 bits can
convey.
c. This is the most interesting part because it
makes the differences between FP and integer
clear. For 6-bit signed integers, the values are
−32, −31, …, −1, 0, 1, …, 30, 31, which are
uniformly distributed. FP, on the other hand,
produces more concentrated values (better
resolution) around zero and spreader values
(poorer resolution) toward the range ends. The
extreme values in this example are ±32 for
integer and ±112 for FP, so FP exhibits a wider
range. Moreover, small values, like 0.5, cannot
be represented with integers but can with FP.

--- Page 95 ---
On the other hand, for large numbers the
opposite happens, where values like 9, 11, 13,
etc., can be represented with integers but
cannot with FP. Putting it all together: There is
no magic; these are simply different
representation systems whose choice is
dictated by the application.
The use of floating-point representation in computers
will be seen in the next chapter when studying
arithmetic functions. Truncation and rounding will also
be described there.
2.7 ASCII Code
We previously saw several binary codes that can be used to
represent decimal numbers (both integer and real-valued).
There are also several codes for representing characters, that
is, letters, numbers, punctuation marks, and other special
symbols used in a writing system. The two main codes in
this category are ASCII and Unicode.
2.7.1 ASCII Code
The ASCII (American Standard Code for Information
Interchange) code was introduced in the 1960s. It
contains 128 7-bit codewords (therefore represented by
decimals from 0 to 127) that are shown in Figure 2.12.
This set of characters is also known as Basic Latin.

--- Page 96 ---
FIGURE 2.12  ASCII code.
The first two columns (decimals 0–31) are indeed for
control only, which, along with DEL (delete, decimal
127), total 33 nonprintable symbols. SP (decimal 32) is
the space between words. For example, to encode the
word “Go” with this code, the following bit string
would be produced: “1000111 1101111”.
2.7.2 Extended ASCII Code
Extended ASCII is an 8-bit character code that includes
the standard ASCII code in its first 128 positions along
with 128 additional characters.
The additional 128 codewords allow the inclusion of
symbols needed in languages other than English, like
the accented characters of French, Spanish, and
Portuguese. However, these additional characters are
not standardized, so a document created using a certain
language might look strange when opened using a word

--- Page 97 ---
processor in a country with a different language. This
type of limitation was solved with Unicode.
2.8 Unicode
Unicode was proposed in 1993 with the intention of attaining
a real worldwide standard code for characters. Its current
version (5.0, released in 2006) contains ∼ 99,000 printable
characters, covering almost all writing systems on the planet.
2.8.1 Unicode Characters
Each Unicode point is represented by a unique decimal
number, so contrary to Extended ASCII (whose upper
set is not standardized), with Unicode the appearance of
a document will always be the same regardless of the
software used to create or read it (given that it supports
Unicode, of course). Moreover, its first 128 characters
are exactly those of ASCII, so compatibility is
maintained.
Unicode points are identified using the notation U+xx
… x, where xx … x is either a decimal or hexadecimal
number. For example, U+0 (or U+000016) identifies the
very first code point, while U+65,535 (or U+FFFF16)
identifies the 65,536th point.
A total of 1,114,112 points (indexed from 0 to
1,114,111) are reserved for this code, which would in
principle require 21 bits for complete representation.
However, Unicode points are represented using
multiples of one byte, so depending on the encoding
scheme (described later), each point is represented by 1,
2, 3, or 4 bytes.

--- Page 98 ---
The current list of Unicode characters takes the range
from 0 to a little over 100,000, within which there is a
small subrange with 2048 values (from 55,296 to
57,343) that are reserved for surrogate pairs (explained
below), so they cannot be used for characters. Besides
the surrogate range, Unicode has several other (above
100k) reserved ranges for control, formatting, etc.
Two samples from the Unicode table are shown in
Figure 2.13. The one on the left is from the very
beginning of the code (note that the first character’s
address is zero), which is the beginning of the ASCII
code. The second sample shows ancient Greek
numbers, whose corresponding decimals start at 65,856
(hexadecimal numbers are used in the table, so 10,14016
= 1 · 216 + 0 · 212 + 1 · 28 + 4 · 24 + 0 · 20 = 65,85610).
FIGURE 2.13  Two samples from Unicode. The one
on the left is from the very beginning of the code table,
which is the ASCII code. The second sample shows ancient
Greek numbers (note that the corresponding decimals are in

--- Page 99 ---
the 65,000 range—the numbers in the table are in
hexadecimal format).
The first subset of Unicode to gain popularity was a
652-character subset called Windows Glyph List 4,
which covers most European languages (with the ASCII
code obviously included). This subset has been
supported by Windows and several other software
programs since the mid-1990s.
Unicode has three standardized encoding schemes
called UTF-8 (Unicode transformation format 8), UTF-
16, and UTF-32, all summarized in Figure 2.14.
FIGURE 2.14  Standard Unicode encoding schemes
(UTF-8, UTF-16, UTF-32).
2.8.2 UTF-8 Encoding

--- Page 100 ---
The UTF-8 encoding scheme uses variable-length
codewords with 1, 2, 3, or 4 bytes. As shown in the
upper table of Figure 2.14, it employs only 1 byte when
encoding the first 128 symbols (that is, the ASCII
symbols), then 2 bytes for characters between 128 and
2047, and so on.
Note that the surrogate subrange mentioned above is
excluded. Note also that the encoding is not continuous
(there are jumps in the middle) so that a single byte
always starts with ‘0’, while multiple bytes always start
with “10”, except byte 1, which starts with “11”. This
causes a UTF-8 bit stream to be less affected by errors
than the other encodings described below (for example,
if an error occurs during data transmission or storage,
the system resynchronizes at the next correct character).
Moreover, in traditional languages, UTF-8 tends to
produce shorter files because most characters are from
the ASCII code. On the other hand, the length of
individual characters is highly unpredictable.
EXAMPLE 2.11 UTF-8 UNICODE
ENCODING
a. Determine the decimal number that
represents the Unicode point whose binary
representation is “0001 1000 0000 0001”.
b. Determine the binary UTF-8 encoding string
for the Unicode point above.
SOLUTION
a. U+ = 212 + 211 + 1 = 6145.
b. This point (6145) is in the third line of the
corresponding table from Figure 2.14.
Therefore, cccc = “0001”, bbbbbb = “100000”,

--- Page 101 ---
and aaaaaa = “000001”. Consequently, the
following UTF-8 string results: “1110 0001
1010 0000 1000 0001”.
Note: In most examples throughout the text the
subscript that specifies the base is omitted because its
identification in general is obvious from the numbers.
However, the base will always be explicitly informed
when dealing with hexadecimal numbers because they
are more prone to confusion (either the subscript “16”
or an “h” following the number will be employed).
2.8.3 UTF-16 Encoding
UTF-16 encoding also employs variable-length
codewords but now with 2 or 4 bytes (Figure 2.14).
This code is derived from the extinct 16-bit fixed-length
encoding scheme, which had only 216 = 65,536
codewords. This part of the code (from 0 to 65,535) is
called base multilingual plane (BMP). When a Unicode
point above this range is needed, a surrogate pair is
used, which is a pair taken from the reserved surrogate
range mentioned earlier. In other words, Unicode points
higher than 65,535 are encoded with two 16-bit words.
In most languages, such characters rarely occur, so the
average length is near 16 bits per character (longer than
UTF-8 and more subject to error propagation).
The first 16-bit word (bytes 1−2) in the surrogate pair is
chosen from the first half of the surrogate range (that is,
55,296−56,319 or D80016−DBFF16), while the second
16-bit word (bytes 3−4) is chosen from the second half
of the surrogate range (56,320−57,343 or
DC0016−DFFF16). Consequently, because there are
1024 words in each half, a total of 10242 = 1,048,576

--- Page 102 ---
codewords result, which, added to the 65,536
codewords already covered with only two bytes,
encompasses the whole range of decimals devoted to
Unicode, that is, from 0 to 1,114,111
(000016−10FFF16).
From the description above, it is easy to verify that the
relationship between the Unicode decimal value (U+)
and the decimals that represent the two words in the
surrogate pair (P1 for bytes 1−2, P2 for bytes 3−4) is the
following:
    (2.19)
Or, reciprocally:
    (2.20)
    (2.21)
Where q is the following quotient:
    (2.22)
EXAMPLE 2.12 UTF-16 UNICODE
ENCODING
a. Determine the decimal corresponding to the
Unicode point whose binary representation is

--- Page 103 ---
“0001 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000”.
b. Determine the binary UTF-16 encoding
string for the Unicode point above using
Equations 2.19 to 2.22.
c. Repeat part (b) above using the table in
Figure 2.14.
SOLUTION
a. U+ = 220 = 1,048,576.
b. q = 960, P1 = 56,256 (= “1101 1011 1100
0000”), and P2 = 56,320 (= “1101 1100 0000
0000”). Therefore, P1P2 = “1101 1011 1100
0000 1101 1100 0000 0000” (= DB C0 DC
00).
c. From U+ = “0001 0000 0000 0000 0000
0000” we determine that bbbbb = “10000” and
aa … a = “00 … 0”. Thus c = b − 1 (truncated
on the left) is c = “10000” −1 = “1111”.
Consequently, the same string shownabove
results for P1P2.
2.8.4 UTF-32 Encoding
As shown in the corresponding table from Figure 2.14,
it employs a fixed-length codeword with 32 bits, which
often facilitates the allocation of resources. However,
even though there are few, some of the Unicode
graphical symbols result from the combination of two
or more characters, so a truly constant length is not
possible. This encoding, of course, leads to files that are
nearly twice the size of UTF-16 files.
EXAMPLE 2.13 UTF-32 UNICODE
ENCODING

--- Page 104 ---
a. Determine the decimal number that
represents the Unicode point whose binary
representation is “0001 1000 0000 1110”.
b. Determine the binary UTF-32 encoding
string for the Unicode point above.
SOLUTION
a. U+ = 212 + 211 + 23 + 22 + 21 = 6158.
b. “0000 0000 0000 0000 0001 1000 0000
1110”.
2.9 Exercises
1. Number of codewords
Consider an 8-bit system.
a. How many codewords are there with
exactly three ‘0’s and five ‘1’s?
b. Write a table with the number of
codewords as a function of the codeword’s
Hamming weight (number of ‘1’s in the
codeword). For which Hamming weight is
this number maximum?
2. Binary to decimal conversion #1
Write the decimal numbers corresponding to the
following unsigned binary representations:
a. “0000 1111” (the space inside the string is
just to make it easier to read)
b. “0000 1111 0010”
c. “1000 1000 0001 0001”
3. Binary to decimal conversion #2
Write the decimal numbers corresponding to the
following unsigned binary representations:
a. “1000 1001”

--- Page 105 ---
b. “1000 1111 0000”
c. “0010 1000 0000 0001”
4. Binary to hexadecimal conversion #1
Write the hexadecimal numbers corresponding to the
following unsigned binary representations:
a. “0000 1110”
b. “00 1111 0010”
c. “1000 1010 0001 0011”
5. Binary to hexadecimal conversion #2
Write the hexadecimal numbers corresponding to the
following unsigned binary representations:
a. “100 1110”
b. “0011 1111 0010”
c. “1 1111 1010 0001 1001”
6. Decimal to binary conversion #1
a. Determine the minimum number of bits
needed to represent the following decimals:
15, 16, 511, 12,345, and 49,999.
b. Using the minimum number of bits, write
the binary vectors corresponding to the
unsigned decimals above.
7. Decimal to binary conversion #2
a. Determine the minimum number of bits
needed to represent the following decimals:
63, 64, 512, 2007, and 99,999.
b. Using the minimum number of bits, write
the binary vectors corresponding to the
unsigned decimals above.
8. Decimal to hexadecimal conversion #1
Using four hexadecimal digits, write the hexadecimal
numbers corresponding to the following decimals:
63, 64, 512, 2007, and 49,999.

--- Page 106 ---
9. Decimal to hexadecimal conversion #2
Using the minimum possible number of hexadecimal
digits, write the hexadecimal numbers corresponding
to the following decimals: 255, 256, 4096, and
12,345.
10. Hexadecimal to binary conversion #1
Using N = 16 bits, write the binary strings
corresponding to the following hexadecimal
numbers: AA, 99C, 000F, and FF7F.
11. Hexadecimal to binary conversion #2
Using the minimum possible number of bits, write the
binary strings corresponding to the following
hexadecimal numbers: D, 29C, F000, and 13FF.
12. Hexadecimal to decimal conversion #1
Convert the following hexadecimal numbers to
decimal: D, 99C, 000F, and 1FF7F.
13. Hexadecimal to decimal conversion #2
Convert the following hexadecimal numbers to
decimal: AA, 990, 7001, and FF007.
14. Octal to decimal conversion
Convert the following octal numbers to decimal: 3,
77, 0011, and 2222.
15. Decimal to octal conversion
Write the octal representation for the following
decimals: 3, 77, 111, and 2222.
16. Decimal to bcd conversion #1
Write the BCD representation for the following
decimals: 3, 77, 001, and 2222.
17. Decimal to BCD conversion #2
Write the BCD representation for the following
decimals: 03, 65, 900, and 7890.

--- Page 107 ---
18. BCD to decimal conversion
Convert the following BCD numbers to decimal:
a. “0101”
b. “1001” “0111”
c. “0000” “0110” “0001”
19. Gray code #1
Starting with “11111”, construct a 5-bit Gray code.
20. Gray code #2
Starting with “00000”, construct a 5-bit Gray code.
21. Decimal range #1
a. Give the maximum decimal range that can
be covered in unsigned systems with the
following number of bits: 6, 12, and 24.
b. Repeat the exercise for signed systems
(with two’s complement).
22. Decimal range #2
a. Give the maximum decimal range that can
be covered in unsigned systems with the
following number of bits: 8, 16, and 32.
b. Repeat the exercise for signed systems
(with two’s complement).
23. Decimal to sign-magnitude conversion
Represent the following signed decimals using 7-bit
sign-magnitude encoding: +3, −3, +31, −31, +48,
−48.
24. Sign-magnitude to decimal conversion
Give the signed decimals corresponding to the
following binary sequence belonging to a system
where sign-magnitude is used to represent negative
numbers:
a. “00110011”

--- Page 108 ---
b. “10110011”
c. “11001100”
25. Decimal to one’s complement conversion
Represent the following signed decimals using 7-bit
one’s complement encoding: +3, −3, +31, −31, +48,
−48.
26. One’s complement to decimal conversion
Write the signed decimals corresponding to the
following numbers from a signed system that
employs one’s complement encoding:
a. “010101”
b. “101010”
c. “0000 0001”
d. “1000 0001”
27. Decimal to two’s complement conversion #1
Represent the following signed decimals using 7-bit
two’s complement encoding: +3, −3, +31, −31, +48,
−48.
28. Decimal to two’s complement conversion #2
Represent the following signed decimals using 8-bit
two’s complement encoding: +1, −1, +31, −31, +64,
−64.
29. Two’s complement to decimal conversion #1
Write the signed decimals corresponding to the
following numbers from a signed system that
employs two’s complement encoding:
a. “010101”
b. “101010”
c. “0000 0001”
d. “1000 0001”
30. Two’s complement to decimal conversion #2

--- Page 109 ---
Write the signed decimals corresponding to the
following numbers from a signed system that
employs two’s complement encoding:
a. “0101”
b. “1101”
c. “0111 1111”
d. “1111 1111”
31. Floating-point representation
For each result in Example 2.9, make a sketch similar
to that in Figure 2.10 showing all bit values.
32. Binary to floating-point conversion
Suppose that y1 = 11111111 11111111 11111111
11111111 is a 32-bit integer. Find its single-precision
floating-point representation, y2. Is there any error in
y2?
33. Decimal to floating-point conversion #1
Find the single-precision floating-point
representation for the following decimals:
a. 0.1875
b. −0.1875
c. 1
d. 4.75
34. Decimal-to-floating-point conversion #2
Determine the single-precision floating-point
representation for the following decimals:
a. 25
b. −25
c. 255
d. 256
35. Floating-point to decimal conversion #1
Convert to decimal the FP numbers depicted in
Figure E2.35.

--- Page 110 ---
36. Floating-point to decimal conversion #2
FIGURE E2.35
Convert to decimal the single-precision FP numbers
below.
a. S = 0, F = 0011000 … 0, and E =
01111100
b. S = 1, F = 1110000 … 0, and E =
10001000
37. ASCII code #1
Write the 21-bit sequence corresponding to the 3-
character string “Hi!” encoded using the ASCII code.
38. ASCII code #2
Write the 21-bit sequence corresponding to the 3-
character string “MP3” encoded using the ASCII
code.
39. ASCII code #3
What is the sequence of characters represented by the
ASCII-encoded sequence “1010110 1001000
1000100 1001100”?
40. UTF-8 Unicode encoding #1
Determine the UTF-8 encoding strings for the
Unicode points shown in the first column of Figure
E2.40 and prove that the values shown in the second
column are correct.

--- Page 111 ---
41. UTF-8 Unicode encoding #2
FIGURE E2.40
Using UTF-8 encoding, determine the total number
of bytes necessary to transmit the following sequence
of Unicode characters (given in hexadecimal format):
U+0031, U+0020, U+1000, U+0020, U+020000.
42. UTF-8 Unicode encoding #3
Using UTF-8 encoding, determine the bit string that
would result from the encoding of each one of the
following Unicode points (the points are given in
hexadecimal format, so give your answers in
hexadecimal format): U+002F, U+01FF, U+11FF,
U+1111F.
43. UTF-16 Unicode encoding #1
Determine the UTF-16 encoding strings for the
Unicode points shown in the first column of Figure
E2.40 and prove that the values shown in the third
column are correct.
44. UTF-16 Unicode encoding #2
Using UTF-16 encoding, determine the total number
of bytes necessary to transmit the following sequence
of Unicode characters (given in hexadecimal format):
U+0031, U+0020, U+1000, U+0020, U+020000.
45. UTF-16 Unicode encoding #3

--- Page 112 ---
Using UTF-16 encoding, determine the bit string that
would result from the encoding of each one of the
following Unicode points (the points are given in
hexadecimal format, so give your answers in
hexadecimal format): U+002F, U+01FF, U+11FF,
U+1111F.
46. UTF-32 Unicode encoding #1
Determine the UTF-32 encoding strings for the
Unicode points shown in the first column of Figure
E2.40 and prove that the values shown in the fourth
column are correct.
47. UTF-32 Unicode encoding #2
Using UTF-32 encoding, determine the total number
of bytes necessary to transmit the following sequence
of Unicode characters (given in hexadecimal format):
U+0031, U+0020, U+1000, U+0020, U+020000.
48. UTF-32 Unicode encoding #3
Using UTF-32 encoding, determine the bit string that
would result from the encoding of each one of the
following Unicode points (the points are given in
hexadecimal format, so give your answers in
hexadecimal format): U+002F, U+01FF, U+11FF,
U+1111F.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 113 ---
3
Binary Arithmetic
Chapter Contents
3.1 Unsigned Addition
3.2 Signed Addition and Subtraction
3.3 Shift Operations
3.4 Unsigned Multiplication
3.5 Signed Multiplication
3.6 Unsigned Division
3.7 Signed Division
3.8 Floating-Point Addition and Subtraction
3.9 Floating-Point Multiplication
3.10 Floating-Point Division
3.11 Exercises
Objective:
Humans are used to doing arithmetic operations with decimal numbers, while
computers perform similar arithmetic operations but use the binary system of
‘0’s and ‘1’s. The objective of this chapter is to show how the latter occurs.
The analysis includes unsigned and signed values, of both integer and real-

--- Page 114 ---
valued types. Because shift operations can also implement certain arithmetic
functions, they too are included in this chapter.
3.1 Unsigned Addition
Binary addition (also called modulo-2 addition) was
introduced in Section 2.5, with Figure 2.5 repeated in Figure
3.1 below. The vectors within the gray area are given, while
the others must be calculated. a = a3 a2 a1a0 and b = b3 b2 b1
b0 represent 4-bit numbers to be added, producing a 5-bit
sum vector, sum = s4 s3 s2 s1 s0, and a 4-bit carry vector,
carry = c4 c3 c2 c1. The algorithm is summarized in (b)
(recall that it is a modulo-2 operation). In (c), an example is
given in which “1100” (= 12) is added to “0110” (= 6),
producing “10010” (= 18) at the output. The carry bits
produced during the additions are also shown.
FIGURE 3.1  Three-input binary addition: (a) Traditional
addition assembly; (b) Truth table; (c) Addition example.
As shown in the truth table of Figure 3.1(b), the sum bit is
‘1’ when the number of inputs that are high is odd, so this is
an odd parity function. It can also be seen that the carry bit is
‘1’ when two or more of the three input bits are high, so this
is a majority function.

--- Page 115 ---
In Figure 3.1(a), the sum has N + 1 bits, where N is the
number of bits at the input. However, computers normally
provide only N bits for the sum, sometimes without a carry-
out bit, in which case overflow can occur (that is, the actual
result is greater than that produced by the circuit). All of
these aspects are described below, where the following two
cases are examined:
Case 1: Unsigned addition with N-bit inputs and
N-bit output
Case 2: Unsigned addition with N-bit inputs and
(N + 1)-bit output
Case 1 Unsigned addition with N-bit inputs
and N-bit output
When the output has the same number of bits as the
inputs, overflow can occur. For example, with 4 bits the
input range is from 0 to 15, thus the sum can be as big
as 30. Consequently, because the output range is also
from 0 to 15, not all operations will be correct. The
overflow check criteria are described below and are
self-explanatory.
Overflow check based on carry: If the last carry bit is
‘1’, then overflow has occurred.
Overflow check based on operands: Overflow occurs
when the MSBs of both operands are ‘1’ or when the
MSBs are different and the sum’s MSB is ‘0’.
EXAMPLE 3.1 UNSIGNED
ADDITION #1

--- Page 116 ---
For 4-bit inputs and 4-bit output, calculate (9 + 6) and (9
+ 7) and check whether the results are valid.
SOLUTION
The solution is depicted in Figure 3.2. The sum and
carry bits (shown within gray areas) were obtained using
the table of Figure 3.1(b). In the second sum, overflow
occurs.
FIGURE 3.2 Solutions of Example 3.1.
Case 2 Unsigned addition with N-bit inputs
and (N+ 1)-bit output
In this case, overflow cannot occur because the input
range is 0 ≤ input ≤ 2N − 1, while the allowed output
range is 0 ≤ output ≤ 2N+1 − 1.
EXAMPLE 3.2 UNSIGNED
ADDITION #2
For 4-bit inputs and 5-bit output, repeat the (9 + 6) and
(9 + 7) additions and check whether or not the results are
valid.
SOLUTION

--- Page 117 ---
The solution is depicted in Figure 3.3. Again, sum and
carry (shown within gray areas) were obtained using the
table of Figure 3.1(b). Both results are valid.
FIGURE 3.3 Solutions of Example 3.2.
3.2 Signed Addition and Subtraction
Subtraction is very similar to addition. Figure 3.4 illustrates
how unsigned subtraction can be computed. In Figure 3.4(a),
a traditional subtraction arrangement, similar to that of
Figure 3.1(a), is shown. However, in the truth table
presented in Figure 3.4(b), the differences between sum and
subtraction are made clear where borrow is employed
instead of carry. Recall that in a binary system all arithmetic
operations are modulo-2, so when a negative result occurs it
is increased by 2 and a borrow-out occurs. An example is
shown in Figure 3.4(c), in which “1001” (= 9) minus “0111”
(= 7) is computed. Following the truth table, “00010” (= 2)
results.


--- Page 118 ---
FIGURE 3.4  Three-input binary subtraction: (a) Traditional
subtraction assembly; (b) Truth table; (c) Subtraction example.
The subtraction algorithm described above is only
illustrative because the approach used in most actual
implementations is two’s complement (described in Section
2.5); that is, all negative numbers are represented in two’s
complement format so they can be added to any other values
instead of being subtracted from them. Therefore, only
adders are actually needed (because a − b = a + (−b), where
−b is the two’s complement of b). As seen in Section 2.5, to
obtain the two’s complement of a number, first all bits are
inverted and then 1 is added to the result. For example, for
−6, we start with +6 (= “0110”), then invert all bits (“1001”)
and add 1 to the result (“1010”=−6).
Again, two cases are described:
Case 1: Signed addition and subtraction with N-bit
inputs and N-bit output
Case 2: Signed addition and subtraction with N-bit
inputs and (N + 1)-bit output
Case 1 Signed addition and subtraction with
N-bit inputs and N-bit output
Recall that signed positive numbers are represented in
the same way as unsigned numbers are, with the
particularity that the MSB must be ‘0’. If the MSB is
‘1’, then the number is negative and represented in
two’s complement form. Recalling also that addition
and subtraction are essentially the same operation, that
is, a − b = a + (−b), only one of them (addition) needs
to be considered, so the algorithm specified in the table
of Figure 3.1(b) suffices.

--- Page 119 ---
In summary, to perform the operation a + b, both
operands are applied directly to the adder regardless of
their actual signs (that is, the fact of being positive or
negative does not affect the hardware). The same is true
for a − b, except that b in this case must undergo two’s
complement transformation before being applied to the
same adder (this transformation must be performed
regardless of b’s actual sign). The two’s complemented
version will be denoted with an asterisk (a* or b*).
In the overflow criteria described below, we look at the
numbers that actually enter the adder, that is, a and b
when the operation is a + b, a and b* when it is a − b,
a* and b when it is −a + b, or a* and b* when it is −a −
b.
Overflow check based on carry: If the last two carry
bits are different, then overflow has occurred.
Overflow check based on operands: If the operand’s
MSBs are equal and the sum’s MSB is different from
them, then overflow has occurred.
The last criterion above says that when two numbers
have the same sign, the sum can only have that sign,
otherwise overflow has occurred. In other words, if
both operands are positive (begin with ‘0’), the sum
must be positive, and when both are negative (begin
with ‘1’), the sum must be negative as well.
The first of the two criteria above says the same thing
but in a less obvious way. If both operands begin with
‘0’, the only way to have the carry-out bit different
from the carry-in bit is by having cin = ‘1’, which
produces s = ‘1’ and count = ‘0’; in other words, two
positive numbers produce a negative result, which is
invalid. Likewise, if both numbers begin with ‘1’, for
carry-out to be different from carry-in the latter has to

--- Page 120 ---
be cin = ‘0’, which then produces s = ‘0’ and count =
‘1’; in other words, two negative numbers produce a
positive sum, which is again invalid. On the other hand,
if the operands have different signs (‘0’ and ‘1’), then
count = cin always, so, as expected, overflow cannot
occur.
EXAMPLE 3.3 SIGNED ADDITION #1
Using signed 4-bit numbers for inputs and output,
calculate the following sums and check the results’
validity using both overflow check criteria described
above: (5 + 2), (5+3), (−5 − 3), (−5 − 4), (5 − 2), (5 − 8).
SOLUTION
The solution is shown in Figure 3.5. Again, the table of
Figure 3.1(b) was used to obtain the sum and carry bits
(shown within gray rectangles). Note that only sums are
performed, so when a subtraction is needed, the numbers
are simply two’s complemented first.
FIGURE 3.5 Solutions of Example 3.3.

--- Page 121 ---
Case 2 Signed addition and subtraction with
N-bit inputs and (N + 1)-bit output
In this case, overflow cannot occur because the input
range is −2N−1 ≤ input ≤ 2N−1 − 1, while the allowed
output range is −2N ≤ output ≤ 2N − 1. However, the
MSB must be modified as follows.
MSB check: If the inputs have different signs, then the
MSB must be inverted.
The operation above is due to the fact that when the
operands have N bits, but the sum has N + 1 bits, both
operands should be sign extended (see two’s
complement representation in Section 2.5) to N+1 bits
before performing the sum. For the positive number,
this is simply the inclusion of a ‘0’ in its MSB position,
which does not affect the result anyway. However, for
the negative number, a ‘1’ is required to keep its value
and sign. Consequently, when the last carry-out bit is
added to the negative extension (‘1’) it gets inverted
(that is, the last sum bit is the reverse of the last carry-
out bit).
EXAMPLE 3.4 SIGNED ADDITION #2
Using signed 4-bit inputs and 5-bit output, calculate the
following sums and check the results’ validity: (7 + 7),
(−8 − 8), (7 − 8), (−7 + 7).
SOLUTION
The solution is shown in Figure 3.6(a). Again, the table
of Figure 3.1(b) was used to obtain the sum and carry
bits (shown within gray rectangles). For the MSB, the
rule described above was applied (indicated by an arrow

--- Page 122 ---
in the figure). A second solution is depicted in Figure
3.6(b), in which sign extension was used.
FIGURE 3.6  Solutions of Example 3.4
using (a) the rule described in Case 2 or (b)
sign extension.
3.3 Shift Operations
The three main shift operations are logical shift, arithmetic
shift, and circular shift (rotation).
Logical shift
The binary word is shifted to the right or to the left
a certain number of positions; the empty positions
are filled with ‘0’s. In VHDL, this operator is
represented by SRL n (shift right logical n
positions) or SLL n (shift left logical n positions).
Examples:
“01011” SRL 2 = “00010” (illustrated in
Figure 3.7(a))

--- Page 123 ---
“10010” SRL 2 = “00100” (illustrated in
Figure 3.7(b))
“11001” SLL 1 = “10010”
“11001” SRL −1 = “10010”
FIGURE 3.7  Logical shift two positions to the
right of (a) “01011” and (b) “10010”.
Arithmetic shift
The binary vector is shifted to the right or to the
left a certain number of positions. When shifted to
the right, the empty positions are filled with the
original leftmost bit value (sign bit). However,
when shifted to the left, there are conflicting
definitions. In some cases, the empty positions are
filled with ‘0’s (this is equivalent to logical shift),
while in others they are filled with the rightmost
bit value. In VHDL, the latter is adopted, so that is
the definition that we will also adopt in the
examples below. The VHDL arithmetic shift
operator is represented by SRA n (shift right
arithmetic n positions) or SLA n (shift left
arithmetic n positions).
Examples:
10110 SRA 2 = 11101
10011 SLA 1 = 00111

--- Page 124 ---
Circular shift (Rotation)
This case is similar to logical shift with the only
difference that the empty positions are filled with
the removed bits instead of ‘0’s. In VHDL, this
operator is represented by ROR n (rotate right n
positions) or ROL n (rotate left n positions).
Examples:
00110 ROR 2 = 10001
11010 ROL 1 = 10101
Shift operations can be used for division and
multiplication as described below.
Division using logical shift
For unsigned numbers, a logical shift to the right
by one position causes the number to be divided by
2 (the result is rounded down when the number is
odd). This process, of course, can be repeated k
times, resulting in a division by 2k.
Examples:
00110 (6) → 00011 (3)
11001 (25) → 01100 (12)
Division using arithmetic shift
For signed numbers, an arithmetic shift to the right
by one position causes the number to be divided by
2. The magnitude of the result is rounded down
when the number is odd positive or rounded up
when it is odd negative.

--- Page 125 ---
Examples:
01110 (14) → 00111 (7)
00111 (7) → 00011 (3)
10000 (−16) → 11000(−8)
11001 (−7) → 11100 (−4)
Multiplication using logical shift
A logical shift to the left by one position causes a
number to be multiplied by 2. However, to avoid
overflow, the leftmost bit must be ‘0’ when the
number is unsigned, or the two leftmost bits must
be “00” or “11” when it is signed positive or
signed negative, respectively.
Examples with unsigned numbers:
01110 (14) → 11100 (28) Correct
11010 (26) → 10100 (20) Incorrect
(overflow)
Examples with signed numbers:
00111 (7) → 01110 (14) Correct
01110 (14) → 11100 (−4) Incorrect
(overflow)
11000 (−8) → 10000 (−16) Correct
10000 (−16) → 00000 (0) Incorrect
(overflow)
Multiplication using logical shift and a wider
output

--- Page 126 ---
When performing multiplication, it is common to
assign to the output signal twice the number of bits
as the input signals (that is, 2N bits when the
inputs are N bits wide). In this case, overflow can
never occur even if up to N shifts occur (that is, if
the number is multiplied by up to 2N). The new N
bits added to the original binary word must be
located on its left side and initialized with ‘0’s if
the number is unsigned, or with the sign bit (MSB)
if it is signed.
Examples with 4-bit unsigned numbers
and 4 shifts:
0011 (original = 3)→0000 0011
(doubled = 3)→0011 0000 (shifted = 48)
Correct
1000 (original = 8)→0000 1000
(doubled = 8) → 1000 0000 (shifted =
128) Correct
Examples with 4-bit signed numbers and
4 shifts:
0011 (original = 3)→0000 0011
(doubled = 3)→0011 0000 (shifted = 48)
Correct
1000 (original = −8) → 1111 1000
(doubled = −8) → 1000 0000 (shifted →
−128) Correct
1111 (original = −1) → 1111 1111
(doubled = −1) → 1111 0000 (shifted =
−16) Correct
3.4 Unsigned Multiplication

--- Page 127 ---
Similarly to addition, multiplication can also be unsigned or
signed. The former case is presented in this section, while
the latter is shown in the next. In both, N bits are employed
for the inputs, while 2N bits are used for the output (this is
the case in any regular multiplier).
Figure 3.8(a) depicts the well-known multiplication
algorithm between two unsigned numbers, where a = a3 a2
a1 a0 is the multiplier, b = b3 b2 b1 b0 is the multiplicand, and
p = p7 … p2 p1 p0 is the product. Because the output is 2N
bits wide, overflow cannot occur.
FIGURE 3.8  (a) Unsigned multiplication algorithm; (b)
Solution of Example 3.5.
EXAMPLE 3.5 UNSIGNED
MULTIPLICATION
Multiply the unsigned numbers “1101” and “1100” using the
algorithm of Figure 3.8(a).
SOLUTION
The multiplication is shown in Figure 3.8(b), where “1101” (=
13) is multiplied by “1100” (= 12), producing “10011100” (=
156).

--- Page 128 ---
Any multiplication algorithm is derived from the basic
algorithm depicted in Figure 3.8(a). For example, most
dedicated hardware multipliers implemented from scratch (at
transistor- or gate-level) are a straight implementation of that
algorithm (see Section 12.9). However, multiplication can
also be performed using only addition plus shift operations.
This approach is appropriate, for example, when using a
computer to do the multiplications because its ALU
(arithmetic logic unit, Section 12.8, which is at the core of
any processor) can easily do the additions while the control
unit can easily cause the data registers to be shifted as
needed. To distinguish this kind of approach from those at
the transistor- or gate-level, we will refer to the former as
ALU-based algorithms.
An example of ALU-based unsigned multiplication is
illustrated in Figure 3.9. The multiplicand and multiplier are
“1001” (= 9) and “1100” (= 12), respectively. Because the
inputs are 4 bits wide, 4 iterations are needed, and the
product register must be 8 bits wide to prevent overflow.
Initially, the right half of the product register is filled with
the multiplier and the left half with ‘0’s. The algorithm is
then the following: If the rightmost product bit is ‘1’, then
the multiplicand is added to the left half of the product, then
the product register is shifted to the right one position;
however, if the bit is ‘0’, then only the shift operation must
occur. The type of shift is logical (Section 3.3). Applying
this 4 times, “01101100” (= 108) results.

--- Page 129 ---
FIGURE 3.9  Unsigned multiplication algorithm utilizing
only addition and logical shift.
3.5 Signed Multiplication
Algorithms for signed multiplication are also derived from
the basic algorithm shown in Figure 3.8(a). An example,
which is useful for hardware multipliers designed from
scratch (at transistor- or gate-level), is illustrated in Figure
3.10 (modified Baugh-Wooley multiplier). Comparing Figure
3.10 to Figure 3.8(a), we observe that several most-
significant partial products were inverted in the former and
also that two ‘1’s were included along the partial products
(shown within gray areas). These little changes can be easily
incorporated into the hardware of the same circuit that
implements the algorithm of Figure 3.8(a), hence resulting in
a programmable signed/unsigned multiplier.

--- Page 130 ---
FIGURE 3.10  Signed multiplication algorithm.
EXAMPLE 3.6 SIGNED
MULTIPLICATION
Multiply the signed numbers “1101” and “1100”.
SOLUTION
This multiplication is shown in Figure 3.11. “1101” (−3) and
“1100” (−4) are negative numbers, so the algorithm of Figure
3.10 can be employed. To better visualize the process, first the
regular partial products are shown (on the left of Figure 3.11),
then the appropriate partial products are inverted and the ‘1’s
are included, producing “00001100” (+12) at the output.
FIGURE 3.11  Solution of Example 3.6.
For signed multiplication, ALU-based algorithms (see
comments in Section 3.4) also exist. Booth’s algorithm,

--- Page 131 ---
illustrated in Figure 3.12, is a common choice. The
multiplier and multiplicand are “01110” (+14) and “10010”
(−14), respectively. Because the inputs are 5 bits wide, five
iterations are needed, and the product register must be 10
bits wide to prevent overflow. Upon initialization, the
multiplier is loaded into the right half of the product register,
while the other positions are filled with ‘0’s, including an
extra ‘0’ on the right of the product. The algorithm is then
the following: If the two rightmost bits are “10”, the
multiplicand must be subtracted from the left half of the
product register, and the result must be arithmetically shifted
(Section 3.3) to the right; if the bits are “01”, then the
multiplicand must be added to the left half of the product
register and the result arithmetically shifted to the right;
finally, if the bits are “00” or “11”, then only arithmetic shift
to the right must occur. Applying this procedure five times,
“1100111100” (−196) results in Figure 3.12.
FIGURE 3.12  Booth’s algorithm for signed multiplication
(with addition/subtraction and arithmetic shift).
3.6 Unsigned Division

--- Page 132 ---
Similarly to multiplication, division can also be unsigned or
signed. The former case is presented in this section, while
the latter is shown in the next. If N bits are used to represent
the inputs, then a total of 2N bits are again needed to
represent the outputs (quotient and remainder).
Figure 3.13 shows the well-known division algorithm, where
“1101” (= 13) is the dividend, “0101” (= 5) is the divisor,
“0010” (= 2) is the quotient, and “0011” (= 3) is the
remainder. Note that for the quotient to have the same
number of bits as the dividend, the latter was filled with ‘0’s
in the most significant positions until a total of 2N − 1 bits
resulted, where N is the size of the divisor (N = 4 in this
example).
FIGURE 3.13  Unsigned division algorithm.
From a hardware perspective, dedicated dividers are more
difficult to implement than dedicated multipliers. For that
reason, the most common approach is to employ ALU-based
algorithms (see comments in Section 3.4), which make use
of only addition/subtraction plus shift operations.
An algorithm of this kind is illustrated in Figure 3.14, where
“1101” (= 13) is the dividend and “0101” (= 5) is the divisor.
Because these numbers are 4 bits long, the number of
iterations is 4 and the remainder register must be 8 bits long.
During initialization, the dividend is loaded into the right
half of the remainder register, and then the whole vector is
shifted one position to the left with a ‘0’ filling the empty

--- Page 133 ---
(rightmost) position. The algorithm is then the following:
The divisor is subtracted from the left half of the remainder;
if the result is negative, then the divisor is added back to the
remainder, restoring its value, and a left shift is performed,
again with a ‘0’ filling the empty position; otherwise, if the
result is positive, the remainder register is shifted left with a
‘1’ filling the empty position. After the last iteration, the left
half of the remainder register must be shifted to the right
with a ‘0’ filling the empty position. The quotient then
appears in the right half of the remainder register, while the
actual remainder appears in its left half. As can be seen in
Figure 3.14, in this example the results are quotient = “0010”
(= 2) and remainder = “0011” (= 3).
FIGURE 3.14  Unsigned division algorithm utilizing only
addition/subtraction and shift operations.
3.7 Signed Division

--- Page 134 ---
Signed division is normally done as if the numbers where
unsigned. This implies that negative numbers must first
undergo two’s complement transformation. Moreover, if the
dividend and the divisor have different signs, then the
quotient must be negated (two’s complemented), while the
remainder must always carry the same sign as the dividend
(in other words, if the dividend is negative, then the
remainder must also undergo two’s complement
transformation to convert it into a negative number).
EXAMPLE 3.7 SIGNED DIVISION
Divide “1001” (−7) by “0011” (+3).
SOLUTION
The two’s complement of −7 is 7, that is, “0111”. Applying
then the division algorithm, we obtain quotient = “0010” (2)
and remainder = ”0001” (1). However, because the dividend
and divisor have different signs, the quotient must be negated,
hence resulting quotient = “1110” (−2). Moreover, the
remainder must have the same sign as the dividend, which in
this example is negative. Therefore, after two’s complement
transformation, remainder = “1111” (−1) results
3.8 Floating-Point Addition and Subtraction
Binary floating-point (FP) representation (for reals) was
described in Section 2.6, and it is summarized in Figure
3.15. The option in Figure 3.15(a), called single-precision,
contains 32 bits, with one bit for the sign (S), 8 bits for the
exponent (E), and 23 bits for the fraction (F). The option in
Figure 3.15(b), called double-precision, contains 64 bits,

--- Page 135 ---
with one bit for the sign (S), 11 bits for the exponent (E), and
52 bits for the fraction (F). The corresponding decimal value
(y) in each case is determined as follows.
FIGURE 3.15  (a) Single- and (b) double-precision
floating-point representations (IEEE 754 standard).
Single precision:
    (3.1)
Where, for normalized numbers:
    (3.2)
Double precision:
    (3.3)
Where, for normalized numbers:
    (3.4)

--- Page 136 ---
In the equations above, E is the biased exponent, while e is
the actual exponent, that is, e = E − 127 for single-precision
or e = E − 1023 for double-precision.
We now describe how computers perform arithmetic
operations using floating-point numbers. We start with
addition/subtraction in this section then multiplication and
division in the succeeding two sections.
Floating-point addition/subtraction algorithm
To add two positive or negative FP numbers, the
four-step procedure below can be used. (Recall
from Section 3.2 that addition and subtraction are
essentially the same operation with only two’s
complement needed to convert one into the other.)
Step 1: If the exponents are different,
make them equal by shifting the
significand of the number with the
smallest exponent to the right.
Step 2: Add the complete significands.
However, if a value is negative, enter its
two’s complement in the sum. Note that
2 bits result on the left of the binary
point. If the resulting MSB is 1, then the
sum is negative, so S = 1 and the result
must be two’s complemented back to a
positive value because in floating-point
notation a negative number is
represented with exactly the same bits as
its positive counterpart (except for the
sign bit).

--- Page 137 ---
Step 3: Normalize the result (scientific
notation) and check for exponent
overflow (exponent inside the allowed
range).
Step 4: Truncation (with rounding) might
be required if the fraction is larger than
23 bits or if it must be sent to a smaller
register. To truncate and round it,
suppress the unwanted bits, adding 1 to
the last bit if the first suppressed bit is 1.
Renormalize the result, if necessary, and
check for exponent overflow.
EXAMPLE 3.8 FLOATING-POINT
ADDITION
Compute the single-precision FP addition 0.75 +
2.625. Assume that the final result must be
represented with only 2 fraction bits.
SOLUTION
Floating-point representation for 0.75: 1.1 · 2−1
(obtained in Example 2.9).
Floating-point representation for 2.625: 1.0101·21
(obtained in Example 2.9).
Now we can apply the 4-step procedure described
above.
Step 1: The smallest exponent must be
made equal to the other: 1.1 · 2−1 =
0.011 · 21.
Step 2: Add the significands (with 2 bits
on the left of the binary point): 1.0101 +
0.011 = 01.1011 (MSB = 0, so this

--- Page 138 ---
result is positive). Thus 0.75 + 2.625 =
1.1011 · 21.
Step 3: The result is already normalized
and the exponent (e = 1) is within the
allowed range (−126 to 127) given by
Equation (3.2).
Step 4: The fraction must be truncated
to 2 bits. Because its third bit is 1, a 1
must be added to the last bit of the
truncated significand, that is, 1.10 +
0.01 = 1.11.
The final (truncated and normalized) result
then is 0.75 + 2.625 = 1.11 · 21.
From 1.11 × 21, the following single-
precision FP representation results:
S = ‘0’, F = “11”, and E = “10000000”
(because E = e + 127 = 1 + 127 = 128).
EXAMPLE 3.9 FLOATING-POINT
SUBTRACTION
Compute the single-precision FP subtraction 0.75
− 2.625.
SOLUTION
Floating-point representation for 0.75: 1.1 · 2−1
(obtained in Example 2.9).
Floating-point representation for 2.625: 1.0101 ·
21 (obtained in Example 2.9).
Now we can apply the 4-step procedure described
above
Step 1: The smallest exponent must be
made equal to the other: 1.1 · 2−1 =
0.011 · 21.
Step 2: Now we must add the
significands. However, because one of

--- Page 139 ---
the numbers (−2.625) is negative, it
must be two’s complemented first:
1.0101 → complement and add one →
(0.1010 + 0.0001) = 0.1011
The addition of the significands then
produces (with 2 bits on the left of the
binary point):
0.011 + 0.1011 = 11.0001 (recall MSB
check rule seen in Case 2 of Section 3.2).
Because the MSB is 1, the result is
negative, so S = 1, and it must be two’s
complemented back to a positive value:
11.0001 → (0.1110 + 0.0001) = 0.1111
Therefore, 0.75 − 2.625 = −0.1111 · 21.
Step 3: The result above requires
normalization:
−0.1111 · 21 = −1.111 · 20 (the exponent is
still within the allowed range).
From −1.111 · 20, the following single-
precision FP representation results:
S = ‘1’, F = “111000 … 000”, and E =
“01111111” (because E = e + 127 = 0 +
127 = 127).
3.9 Floating-Point Multiplication
To multiply two (positive or negative) floating-point
numbers, the four-step procedure below can be used.
Step 1: Add the actual exponents and check for
exponent overflow.
Step 2: Multiply the significands and assign the
proper sign to the result.

--- Page 140 ---
Step 3: Normalize the result, if necessary, and
check again for exponent overflow.
Step 4: Truncate and round the result, if necessary
(same as Step 4 of addition).
EXAMPLE 3.10 FLOATING-POINT
MULTIPLICATION
Using single-precision FP, compute (0.75) × (−2.625).
Truncate/round the fraction to 3 bits.
SOLUTION
Floating-point representation for 0.75: 1.1 · 2−1 (obtained in
Example 2.9).
Floating-point representation for 2.625: 1.0101 · 21 (obtained
in Example 2.9).
Now we can apply the 4-step procedure described above.
Step 1: The resulting exponent is −1 + 1 = 0 (within
the allowed range).
Step 2: The multiplication of the significands
produces (1.1) × (1.0101) = 1.11111, and the sign is
‘−.
Hence the product is (0.75) × (−2.625) = −1.11111 · 20.
Step 3: The result above is already normalized.
Step 4: The fraction above has 5 bits and must be
reduced to 3. Because the 4th bit is 1, a 1 must be
added to the last bit of the truncated significand, that
is, 1.111 + 0.001 = 10.000. Renormalization is now
needed, so the final result is (0.75) × (−2.625) =
−1.000 · 21.
From −1.000 · 21, the following single-precision FP
representation results:
S = ‘1’, F=“000”, and E = “10000000” (E = e + 127 = 1
+ 127 = 128).

--- Page 141 ---
EXAMPLE 3.11 TRUNCATION ERROR
Convert the result obtained in Example 3.10 back to decimal to
calculate the error introduced by the truncation.
SOLUTION
Exact result: (0.75) × (−2.625) = −1.96875
Truncated result (from Example 3.10): (0.75) × (−2.625) =
−1.000 · 21
Decimal value for the truncated result (Equation (3.1)) y =
(−1)1(1 + 0)21 = −2
Error = (|1.96875 − 2|/1.96875) × 100 = 1.59%
3.10 Floating-Point Division
To divide two (positive or negative) floating-point numbers,
the four-step procedure below can be used.
Step 1: Subtract the exponents and check for
overflow.
Step 2: Divide the significands and assign the
proper sign to the result.
Step 3: Normalize the result, if necessary.
Step 4: Truncate and round the result, if necessary
(same as Step 4 of addition).
EXAMPLE 3.12 FLOATING-POINT
DIVISION
Compute the division (0.75) ÷ (−2.625) using single-precision
floating-point numbers.

--- Page 142 ---
SOLUTION
Floating-point representation for 0.75: 1.1 · 2−1 (obtained in
Example 2.9).
Floating-point representation for 2.625: 1.0101 · 21 (obtained
in Example 2.9).
Now we can apply the 4-step procedure described above.
Step 1: The resulting exponent is −1 − 1 = −2 (within
the allowed range).
Step 2: The division of the significands produces
(1.1) ÷ (1.0101)= 1.001001001 …, and the sign is ‘−’
Hence the result is −1.001001001 … · 2−2.
From −1.001001001 … · 2−2, the following single-
precision FP representation results:
S = ‘1’, F = “001001001 …”, and E = “01111101”
(because E = e + 127 = −2 + 127 = 125).
3.11 Exercises
1. Unsigned addition #1
Consider an adder with unsigned 5-bit inputs and 5-
bit output.
a. Determine the (decimal) range of each
input and of the output.
b. Representing all signals using regular
binary code, calculate 16 + 15 and check
whether the result is valid.
c. Repeat part (b) above for 16 + 16.
2. Unsigned addition #2
Repeat Exercise 3.1 assuming that the output is 6 bits
wide.
3. Unsigned addition #3

--- Page 143 ---
Given the unsigned values a = “111101”, b =
“000001”, and c = “100001”, and knowing that x, y,
and z are also unsigned 6-bit numbers, calculate and
check the result of:
a. x = a + b
b. y = a + c
c. z = b + c
4. Signed addition #1
Consider an adder with signed 5-bit inputs and 5-bit
output.
a. Determine the (decimal) range of each
input and of the output.
b. Using binary vectors, with negative
numbers in two’s complement format,
calculate −8 − 8 andcheck whether the result
is valid.
c. Repeat part (b) above for −8 − 9.
d. Repeat part (b) above for 8 − 9.
e. Repeat part (b) above for 8 + 8.
5. Signed addition #2
Repeat Exercise 3.4 assuming that the output is 6 bits
wide.
6. Signed addition #3
Given the signed values a = “111101”, b = “000001”,
and c = “100001”, and knowing that x, y, and z are
also signed 6-bit values, calculate and check the
result of:
a. x = a + b
b. y = a + c
c. z = b +c
7. Logical shift #1

--- Page 144 ---
Write the resulting vectors when the logical shift
operations below are executed.
a. “11010” SRL 2
b. “01011” SRL −3
c. “10010” SLL 2
d. “01011” SLL 3
8. Logical shift #2
Write the resulting vectors when the logical shift
operations below are executed.
a. “111100” SRL 2
b. “010000” SRL 3
c. “111100” SLL −2
d. “010011” SLL 3
9. Arithmetic shift #1
Write the resulting vectors when the arithmetic shift
operations below are executed.
a. “11010” SRA 2
b. “01011” SRA −3
c. “10010” SLA 2
d. “01011” SLA 3
10. Arithmetic shift #2
Write the resulting vectors when the arithmetic shift
operations below are executed.
a. “111100” SRA 2
b. “010000” SRA 3
c. “111100” SLA –2
d. “010011” SLA 1
11. Circular shift #1
Write the resulting vectors when the circular shift
operations below are executed.
a. “11010” ROL 1
b. “01011” ROL −3

--- Page 145 ---
c. “10010” ROR 2
d. “01011” ROR 3
12. Circular shift #2
Write the resulting vectors when the circular shift
operations below are executed.
a. “111100” ROL 2
b. “010000” ROL 3
c. “111100” ROR –2
d. “010011” ROR 3
13. Shift × unsigned multiplication
Logically shift each of the unsigned numbers below
one position to the left and check whether the number
gets multiplied by 2. Are there any restrictions
(overflow) in this case?
a. “001111”
b. “010001”
c. “110011”
14. Shift × signed multiplication
Arithmetically shift each of the signed numbers
below one position to the left and check whether the
number gets multiplied by 2. Are there any
restrictions (overflow) in this case?
a. “001111”
b. “010001”
c. “110011”
d. “100001”
15. Shift × unsigned division
Logically shift each of the unsigned numbers below
two positions to the right and check whether the
number gets divided by 4. Are there any restrictions
in this case?
a. “001100”

--- Page 146 ---
b. “000110”
c. “111101”
16. Shift × signed division
Arithmetically shift each of the signed numbers
below two positions to the right and check whether
the number gets divided by 4. Are there any
restrictions in this case?
a. “001100”
b. “000110”
c. “111101”
17. Unsigned multiplication #1
Using the multiplication algorithm of Figure 3.8(a),
multiply the following unsigned 5-bit numbers:
a. 7 × 31
b. 14 × 16
18. Unsigned multiplication #2
Repeat the exercise above using the unsigned
multiplication algorithm of Figure 3.9.
19. Signed multiplication #1
Using the multiplication algorithm of Figure 3.10,
multiply the following signed 5-bit numbers:
a. −6 × 14
b. −16 × 8
20. Signed multiplication #2
Repeat the exercise above using Booth’s algorithm
for signed multiplication (Figure 3.12).
21. Unsigned division
Using the division algorithm of Figure 3.14, divide
the following unsigned 5-bit numbers:
a. 31 ÷ 7
b. 16 ÷ 4

--- Page 147 ---
22. Signed division
Using the division algorithm of Figure 3.14, plus the
description in Section 3.7, divide the following
signed 5-bit numbers:
a. 14 ÷ −6
b. −16 ÷ −3
23. Floating-point addition/subtraction #1
a. Show that the single-precision floating-
point representations for 1 and 0.875 are as
follows.
For 1: S = ‘0’, F = “00 … 0” (= 0), E =
“01111111” (= 127).
For 0.875: S = ‘0’, F = “1100 … 0” (= 0.75),
E = “01111110” (= 126).
Now, using the procedure described in
Section 3.8, calculate the following:
b. 1 + 0.875
c. −1 + 0.875
24. Floating-point addition/subtraction #2
Using single-precision floating-point representations
and the procedure described in Section 3.8,
determine:
a. 12.5 − 0.1875
b. 4.75 + 25
25. Floating-point addition/subtraction #3
Using single-precision floating-point representations
and the procedure described in Section 3.8,
determine:
a. 8.125 − 8
b. −19 − 32.0625
26. Floating-point multiplication #1

--- Page 148 ---
a. Show that the single-precision floating-
point representations for 4.75 and 25 are as
follows.
For 4.75: S = ‘0’, F = “00110 … 0” (=
0.1875), E = “10000001” (= 129).
For 25: S = ‘0’, F = “10010 … 0” (=
0.5625), E = “10000011” (= 131).
Now, using the procedure described in
Section 3.9, calculate the following
products:
b. 4.75 × 25
c. (−4.75) × 25
27. Floating-point multiplication #2
Using single-precision floating-point representations
and the procedure described in Section 3.9, determine
the products below. The result should be truncated
(and rounded) to 3 fraction bits (if necessary).
a. 8.125 × (−8)
b. (−19) × (−12.5)
28. Floating-point division #1
Using single-precision floating-point representations
and the procedure described in Section 3.10,
determine the ratios below.
a. 4.75 ÷ 25
b. 8.125 ÷ (−8)
29. Floating-point division #2
Using single-precision floating-point representations
and the procedure described in Section 3.10,
determine the ratios below. The result should be
truncated (and rounded) to 3 fraction bits (if
necessary).
a. (−4.75) ÷ (−0.1875)

--- Page 149 ---
b. (−19) ÷ (−12.5)
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 150 ---
4
Introduction to Digital Circuits
Chapter Contents
4.1 Introduction to MOS Transistors
4.2 Inverter and CMOS Logic
4.3 AND and NAND Gates
4.4 OR and NOR Gates
4.5 XOR and XNOR Gates
4.6 Modulo-2 Adder
4.7 Buffer
4.8 Tri-State Buffer
4.9 Open-Drain Buffer
4.10 D-Type Flip-Flop
4.11 Shift Register
4.12 Counters
4.13 Pseudo-Random Sequence Generator
4.14 Exercises
Objective:
This chapter introduces the most fundamental logic gates and also the most
fundamental of all registers along with basic applications. Moreover, to make

--- Page 151 ---
the presentations more effective and connected to the physical
implementations, the corresponding electronic circuits, using CMOS
architecture, are also included. Even though many other details will be seen
later, the concepts selected for inclusion in this chapter are those absolutely
indispensable for the proper understanding and appreciation of the next
chapters.
4.1 Introduction to MOS Transistors
As mentioned in the introduction, the electronic circuits for
the gates and register described in this chapter will also be
presented, which requires some knowledge about transistors.
Because MOS transistors are studied later (Chapter 9), a
brief introduction is presented here.
Almost all digital circuits are constructed with a type of
transistor called MOSFET (metal oxide semiconductor field
effect transistor), or simply MOS transistor. Indeed, there are
two types of MOS transistors, one called n-channel MOS (or
simply nMOS) because its internal channel is constructed
with an n-type semiconductor, and the other called p-channel
MOS (or simply pMOS) because its channel is of type p.
Regarding their operation, in simple words it can be
summarized as follows: An nMOS transistor is ON
(emulating a closed switch) when its gate voltage is high,
and it is OFF (open switch) when its gate voltage is low;
reciprocally, a pMOS transistor is ON (closed switch) when
its gate voltage is low, and it is OFF (open switch) when it is
high.
The operation principle mentioned above is illustrated in
Figure 4.1. In Figure 4.1(a), the basic circuit is shown, with
the transistor’s source terminal (S) connected to the ground
(0V, represented by a triangle or GND), its drain (D)

--- Page 152 ---
connected through a resistor to the power supply
(represented by VDD, which is 5 V in this example), and its
gate (G) connected to the input signal source (x). The
situation for x = 0V is depicted in Figure 4.1(b). Because a
low gate voltage turns the nMOS transistor OFF, no electric
current flows through the resistor, causing the output voltage
to remain high (in other words, when x = ‘0’, y = ‘1’); this
situation is further illustrated by means of an open switch on
the right of Figure 4.1(b). The opposite situation is shown in
Figure 4.1(c), now with the transistor’s gate connected to 5V.
Because a high gate voltage turns the nMOS transistor ON,
electric current now flows through R, thus lowering the
output voltage (in other words, when x = ‘1’, y = ‘0’); this
situation is further illustrated by means of a closed switch on
the right of Figure 4.1(c).
FIGURE 4.1  Digital operation of an nMOS transistor.
A similar analysis for a pMOS transistor is presented in
Figure 4.2 (note the little circle at the transistor’s gate, which
differentiates it from the nMOS type). In Figure 4.2(a), the
basic circuit is shown, with the transistor’s source terminal

--- Page 153 ---
(S) connected to VDD, the drain (D) connected through a
resistor to ground, and its gate (G) connected to the input
signal source (x). The situation for x = 5 V is depicted in
Figure 4.2(b). Because a high gate voltage turns the pMOS
transistor OFF, no electric current flows through the resistor,
causing the output voltage to remain low (in other words,
when x = ‘1’, y = ‘0’); this situation is further illustrated by
means of an open switch on the right of Figure 4.2(b). The
opposite situation is shown in Figure 4.2(c), now with the
transistor’s gate connected to 0 V. Because a low gate
voltage turns the pMOS transistor ON, electric current now
flows through R, thus rising the output voltage (in other
words, when x = ‘0’, y = ‘1’); this situation is further
illustrated by means of a closed switch on the right of Figure
4.2(c).
FIGURE 4.2  Digital operation of a pMOS transistor.
The operation of both nMOS and pMOS transistors is further
illustrated in Figure 4.3, which shows a square waveform (x)
applied to their gates. Note that in both cases the output (y) is
always the opposite of the input (when one is high, the other

--- Page 154 ---
is low, and vice versa), so this circuit is an inverter. Note
also that some time delay between x and y is inevitable.
FIGURE 4.3  Further illustrations of the digital behavior of
(a) nMOS and (b) pMOS transistors.
4.2 Inverter and CMOS Logic
Having seen how MOS transistors work, we can start
discussing the structures of fundamental digital gates.
However, with MOS transistors several distinct architectures
can be devised for the same gate (which will be studied in
detail in Chapter 10). Nevertheless, there is one among them,
called CMOS, that is used much more often than any other,
so it will be introduced in this chapter.
CMOS stands for complementary MOS because for each
nMOS transistor there also is a pMOS one. As will be
shown, this arrangement allows the construction of digital
circuits with very low power consumption, which is the main
reason for its huge popularity. For each gate described in this
and following sections, the respective CMOS circuit will
also be presented.
4.2.1 Inverter

--- Page 155 ---
The inverter is the most basic of all logic gates. Its
symbol and truth table are depicted in Figure 4.4. It
simply complements the input (if x = ‘0’, then y = ‘1’,
and vice versa), so its logical function can be
represented as follows, where some properties are also
shown.
FIGURE 4.4  Inverter symbol and truth table.
Inverter function:
    (4.1)
Inverter properties:
    (4.2)
The inverter is not only the most basic logic gate, but it
is also physically the simplest of all logic gates. Indeed,
both circuits seen in Figures 4.1–4.2 (or 4.3) are
inverters because both implement the function y = x′.
However, those circuits exhibit major limitations for
use in digital systems, like excessive power
consumption. For example, observe in Figure 4.1(c)
that, during the whole time in which x = ‘1’, electric
current flows through the circuit, so power is
consumed, and the same occurs in Figure 4.2(c) for x =
‘0’. Another major limitation is the large silicon space

--- Page 156 ---
needed to construct the resistor. In summary, that type
of inverter, though fine for analog (linear) systems, is
not appropriate for digital applications. As mentioned
earlier, in digital circuits the most common architecture
is CMOS, which is described below.
4.2.2 CMOS Logic
An inverter constructed using the CMOS logic
architecture is shown in Figure 4.5(a). Comparing it to
the inverters of Figures 4.1–4.2, we observe that it
employs two (complementary) transistors instead of one
and that resistors are not required. Because a CMOS
gate requires nMOS and pMOS transistors, the CMOS
inverter is the simplest CMOS circuit because it
contains only one transistor of each type.
FIGURE 4.5  (a) CMOS inverter; Operation with (b)
x = ‘0’ and (c) x = ‘1’.
The operation of the CMOS inverter is illustrated in
Figures 4.5(b)–(c). In Figure 4.5(b), x = ‘0’ (0 V) is
applied to the input, which causes the pMOS transistor
to be ON and the nMOS to be OFF (represented by a
closed and an open switch, respectively). Thus, the
upper switch connects y to VDD, yielding y = ‘1’, while
the lower switch, being open, guarantees the inexistence
of static electric current through the circuit (from VDD

--- Page 157 ---
to GND). The opposite situation is shown in Figure
4.5(c), that is, x = ‘1’ (5V in this example) is applied to
the input, causing the nMOS to be ON and the pMOS to
be OFF (again represented by a closed and an open
switch, respectively). This time the lower switch
connects y to GND, yielding y = ‘0’, while the upper
switch, being open, guarantees the inexistence of static
electric current from VDD to GND.
4.2.3 Power Consumption
Power consumption is a crucial specification in modern
digital systems, particularly for portable (battery-
operated) devices. It is classified as static or dynamic,
where the former is the power consumed while the
circuit remains in the same state, and the latter is the
power consumed when the circuit changes its state. The
total power consumption (PT) is therefore given by:
    (4.3)
The inverter seen in Figure 4.1 is an example of circuit
that consumes static power. Note in Figure 4.1(c) that
during the whole time while x = ‘1’ a drain current (ID)
flows through the circuit (from VDD to GND), hence
causing a static power consumption Pstatic = VDD · ID.
For example, if VDD = 5V and ID = 1 mA, then 5 mW of
static power results. The same reasoning is valid for the
inverter of Figure 4.2.
Contrary to the inverters mentioned above, CMOS
circuits (Figure 4.5, for example) practically do not
consume static power (which is one of the main

--- Page 158 ---
attributes of CMOS logic) because, as seen in Figure
4.5, one of the transistor sections (nMOS or pMOS) is
guaranteed to be OFF while there is no switching
activity.
It is important to observe, however, that as the CMOS
technology shrinks (currently at 65 nm), leakage
currents grow, so static power consumption due to
leakage tends to become a major factor in future
technologies (45 nm and under). Static power due to
leakage is illustrated in Figure 4.6(a), where the circuit
is idle, so leakage is the only type of current that can
occur. (Even though Ileak was represented as flowing
only through the transistor drains, its composition is
more complex, containing also contributions from the
gates.)
FIGURE 4.6  Static and dynamic power
consumptions in a CMOS inverter: (a) Idle mode, so only
leakage currents can occur (static power consumption); (b)
Short-circuit (dynamic) power consumption, which occurs
when one transistor is turned ON with the other still
partially ON; (c) Capacitive (also dynamic) power
consumption, needed to charge the capacitor during ‘0’ →
‘1’ output transitions; (d) Capacitor discharged to ground
during ‘1’ → ‘0’ output transitions (this does not consume
power from VDD).
Contrary to the static power, dynamic power is
consumed by all sorts of digital circuits. This is

--- Page 159 ---
particularly relevant in CMOS circuits because it
constitutes their main type of power consumption.
The dynamic power of CMOS circuits can be divided
into two parts, called short-circuit (Pshort) and
capacitive (Pcap) power consumptions, that is:
    (4.4)
The dynamic power consumption is illustrated in
Figures 4.6(b)–(d), where CL represents the total load
capacitance (parasitic or not) at the output node. The
case in Figure 4.6(b) corresponds to the moment when
one transistor is being turned ON and the other is being
turned OFF, so for a brief moment both are partially
ON, causing a short-circuit current (Ishort) to flow from
VDD to GND. The value of Pshort is obtained by
integrating Ishort and multiplying it by VDD. Note that
this occurs at both signal transitions (that is, ‘0’ → ‘1’
and ‘1’ → ‘0’).
Figure 4.6(c) shows a ‘0’ → ‘1’ transition at the output
(after the nMOS transistor has been turned OFF and so
only the pMOS transistor is ON). The capacitor is
charged toward VDD, causing the power Pcap to be
consumed from the power supply. The value of Pcap can
be obtained by integrating the product i(t)·VDD.
Pcap can be determined as follows. Say that a complete
charge-discharge cycle occurs every T seconds (that is,
with a frequency f= 1/T). The amount of charge needed
to charge a capacitor is Q = CV, where C is the
capacitance and V is the final voltage, so in our case
QCL = CLVDD. The power supplied by VDD is
determined by integrating the product v(t) · i(t) over the

--- Page 160 ---
period T, where v(t) and i(t) are the voltage and current
provided by the power supply. Doing so, the following
results:
    (4.5)
In the last step above it was considered that CL gets
fully charged to VDD. Also recall that Pcap relates to the
energy consumed from the power supply to charge CL,
not to the energy stored on CL (the latter is only 50% of
the former; the other 50% is dissipated in the
transistor). f = 1/T represents the frequency with which
the ‘0’ → ‘1’ transitions occur at the output (also called
switching frequency, sometimes represented by f0 → 1).
During the ‘1’ → ‘0’ output transitions no power is
consumed from VDD.
In some cases, an “equivalent” (higher) CL is used
(called CLeq in the equation that follows), which
encompasses the short-circuit effect described above
(Figure 4.6(b)). Consequently:
    (4.6)
However, when the actual load is large (CL = 0.5pF, for
example) or the switching signal’s transitions are very
fast, the short-circuit power consumption tends to be
negligible, so the actual value of CL can be employed in
Equation 4.6.

--- Page 161 ---
4.2.4 Power-Delay Product
The power-delay (PD) product is an important measure
of circuit performance. Equation 4.6 shows that the
power consumption is proportional to VDD2, hence it is
important to reduce VDD to reduce the power. On the
other hand, it will be shown in Chapter 9 (see Equations
9.8 and 9.9) that the transient response of a CMOS
inverter is roughly proportional to 1/VDD, so VDD must
be increased to improve the speed.
Removing some of the simplifications used in
Equations 9.8 and 9.9, an equation of the form
kVDD/(VDD–VT)2 indeed results for the delay (where k is
a constant and VT is the transistor’s threshold voltage).
Multiplying it by Equation 4.6 to obtain the PD product,
and then taking its derivative, an important conclusion
results, which shows that PD is minimum when V DD 
3VT.
This implies that to optimize the PD product VDD
cannot be reduced indefinitely, but VT must be reduced
as well. This, however, brings other problems, like the
reduction of the noise margin (studied in Chapter 10).
Typical values for VDD and VT in current (65 nm)
CMOS technology are 1 V and 0.4 to 0.5 V,
respectively.
4.2.5 Logic Voltages
Another important parameter of a specific logic
architecture is its supply voltage (VDD, introduced in
Section 1.8), along with the allowed signal ranges. The
first integrated CMOS family, called HC (Section 10.6),
employed a nominal supply voltage of 5 V, borrowed

--- Page 162 ---
from the TTL (transistor-transistor logic) family
(Section 10.3), constructed with bipolar transistors,
which preceded CMOS.
Modern designs employ lower supply voltages, which
reduce the power consumption (note in Equation 4.6
that power is proportional to the square of the supply
voltage). The complete set of LVCMOS (low-voltage
CMOS) standards at the time of this writing is depicted
in Figure 4.7, ranging from 3.3 V (older) to 1 V
(newest). For example, current top-performance FPGA
chips (described in Chapter 18) operate with VDD = 1 V
(or even 0.9 V).
FIGURE 4.7  Standard LVCMOS supply voltages
and respective input-output voltage ranges.
Figure 4.7 also shows the allowed voltage ranges for
each I/O. The vertical bar on the left represents gate
output voltages, while the bar on the right corresponds
to gate input voltages. For example, the ‘0’ output from
a 2.5 V LVCMOS gate is in the 0 V to 0.4 V range,
while a ‘0’ input to a similar gate is required to fall in
the 0 V to 0.7 V range. This gives a noise margin when
low (NML) of 0.3 V. Likewise, the ‘1’ output produced
by such a gate falls in the 2 V to 2.5 V range, while a
‘1’ input is required to be in the 1.7 V to 2.5 V range.
Thus the noise margin when high (NMH) is also 0.3 V.

--- Page 163 ---
This signifies that any noise whose amplitude is lower
than 0.3 V cannot corrupt the signals traveling from one
gate to another in this family.
4.2.6 Timing Diagrams for Combinational
Circuits
We conclude this section by reviewing the concept of
timing diagrams (introduced in Section 1.10), which
constitute a fundamental tool for graphically
representing the behavior of digital circuits. More
specifically, they show the response of a circuit to a
large-amplitude fast-varying stimulus (normally ‘0’ →
‘1’ and ‘1’ → ‘0’ transitions).
Three timing diagram versions were introduced in
Figure 1.13, and a more detailed plot was presented in
Figure 1.16. The plots of Figure 1.13, adapted to the
inverter, are repeated in Figure 4.8 below.

--- Page 164 ---
FIGURE 4.8  Three timing diagram (transient
response) versions for an inverter.
The option in Figure 4.8(a) is obviously the simplest
and cleanest. However, it does not show time-related
parameters, so it is normally referred to as functional
timing diagram. The case in Figure 4.8(b) is a little
more realistic because propagation delays are taken into
account. The high-to-low propagation delay is called
tpHL, while the low-to-high is called tpLH. Finally, the
plots in Figure 4.8(c) depict the fact that the transitions
are never perfectly vertical (though represented in a
linearized form), with the time delays measured at the
midpoint between the two logic voltages. In modern
technologies, these propagation delays are in the
subnanosecond range.

--- Page 165 ---
EXAMPLE 4.1 BUFFER TIMING
DIAGRAM
Consider the buffer shown in Figure 4.9(a), to which the
stimulus a depicted in the first waveform of Figure
4.9(b) is applied. Draw the waveforms for x and y in the
following two situations:
a. With a negligible time delay (hence this is a
functional analysis similar to that in Figure
4.8(a)).
b. Knowing that the propagation delays
through the inverters that compose the buffer
are tpHL_inv11 = 1 ns, tpLH_inv1 = 2 ns,
tpHL_inv2 = 3 ns, and tpLH_inv2 = 4 ns, and
that the time slots in Figure 4.9(c) are 1 ns
wide. To draw the waveforms, adopt the style
seen in Figure 4.8(b).
FIGURE 4.9  Buffer and corresponding
timing diagrams of Example 4.1.
SOLUTION
a. The resulting waveforms are included in
Figure 4.9(b) with no delay between a, x, and
y.
b. The resulting waveforms are included in
Figure 4.9(c). Gray shades were used to
highlight the propagation delays (1, 2, 3, and 4
ns). Note that, as expected, the delay gets

--- Page 166 ---
accumulated in y (5ns at both up and down
transitions).
Note: The CMOS inverter analysis will continue in
Sections 9.5 and 9.6 after we learn more about MOS
transistors. Its construction, main parameters, DC
response, and transition voltage will be presented in
Section 9.5, while its transient response will be seen in
Section 9.6.
4.3 AND and NAND Gates
Having seen how CMOS logic is constructed and how the
CMOS inverter operates, we now begin describing the other
fundamental gates, starting with the AND/NAND pair.
Figure 4.10 shows AND and NAND gates, both with
symbol, truth table, and respective CMOS implementation.
Contrary to what one might initially expect, NAND requires
less hardware than AND (the latter is a complete NAND plus
an inverter).
FIGURE 4.10  (a) AND gate and (b) NAND gate (symbol,
truth table, and CMOS circuit).

--- Page 167 ---
As the name says (and the truth table shows), an AND gate
produces a ’1’ at the output when a and b are high. Or, more
generally, when all inputs are high. Therefore, its logical
function can be represented by a “product”, as shown below,
where some AND properties are also included.
AND function:
    (4.7)
AND properties:
    (4.8)
The corresponding CMOS circuit is shown on the right of
Figure 4.10(a), which consists of a NAND circuit plus a
CMOS inverter.
A NAND gate is shown in Figure 4.10(b), which produces
the complemented version of the AND gate.
NAND function:
    (4.9)
From a hardware perspective, a simpler circuit results in this
case because NAND is an inverting gate, and all transistors
(as seen in Section 4.1) are inverters by nature.
The NAND circuit on the right of Figure 4.10(b) operates as
follows. Suppose that a = ‘1’ (= VDD) and b = ‘0’ (= 0 V). In
this case, the bottom nMOS transistor is OFF (due to b = ‘0’)
and the top one is ON (due to a = ‘1’). Reciprocally, the left
pMOS is OFF (due to a = ‘1’) and the right pMOS is ON

--- Page 168 ---
(due to b = ‘0’). Because the nMOS transistors are connected
in series (two switches in series), it suffices to have one of
them OFF (open) for the branch to be disconnected from
GND. On the other hand, the pMOS transistors are
associated in parallel (switches in parallel), so it suffices to
have one of them ON (closed) for that section to be
connected to VDD. In summary, y is connected to VDD (and
disconnected from GND), hence resulting y = ‘1’ (= VDD) at
the output. Only when both nMOS transistors are ON (and
consequently both pMOS are OFF) will the output be
connected to GND. This situation requires a = b = ‘1’, so the
circuit indeed computes the NAND function, y = (a · b)′.
EXAMPLE 4.2 TIMING DIAGRAM OF A
COMBINATIONAL CIRCUIT
Consider the circuit shown in Figure 4.11(a).
a. Write the expression for y.
b. Suppose that the circuit is submitted to the stimuli
a, b, and c depicted in the first three waveforms of
Figure 4.11(b), where every time slot is 2 ns wide.
Consider that the propagation delays through the
AND and NAND gates are tp_AND = 4 ns and
tp_NAND = 3 ns with the same value for the up and
down transitions. Draw the corresponding waveforms
for x and y, adopting the simplified timing diagram
style of Figure 4.8(b).

--- Page 169 ---
FIGURE 4.11  Circuit and timing diagram of
Example 4.2.
SOLUTION
a. y = (x · c)′ = (a · b · c)′.
b. The resulting waveforms are included in Figure
4.11(b). Gray shades were used again to highlight the
propagation delays (4 ns and 3 ns). Note that the
delay sometimes gets accumulated (7 ns).
4.4 OR and NOR Gates
The next pair of gates, called OR/NOR, is depicted in Figure
4.12, which includes their symbols, truth tables, and CMOS
implementations. Again, NOR requires less hardware than
OR (the latter is a complete NOR plus an inverter).

--- Page 170 ---
FIGURE 4.12  (a) OR gate and (b) NOR gate (symbol,
truth table, and CMOS circuit).
As the name says (and the truth table shows), an OR gate
produces a ‘1’ at the output when a or b is high. Or, more
generally, when any input is high. Therefore, its logical
function can be represented by a “sum”, as shown below,
where some OR properties are also included.
OR function:
    (4.10)
Some OR properties:
    (4.11)
The corresponding CMOS circuit is shown on the right of
Figure 4.12(a), which consists of a NOR circuit plus a
CMOS inverter.
A NOR gate is shown in Figure 4.12(b), which produces the
complemented version of the OR gate. NOR function:

--- Page 171 ---
    (4.12)
Here again a simpler circuit results than that for the OR
function because NOR is also an inverting gate, and all
transistors (as seen in Section 4.1) are inverters by nature.
The NOR circuit on the right of Figure 4.12(b) operates as
follows. Suppose that a = ‘0’ (= 0V) and b = ‘1’ (= VDD). In
this case, the left nMOS transistor is ON (due to b = ‘1’) and
the right one is OFF (due to a = ‘0’). Reciprocally, the top
pMOS is ON (due to a = ‘0’) and the bottom pMOS is OFF
(due to b = ‘1’). Because the pMOS transistors are connected
in series (two switches in series), it suffices to have one of
them OFF (open) for the branch to be disconnected from
VDD. On the other hand, the nMOS transistors are associated
in parallel (switches in parallel), so it suffices to have one of
them ON (closed) for that section to be connected to GND.
In summary, y is connected to GND (and disconnected from
VDD), hence resulting in y = ‘0’ (= 0V) at the output. Only
when both nMOS transistors are OFF (and consequently
both pMOS are ON) will the output be connected to VDD.
This situation requires a = b = ‘0’, so the circuit indeed
computes the NOR function, y = (a + b)’.
EXAMPLE 4.3 TWO-LAYER CIRCUIT
Figure 4.13 shows two 2-layer (or 2-level) circuits. The circuit
in Figure 4.13(a) is an AND-OR circuit because the first layer
(also called input layer) consists of AND gates, while the
second layer (also called output layer) is an OR gate. The
reciprocal arrangement (that is, OR-AND) is shown in Figure
4.13(b). Find the expression for y in each one.

--- Page 172 ---
FIGURE 4.13 Two-layer (a) AND-OR and (b)
OR-AND circuits of Example 4.3.
SOLUTION
Figure 4.13(a): The upper AND gate produces a · b, while the
lower one produces c · d. These terms are then ORed by the
output gate, resulting in y = a · b + c · d. Because the logic
AND and OR operations are represented by the mathematical
product and addition symbols (though they have different
meanings here), the equation looks like a regular sum of
product terms, so this format is referred to as sum-of-products
(SOP).
Figure 4.13(b): The upper OR gate produces a · b, while the
lower one produces c + d. These terms are then ANDed by the
output gate, resulting in y = (a + b) · (c + d). For a reason
analogous to that above, this format is referred to as product-of-
sums (POS).
EXAMPLE 4.4 PSEUDO THREE-LAYER
CIRCUIT
Even though the circuit of Figure 4.14 looks like a 3-layer
circuit, inverters are normally not considered as constituting a
layer. Indeed, they are considered as part of existing gates (for
instance, recall that intrinsic inverters are needed to construct
AND gates). The time delays that they cause, however, are
taken into consideration in the timing analysis. Write the
expression for y in Figure 4.14.

--- Page 173 ---
FIGURE 4.14 Pseudo three-layer circuit of
Example 4.4.
SOLUTION
The AND gates produce (from top to bottom) a′ · b b · c, and a ·
b′ · c′. These terms are then ORed by the output gate, resulting
y = a′ · b + b · c + a · b′ · c·
4.5 XOR and XNOR Gates
Figure 4.15 shows XOR and XNOR gates, both with
symbol, truth table, and respective CMOS implementation.
For the XOR gate, an additional implementation, based on
transmission gates (studied in Chapter 10), is also included.

--- Page 174 ---
FIGURE 4.15  (a) XOR gate and (b) XNOR gate (symbol,
truth table, and CMOS circuit).
As the truth table in Figure 4.15(a) shows, the XOR gate
produces a ‘1’ when the inputs are different, or a ‘0’
otherwise. More generally, the XOR gate implements the
odd parity function, that is, produces y = ‘1’ when the
number of inputs that are high is odd. This function is
represented by the operator ⊕ , that is, y = a ⊕  b, which has
an equivalent representation using AND/OR operations as
follows.
XOR function:
    (4.13)
This gate has several interesting properties (listed below),
which are useful in the implementation of several circuits
described later.

--- Page 175 ---
      (4.14a)
      (4.14b)
      (4.14c)
      (4.14d)
      (4.14e)
      (4.14f)
      (4.14g)
      (4.14h)
A CMOS circuit for the XOR gate is shown on the right of
Figure 4.15(a). Note that a, a′, b, and b′ are connected to
nMOS and pMOS transistors in such a way that, when a = b,
one of the nMOS branches is ON and both pMOS branches

--- Page 176 ---
are OFF, hence connecting y to GND (y = ‘0’). On the other
hand, when a ≠ b, both nMOS branches are OFF and one
pMOS branch is ON, then connecting y to VDD (y = ‘1’).
The same kind of information is contained in Figure 4.15(b),
which presents an XNOR gate. As the truth table shows, the
XNOR gate produces a ‘1’ when the inputs are equal or a ‘0’
otherwise. More generally, the XNOR gate implements the
even parity function, that is, produces y = ‘1’ when the
number of inputs that are high is even. This function is
represented by the complement of the XOR function, so the
following results:
XNOR function:
    (4.15)
A CMOS circuit for the XNOR gate is also included in
Figure 4.15(b), which is very similar to the XOR circuit.
However, in the XNOR gate the output is ‘1’ when the a = b,
whereas in the XOR gate it is ‘1’ when a ≠ b.
EXAMPLE 4.5 XOR PROPERTIES
Prove Equations 4.14(a)-(c) above (the others are left to the
exercises section).
SOLUTION
The proofs below employ Equation 4.13 plus AND/OR
properties (Equations 4.8 and 4.11).
For Equation 4.14(a): a ⊕  0 = a′ · 0+ a · 0′ = 0 + a · 1 = a
For Equation 4.14: a ⊕  1 = a′ · 1 + a · 1 = a′ + 0 = a′
For Equation 4.14(c): a ⊕  a = a′ · a + a · a′ = 0 + 0 = 0.

--- Page 177 ---
4.6 Modulo-2 Adder
We saw in Section 3.1 that the function implemented by a
binary adder (also called modulo-2 adder) is the odd parity
function. Therefore, because that is also the function
implemented by the XOR gate, we conclude that XOR and
modulo-2 adder are indeed the same circuit (recall, however,
that in a binary adder additional circuitry is needed to
produce the carry-out bit, so complete equivalence between
binary adder and XOR only occurs when the carry-out bit is
of no interest). This fact is illustrated in Figure 4.16 for 2 and
N inputs (two options are shown for the latter).
FIGURE 4.16  Modulo-2 adder (without carry-out) and
XOR gate are the same circuit.
EXAMPLE 4.6 N -BIT PARITY
FUNCTION
Consider the N-bit XOR gate depicted at the bottom right of
Figure 4.16(b). Prove that it computes the odd parity function
and that it is a modulo-2 adder (without carry-out, of course).
SOLUTION

--- Page 178 ---
Without loss of generality, we can reorganize the inputs as two
sets, say a1 … an, containing all inputs that are ‘1’, and an+ 1
… aN, containing all inputs that are ‘0’. Applying Equation
4.14(b) with a = ‘1’ successive times to the first set, the result is
‘0’ when n is even or ‘1’ when it is odd. Similarly, the
application of Equation 4.14(a) with a = ‘0’ successive times to
the second set produces ‘0’ regardless of its number of inputs.
Finally, applying Equation 4.14(a) to these to results, ‘0’ or ‘1’
is obtained, depending on whether n is even or odd,
respectively.
EXAMPLE 4.7 BINARY ADDITION
VERSUS OR OPERATION
Consider the following binary operations (even though quotes
are omitted, these are binary numbers):
(i) 1 + 1, (ii) 1 + 1 + 1, and (iii) 1 + 1 + 1 + 1.
a. Find the results when ‘+ ′ is performed by a
binary adder.
b. Find the results when ‘+ ′ is performed by an
OR gate.
SOLUTION
a. (i) 1 + 1 = 10 (decimal = 2), (ii) 1 + 1 + 1 = 11
(decimal = 3), (iii) 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 = 100 (decimal = 4).
b. + 1 = 1 (1 OR 1 = 1), (ii) 1 + 1 + 1 = 1 (1 OR 1 OR
1 = 1), (iii) 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 = 1.
4.7 Buffer
The last fundamental gates fall in the buffer category and are
divided into three types: regular buffers (described in this
section), tri-state buffers (Section 4.8), and open-drain
buffers (Section 4.9). What they have in common is the fact

--- Page 179 ---
that none of them performs any logical transformation (thus
y = x) except for inversion sometimes.
A regular buffer is depicted in Figure 4.17(a). As shown in
the truth table, this circuit does not perform any logical
transformation (except for inversion in some cases), so its
function can be represented as follows. Buffer function:
FIGURE 4.17  (a) Regular buffer (symbol, truth table, and
implementation); (b) Buffer used to increase current driving
capacity; (c) Buffer employed to restore a weak signal.
    (4.16)
A typical implementation is also shown in Figure 4.17(a),
which consists of cascaded inverters. Depending on the
number of inverters, the resulting buffer can be noninverting
or inverting.
Two typical applications for buffers are depicted in Figures
4.17(b) and (c). That in (b) serves to increase a gate’s
current-driving capability, so the signal from one gate can be
fed to a larger number of gates. That in (c) shows a buffer

--- Page 180 ---
employed to restore a “weak” signal (in long-distance
transmissions or noisy environments). Buffers with a large
current capacity (normally many milliamperes) are also
referred to as drivers (employed as line drivers and bus
drivers, for example).
4.8 Tri-State Buffer
The circuit in Figure 4.18 is called a tri-state buffer (also
three-state buffer or 3-state buffer) because it has a third
state, called ‘Z’, which represents high impedance. In other
words, when the circuit is enabled (ena = ‘1’), it operates as
a regular buffer, whereas when disabled (ena = ‘0’), the
output node is disconnected from the internal circuitry. Its
logical function is therefore that shown below.
FIGURE 4.18  Tri-state buffer (symbol, truth table, and
CMOS-C2MOS implementation).
Tri-state buffer function:
    (4.17)
A typical CMOS circuit for this buffer is also included in
Figure 4.18, which consists of a CMOS inverter followed by
a C2MOS inverter (C2MOS logic will be studied in Chapter

--- Page 181 ---
10). Note that when ena = ‘1’, both inner transistors are ON
(because ‘1’ is applied to the gate of the nMOS and ‘0’ to the
gate of the pMOS), so the outer transistors are connected to
the output node (y), rendering a regular CMOS inverter.
However, when ena = ‘0’, both inner transistors are turned
OFF (because now the nMOS receives ‘0’ and the pMOS
receives ‘1’), causing node y to be disconnected from all
transistors (node y is left “floating”).
The construction of multi-bit buffers is straightforward. As
illustrated in Figure 4.19, an N-bit buffer consists simply of
N single-bit units sharing the same buffer-enable (ena)
signal. Two equivalent representations are shown on the
right of Figure 4.19, where the second one includes
references to the bit indexes. Note that in both a thick line is
used to indicate a multi-bit path, while for ena it is still a thin
line (only one bit).
FIGURE 4.19  Construction of a multi-bit tri-state buffer
(two equivalent representations are shown on the right).
A typical application for tri-state buffers is in the connection
of multiple circuits to shared physical resources (like data
buses, illustrated in the example below).
EXAMPLE 4.8 TRI-STATE BUS DRIVERS

--- Page 182 ---
Draw a diagram for a system that must connect 4 similar 16-bit
circuits to a common 16-bit data bus.
SOLUTION
The solution diagram is shown in Figure 4.20 where 4 tri-state
buffers of 16 bits each are employed. The number of bits in the
thick lines is explicitly marked. In an actual system, a bus
master (not shown in the figure) is needed to manage bus
requests, generating proper access-enable (ena) signals.
Obviously only one unit can hold the bus at a time while all the
others remain disconnected from it (in the high-impedance
state, ‘Z’).
FIGURE 4.20 Tri-state bus drivers of Example
4.8.
4.9 Open-Drain Buffer
A final buffer is depicted in Figure 4.21. It is called open-
drain buffer (or OD buffer) because it has at the output a
MOS transistor (generally nMOS type) with its drain
disconnected from any other circuit element. This point
(drain) is wired to one of the IC’s pins, allowing external
connections to be made as needed. A pull-up resistor (or
some other type of load), connecting this point to VDD, is
required for proper circuit operation.

--- Page 183 ---
FIGURE 4.21  Open-drain buffer applications: (a) Wired
NOR gate; (b) Large-current sinker.
Typical usages for OD buffers include the construction of
wired AND/NOR gates and the provision of higher
currents/voltages. Both cases are illustrated in Figure 4.21.
In Figure 4.21(a), N open-drain buffers are wired together to
form a NOR gate (note that it suffices to have one x high for
y to be low), where VDD2 can be different from VDD1. In
Figure 4.21(b), an external load, for example a 12 V/24 mA
mini-relay, thus requiring a larger current and a higher
voltage than that usually provided by the corresponding
logic family, is depicted.
4.10 D-Type Flip-Flop
Having finished the introduction of fundamental logic gates,
we now describe the most fundamental logic register.
Digital circuits can be classified into two large groups called
combinational circuits and sequential circuits. A circuit is
combinational when its output depends solely on its current

--- Page 184 ---
inputs. For example, all circuits discussed above are
combinational. This type of circuit obviously does not
require memory. In contrast, a circuit is sequential if its
output is affected by previous system states, in which case
storage elements are necessary. A clock signal is then also
needed to control the system evolution (to set the timing).
Counters are good examples in this category because the
next output depends on the present output.
The most fundamental use for registers is in the
implementation of the memory needed in sequential circuits.
The type of register normally used in this case is called D-
type flip-flop (DFF).
Indeed, it will be shown in Chapter 13 that registers can be
divided into two groups called latches and flip-flops. Latches
are further divided into two types called SR and D latches.
Similarly, flip-flops are divided into four types called SR, D,
T, and JK flip-flops. However, for the reason mentioned
above (construction of sequential circuits), the D-type flip-
flop (DFF) is by far the most commonly used, covering
almost all digital applications where registers are needed.
The symbol and truth table for a positive-edge triggered DFF
are shown in Figure 4.22. The circuit has two inputs called d
(data) and clk (clock), and two outputs called q and q′ (where
q′ is the complement of q). Its operation can be summarized
as follows. Every time the clock changes from ‘0’ to ‘1’
(positive edge), the value of d is copied to q; during the rest
of the time, q simply holds its value. In other words, the
circuit is “transparent” at the moment when a positive edge
occurs in the clock (represented by q+ = d in the truth table,
where q+ indicates the circuit’s next state), and “opaque” at
all other times (that is, q+ = q).

--- Page 185 ---
FIGURE 4.22  Positive-edge triggered DFF (symbol and
truth table).
This type of circuit can be constructed in several ways,
which will be described at length in Chapter 13. It can also
be constructed with regular NAND gates as shown in Figure
4.23(a). This, however, is only for illustration because that is
not how it is done in actual integrated circuits (though you
might have seen it around). An example of actual
implementation, borrowed from Figure 13.19, is displayed in
Figure 4.23(b), which shows a DFF used in the Itanium
microprocessor.
FIGURE 4.23  DFF implemented with regular NAND gates
(only for illustration because this is not how it is done in actual
ICs). Actual implementations, like that in (b), which shows a DFF
employed in the Itanium processor, will be described in Chapter
13.
Timing diagrams for sequential circuits
Three timing diagram options were presented in
Section 4.2 (Figure 4.8) and illustrated
subsequently in Examples 4.1 and 4.2 for

--- Page 186 ---
combinational circuits. We conclude this section
with a similar analysis but now for sequential
circuits (a DFF in this section, then larger DFF-
based circuits in the sections that follow). The
diagrams, however, are simplified, because they do
not include certain time parameters, like setup and
hold times (these will be seen in Chapter 13—see
Figure 13.12).
A typical timing diagram for a D-type flip-flop is
shown in Figure 4.24, where the style of Figure
4.8(c) was adopted. As can be seen, there are two
main parameters, both called tpCQ (one down, the
other up), which represent the propagation delay
from clk to q (that is, the time needed for q to
change when the proper transition occurs in clk).
The up and down delays are not necessarily equal,
but in general the worst (largest) of them is taken
as the DFF’s only tpCQ value. The usage of this
parameter is illustrated in the example that
follows.
FIGURE 4.24  Simplified timing diagram for
a DFF.
EXAMPLE 4.9 FREQUENCY DIVIDER

--- Page 187 ---
Figure 4.25(a) shows a positive-edge triggered
DFF with an inverted version of q connected to d.
Using the clock as reference and the style of
Figure 4.8(b), draw the waveform for the output
signal, q, and compare its frequency, fq, to the
clock’s, fclk. Assume that the propagation delays
are tpCQ = 3 ns for the DFF and tp = 1 ns for the
inverter.
FIGURE 4.25 Frequency divider of
Example 4.9.
SOLUTION
The solution is depicted in Figure 4.25(b), where
the simplified timing diagram style of Figure
4.8(b) was employed. Because this circuit is a
positive-edge DFF, arrows were marked in the
clock waveform to highlight the only points where
the circuit is transparent. The DFF’s initial state
was assumed to be q = ‘0’, so d = ‘1’, which is
copied to q at the next positive clock edge,
producing q = ‘1’ after 3 ns. The new value of q
now produces d = ‘0’ after 1 ns. Then, at the next
positive clock transition, d is again copied to q,
this time producing q = ‘0’ and so on. Gray shades
were used in the figure to highlight the
propagation delays (1 ns and 3 ns). Comparing the
waveforms of q and clk, we observe that fq =

--- Page 188 ---
fclk/2, so this circuit is a divide-by-two frequency
divider (typically used in the implementation of
counters).
For now, what is important to understand is how a
DFF operates, as well as the basic types of circuits
that can be constructed with it, because these
concepts will be needed in Chapters 6 and 7 (the
rest can wait until we reach Chapter 13). For that
purpose, three specially selected sections are
included below, where the following DFF-based
circuits are described: Shift registers (Section
4.11), counters (Section 4.12), and pseudo-random
sequence generators (Section 4.13).
4.11 Shift Register
A common DFF application is shown in Figure 4.26(a),
which shows a 4-stage shift register (SR). As will be further
seen in Section 14.1, SRs are used for storing and/or
delaying data.
FIGURE 4.26  (a) Four-stage shift register; (b) Simplified
representation.
The operation of a shift register is very simple: Each time a
positive clock edge occurs, the data vector advances one
position (assuming that it employs positive-edge DFFs).
Hence in the case of Figure 4.26(a) each input bit (d) reaches

--- Page 189 ---
the output (q) after 4 positive clock edges have occurred.
Note that the DFFs in this case have an additional input,
called rst (reset), which forces all DFF outputs to ‘0’ when
asserted.
A simplified representation is also included in Figure
4.26(b), where the flip-flops are represented by little boxes
without any reference to clock or reset.
EXAMPLE 4.10 SHIFT REGISTER
OPERATION
Suppose that the signals rst, clk, and d shown in the first three
waveforms of Figure 4.27 are applied to the 4-stage shift
register of Figure 4.26(a). Draw the corresponding signals at all
DFF outputs (q1, q2, q3, and q4). Assume a fixed propagation
delay tpCQ ≠ 0 for all DFFs.
FIGURE 4.27 Timing diagram for the SR of
Example 4.10.
SOLUTION
The solution is depicted in Figure 4.27, where d consists of a
single pulse that travels along the SR as the clock ticks,

--- Page 190 ---
reaching the output after 4 positive clock transitions. A fixed
value was used for tpCQ.
4.12 Counters
Like the other two sequential circuits introduced above (flip-
flops and shift registers), counters will also be studied at
length later (Chapter 14). However, because they are the
most common of all sequential circuits (therefore the largest
application for DFFs), an earlier introduction is deserved.
Counters can be divided into two groups called synchronous
and asynchronous. In the former, the clock signal is
connected to the clock input of all flip-flops, whereas in the
latter the output of one flip-flop serves as input (clock) to the
next.
Counters can also be divided into full-scale and partial-scale
counters. The former is modulo-2N, because it has 2N states
(where N is the number of flip-flops), while the latter has M
< 2N states. For example, with N = 4 DFFs, the largest
counter has 24 = 16 states (counting from 0 to 15, for
example), which is then a modulo-2N counter. If the same
four DFFs are employed to construct a decimal counter
(counting from 0 to 9), for example, thus with only 10 states,
then it is a modulo-M counter (because 10 < 16). Only the
first category (modulo-2N), which is simpler, will be seen in
this introduction.
Synchronous counter
A popular architecture for synchronous counters is
shown in Figure 4.28(a). This circuit contains one
DFF plus two gates (AND + XOR) per stage.
Owing to its modularity (all cells are alike), this

--- Page 191 ---
circuit can be easily extended to any number of
stages (thus implementing counters with any
number of bits) by simply cascading additional
standard cells.
FIGURE 4.28  Synchronous counter: (a)
Circuit; (b) Timing diagram.
The corresponding timing diagram is depicted in
Figure 4.28(b), where q2 q1 q0 = “000” (decimal 0)
is the initial state. After the first positive clock
edge, the first DFF changes its state (as in
Example 4.9), thus resulting in q2 q1 q0 = “001”
(decimal 1). At the next clock edge, the first two
DFFs change their state, thus now resulting in q2
q1 q0 = “010” (decimal 2) and so on. In summary,
q0 changes at every 20 = 1 positive clock
transitions, q1 every 21 = 2 clock transitions, q2
every 22 = 4 clock transitions, and so on, hence
resulting in a sequential upward binary counter.
Note that the simplicity of modulo-2N counters is
due to the fact that they are self-resetting, that is,

--- Page 192 ---
upon reaching the last state, 2N – 1, the circuit
automatically restarts from zero (see Figure
4.28(b)).
Asynchronous counter
The advantage of asynchronous counters is that
they require a little less hardware (less silicon
space) than their synchronous counterpart. On the
other hand, they are a little slower.
A modulo-2N sequential upward asynchronous
counter is shown in Figure 4.29. This too is a
modular structure, so it can be easily extended to
any number of bits. Because in this case the output
of one stage acts as clock to the next one, the clock
only reaches the last stage after it propagates
through all the others, and that is the reason why
this circuit is slower than the synchronous version.
FIGURE 4.29  Asynchronous counter.
Note also that each cell is similar to that in
Example 4.9, that is, a divide-by-two circuit, so fq0
= fclk/2, fq1 = fq0/2, fq2 = fq1/2, etc., so the timing
diagram for this circuit is similar to that in Figure
4.28(b) but with accumulated propagation delays.
EXAMPLE 4.11 DOWNWARD
ASYNCHRONOUS COUNTER

--- Page 193 ---
Figure 4.30 shows the same asynchronous counter
of Figure 4.29 but with q used as clock for the
succeeding stage instead of q′. Prove that this is a
sequential downward counter.
FIGURE 4.30 Downward
asynchronous counter of Example
4.11.
SOLUTION
The timing diagram for this circuit is shown in
Figure 4.30(b), which can be obtained as follows.
Suppose that the present state is q2q1q0 = “000”
(decimal 0), so d2 = d1 = d0 = ‘1’. Because at the
next positive clock edge d0 is copied to q0, q0 =
‘1’ then results. However, this upper transition of
q0 is a positive edge for the second stage, which
then copies d1 to q1, resulting in q1 = ‘1’. This is
also a positive clock edge for the succeeding
stage, so d2 is copied to q2, resulting in q2 = ‘1’.
In other words, q2q1q0 = “111” (decimal 7) is the
system’s next state. Similar reasoning leads to the
conclusion that q2q1q0 = “110” (decimal 6) then

--- Page 194 ---
follows, and so on, until q2q1q0 = “000” (decimal
0) is reached again. Note in the timing diagram
that the delay accumulates because each stage
depends on information received from its
preceding stages.
4.13 Pseudo-Random Sequence Generator
A final sequential circuit (thus employing flip-flops)
example is shown in Figure 4.31(a). This circuit is called
linear-feedback shift register (LFSR) and implements a
pseudo-random sequence generator. Other LFSR sizes will
be seen in Section 14.7.
FIGURE 4.31  (a) Four-stage pseudo-random sequence
generator; (b) Simplified representation.
The circuit in Figure 4.31 consists of a shift register (seen in
Section 4.11) with two taps connected to an XOR gate
whose output is fed back to the shift register’s input. This
circuit is represented by the polynomial 1 + x3 + x4 because
the taps are derived after the 3rd and 4th registers.
The generated sequence (d) has a pseudo-random
distribution, which is useful in communications and
computer applications, like the construction of data
scramblers (Section 14.8).

--- Page 195 ---
The shift register must start from a non-zero state, so the
initialization can be done, for example, by presetting all flip-
flops to ‘1’. Note in Figure 4.31 that the reset signal is
connected to the preset (pre) input of all DFFs, which is the
reciprocal of rst, that is, forces the outputs to ‘1’ when
asserted.
A simplified representation is included in Figure 4.31(b),
where again the DFFs are represented by little boxes, as in
Figure 4.26(b), without any reference to clock or
reset/preset. Note that in this case a modulo-2 adder was
used instead of an XOR gate to reinforce the fact that they
are indeed the same circuit (as seen in Section 4.6).
EXAMPLE 4.12 PSEUDO-RANDOM
SEQUENCE GENERATOR
Consider the 4-bit LFSR-based pseudo-random sequence
generator of Figure 4.31. Starting with “1111”, list the
corresponding sequence of values that it produces, and also
verify that it indeed contains 2N – 1 distinct states.
SOLUTION
The solution is shown in Figure 4.32. Starting with q1q2q3q4 =
“1111”, one can easily observe that the next state is “0111”,
then “0011”, and so on, until “1111” again occurs. The table
shows 24 – 1 = 15 distinct values (states).


--- Page 196 ---
FIGURE 4.32 Pseudo-random sequence
generation of Example 4.12.
4.14 Exercises
1. Static power consumption #1
a. Consider the inverter shown in Figure 4.1.
It was shown in Figure 4.1(c) that while x =
‘1’ the circuit consumes static power, so it is
not adequate for digital systems. Assuming
that R = 10 kΩ and that the actual output
voltage is 0.1 V, with VDD = 5V, calculate
that power.
b. Calculate the new power consumption in
case VDD were reduced to 3.3V.
2. Static power consumption #2
a. Consider the inverter shown in Figure 4.2.
It was shown in Figure 4.2(c) that while x =
‘0’ the circuit consumes static power, so it is
not adequate for digital systems. Assuming
that R = 10 kü and that the actual output
voltage is 4.9V, with VDD = 5V, calculate
that power.
b. Calculate the new power consumption in
case VDD were reduced to 3.3V.
3. Static power consumption #3
a. Consider the CMOS inverter shown in
Figure 4.5(a). Assuming that it does not
exhibit any current leakage when in steady
state, what is its static power consumption?
b. Suppose that the circuit presents a leakage
current from VDD to GND of 1 pA while in
steady state and biased with VDD = 3.3 V.

--- Page 197 ---
Calculate the corresponding static power
consumption.
4. Dynamic power consumption
Suppose that the CMOS inverter of Figure 4.6(a) is
biased with VDD = 3.3 V and feeds a load CL = 1 pF.
Calculate the dynamic power consumption when:
a. There is no activity (that is, the circuit
remains in the same state).
b. The input signal is a square wave (Figure
1.14) with frequency 1 MHz and 50% duty
cycle.
c. The input signal is a square wave with
frequency 1 MHz and 10% duty cycle.
5. Ideal versus nonideal transistors
In the analysis of the CMOS inverter of Figure 4.5 it
was assumed that the MOS transistors are ideal, so
they can be represented by ideal switches. Suppose
that instead they exhibit an internal resistance ri ≠ 0,
which should then be included in series with the
switch in Figures 4.5(b)–(c). If the load connected to
the output node (y) is purely capacitive, will ri affect
the final voltage of y or only the time needed for that
voltage to settle? Explain.
6. Noise margins
With the help of Figure 4.7, determine the noise
margins when low (NML) and high (NML) for the
following logic families:
a. 3.3 V LVCMOS
b. 1.8 V LVCMOS
c. 1.2 V LVCMOS
7. All-zero and all-one detectors

--- Page 198 ---
a. An all-zero detector is a circuit that
produces a ‘1’ at the output when all input
bits are low. Which, among all the gates
studied in this chapter, is an all-zero
detector?
b. Similar to the case above, an all-one
detector is a circuit that produces a ‘1’ at the
output when all input bits are high. Which,
among all the gates studied in this chapter, is
an all-one detector?
8. Three-input CMOS NAND gate
Draw a CMOS circuit for a 3-input NAND gate
(recall that in a NAND gate nMOS transistors are
connected in series and pMOS transistors are
connected in parallel).
9. Four-input CMOS NOR gate
Draw a CMOS circuit for a 4-input NOR gate (recall
that in a NOR gate nMOS transistors are connected
in parallel and pMOS transistors are connected in
series).
10. AND/OR circuit #1
Using AND and/or OR gates with any number of
inputs, draw circuits that implement the following
functions:
a. y = a · b · c · d
b. y = a + b + c + d
c. y = a = b + c · d · e
d. y = (a + b) · (c + d + e)
11. AND/OR circuit #2
Using only 2-input AND and/or OR gates, draw
circuits that implement the functions below.
a. y = a · b · c · d

--- Page 199 ---
b. y = a + b + c + d
c. y = a · b + c · d · e
d. y = (a + b) · (c + d + e)
12. NAND-AND timing analysis
Suppose that the NAND-AND circuit of Figure
E4.12 is submitted to the stimuli also included in the
figure where every time slot is 10ns wide. Adopting
the simplified timing diagram style of Figure 4.8(b),
draw the corresponding waveforms at nodes x and y
for the following two cases:
a. Assuming that the propagation delays
through the gates are negligible.
b. Assuming that the propagation delays
through the NAND and AND gates are 1 ns
and 2 ns, respectively.
13. OR-NOR timing analysis
FIGURE E4.12
Suppose that the OR-NOR circuit of Figure E4.13 is
submitted to the stimuli also included in the figure
where every time slot is 10 ns wide. Adopting the
simplified timing diagram style of Figure 4.8(b),
draw the corresponding waveforms at nodes x and y
for the following two cases:
a. Assuming that the propagation delays
through the gates are negligible.

--- Page 200 ---
b. Assuming that the propagation delays
through the OR and NOR gates are 2 ns and
1 ns, respectively.
14. NOR-OR timing analysis
FIGURE E4.13
Suppose that the NOR-OR circuit of Figure E4.14 is
submitted to the stimuli also included in the figure
where every time slot is 10 ns wide. Adopting the
simplified timing diagram style of Figure 4.8(b),
draw the corresponding waveforms at nodes x and y
for the following two cases:
a. Assuming that the propagation delays
through the gates are negligible.
b. Assuming that the propagation delays
through the NOR and OR gates are 1 ns and
2 ns, respectively.
15. NAND-only timing analysis
FIGURE E4.14

--- Page 201 ---
Suppose that the NAND-only circuit of Figure E4.15
is submitted to the stimuli also included in the figure,
where every time slot is 10 ns wide. Adopting the
simplified timing diagram style of Figure 4.8(b),
draw the corresponding waveforms at nodes x and y
for the following two cases:
a. Assuming that the propagation delays
through the gates are negligible.
b. Assuming that the propagation delay
through each NAND gate is 1 ns.
16. XOR properties #1
FIGURE E4.15
Prove Equations 4.14(d)-(h) relative to the XOR gate.
17. XOR properties #2
Show that:
a. 0 ⊕  0 ⊕  0 … ⊕  0 = 0
b. 1 ⊕  0 ⊕  0 … ⊕  0 = 1
c. 1 ⊕  1 ⊕  0 ⊕  0 … ⊕  0 = 0
d. 1 ⊕  1 ⊕  1 ⊕  0 ⊕  0 … ⊕  0 = 1
e. a ⊕  a· ⊕  b ⊕  b· = 0
18. Equivalent XOR gate
Using only inverters, AND and OR gates, draw a
circuit that implements the 2-input XOR function.

--- Page 202 ---
19. 19. 3-input XOR gate
Figure E4.19 shows a 3-input XOR gate.
a. Write its truth table.
b. Derive its Boolean expression.
c. Draw an equivalent circuit using only 2-
input XOR gates.
d. Draw an equivalent circuit using only
NAND gates (with any number of inputs).
20. Modulo-2 addition
FIGURE E4.19
Find the expression of y for each circuit in Figure
E4.20. Note that these circuits are binary adders,
which therefore compute the modulo-2 addition, but
carry-out bits are not of interest in this case (hence
they are just XOR gates).
21. Truth table #1
a. Write the truth table for the circuit in
Figure E4.21 with the switch in position (1).
b. Repeat the exercise with the switch in
position (2).
c. Based on your answers above, draw the
simplest possible equivalent circuit.
22. Truth table #2

--- Page 203 ---
FIGURE E4.20
FIGURE E4.21
Write the truth table for the circuit in Figure E4.22.
(After solving it, see Figure 13.2.)
23. Combinational versus sequential
FIGURE E4.22
Both circuits in the last two exercises have feedback
loops, which are typical of sequential circuits (such
circuits will be discussed in detail in Chapters 13–15;
as already mentioned, a sequential circuit is one in
which the outputs depend on previous system states).
Which of these circuits is actually sequential?
Comment.
24. Bidirectional bus driver

--- Page 204 ---
The circuit of Figure E4.24 must be connected to a
bidirectional 8-bit bus. Comparing this situation with
that in Example 4.8, we observe that now the circuit
must transmit and receive data. What type(s) of
buffer(s) must be inserted in the region marked with
a circle to construct the appropriate connections?
Does RX need to go into high-impedance mode?
Redraw Figure E4.24, including the proper buffer(s)
in it.
25. Open-drain buffer
a. The circuit of Figure E4.25 shows a wired
gate constructed with open-drain buffers
(note that the internal buffers are inverters).
What type of gate is this?
b. When y is low ( ∼ 0 V), current flows
through the 10 k pull-up resistor. What is the
power dissipated by this resistor when only
one nMOS transistor is ON? And when all
are ON?
26. Flip-flop timing analysis #1
FIGURE E4.24

--- Page 205 ---
FIGURE E4.25
Figure E4.26 shows a DFF to which the signals clk,
rst, and d shown on the right are applied. Draw the
complete waveform for q, assuming that all
propagation delays are negligible and that the DFF’s
initial state is q = ‘0’.
27. Flip-flop timing analysis #2
FIGURE E4.26
Figure E4.27 shows the divide-by-2 circuit of
Example 4.9 with some modifications introduced in
the clock path. Draw the waveforms for d, q, and x
using the clock waveform as reference. Assume that
the propagation delays are negligible.
28. Shift register diagram

--- Page 206 ---
a. Make a circuit diagram, as in Figure
4.26(a), for a 5-stage shift register.
b. Say that the clock period is 50 ns. What
are the minimum and maximum time
intervals that it can take for a bit presented
to the input of this SR to reach the output?
Assume that the propagation delays are
negligible.
29. Shift register timing analysis
FIGURE E4.27
Suppose that the signals clk, rst, and d depicted in
Figure E4.29 are applied to the 4-stage shift register
of Figure 4.26. Draw the corresponding waveforms at
all circuit nodes (q1, q2, q3, and q4). Assume that the
propagation delays are negligible.
30. Number of flip-flops
a. What is the minimum number of flip-flops
needed to construct the following counters:

--- Page 207 ---
FIGURE E4.29
(i) 0–to–99, (ii) 0–to–10,000.
b. When constructing sequential upward
counters with initial state zero, what is the
largest count (decimal) value achievable
with (i) 8 DFFs, (ii) 16 DFFs, (iii) 32 DFFs?
31. Asynchronous counter timing analysis
Draw the timing diagram for the asynchronous
counter of Figure 4.29 and prove that it is indeed a
sequential upward 0–to–7 counter with self-reset.
32. Pseudo-random sequence generator
a. Starting with “1111” in the shift register,
write the truth table for the LFSR of Figure
4.31 and check whether the results match
those given in Figure 4.32.
b. Repeat the exercise starting from a
different value, say “1000”, and check if
“circularly” exactly the same sequence is
produced.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 208 ---
5
Boolean Algebra
Chapter Contents
5.1 Boolean Algebra
5.2 Truth Tables
5.3 Minterms and SOP Equations
5.4 Maxterms and POS Equations
5.5 Standard Circuits for SOP and POS
Equations
5.6 Karnaugh Maps
5.7 Large Karnaugh Maps
5.8 Other Function-Simplification
Techniques
5.9 Propagation Delay and Glitches
5.10 Exercises
Objective:
This chapter describes the mathematical formalities behind binary functions.
It includes Boolean algebra and its theorems, followed by standard function
representation formats and corresponding standard circuit implementations.
The study of Karnaugh maps and other function-simplification techniques is

--- Page 209 ---
also included, along with a discussion on timing diagrams and glitch
generation in combinational circuits.
5.1 Boolean Algebra
Formal analysis of digital circuits is based on Boolean
algebra, whose initial foundations were laid by G. Boole
[Boole 1854] in the 1850s. It contains a set of mathematical
rules that govern a two-valued (binary) system represented
by zeros and ones. Such rules are discussed in this chapter,
where several examples are also presented. To represent bit
or bit vector values, VHDL syntax will again be employed
whenever appropriate, which consists of a pair of single
quotes for single bits or a pair of double quotes for bit
vectors.
A Boolean function is a mathematical function involving
binary variables, logical addition (“ + ”, also called OR
operation), logical multiplication (“ · ”, also called AND
operation), and logical inversion (“ ′ ”). In summary,
Boolean functions can be implemented using only the three
fundamental gates depicted in Figure 5.1, which were
introduced in Chapter 4. (More precisely, because there are
equivalences between NOR and NAND gates, that is, (a + b)
′ = a′ · b′ and (a · b)′ = a′ + b′, any Boolean function can be
implemented using only one of these two gates, that is, only
NOR or only NAND gates.)
FIGURE 5.1  The three fundamental operations employed
in Boolean functions: Inversion, OR, and AND.

--- Page 210 ---
Some examples of Boolean functions are shown below,
where y represents the function and a, b, c, and d are binary
variables.
The first expression above has only one term (a · b, called a
product term because it involves logical multiplication
between its components), which contains two literals (a and
b), where a literal is a variable or its complement. The
second expression has two product terms (a′ · b and a · c · d)
with two and three literals, respectively. And the third
expression has three product terms (a · b · c, b′ · d, and a · c′ ·
d), with three, two, and three literals, respectively. Because
in these examples the product terms are added to produce the
final result, the expressions are said to be written in SOP
(sum-of-products) format.
Note in the expressions above that the dot used to represent
the AND operation was not omitted (for example, a · b could
have been written as ab), because in actual designs (see
VHDL chapters, for example) signal names normally include
several letters, so the absence of the dot could cause
confusion. For example, ena · x could be confused with e · n
· a · x.
The fundamental rules of Boolean algebra are summarized
below, where a, b, and c are again binary variables and f() is
a binary function. All principles and theorems are first
summarized, then a series of examples are given. The proofs
are straightforward, so most are left to the exercises section.
Properties involving the OR function:

--- Page 211 ---
      (5.1a)
      (5.1b)
      (5.1c)
      (5.1d)
      (5.1e)
      (5.1f)
Properties involving the AND function:
      (5.2a)
      (5.2b)

--- Page 212 ---
      (5.2c)
      (5.2d)
      (5.2e)
      (5.2f)
      (5.2g)
Absorption theorem:
      (5.3a)
      (5.3b)
      (5.3c)
Consensus theorem:
      (5.4a)

--- Page 213 ---
      (5.4b)
Shannon’s theorem:
      (5.5a)
      (5.5b)
DeMorgan’s law:
      (5.6a)
      (5.6b)
Principle of duality:
Any Boolean function remains unchanged when ‘0’s and ‘1’s
as well as “+” and “·” are swapped (this is a generalization of
DeMorgan’s law).
    (5.7)
Common-term theorem:
Suppose that y=f() is an N-variable Boolean function with a
common-term a. If the common-term occurs when y is

--- Page 214 ---
expressed as a sum of products (SOP), then the following
holds:
      (5.8a)
Likewise, if the common-term occurs when y is expressed as
a product of sums (POS), then the following is true:
      (5.8b)
As mentioned earlier, the proofs for all of the theorems
above are straightforward, so most are left to the exercises
section (except for one proof, given in the example below).
Several examples, illustrating the use of these theorems,
follow.
EXAMPLE 5.1 ABSORPTION THEOREM
Prove Equation 5.3(b) of the absorption theorem.
SOLUTION
We can write a = a · (b + b′) = a · b + a · b′. We can also
duplicate any term without affecting the result (because a + a =
a). Therefore, a + a′ · b = a · b + a · b′ + a′ · b = a · b + a · b′ +
a′ · b + a · b = a · (b + b′) + (a′ + a) · b = a + b.
EXAMPLE 5.2 SHANNON’S THEOREM
Apply both parts of Shannon’s theorem to the function y = a′ +
b · c and check their validity.
SOLUTION

--- Page 215 ---
a. Note that f(0, b, c) = 1 + b · c = 1 and f(1, b, c) =
0+b · c=b · c. Therefore, y = f(a, b, c) = a′ f(0, b, c) +
a · f(1, b, c) = a′ · 1 + a · b · c = a′ + a · b · c=a′ + b · c
(in the last step, the absorption theorem was applied).
b. y = f(a, b, c) = [a + f(0, b, c)] · [a′ + f(1, b, c)] = (a
+ 1) · (a′ + b · c) = a′ + b · c.
EXAMPLE 5.3 DEMORGAN’S LAW
Using DeMorgan’s law, simplify the following functions:
a. y = (a′ + b′ · c′)′
b. y = [(a + b) · c + (b · c′)′]′
SOLUTION
a. y = (a′ + b′ · c′)′ = (a′)′ · (b′ · c′)′ = a · (b + c)
b. y = [(a + b) · c + (b · c′)′]′ = [(a + b) · c + (b′ + c)]′
= [(a + b) · c]′ · (b′ + c)′ = [(a + b)′ + c′] · b · c′ = (a′ ·
b′ + c′) · b · c′ = b · c′.
EXAMPLE 5.4 COMMON-TERM
ANALYSIS
If y = a1 · a2 · a3 … am + b1 · b2 · b3 … bn, prove that y =
Π(ai + bj).
SOLUTION
Π(ai + bj) = [(a1 + b1) · (a1 + b2) … (a1 + bn)] … [(am + b1) ·
(am + b2) … (am + bn)]. For each expression between
brackets, Equation 5.8(b) can be applied, yielding [a1 + b1 ·
b2…bn]…[aM + b1·b2…bn]. Reapplying Equation 5.8(b) for
the common term b1 · b2…bn, y = a1 · a2 · a3 … am + b1 · b2
· b3 … bn results.
EXAMPLE 5.5 PRINCIPLE OF DUALITY
#1

--- Page 216 ---
Apply the principle of duality to the function y = a′ + b · c and
check its validity.
SOLUTION
First, it is important to place parentheses around the operations
that have precedence (that is, “ · ”) because they will be
replaced with “+” but must keep the precedence. Therefore, the
dual of y = a′ + (b · c) is y′ = a · (b′ + c′). Using DeMorgan’s
law, the latter can be manipulated as follows: (y′)′ = [a · (b′ +
c′)]′ = a′ + (b′ + c′)′ = a′ + b · c. Hence the dual functions are
indeed alike.
EXAMPLE 5.6 PRINCIPLE OF DUALITY
#2
Apply the principle of duality to the gates shown in Figure
5.2(a).
FIGURE 5.2  Duality principle applied to basic
gates (Example 5.6).
SOLUTION
The solution is depicted in Figure 5.2(b). Note that ‘0’ ↔ ‘1’
(that is, a ↔ a′) and AND ↔ OR were swapped. Two solutions

--- Page 217 ---
are shown, one using ticks (′) to represent inversion, the other
using bubbles.
EXAMPLE 5.7 CIRCUIT
SIMPLIFICATION
Prove that the circuits shown in Figure 5.3 are equivalent.
FIGURE 5.3 Circuits of Example 5.7.
SOLUTION
The Boolean function for the circuit on the left is y = [a′ + (b ·
c)′ + d′ + (a · d)′]′. Using DeMorgan’s law, the following
results: y = (a′ + b′ + c′ + d′ + a′ + d′)′ = (a′ + b′ + c′ + d′)′ = a ·
b · c · d. Thus the circuits are indeed equivalent.
5.2 Truth Tables
As already seen in Chapter 4, truth tables are also a
fundamental tool for digital circuit analysis. A truth table is
simply a numeric representation of a Boolean function;
therefore, for an N-variable function, 2N rows are needed.
Any truth table will fall in one of the four cases depicted in
Figure 5.4, all for N = 3 (thus with 8 entries). The function
shown in the truth table of Figure 5.4(a) is y = a′ + b · c.
Note that the first column contains all possible input
(variable) values, while the second contains the output

--- Page 218 ---
(function) values. Observe also that the variable values are
organized in increasing decimal order, that is, from “000”
(decimal 0) to “111” (decimal 7).
FIGURE 5.4  (a) Regular truth table; (b) Truth table with
“don’t care” states; (c) Incomplete truth table; (d) Degenerate
truth table (< 2N rows).
Another function is depicted in Figure 5.4(b), where a value
different from ‘0’ or ‘1’, represented by ‘X’, can be
observed. The ‘X’s indicate don’t care values, meaning
values that either will not be used or are not relevant, so they
can be chosen at will by the circuit designer (a common
choice because that minimizes the hardware).
A third case is shown in Figure 5.4(c), which contains an
incomplete truth table. This should always be avoided
because when using an automated tool (like a VHDL
synthesizer) to infer the hardware, the compiler might
understand that the previous system state must be held, in
which case registers will be inferred (thus wasting
resources).
Finally, a “degenerate” truth table is depicted in Figure
5.4(d), where less than 2N rows are employed. Because not
all entries (variable values) are explicitly provided, the rows
cannot be organized in adjacently increasing order. This type
of table is normally used only when there are very few zeros
or ones, so a compact representation results.

--- Page 219 ---
5.3 Minterms and SOP Equations
There are two standard formats for Boolean functions, which
are called SOP (sum-of-products) and POS (product-of-
sums). The former is described in this section, while the
latter is seen in the next.
For a Boolean function of N variables, a minterm is any
product term containing N literals (recall that a literal is a
variable or its complement). For example, a′ · b′ · c′, a · b′ ·
c′, and a · b · c are examples of minterms for f(a, b, c).
Therefore, looking at truth tables (Figure 5.4), we conclude
that each entry is indeed a minterm.
Let us consider the function y=f(a, b, c) given below:
      (5.9a)
Because all terms in Equation 5.9(a) are minterms, this
expression is referred to as minterm expansion. Moreover,
because it is also a sum of products, it is called SOP equation
(SOP format).
The truth table for Equation 5.9(a) is presented in Figure 5.5
with the corresponding minterms also included (represented
by mi, where i is the decimal value represented by abc in that
row of the truth table). Note that y = ‘1’ occurs only for the
minterms that appear in Equation 5.9(a), so another
representation for that equation is the following:

--- Page 220 ---
FIGURE 5.5  Truth table for y=a′ · b · c′ + a · b · c′ + a · b ·
c (minterm expansion).
      (5.9b)
Or, equivalently:
      (5.9c)
Every term of an SOP is called an implicant because when
that term is ‘1’ the function is ‘1’ too. Therefore, all
minterms that cause y = ‘1’ are implicants of y. However, not
all minterms are prime implicants.
A prime implicant is an implicant from which no literal can
be removed. To illustrate this concept, let us examine
Equation 5.9(a) again. That function can be simplified to the
following (simplification techniques will be discussed
ahead):
      (5.9d)
Equation 5.9(d) has two terms from which no literal can be
further removed, so a · b and b · c′ are prime implicants of y.

--- Page 221 ---
Note that in this particular example neither prime implicant
is a minterm.
EXAMPLE 5.8 MINTERMS AND PRIME
IMPLICANTS
Consider the irreducible function of four variables y = a′ · c′ +
a′ · b′ · d′ + a · b · c · d. Which terms are minterms and which
are prime implicants?
SOLUTION
Because the equation is irreducible, all three terms are prime
implicants. However, only one of them has four literals, that is,
only a · b · c · d is a minterm (= m15).
EXAMPLE 5.9 MINTERM EXPANSION
AND IRREDUCIBLE SOP
a. For the function of Figure 5.6(a), write the
minterm expansion and obtain the corresponding
irreducible SOP. Which prime implicants are
minterms?
b. Repeat the exercise for the function of Figure
5.6(b).
FIGURE 5.6  Truth tables of Example 5.9. (a)
Minterm expansion: y = m1 + m2 = a′ · b + a · b′.
(b) Minterm expansion: y = m2 + m3 + m4 + m7 =
a′ · b · c′ + a′ · b · c + a · b′ · c′ + a · b · c.

--- Page 222 ---
SOLUTION
Part (a):
Simplified expression: This is indeed the XOR function
(compare the truth table of Figure 5.6(a) with that in Figure
4.15(a)), already in irreducible SOP format. Both prime
implicants are minterms.
Part (b):
Simplified expression: In the first and second terms, a′ · b can
be factored, while b · c can be factored in the second and fourth
terms. Because any term can be duplicated without affecting
the result, so can the second term. Therefore:
In this case, only the last prime implicant is a minterm (= m4).
5.4 Maxterms and POS Equations
We describe now the other standard function format, called
POS (product-of-sums).
For a Boolean function of N variables, a maxterm is any sum
term containing N literals. For instance, a′ + b′ + c′, a + b′ +
c′, and a + b + c are examples of maxterms for f(a, b, c).
Let us consider again the function y = f(a, b, c) given by
Equation 5.9(a) and numerically displayed in the truth table
of Figure 5.5. Instead of using the minterms for which y =

--- Page 223 ---
‘1’, we can take those for which y = ‘0’ and then
complement the result, that is:
The expression derived above,
      (5.10a)
contains only maxterms, hence it is referred to as a maxterm
expansion. Moreover, because it is also a product-of-sums, it
is called POS equation (POS format).
The truth table for Equation 5.10(a), which is the same as
that for Equation 5.9(a), is shown in Figure 5.5, where the
maxterms are also included (represented by Mi, where i is
the decimal value represented by abc in that row of the truth
table).
Two other representations for Equation 5.10(a) are shown
below.
      (5.10b)
      (5.10c)
Minterm-Maxterm relationship

--- Page 224 ---
Suppose that y = f() is a binary function of N
variables. Without loss of generality, we can
assume that f() is ‘1’ for all minterms from 0 to n −
1 and ‘0’ for the others (n to N). Thus we can
write:
    (5.11)
where m and M represent minterms and maxterms,
respectively, which are related by the following
equation:
    (5.12)
EXAMPLE 5.10 MAXTERM EXPANSION
AND IRREDUCIBLE POS
The truth tables of Figure 5.7 are the same as
those of Figure 5.6 but with maxterms included in
the extra column instead of minterms.
a. For the function of Figure 5.7(a),
write the maxterm expansion, show that
the result is equivalentto that in
Example 5.9, and obtain the
corresponding irreducible POS.
b. Repeat the exercise for the function
of Figure 5.7(b).

--- Page 225 ---
FIGURE 5.7  Truth tables of
Example 5.10 (similar to those in
Example 5.9). (a): Maxterm
expansion: y = M0 · M3 = (a+b) · (a′ +
b′). (b): Maxterm expansion: y = M0 ·
M1 · M5 · M6 = (a+b+c) · (a+b+c′) ·
(a′ + b+c′) · (a′ + b′ + c).
SOLUTION
Part (a):
Proof of equivalence: Multiplying the terms in the
expression above, (a + b) · (a′ + b′) = a · b′ + a′ · b
results, which is the same expression obtained in
Example 5.9.
Irreducible POS expression: As mentioned in
Example 5.9, this is the equation of a 2-input
XOR gate with y = (a + b) · (a′ + b′) already in
irreducible POS form.
Part (b):
Proof of equivalence: In this case, the
multiplication of the terms leads potentially to 34
= 81 terms, so another approach should be
adopted. Equation 5.11 can be applied, that is, y =
M0 · M1 · M5 · M6 = m2 + m3 + m4 + m7, which

--- Page 226 ---
is therefore the same equation derived in Example
5.9.
Irreducible POS expression: A simple solution is
to double-invert the SOP equation (from Example
5.9), that is, y = [(a′ · b + b · c + a · b′ · c′)′]′ = [(a
+ b′) · (b′ + c′) · (a′ + b + c)]′.
5.5 Standard Circuits for SOP and POS Equations
As seen above, logic expressions can be represented in two
standard formats called SOP and POS. For example:
Standard circuits for SOP equations
Any SOP can be immediately implemented using
AND gates in the first (product) layer and an OR
gate in the second (sum) layer, as shown in Figure
5.8(a) for y = a · b + c · d. This architecture is
equivalent to one that employs only NAND gates
in both layers. To demonstrate this, in Figure
5.8(b), bubbles were inserted at both ends of the
wires that interconnect the two layers (thus not
affecting the result). Subsequently, the duality
principle was applied to the gate in the second
layer, resulting in the NAND-only circuit of Figure
5.8(c). Recall from Chapter 4 that 2-input
NAND/NOR gates require only 4 transistors, while
2-input AND/OR gates require 6, so the circuit in
Figure 5.8(c) requires less hardware than that in
Figure 5.8(a).

--- Page 227 ---
FIGURE 5.8  Principle of duality employed to
convert the AND-OR circuit in (a) to a NAND-only
circuit in (c). These circuits implement the SOP
equation y = a · b + c · d.
Standard circuits for POS equations
Any POS can be immediately implemented using
OR gates in the first (sum) layer and an AND gate
in the second (product) layer as shown in Figure
5.9(a) for y = (a + b) · (c + d). This architecture is
equivalent to one that employs only NOR gates in
both layers. To demonstrate this, in Figure 5.9(b)
bubbles were inserted at both ends of the wires that
interconnect the two layers (thus not affecting the
result), then the duality principle was applied to
the gate in the second layer, resulting in the NOR-
only circuit of Figure 5.9(c). Similarly to what
occurred in Figure 5.8, the circuit in Figure 5.9(c)
also requires less hardware than that in Figure
5.9(a).
FIGURE 5.9  Principle of duality employed to
convert the OR-AND circuit in (a) to a NOR-only
circuit in (c). These circuits implement the POS
equation y = (a + b) · (c + d).

--- Page 228 ---
EXAMPLE 5.11 STANDARD SOP AND POS
CIRCUITS
a. Using the standard NAND-only SOP
approach of Figure 5.8(c), draw a circuit
that implements y1 = a + b · c + d · e · f.
b. Using the standard NOR-only POS
approach of Figure 5.9(c), draw a circuit
that implements y2 = a · (b + c) · (d + e
+ f).
SOLUTION
Both circuits are depicted in Figure 5.10. Note
that a one-input NAND or NOR is indeed an
inverter.
FIGURE 5.10 Standard SOP and
POS circuits for (a) y1 = a + b · c + d ·
e · f and (b) y2 = a · (b + c) · (d + e +
f).
EXAMPLE 5.12 STANDARD SOP CIRCUIT
Suppose that we want to draw a circuit that
implements the trivial function y = a · b · c, which
only requires a 3-input AND gate. This function,
having only one term, can be considered either an
SOP or a POS equation. Adopting the SOP case,
the implementation then requires a 2-layer
NAND-only circuit like that in Figure 5.8(c).
Show that, even when such an approach is

--- Page 229 ---
adopted, the circuit eventually gets reduced to a
single 3-input AND gate.
SOLUTION
The solution is depicted in Figure 5.11. Being an
SOP, y = a · b · c can be written as y = a · b · c + 0
+ 0 + … Therefore, as shown in Figure 5.11(a),
the first NAND receives abc, whereas all the
others get “000” (only one additional gate is
depicted). The output of the all-zero NAND is ‘1’,
shown in Figure 5.11(b). A 2-input NAND gate
with a ‘1’ in one input is simply an inverter,
depicted in Figure 5.11(c), which annuls the
bubble at the NAND output, hence resulting in the
expected 3-input AND gate of Figure 5.11(d).
FIGURE 5.11  SOP-based
implementation of y = a · b · c, which,
as expected, gets reduced to a simple
AND gate.
EXAMPLE 5.13 STANDARD POS CIRCUIT
Suppose that we want to draw a circuit that
implements the same trivial function y = a · b · c
seen above, this time using the POS-based
approach, in which a 2-layer NOR-only circuit
like that in Figure 5.9(c) is required. Show that,
even when such an approach is adopted, the

--- Page 230 ---
circuit eventually gets reduced to a single 3-input
AND gate.
SOLUTION
The solution is depicted in Figure 5.12. Being a
POS, y = a · b · c can be written as y = (a + 0) · (b
+ 0) · (c + 0). Therefore, as shown in Figure
5.12(a), each NOR gate receives one variable and
one ‘0’. Recall that a 2-input NOR gate with a ‘0’
in one input is simply an inverter, as depicted in
Figure 5.12(b). The inverters were replaced with
bubbles in Figure 5.12(c), and then the duality
principle was applied, converting the NOR gate
with bubbles on both sides into the expected 3-
input AND gate shown in Figure 5.12(d).
FIGURE 5.12 POS-based
implementation of y=a · b · c, which,
as expected, gets again reduced to a
simple AND gate.
EXAMPLE 5.14 NAND-ONLY CIRCUIT #1
It is very common in actual designs to have gates
with a number of inputs (fan-in) that do not
directly match the design needs. This kind of
situation is examined in this and in the next
example. Draw a circuit that implements the

--- Page 231 ---
equation y = a · b · c using only NAND gates.
Show two solutions:
a. Using only 3-input gates.
b. Using only 2-input gates.
SOLUTION
Part (a):
The circuit is shown in Figure 5.13(a). In Figure
5.13(a1), the intended circuit is shown, which is a
3-input AND gate. However, because only NAND
gates are available, in Figure 5.13(a2) bubbles are
inserted at both ends of the output wire (one at the
AND output, which then becomes a NAND, and
the other before y), thus not affecting the result. In
Figure 5.13(a3), the output bubble is replaced
with an inverter, which can be constructed as
shown in Figure 5.13(d).
FIGURE 5.13 Implementation of y
= a · b · c using only (a) 3-input and
(b) 2-input NAND gates. Inverter
implementations are shown in (c) and
(d).

--- Page 232 ---
Part (b):
The circuit is shown in Figure 5.13(b). In Figure
5.13(b1), the intended circuit is shown, which
requires two 2-input AND gates. However,
because only NAND gates are available, in Figure
5.13(b2) bubbles are inserted at both ends of the
wires that depart from AND gates, thus converting
those gates into NAND gates without affecting the
result. In Figure 5.13(b3), the undesired (but
inevitable) bubbles are replaced with inverters,
constructed according with Figure 5.13(c).
EXAMPLE 5.15 NAND-ONLY CIRCUIT #2
Similarly to the example above, draw a circuit that
implements the equation y = a · b + c · d · e using
only NAND gates. Show two solutions:
a. Using only 3-input gates.
b. Using only 2-input gates.
SOLUTION
Part (a):
The circuit is shown in Figure 5.14(a). In Figure
5.14(a1), the conventional AND-OR circuit for
SOP implementations is shown (similar to Figure
5.8(a)). However, because only NAND gates are
available, in Figure 5.14(a2) bubbles are inserted
at both ends of all wires that depart from AND
gates, thus converting them into NANDs without
affecting the result. In Figure 5.14(a3), the duality
principle is applied to the OR gate, resulting the
NAND-only circuit shown in Figure 5.14(a3).
(This sequence had already been seen in Figure

--- Page 233 ---
5.8, so the standard NAND-only circuit could
have been drawn directly.)
FIGURE 5.14 Implementation of
y=a · b + c · d · e using only (a) 3-
input and (b) 2-input NAND gates.
The inverter is similar to that in Figure
5.13(c).
Part (b):
The circuit is shown in Figure 5.14(b). In Figure
5.14(b1), the traditional AND-OR circuit is
shown, which requires two 2-input AND gates to
implement the term c · d · e. However, because
only NAND gates are available, in Figure
5.14(b2) bubbles are inserted at both ends of the
wires that depart from AND gates, thus again
converting them into NAND gates. In Figure
5.14(b3), the duality principle is applied to the OR
gate, converting it into a NAND gate, while the
undesired (but inevitable) bubble is replaced with
an inverter, constructed according with Figure
5.13(c).

--- Page 234 ---
5.6 Karnaugh Maps
We saw in previous sections that many times a Boolean
function allows simplifications, which are desirable to save
hardware resources, often leading to faster circuits and lower
power consumption.
The simplification of a binary function can be done basically
in four main ways: (i) analytically, (ii) using Karnaugh maps,
(iii) using the Quine-McCluskey algorithm, or (iv) using
heuristic quasi-minimum methods. The first two are by-hand
procedures, while the others allow systematic, computer-
based implementations.
Simplification techniques are normally based on part (c) of
the absorption theorem, that is, a · b + a · b′ = a, which is
applied to the Boolean function expressed in SOP format.
The main problem in the analytical approach (besides not
being appropriate for computer-based simplification) is that
it is very difficult to know when an irreducible (minimum)
expression has been reached. For example, consider the
function y = f(a, b, c) below:
      (5.13a)
We can apply the absorption theorem to the pairs of terms 1–
2, 2–3, and 3–4, resulting in the following:
      (5.13b)

--- Page 235 ---
However, we could also have applied it only to the pairs 1–2
and 3–4, that is:
      (5.13c)
We know that the expressions above are equivalent, but
Equation 5.13(c) is simpler than Equation 5.13(b).
Moreover, it is not immediately obvious by looking at
Equation 5.13(b) that an extra step can be taken (the
absorption theorem can no longer be applied anyway; the
consensus theorem would now be needed). For that reason,
the Karnaugh approach is preferred when developing by-
hand optimization.
A Karnaugh map is another way of representing the truth
table of a Boolean function with the main purpose of easing
its simplification. Figure 5.15(a) shows the general form of a
Karnaugh map for a function f(a, b, c, d) of four variables.
Note that the values for the pairs ab (top row) and cd (left
column) are entered using Gray code (that is, two adjacent
pairs differ by only one bit). Each box receives the value of
one minterm, so 2N boxes are needed. The box marked with
“0000” (decimal 0) receives the value of minterm m0, the
box with “0100” (decimal 4) receives the value of m4, and so
on. The minterms are explicitly written inside the boxes in
Figure 5.15(b).

--- Page 236 ---
FIGURE 5.15  Construction of a four-variable Karnaugh
map.
Prime implicants
Figure 5.16 shows three actual Karnaugh maps for
functions of two (a, b), three (a, b, c), and four (a,
b, c, d) variables. To simplify a function, all ‘1’s
(or ‘0’s) must be grouped in sets as large as
possible, whose sizes are powers of two (that is, 1,
2, 4, 8,…). Regarding the Gray encoding of the
variables, note that the last row is adjacent to the
first row (they differ by just one bit) and that the
last column is adjacent to the first column, thus the
map can be interpreted as a horizontal or vertical
cylinder, as indicated by circular lines in Figure
5.15(b). If a group of ‘1’s cannot be made any
larger, then it is a prime implicant of that function.


--- Page 237 ---
FIGURE 5.16  Karnaugh maps for (a) two
variables, (b) three variables, and (c) four variables.
The map in Figure 5.16(a) has only one ‘1’, which
occurs when a = ‘1’ and b = ‘1’ (minterm m3).
Therefore, the corresponding equation is y = a · b.
The map in Figure 5.16(b) has three ‘1’s, which
can be collected in two groups, one with two ‘1’s
and the other with a single minterm. The group
with two ‘1’s occurs when a = ‘0’, b = ‘1’, and c =
‘0’ or ‘1’ (hence the value of c does not matter), so
the corresponding expression is a′ · b. The other
‘1’ occurs for a = ‘1’, b = ‘0’, and c = ‘0’, so its
expression is a · b′ · c′. Consequently, the complete
minimum (irreducible) SOP equation is y = a′ · b +
a · b′ · c′.
Finally, the map in Figure 5.16(c) has six ‘1’s,
which can be collected in two groups, one with
four ‘1’s and the other with two ‘1’s. The group
with four ‘1’s occurs when a = ‘0’ or ‘1’ (hence a
does not matter), b = ‘1’, c = ‘0’ or ‘1’ (hence c
does not matter either), and d = ‘1’, so its
expression is b · d. The group with two ‘1’s occurs
for a = ‘0’ or ‘1’ (hence a does not matter again)
and b = c = d = ‘0’, so the corresponding
expression is b′ · c′ · d′. Consequently, the
complete minimum (irreducible) SOP equation is y
= b · d + b′ · c′ · d′.
Essential implicants
As seen above, each maximized group of ‘1’s in a
Karnaugh map is a prime implicant, so the
minimum SOP contains only prime implicants.

--- Page 238 ---
However, not all prime implicants might be
needed. As an example, consider the map shown in
Figure 5.17, which contains four prime implicants
(a · c′ · d′, a · b · c′, b · c′ · d, and a′ · d). Note,
however, that only one of the two prime implicants
in the center is actually needed.
FIGURE 5.17  Function with four prime
implicants, of which only two are essential
implicants (a · c′ · d′ and a′ · d).
An essential implicant is a prime implicant that
contains at least one element (minterm) not
covered by any other prime implicant. Thus in the
case of Figure 5.17 only a · c′ · d′ and a′ · d are
essential implicants. If a function contains prime
implicants that are not essential implicants, then
the number of terms in the minimum (irreducible)
SOP equation contains less terms than the total
number of prime implicants. For example, the
function in Figure 5.17 can be written in two ways
(both with only three prime implicants, out of four
observed in the Karnaugh map):


--- Page 239 ---
EXAMPLE 5.16 MINIMUM SOP
Derive a minimum (irreducible) SOP equation for
the Boolean function depicted in the Karnaugh
map of Figure 5.18.
FIGURE 5.18 Karnaugh map of
Example 5.16, which contains “don’t
care” values.
SOLUTION
Besides ‘0’s and ‘1’s, the map of Figure 5.18
contains also “don’t care” minterms (represented
by ‘X’), which can be freely included or not in the
groups of ‘1’s. The decision is normally made in
the sense of maximizing the group (prime
implicant) sizes. Doing so, the following results:
EXAMPLE 5.17 PROOFS FOR THE
ABSORPTION THEOREM
Using Karnaugh maps, prove all three parts of the
absorption theorem (Equations 5.3(a)-(c)).
SOLUTION
The solution is depicted in Figure 5.19. For each
equation, a corresponding two-variable Karnaugh
map is drawn, showing all equation terms, from
which the conclusions are self explanatory.

--- Page 240 ---
FIGURE 5.19 Proofs for the
absorption theorem (Equations 5.1(a)-
(c)).
Karnaugh maps for zeros
In the examples above, the minterms for which a
‘1’ must be produced were grouped to obtain
optimal SOP expressions. The opposite can also be
done, that is, the minterms for which the output
must be ‘0’ can be collected with the only
restriction that the resulting expression must then
be inverted. An optimal POS representation then
results because the complement of an SOP is a
POS of the complemented literals (Section 5.4).
As an example, let us consider again the Karnaugh
map of Figure 5.16(b). Grouping the ‘0’s (and
inverting the result), the following is obtained:
Developing this equation, the following results:
Note that this equation indeed contains only the
coordinates for the zeros but in complemented
form and arranged in POS format. Just to verify
the correctness of this equation, it can be
expanded, resulting in y = a′ · b + a · b′ · c′, which
is the expression obtained earlier when grouping
the ‘1’s instead of the ‘0’s.

--- Page 241 ---
There is one exception, however, in which these
two results (from grouping the ones and from
grouping the zeros) are not necessarily equal. It
can occur when there are “don’t care” states in the
Karnaugh map because the grouping of such states
is not unique. The reader is invited to write the
POS equation for the zeros in the Karnaugh map of
Figure 5.18 to verify this fact.
5.7 Large Karnaugh Maps
Although the Karnaugh maps above operate with N ≤ 4
variables, the concept can be easily extended to larger
systems using Shannon’s theorem (Equation 5.5(a)), which
states the following:
For N = 5, two 4-variable maps are then needed, one for the
5th variable (say a) equal to ‘0’, the other for a = ‘1’.
Subsequently, the set of prime implicants obtained from the
first map must be ANDed with a′, while the second set must
be ANDed with a. This procedure is illustrated in the
following example.
EXAMPLE 5.18 KARNAUGH MAP FOR N
= 5
Derive an irreducible expression for the 5-variable function
depicted in the truth table of Figure 5.20(a).

--- Page 242 ---
FIGURE 5.20 (a) Truth table and (b)–(c)
Karnaugh maps for the 5-variable function of
Example 5.18.
SOLUTION
Two 4-variable Karnaugh maps are shown in Figures 5.20(b)–
(c) for a = ‘0’ and a = ‘1’, respectively. As can be seen, all
prime implicants are essential implicants because all contain at
least one element not covered by other prime implicants. The
corresponding equations are:
Using Shannon’s theorem, we obtain:
5.8 Other Function-Simplification Techniques
The simplification method described above (Karnaugh
maps) is a graphical tool that is only adequate for small
systems. Larger systems require a computer-based approach.
5.8.1 The Quine-McCluskey Algorithm
The first algorithm adequate for computer-based
simplifications was developed by Quine and

--- Page 243 ---
McCluskey [McCluskey 1965] in the 1960s. Like
analytical simplification, this algorithm too is based on
Equation 5.3(c) of the absorption theorem, which states
that a · b + a · b′ = a.
The algorithm starts with a minterm expansion (SOP
form), like the following example:
    (5.14)
This function is also shown in the Karnaugh map of
Figure 5.21(b), where the minterms of Equation 5.14
(see minterm positions in Figure 5.21(a)) were replaced
with ‘1’s, while all the others received ‘0’s. First, it is
observed that for a · b+a · b′ = a to apply, the
corresponding minterms or groups of minterms must be
adjacent (that is, must differ by only one bit). Therefore,
to save computation time, the minterms of Equation
5.14 are divided into groups according to the number of
‘1’s that they contain, as shown in the table of Figure
5.21(c), where group A contains the vector with zero
‘1’s, group B contains those with one ‘1’, and so on.
This is important because group A only needs to be
compared with group B, group B with group C, etc.

--- Page 244 ---
FIGURE 5.21  Function simplification using the
Quine-McCluskey algorithm.
When the minterms have been properly separated, the
first iteration occurs, which consists of comparing the
first vector in group A against all vectors in group B,
and so on. The results from this iteration can be seen in
Figure 5.21(d), where in the comparison of groups A–B
only one adjacent vector was found, that is, minterms 0
(“0000”) and 4 (“0100”), thus resulting from their union
“0X00,” where ‘X’ stands for “don’t care.” At the end
of the first iteration, all vectors in Figure 5.21(c) that
participated in at least one group are checked out (in
this example, all were eliminated—marked with a gray
shade).
In the next iteration, the table of Figure 5.21(d) is
employed, with the first group (AB) again compared
against the second (BC), the second (BC) against the
third (CD), and so on. The results are shown in the table
of Figure 5.21(e). Again, all terms from Figure 5.21(d)
that participated in at least one group are eliminated

--- Page 245 ---
(gray area), as well as any repetition in Figure 5.21(e).
Because no other grouping is possible after the second
iteration, the algorithm ends, and the leftover terms (not
shaded out) are the prime implicants of the function. In
other words,
Note that these prime implicants coincide with those
shown in Figure 5.21(b). However, one of these prime
implicants (b · c · d′) is redundant, so it could have been
left out (at the expense of additional computation
effort).
5.8.2 Other Simplification Algorithms
A major limitation of the Quine-McCluskey algorithm
is that its time complexity grows exponentially with the
number of variables. Moreover, it is not desirable to
have gates with too many inputs because a gate’s speed
decreases as the fan-in (number of inputs) increases.
Consequently, most practical circuits limit the fan-in to
a relatively low value. For example, when using CMOS
gates, this limit is normally between 4 and 8.
Because of the fan-in constraint, minimum SOP
equations, which might involve very large product
terms as well as a large number of such terms, are not
necessarily the best implementation equations for a
given technology. A typical example is the use of
CPLD/FPGA devices (Chapter 18), in which large
equations must be broken down into smaller equations
to fit internal construction constraints.
Consequently, modern automated design tools employ
heuristic algorithms instead, which lead to quasi-
minimal solutions tailored for specific technologies.

--- Page 246 ---
Therefore, the Quine-McCluskey algorithm is now
basically only of historical interest.
5.9 Propagation Delay and Glitches
We conclude this chapter with a brief discussion of
propagation delay and glitches in which Karnaugh maps can
again be employed.
As already mentioned in Chapter 4 (Section 4.10), digital
circuits can be divided into two large groups, called
combinational circuits and sequential circuits. A circuit is
combinational when its output depends solely on its current
inputs. For example, all gates employed in this chapter
(AND, NAND, OR, etc.) are combinational. In contrast, a
circuit is sequential if its output is affected by previous
system states, in which case storage elements (flip-flops) are
necessary, as well as a clock signal to control the system
evolution (to set the timing). It was also mentioned that
counters are good examples of circuits in this category
because the next output value depends on the present output
value.
As will be seen in later chapters, sequential circuits can
easily generate glitches (undesired voltage/current spikes at
the output), so special care must be taken in the designs.
However, what we want to point out here is that
combinational circuits are also subject to glitch generation.
First, we recall from Chapter 4 (Figure 4.8) that any circuit
response to a stimulus takes a certain amount of time to
propagate through the circuit. Such a delay is called
propagation delay and is measured under two distinct
circumstances, which are depicted in Figure 5.22. One
represents the propagation delay high-to-low (tpHL), which is

--- Page 247 ---
the time interval between the occurrence of a stimulus and
the corresponding high-to-low transition at the circuit output,
measured at the midpoint between the logic voltages (for
example, at 1.65 V if the logic voltages are 0 V and 3.3 V).
The other represents the propagation delay low-to-high
(tpLH) with a similar definition. These time intervals are
illustrated in Figure 5.22 where y is an inverted version of x,
which can then be produced, for example, by one of the
gates shown on the left of the figure.
FIGURE 5.22  Propagation delay in a combinational
circuit.
The aspect that we want to examine in this section is why
glitches can occur in combinational circuits, as well as how
Karnaugh maps can be used to prevent them (so they are not
only for function simplifkation).
Consider the Boolean function depicted in the truth table of
Figure 5.23(a) whose corresponding Karnaugh map is shown
in Figure 5.23(b), from which the irreducible SOP equation y
= b · c′ + a · c results.

--- Page 248 ---
FIGURE 5.23  Glitch generation in a combinational circuit.
This equation can be implemented in several ways, with one
alternative depicted in Figure 5.23(c). A corresponding
timing diagram is presented in Figure 5.23(d), with a and b
fixed at ‘1’ and c transitioning from ‘1’ to ‘0’. While c = ‘1’,
the input is abc = “111” (minterm m7), so the circuit is in the
box “111” of the Karnaugh map. When c changes to ‘0’, the
new input is abc = “110” (minterm m6), so the circuit moves
to a new box, “110,” of the Karnaugh map. This transition is
indicated by an arrow in Figure 5.23(b). Even though y = ‘1’
in both boxes, it will be shown that, during the transition
from one box to the other, a momentary glitch (toward zero)
can occur in y.
For simplicity, the propagation delay of all gates (inverter
and NANDs) was considered to be the same (= T). Note that,
when c changes to ‘0’, x2 changes to ‘1’ before x3 has had
time to change to ‘0’, so a momentary pulse toward zero (a
glitch, shown in Figure 5.23(d)) is inevitable at the output.
The glitch described above can be avoided with the help of a
Karnaugh map. Note that there are two neighboring essential
implicants with a glitch occurring when the system
transitions from one to the other in the direction indicated by
the arrow. There also is, however, another prime implicant (a

--- Page 249 ---
· b, not shown in the figure), which is not an essential
implicant because it is completely covered by the other two.
However, this redundant implicant covers precisely the
transition where the glitch occurs, so its inclusion would
prevent it. The glitch-free function would then be y = b · c′ +
a · c + a · b.
A final note regards the applicability of such a procedure to
prevent glitches in combinational circuits, which is clearly
only feasible in very small designs. A more common
approach in actual designs is to simply sample the results
after a large enough time delay that ensures that all signals
have had time to settle.
5.10 Exercises
1. Consensus theorem
Prove both parts of the consensus theorem (Equations
5.4(a)–(b)).
2. Shannon’s theorem
Apply both parts of Shannon’s theorem (Equations
5.5(a)–(b)) to the function y = a′ · b + b · c + a · b′ · c′
and check their validity.
3. Common-term theorem
Prove Equation 5.8(b) of the common-term theorem.
4. Common-term extension
If y = (a + c1) · (a + c2) … (a + cM) · (b + c1) · (b +
c2) … (b + cN), where N ≥ M, then prove that y = a ·
b + b · c1 · c2 … cM + c1 · c2 … cN.
5. Absorption and consensus theorems
Check the equalities below using the absorption or
consensus theorems.
a. a · b′ + a · b · c = a · b′ + a · c

--- Page 250 ---
b. a · b′ + b · c + a · c = a · b′ + b · c
6. Binary identities
Suppose that a, b, and c are three binary variables.
Show the following:
a. (a + b) = (a + c) does not imply
necessarily that b = c.
b. a · b = a · c does not imply necessarily
that b = c.
7. XOR properties
Prove the XOR properties below.
a. Associative: a + (b ⊕  c) = (a ⊕  b) ⊕  c
b. Distributive: a · (b ⊕  c) = a · b ⊕  a · c
8. XOR functions
Convert the XOR functions below in SOP equations.
a. a · b · c ⊕  a · b · c
b. a · b · c ⊕  (a · b · c)′
c. a ⊕  a · b ⊕  a · b · c
9. DeMorgan’s law #1
Using DeMorgan’s law, simplify the Boolean
functions below.
a. y = [a · (b · c)′ · (d + (a′ · d′)′)]′
b. y = a + b′ · [c + d′ · (a + b)′]′
c. y = [((a + b)′ + c) · (a + (b + c)′) · (a + b +
c)′]′
10. DeMorgan’s law #2
Using DeMorgan’s law, simplify the Boolean
functions below.
a. [a′ · (b′ + c′)]′
b. [a + (a + b)′ · (a′ ⊕  b)′ + c′]′
c. [a ⊕  b · (a + (b ⊕  c)′)]′
11. Circuit simplification #1

--- Page 251 ---
Simplify the circuits shown in Figure E5.11.
12. Circuit simplification #2
FIGURE E5.11
Simplify the circuits shown in Figure E5.12.
13. Principle of duality for AND gates
a. Apply the principle of duality to each gate
of Figure E5.13 and draw the resulting
circuit (usebubbles instead of ticks).
b. Write the equation for the original and for
the dual circuit and check whether they are
alike.
14. Principle of duality for OR gates
a. Apply the principle of duality to each gate
of Figure E5.14 and draw the resulting
circuit (usebubbles instead of ticks).
b. Write the equation for the original and for
the dual circuit and check whether they are
alike.
15. Principle of duality for XOR gates
a. Apply the principle of duality to each gate
of Figure E5.15 and draw the resulting
circuit (usebubbles instead of ticks).

--- Page 252 ---
b. Write the equation for the original and for
the dual circuit and check whether they are
alike.
16. Minterm/Maxterm expansion #1
FIGURE E5.12
FIGURE E5.13
FIGURE E5.14
FIGURE E5.15
Consider the function expressed in the truth table of
Figure E5.16.
a. Complete the minterm and maxterm
expressions in the truth table.
b. Write the corresponding minterm
expansion in all three forms shown in
Equations 5.8(a)–(b).

--- Page 253 ---
c. Write the corresponding maxterm
expansion in all three forms shown in
Equations 5.10(a)-(c).
17. Minterm/Maxterm expansion #2
FIGURE E5.16
Suppose that the minterm expansion of a certain 3-
variable Boolean function is y = m2 + m3 + m4 + m5 +
m6. Write its corresponding maxterm expansion.
18. Minterm/Maxterm expansion #3
Suppose that the minterm expansion of a certain 4-
variable Boolean function is y = m2 + m3 + m4 + m5 +
m6. Write its corresponding maxterm expansion.
19. Prime and essential implicants
a. Define prime implicant.
b. Define essential implicant.
c. Suppose that the irreducible (minimum)
SOP equation of a given Boolean function
has 5 terms. How many prime implicants
and how many essential implicants does this
function have?
20. Standard POS circuit
Suppose that we want to draw a circuit that
implements the trivial function y = a + b + c using
the POS-based approach, in which a 2-layer NOR-

--- Page 254 ---
only circuit like that in Figure 5.9(c) is required.
Show that, even when such an approach is adopted,
the circuit eventually gets reduced to a single 3-input
OR gate.
21. Standard SOP circuit
Suppose that we want to draw a circuit that
implements the same trivial function y = a + b + c
seen above, this time using the SOP-based approach
in which a 2-layer NAND-only circuit like that in
Figure 5.8(c) is required. Show that, even when such
an approach is adopted, the circuit eventually gets
reduced to a single 3-input OR gate.
22. Function implementation #1
Draw a circuit capable of implementing the function
y = a + b + c using:
a. Only OR gates.
b. Only 3-input NOR gates.
c. Only 2-input NOR gates.
d. Only NAND gates.
23. Function implementation #2
Draw a circuit capable of implementing the function
y = a + b + c + d using:
a. Only OR gates.
b. Only NOR gates.
c. Only 2-input NOR gates.
d. Only NAND gates.
24. Function implementation #3
Draw a circuit capable of implementing the function
y = a · b · c · d using:
a. Only AND gates.
b. Only NAND gates.
c. Only 2-input NAND gates.

--- Page 255 ---
d. Only NOR gates.
25. Function implementation #4
Draw a circuit capable of implementing the function
y = a + b · c + d · e · f + g · h · i · j using:
a. AND gates in the first layer and an OR
gate in the second layer.
b. Only NAND gates in both layers.
26. Function implementation #5
Draw a circuit capable of implementing the function
y = a · (b + c) · (d + e + f) · (g + h + i + j) using:
a. OR gates in the first layer and an AND
gate in the second layer.
b. Only NOR gates in both layers.
27. Function implementation #6
Draw a circuit capable of implementing the function
y = a · (b + c) · (d + e + f) using:
a. Only NAND gates.
b. Only 2-input NAND gates.
28. Function implementation #7
Draw a circuit capable of implementing the function
y = a · (b + c) · (d + e + f) using:
a. Only NOR gates.
b. Only 2-input NOR gates.
29. Consensus theorem
Using a 3-variable Karnaugh map, check the
consensus theorem.
30. Analytical function simplification
Using the analytical function simplification
technique, simplify the Boolean functions below.
a. y = a · b + a′ · b · c′ + a · b′ · c
b. y = a′ · b + a · b · c′ + a′ · b′ · c

--- Page 256 ---
c. y = a · b′ · c′ + a · b′ · c · d + b′ · c · d′ + b′
· c′ · d′
31. Function simplification with Karnaugh
maps #1
Using Karnaugh maps, simplify the functions in the
exercise above and then compare the results.
32. Function simplification with Karnaugh
maps #2
For the function y = f(a, b, c) depicted in the
Karnaugh map of Figure E5.32, complete the
following:
a. What are the prime implicants? Which of
them are also essential implicants?
b. Obtain an irreducible (minimum) SOP
equation for y.
c. Draw a circuit that implements y using
AND gates in the first layer and an OR gate
in the secondlayer. Assume that the
complemented versions of a, b, and c are
also available.
d. Repeat part (c) above using only NAND
gates.
33. Function simplification with Karnaugh
maps #3
FIGURE E5.32

--- Page 257 ---
For the function y = f(a, b, c, d) depicted in the
Karnaugh map of Figure E5.33, complete the
following:
a. What are the prime implicants? Which of
them are also essential implicants?
b. Obtain an irreducible (minimum) SOP
equation for y.
c. Draw a circuit that implements y using
AND gates in the first layer and an OR gate
in the second layer. Assume that the
complemented versions of a, b, c, and d are
also available.
d. Repeat part (c) above using only NAND
gates.
34. Function simplification with Karnaugh
maps #4
FIGURE E5.33
For the function y = f(a, b, c, d) depicted in the
Karnaugh map of Figure E5.34, complete the
following:
a. What are the prime implicants? Which of
them are also essential implicants?
b. Obtain an irreducible (minimum) SOP
equation for y.

--- Page 258 ---
c. Draw a circuit that implements y using
AND gates in the first layer and an OR gate
in the second layer. Assume that the
complemented versions of a, b, c, and d are
also available.
d. Repeat part (c) above using only NAND
gates.
35. Function simplification with Karnaugh
maps #5
FIGURE E5.34
For the function y = f(a, b, c, d) depicted in the
Karnaugh map of Figure E5.35, complete the
following:
a. What are the prime implicants? Which of
them are also essential implicants?
b. Obtain an irreducible (minimum) SOP
equation for y.
c. Draw a circuit that implements y using
AND gates in the first layer and an OR gate
in the second layer. Assume that the
complemented versions of a, b, c, and d are
also available.
d. Repeat part (c) above using only NAND
gates.

--- Page 259 ---
36. Function simplification with Karnaugh
maps #6
FIGURE E5.35
Using a Karnaugh map, derive a minimum
(irreducible) SOP expression for each function y
described in the truth tables of Figure E5.36.
37. Large Karnaugh map #1
FIGURE E5.36
Assume that y = f(a, b, c, d, e) is a 5-variables
Boolean function given by y = m1 + m5 + m9 + m11 +
m13 + m15 + m18 + m19.
a. Draw the corresponding truth table (it can
be in degenerate form as in Figure 5.20(a)).
b. Draw two Karnaugh maps, one for a = ‘0’
and the other for a = ‘1’ (as in Figures
5.20(b)–(c)).
c. Find an irreducible SOP equation for y.

--- Page 260 ---
38. Large Karnaugh map #2
Assume that y = f(a, b, c, d, e) is a 5-variables
Boolean function given by y = m0 + m4 + m8 + m12 +
m17 + m18 + m19 + m21 + m25 + m29.
a. Draw the corresponding truth table (it can
be in degenerate form as in Figure 5.20(a)).
b. Draw two Karnaugh maps, one for a = ‘0’
and the other for a = ‘1’ (as in Figures
5.20(b)–(c)).
c. Find an irreducible SOP equation for y.
39. Combinational circuit with glitches #1
The circuit in Figure E5.39 exhibits a glitch at the
output during one of the input signal transitions
(similar to what happens with the circuit in Figure
5.23).
a. Draw its Karnaugh map and determine the
essential implicants.
b. When the circuit jumps from one of the
essential implicants to the other in a certain
direction, a glitch occurs in y. Which is this
transition? In other words, which one of the
three input signals must change and in which
direction (‘0’ to ‘1’ or ‘1’ to ‘0’)?
c. Draw the corresponding timing diagram
and show the glitch.
d. How can this glitch be prevented?
40. Combinational circuit with glitches #2


--- Page 261 ---
FIGURE E5.39
Devise another combinational circuit (like that
above) that is also subject to glitches at the output
during certain input transitions.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 262 ---
6
Line Codes
Chapter Contents
6.1 The Use of Line Codes
6.2 Parameters and Types of Line Codes
6.3 Unipolar Codes
6.4 Polar Codes
6.5 Bipolar Codes
6.6 Biphase/Manchester Codes
6.7 MLT Codes
6.8 mB/nB Codes
6.9 PAM Codes
6.10 Exercises
Objective:
The need for communication between system units, forming larger, integrated
networks, and the need for large data-storage spaces are two fundamental
components of modern digital designs. The digital codes employed in such
cases are collectively known as line codes, while the corresponding data-
protection codes are collectively known as error-detecting/correcting codes.
With the integration of subsystems to perform these tasks onto the same chip
(or circuit) that perform other, more conventional digital tasks, a basic

--- Page 263 ---
knowledge of these techniques becomes indispensable to the digital designer.
For that reason, an introduction to each one of these topics is included in this
text with the former presented in this chapter and the latter in the next.
To a certain extent, line codes can be viewed as a continuation of Chapter 2,
in which several binary codes were already described (for representing
numbers and characters). Line codes are indispensable in data transmission
and data storage applications because they modify the data stream, making it
more appropriate for the given communication channel (like Ethernet cables)
or storage media (like magnetic or optical memory). The following families of
line codes are described in this chapter: Unipolar, Polar, Bipolar,
Biphase/Manchester, MLT, mB/nB, and PAM. In the examples, emphasis is
given to Internet-based applications.
6.1 The Use of Line Codes
In Chapter 2 we described several codes for representing
decimal numbers (sequential binary, Gray, BCD, floating-
point, etc.) and also codes for representing characters (ASCII
and Unicode). In this chapter and in the next we introduce
two other groups of binary codes, collectively called line
codes (Chapter 6) and error-detecting/correcting codes
(Chapter 7). Such codes are often used together, mainly in
data transmission and data storage applications. However,
while the former makes the data more appropriate for a
given communications/storage media, the latter adds
protection against errors to it.
Concept
The basic usage of line codes is illustrated in
Figure 6.1, which shows a serial data stream x
being transmitted from location A to location B
through a communications channel. To make the

--- Page 264 ---
data sequence more “appropriate” for the given
channel, x is modified by a line encoder,
producing y, which is the data stream actually sent
to B. At the receiving end, a line decoder returns y
to its original form, x.
FIGURE 6.1  Line encoder-decoder pair.
Note in Figure 6.1 that a line encoder modifies the
data sequence, thus the word “code” has a more
strict meaning than in Chapter 2 (in Chapter 2, it
was used sometimes to actually indicate a different
data structure, like Gray or BCD codes, while in
other occasions it simply meant a different
representation for the same data structure, like
octal and hexadecimal codes).
Even though illustrated above for data
transmission, line codes are also employed in other
applications. An important example is in data
storage, particularly in magnetic and optical (CDs,
DVDs) media, where specific encoding schemes
are necessary. The particular case of audio CDs,
which combine line codes with error-correcting
codes, will be described in detail in Section 7.5.
Ethernet applications
An actual application for line codes is shown in
Figure 6.2, where Ethernet interfaces (which
include the encoder-decoder pairs) can be seen.

--- Page 265 ---
The channel in this case is the well-known blue
cable used for Internet access, which contains four
pairs of twisted copper wires (known as unshielded
twisted pair, or UTP) that are proper for short
distance communication (typically up to 100 m).
Three of the four Ethernet interfaces that operate
with UTPs are included in Figure 6.2.
FIGURE 6.2  Ethernet interfaces based on
twisted pairs: (a) 10Base-T, (b) 100Base-TX, and (c)
1000Base-T. The respective transmission modes and
line codes are indicated in the figures.
In Figure 6.2(a), the first Ethernet interface for
UTPs, called 10Base-T, is shown. It uses only two
of the four twisted pairs, normally operating in
simplex (unidirectional) mode, with a data rate of

--- Page 266 ---
10 Mbps in each pair. Manchester is the line code
employed in this case (described ahead). The UTP
is category 3, which is recommended for signals
up to 16 MHz.
In Figure 6.2(b), the very popular 100Base-TX
Ethernet interface is depicted (which is probably
what is connected to your computer right now).
Again, only two of the four twisted pairs are used,
usually also operating in simplex mode. However,
even though the (blue) cable has the same
appearance, its category is now 5, which allows
signals of up to 100 MHz. A different type of line
code is employed in this case; it is a combination
of two line codes called 4B/5B and MLT-3 (both
described ahead). The symbol rate in each UTP is
125 MBaud (where 1Baud = 1symbol/second),
which in this case gives an actual information rate
of 100 Mbps in each direction. It will be shown in
the description of the MLT-3 code that a 125 Mbps
signal can be transmitted with a spectrum under 40
MHz, thus well under the cable limit of 100 MHz.
Finally, Figure 6.2(c) shows the 1000Base-T
Ethernet interface. In it, all four pairs are used and
operate in full-duplex (simultaneous bidirectional)
mode with a symbol rate of 125 MBaud per pair,
totaling 500 MBaud in each direction. Because in
this encoding each symbol contains two bits, the
actual information rate is 1 Gbps in each direction.
The line code employed in this case is called 4D-
PAM5, combined with trellis encoding for FEC
(forward error correction) and data scrambling to
whiten the spectrum and reduce the average DC
voltage (scramblers are studied in Section 14.8).

--- Page 267 ---
The UTP is still the 4-pair (blue) cable, now of
category 5e, which still limits the spectrum to 100
MHz. It will be shown in the description of the
corresponding line codes how such a high
information rate can be fit into this cable.
6.2 Parameters and Types of Line Codes
Several parameters are taken into consideration when
evaluating a line code. A brief description of the main ones
follows. A list with the main line codes is provided
subsequently.
Line code parameters
DC component: A DC component corresponds to
the waveform’s average voltage. For example, if
the bits are represented by ‘0’ = 0 V and ‘1’ = + V,
and they are equally likely, then the average DC
voltage is V/2 (see Figure 6.3). This is undesirable
because it is a large energy that is transmitted
without conveying any information. Moreover, DC
signals cannot propagate in certain types of lines,
like transformer-coupled telephone lines.
FIGURE 6.3  Data transmission illustrating the
signal’s DC component and the channel’s limited
spectrum.
Code spectrum: Given that any communications
channel has a finite frequency response (that is, it

--- Page 268 ---
limits high-frequency propagation), it is important
that the spectrum of the signal to be transmitted be
as confined to the allowed frequency range as
possible to prevent distortion. This is illustrated in
Figure 6.3 where the transmitted signal is a square
wave but the received one looks more like a
sinusoid because the high-frequency components
are more attenuated than the low-frequency ones.
For example, as mentioned earlier, the maximum
frequency in categories 5 and 5e UTPs is around
100 MHz.
Additionally, for a given total power, the spreader
the spectrum is the less it irradiates because
spreading avoids high-energy harmonics. Indeed,
because serious irradiation constraints are imposed
for frequencies above 30 MHz, only spread
spectrums are allowed in UTPs above this value
(achieved, for example, with data scrambling).
Transition density: If the data transmission is
synchronous, the decoder must have information
about the clock used in the encoder to correctly
recover the bit stream. This information can be
passed in a separate channel (a wire, for example)
containing the clock, or it can be recovered from
the bit stream itself. The first option is obviously
too costly, so the second is employed. The
recovery (with a PLL (phase locked loop) circuit,
Section 14.6) is possible if the received signal
contains a substantial number of transitions (‘0’ →
‘1’, → ‘0’).
As will be shown, some codes provide a transition
density of 100%, meaning that for every bit there
is a transition. Others, on the other hand, can

--- Page 269 ---
remain a long time without any activity, making
clock recovery (synchronism) very difficult. Codes
that do not provide transitions in all time slots are
often measured in terms of maximum run length,
which is the longest run of consecutive ‘0’s or ‘1’s
that it can produce (of course, the smaller this
number, the better from the synchronization point
of view).
Implementation complexity: This is another
crucial aspect, which includes the hardware
complexity as well as the time complexity. From
the hardware perspective, the encoder/decoder pair
should be simple, compact, and low power to be
easily incorporated into fully integrated systems.
From the time perspective, the encoding/decoding
procedures should be simple (fast) enough to allow
communication (encoding-decoding) at the desired
speed.
Types of line codes
There are a large variety of line codes, each with
its own advantages and disadvantages and
intended applications. Fourteen types (listed in
Figure 6.4) are selected for presentation in the
sections that follow.

--- Page 270 ---
FIGURE 6.4  Line codes described in this
chapter.
The first 11 codes of Figure 6.4 are illustrated in
Figure 6.5, while the other three are illustrated
separately. The column on the right of Figure 6.5
summarizes the average ( ∼ ) or exact (=) DC
voltage of each code, as well as its main (1st
harmonic) spectral frequency, accompanied by the
bit sequence that causes the latter to peak.

--- Page 271 ---
FIGURE 6.5  Illustration including 11 of the
14 line codes listed in Figure 6.4. The encoded
sequence is “01001101”. The average ( ∼ ) or exact
(=) voltage of the DC component and the frequency
of the main AC component (1st harmonic) for each
code are listed on the right along with the bit
sequence that causes the latter to peak.
6.3 Unipolar Codes
The first three groups in Figure 6.5, called unipolar, polar,
and bipolar, have the following meaning: unipolar employs
only the voltages 0 V and +V; polar employs −V and +V (0 V
is used only for RZ); and bipolar uses −V, 0 V, and +V.

--- Page 272 ---
Figure 6.5 also shows that these three groups contain options
called NRZ (nonreturn to zero), RZ (return to zero), and
NRZ-I (NRZ invert). Such names are misleading because
NRZ means that the voltage does not return to zero while
data = ‘1’ (it does return to zero when ‘0’ occurs), and RZ
means that the voltage does return to zero while data=‘1’.
NRZ-I means that the voltage does not return to 0 V while
data=‘1’, but it alternates between +V and −V. Particular
details are described below.
Unipolar NRZ
As shown in Figure 6.5, unipolar NRZ is a regular
binary code, so it employs ‘0’ = 0 V and ‘1’ = +V.
If the bits are equally likely, then the average DC
voltage is V/2 (“ ∼ ” in Figure 6.5 indicates
average). Note that the main AC component is
fck/2 (where fck is the clock frequency), and peaks
when the sequence “0101…” occurs (one period of
the sinusoid corresponds to two data bits, that is,
two clock periods). Besides the high DC
component, a long series of ‘0’s or of ‘1’s makes
synchronization very difficult, so this code is not
practical for regular data transmission applications.
Unipolar RZ
Here ‘0’ = 0 V, as before, but ‘1’ = + V/0 V, that is,
the voltage returns to 0 V while the bit is ‘1’. This
decreases the average DC level to V/4, but it
increases the spectrum (see the column on the right
of Figure 6.5). Consequently, this code too is
limited to very simple applications.
Unipolar NRZ-I

--- Page 273 ---
The NRZ invert code consists of alternating the
output voltage between 0 V and + V when a ‘1’ is
found. It prevents long periods without signal
transitions when “1111…” occurs, though it cannot
prevent it when “000…” happens. Its main
attribute is that it is a differential code, so decoding
is more reliable because detecting a voltage
transition is easier than detecting a voltage level.
Its DC component and AC spectrum are similar to
unipolar NRZ, but the largest first harmonic
voltage occurs when the sequence of bits is
“1111…” rather then “0101…” This is illustrated
in Figure 6.6 where a sinusoid (first harmonic)
with frequency fck/2 can be seen for data = “111”
FIGURE 6.6  Illustration showing that in an
NRZ-I code the fundamental harmonic is fck/2,
which peaks (highest energy) when the data
sequence “111….” occurs.
This type of encoding is employed in commercial
music CDs where the transition from land to pit or
from pit to land is a ‘1’, while no transition is a ‘0’
(in this type of CD, data are recorded by very
small indentations, called pits, disposed in a spiral
track; the flat region between two pits is called
land).
6.4 Polar Codes

--- Page 274 ---
Polar codes are similar to unipolar codes except for the fact
that they employ −V and +V (plus 0 V for RZ) instead of 0
V and −V.
Polar NRZ
As shown in Figure 6.5, polar NRZ is similar to
unipolar NRZ, but now with ‘0’ = −V and ‘1’ = +
V, so the DC component oscillates about 0 V
instead of V/2. The main spectral component is
still the same.
Polar RZ
Compared to the unipolar RZ, polar RZ code uses
‘0’ = −V and ‘1’ = +V, so the bits return to zero (in
the middle of the clock period) while data = ‘0’
and while data = ‘1’. Like unipolar RZ, this
doubles the main spectral AC component, and its
peak occurs in two cases rather than one (for
“0000…” and “1111…”). On the other hand, the
average DC voltage is now zero.
Polar NRZ-I
Like unipolar NRZ invert, the encoder switches its
output when a ‘1’ occurs in the bit stream. This is
another differential code, so decoding is more
reliable (detecting a voltage transition is easier
than detecting a voltage level), and it is used in
some transition-based storage media, like magnetic
memories. Its main AC component is similar to
unipolar NRZ-I, but the DC component is better
( ∼ 0).

--- Page 275 ---
6.5 Bipolar Codes
As shown in Figure 6.5, bipolar codes employ ‘0’ = 0 V and
‘1’ = ±V.
Bipolar NRZ
In bipolar NRZ, ‘0’ = 0 V, while ‘1’ alternates
between =V and −V. It achieves true-zero DC
voltage (assuming that the number of ones is even)
without enlarging the spectrum (peak still at fck/2,
which occurs for “1111…”).
Bipolar RZ
Bipolar RZ, also called AMI (alternate mark
inversion), is similar to bipolar NRZ except for the
fact that the ‘1’s return to 0 V in the middle of the
clock period. The DC components and peak
frequencies are similar (though their overall
harmonic contents are not), again occurring when
data = “1111….”
6.6 Biphase/Manchester Codes
Biphase codes, also called Manchester codes, are also
depicted in Figure 6.5. At the middle of the clock period, a
transition always occurs, which is either from −V to + V or
from + V to −V. By providing a 100% transition density,
clock recovery (for synchronism) is easier and guaranteed (at
the expense of spectrum).
Regular Manchester code

--- Page 276 ---
In this biphase code, ‘0’ is represented by a +V to
−V transition, while a ‘1’ is represented by a
transition from −V to +V. The transition density is
therefore 100%, so clock recovery is simpler and
guaranteed, but the spectrum is enlarged; note that
the frequency of its main component is twice the
regular value (that is,fck instead of fck/2), and peaks
for two data patterns (“0000…” and “1111…”). As
shown in Figure 6.2, this code is employed in the
10Base-T Ethernet interface.
Differential Manchester code
In this differential biphase code, the direction of
the transitions changes when a ‘1’ occurs in the
bitstream. Therefore, if the received signal is
sampled at 3T/4 of one time slot and at T/4 of the
next, equal voltages indicate a ‘1’, while different
voltages signify a ‘0’ (differential decoding is
more reliable). Againthe DC voltage is truly zero,
but the first harmonic is again high (fck), occurring
when data = “1111”
6.7 MLT Codes
MLT (multilevel transition) codes operate with more than
two voltage levels, which are accessed sequentially when ‘1’
occurs in the data sequence. Its purpose is to reduce the
signal’s spectrum.
MLT-3 code
The most common MLT code is MLT-3, depicted
in the last plot of Figure 6.5. It is simply a 3-level
sequence of the type…, −1, 0, +1, 0, −1,…,

--- Page 277 ---
controlled by the ‘1’s, which causes the first
harmonic to be reduced to fck/4. This fact is
illustrated in Figure 6.7, which shows MLT-3
encoding for the data sequence “111….” Note that
one sinusoid period corresponds to four clock
periods with the additional property of providing
zero DC voltage. As shown in Figure 6.2, this
code, combined with the 4B/5B code described
below, is used in the 100Base-TX Ethernet
interface.
FIGURE 6.7  MLT-3 encoding for the data
sequence “111….”
6.8 mB/nB Codes
In all codes described above, the correspondence between
the number of bits at the input of the encoder and at its
output is 1:1 (so the data rate equals the information rate). In
mB/nB codes the relationship is m:n, that is, m information
bits enter the encoder, which produces n (>m) data bits
(hence a higher data rate is needed to attain the desired
information rate). This is done to improve some of the code
parameters described earlier, notably transition density and
DC component. This effect can be observed in the 4B/5B
and 8B/10B codes described below, which are the main
members of the mB/nB code family.
4B/5B code

--- Page 278 ---
Because with 4 bits there are 16 codewords, while
with 5 bits there are 32, codewords with at least
two ‘1’s and one ‘0’ can be chosen, thus
guaranteeing enough transitions for clock recovery
(synchronization) and a reasonable DC balance.
The corresponding translation table is presented in
Figure 6.8.
FIGURE 6.8  Encoding-decoding table for the
4B/5B code.
As mentioned in Section 6.1, this code is used in
100Base-TX Ethernet, which then requires the
transmission of 125 Mbps (also called 125 MBaud,
where 1Baud = 1symbol/second) to achieve an
actual information rate of 100 Mbps. Because this
frequency is too high for the category 5 UTP cable
and much above the 30 MHz irradiation constraint,
the output bit stream is passed through an MLT-3
encoder (Section 6.7). Because the frequency of
the main AC component in the latter is fck/4, the
fundamental harmonic in the cable gets reduced to
125/4 = 31.25 MHz, thus complying with the cable
frequency range and also maintaining the only
high-energy harmonic close to the recommended
limit of 30 MHz.

--- Page 279 ---
8B/10B code
Introduced by IBM in 1983 [Widner83], this is the
most popular member of the mB/nB code family.
Each 8-bit block (one byte) is encoded with 10
bits. The choice of 8-bit blocks is a natural one
because bits are generally handled in multiples of
bytes.
The general encoder architecture is depicted in
Figure 6.9. The incoming bit stream, which is
serial, is stored in the deserializer (clock not
shown) to form the 8-bit block called
“HGFEDCBA” (the same notation used in the
original paper is employed here, where A and a
represent the LSBs of the input and output vectors,
respectively). This block is broken into two
subblocks, one with the 3 MSBs, the other with the
5LSBs, which are passed through two specially
designed encoders of sizes 3B/4B and 5B/6B,
respectively. The resulting 10-bit output (denoted
by “jhgfiedcba”) is then reserialized by the last
circuit block. Note in the architecture the presence
of a control unit that is responsible for handling
special characters (called K) and for calculating
RD (running disparity).

--- Page 280 ---
FIGURE 6.9  Simplified 8B/10B encoder
architecture.
In simple terms, this code operates as follows.
Because there are only 28 = 256 input patterns,
while the output allows 210 = 1024 patterns, the
codewords can be chosen in a way to improve
some of the code parameters, notably transition
density and DC balance. Moreover, additional
(special purpose) codewords can also be created
for data transmission control (like package
delimiters). A total of 268 codewords were picked
for this code (plus their complements), of which
256 are for the 8-bit inputs and 12 are for the
special characters (K codewords). Such codewords
are listed in Figure 6.10 (for the regular codewords
only the initial eight and final eight are shown)
where the internal vector separation only
highlights the results from the 3B/4B and 5B/6B
encoders of Figure 6.9.

--- Page 281 ---
FIGURE 6.10  Partial encoding-decoding
table for the 8B/10B code.
As can be seen in Figure 6.10, the chosen
codewords have four ‘0’s and six ‘1’s (disparity =
+2), or five ‘0’s and five ‘1’s (disparity = 0), or six
‘0’s and four ‘1’s (disparity = −2). This guarantees
a large number of transitions, hence easy
synchronization. Each codeword is available in
two forms, one with disparity = 0 or +2 and its
bitwise reverse, therefore with disparity = 0 or −2.
The encoder keeps track of the accumulated
disparity (called running disparity—see RD in
Figure 6.9); if RD = +2, for example, then the next
time a codeword with disparity ≠ 0 must be
transmitted the encoder picks that with disparity =
−2. This guarantees a DC voltage of practically 0
V.
The 12 special characters, denoted by K and used
for data transmission control, are also included in

--- Page 282 ---
Figure 6.10. Note that three of them consist of
“xxx1111100” (K28.1, K28.5, and K28.7), that is,
the last seven LSBs are “1111100”. This sequence
is called + comma, while its complement,
“0000011,” is called -comma. The importance of
these sequences is that they do not occur anywhere
else, neither in separate codewords nor in
overlapping codewords, so they can be used as
packet delimiters or to indicate an idle condition
(K28.5 is normally used as comma).
The 8B/10B code is used, for example, in the
1000Base-X gigabit Ethernet interface (for optical
fiber communication), in which the transmission of
1.25 Gbps is then required to achieve an actual rate
of 1 Gbps of information bits. Another application
example is in the new PCI Express standard for
PCs (see Section 10.9, Figure 10.37).
6.9 PAM Codes
Even though PAM (pulse amplitude modulation) codes
employ multiple voltage levels, they operate very differently
from MLT codes. This can be seen in the 4D-PAM5 code
described below.
4D-PAM5 code
As shown in Figure 6.2, the 4D-PAM5 code (4-
dimensional PAM code with 5 voltage levels) is
employed in the 1000Base-T Ethernet interface.
This interface is shown with additional details in
Figure 6.11(a). The transmitter contains a pseudo-
random data scrambler (to spread the spectrum and
reduce the DC component— scramblers will be

--- Page 283 ---
discussed in Section 14.8) plus a trellis encoder (a
convolutional encoder that adds redundancy for
error correction, which will be discussed in
Chapter 7) and finally the 4D-PAM5 encoder
(which converts the 9 bits into a 4D 5-level
symbol). Likewise, the receiver contains a 4D-
PAM5 decoder (which deconverts the 4D 5-level
symbol to regular bits), a Viterbi decoder (to
decode the convolutional code and possibly correct
some errors), plus a pseudo-random descrambler
(to return the bit stream to its original form).
FIGURE 6.11  1000Base-T Ethernet interface
illustrating the use of 4D-PAM5 code.
The channel, which in this case consists of four
twisted pairs of wires (category 5e UTP, described

--- Page 284 ---
earlier), operates in full-duplex mode (that is, both
ends of the channel can transmit simultaneously),
which is possible due to the hybrid (H, normally
constructed with a magnetic circuit plus associated
crosstalk and echo cancellers) that couples the
transmitter’s output to the UTP and the incoming
signal (from the UTP) to the receiver. The internal
circuit delivers 1 Gbps of information bits to the
4D-PAM5 encoder. Because every eight
information bits creates one 4D channel symbol,
such symbols must be actually transmitted at a rate
of 125 Msymbols/second (125 MBaud). (Note in
the figure that two of the eight information bits are
first used to create a ninth bit, called parity bit, so
the nine bits together select the symbol to be
transmitted.)
The PAM5 code operates with five voltage levels,
represented by {−2, −1, 0, +1, +2} (the actual
values normally are −1 V, −0.5 V, 0 V, 0.5 V, and 1
V) and illustrated in the timing diagram of Figure
6.11(b), which shows the signals traveling along
the wires. However, contrary to the MLT code seen
earlier, in PAM codes all channels (transmitters)
are examined together rather than individually (so
the signals in the diverse channels are
interdependent). For example, the case in Figure
6.11(b) involves four channels, and that is the
reason why it is called 4D (four-dimensional)
PAM5 code.
Before we proceed with the 4D case, let us
examine a simpler implementation constructed
using a 2D-PAM5 code (thus with 2 channels).
This code is also known as PAM5 × 5 because the

--- Page 285 ---
2D symbol space forms a 5 × 5 constellation. This
case is illustrated in Figure 6.12(a), which shows
all 5 × 5 = 25 symbols that can occur when we
look at both channels simultaneously. The
minimum Euclidean distance between the points is
obviously just 1 unit in this case.
FIGURE 6.12  (a) Symbol constellation for a
2D-PAM5 code; (b) Effect of channel attenuation
and noise.
The effect of channel attenuation plus the pick up
of noise as the signal travels along the cable is
illustrated in Figure 6.12(b). The former causes the
points to get closer, while the latter causes them to
blur. In other words, both cause the effective
separation between the points to decrease, making
the correct identification of the transmitted symbol
more difficult.

--- Page 286 ---
To combat the effects above (channel attenuation
and noise), one solution is not to use the whole
symbol constellation but only a subset with higher
Euclidean distance. The splitting of the 2D-PAM5
constellation into subconstellations is depicted in
Figure 6.13. First, the five PAM5 logical values
are divided into two subsets, called X=(−1, 1) and
Y=(−2, 0, +2). Note in the complete constellation
of Figure 6.13(a) that different symbols are used to
represent points with coordinates of types XX, YY,
XY, and YX. Level-1 splitting is shown in Figures
6.12(b)–(c). The upper subset is said to be even
and the lower is said to be odd because they have
an even or odd number of coordinates coming
from X, respectively. In these two subsets, the
minimum Euclidean distance is (or minimum
squared distance) equal to 2. Level-2 splitting is
shown in Figures 6.13(d)–(g), now leading to
subsets whose minimum Euclidean distance is 2.

--- Page 287 ---
FIGURE 6.13  2D constellation splitting to
obtain subsets with larger Euclidean distances.
Let us now consider an application where the 2D-
PAM5 code described above must be used.
Suppose that 12 bit patterns must be encoded (that
is, for each pattern a symbol must be assigned).
There are at least two solutions for this problem.
The simple one is to use only the even or the odd
subset of points (Figures 6.13(b)–(c)) because
either one has enough symbols (13 and 12,
respectively), with a resulting minimum squared
distance equal to 2. What one might argue is that

--- Page 288 ---
when one of these subsets has been chosen, the
other is simply thrown away. So maybe there is
some other solution where both spaces (even plus
odd) can be used simultaneously to provide a
larger Euclidean distance. This might seem to be a
paradox at first because if the two subsets are used
we are back to the full set (Figure 6.13(a)), where
the minimum distance is just 1. The solution
resides in the fact that there are many more points
(25) than the number needed (12), so maybe we
can stay in the complete symbol space but restrict
which points can come after each point such that
the minimum squared distance between any two
sequences is greater than 2. This transformation of
individual (independent) symbols into a sequence
of dependent symbols is called convolutional
encoding, and it leads to an optimal usage of the
symbol space. Not only does it allow the distance
to be optimized, but it also allows some errors to
be corrected by the corresponding decoder (which
is a Viterbi decoder—convolutional encoders,
Viterbi decoder, and other error-correcting codes
are described in Chapter 7). This is the type of
solution employed in the 4D-PAM5 encoder
described next.
We now return to the 4D-PAM5 encoder, which
processes four channels instead of two. Therefore,
it is a 4D symbol constellation with a total of 54 =
625 points. If all points were employed, the
minimum Euclidean distance between them would
obviously be 1. To avoid that, only one byte of
data is encoded at a time, so because eight bits
require only 256 symbols, these can be properly

--- Page 289 ---
chosen among the 625 symbols available to
maximize the Euclidean distance (and also
propitiate some error correction capability).
As mentioned above, a trivial solution would be to
pick just the even or the odd subsets (because they
have enough points, that is, 313 and 312,
respectively), with a resulting minimum squared
Euclidean distance of 2. As an example, suppose
that the even subset is chosen (symbols with an
even number of Xs), and that the sequence XXXX-
XXYY-XYYX occurs with coordinates (+1, +1, +1,
+1), (+1, +1, 0, 0), and (+1, 0, 0, +1), respectively.
As expected, the corresponding squared distances
in this case are XXXX-to-XXYY = [(1 − 1)2 + (1 −
1)2 + (0 − 1)2 + (0 − 1)2] = 2 and XXYY-to−XYYX
= [(1 − 1)2 + (0 − 1)2 + (0 − 0)2 + (1 − 0)2] = 2.
As already mentioned, a better solution is achieved
by staying in the full symbol space but using only
specific paths within it. This signifies that, instead
of examining individual symbols, the decoder must
examine sequences of symbols. Although more
complex, the importance of this process is that
without reducing the minimum squared distance
between consecutive symbols (still 2), two
additional benefits arise. The first regards the fact
that such sequences are chosen so that the
minimum squared distance between them is 4, thus
improving noise immunity. The second comes
from the fact that because only specific sequences
are allowed (which the decoder knows), the
decoder can choose the one that is more likely to
represent the transmitted sequence, hence
correcting some of the errors that might occur

--- Page 290 ---
during transmission (the decoder picks, among the
allowed sequences, that with the lowest Hamming
distance to the received one, where the Hamming
distance is the number of bits in which the
sequences disagree).
The choice of sequences is done as follows. Given
that all four channels must be considered at once, a
total of 16 combinations exist (XXXX, XXXY, …,
YYYY). The first step consists of grouping these 16
cases into eight subgroups (called sublattices) by
putting together those that are complements of
each other, that is, XXXX + YYYY, XXXY + YYYX,
etc. The resulting eight sublattices (called D0, D1,
…, D7) are listed in Figure 6.14(a). This grouping
simplifies the encoder and decoder, and it is
possible because the minimum squared distance
between any two symbols within the same
sublattice is still 4, and the minimum squared
distance between two symbols belonging to
different sublattices is still 2.

--- Page 291 ---
FIGURE 6.14  (a) The eight sublattices
employed in the 4D-PAM5 code; (b) Convolutional
(trellis) encoder used to generate the parity bit (b8),
which participates in the 4D-PAM5 encoding
procedure; (c) 4D-PAM5 encoder.
The table in Figure 6.14(a) also shows the number
of points in each sublattice, of which only 64 are
taken, thus totaling 512 points. In summary, the
256-symbol space was converted into a 512-
symbol space with the minimum squared distance
between any two consecutive symbols equal to 4 if
they belong to the same sublattice, or 2 if they do
not, and between any two sequences equal to 4.
To choose from 512 symbols, nine bits are needed,
so an additional bit (called parity bit) is added to
the original eight data bits. The parity bit is
computed by the convolutional (trellis) encoder
mentioned earlier and shown in Figure 6.14(b).
The 4D-PAM5 encoder is presented in Figure
6.14(c). Bits b0 … b7 are data bits, while b8 is the

--- Page 292 ---
parity bit. The splitting is similar to that in Figure
6.13, that is, level-1 separates the symbols into
even and odd sets (with minimum squared distance
equal to 2), while level-2 further splits the space
into the eight sublattices listed in Figure 6.14(a)
(with minimum squared distance equal to 4). The
operation occurs in the full symbol space with the
splitting used only to construct the sequences. As
shown in Figure 6.14(c), b8 selects the family
(even or odd), while b7 b6 select one of the four
sublattices in that family, and finally b5 b4 b3 b2 b1
b0 select one of the 64 points within that sublattice.
Note that the convolutional encoder (Figure
6.14(b)), which contains 3 D-type flip-flops
(DFFs) plus two modulo-2 adders (XOR gates)
uses bits b7 b6 to calculate b8. (This type of
encoder, along with the respective Viterbi decoder,
will be studied in Chapter 7.)
The description presented above is summarized in
Figure 6.15 where another view of the 4D-PAM5
encoder used in the Ethernet 1000Base-T interface
is shown. For every eight information bits
(represented by b7 … b0 and produced at a rate of
1 Gbps), the trellis encoder must first create the
ninth bit (b8), then the nine bits together are
employed to select one 4D-PAM5 point. In Figure
6.15, it is assumed that (−1, +1, 0, +2) was the
point chosen. The corresponding voltage levels are
then delivered to the four twisted pairs of wires,
operating at a rate of 1 Gbps/8 = 125 MBaud.

--- Page 293 ---
FIGURE 6.15  Summary of 1000Base-T
transmitter operation, which employs the 4D-PAM5
encoder.
As a final note, there are 625−512 = 113 symbols
left, some of which are used for control (idle, start
of packet, end of packet, etc.), while others are
avoided (like the five “flat” ones, (−2 − 2 − 2 − 2),
…, (+2 + 2 + 2 + 2)).
6.10 Exercises
1. UTP cables
a. It was mentioned that both 100Base-TX
and 1000Base-T Ethernet interfaces employ
unshieldedtwisted pairs (UTPs) for
communication, of categories 5 and 5e,
respectively. However, the max–imum
frequency for both is 100 MHz. Look first
for the definition of cable crosstalk, then
check inthe respective UTP’s data sheets
what actually differentiates 5e from 5.
b. Low and high frequencies are attenuated
differently as they travel along a UTP. Check
in the cor-responding data sheets for the
attenuation, in dB/100 m (decibels per one
hundred meters), for cat-egories 3 and 5e
UTPs for several frequencies. Is the

--- Page 294 ---
attenuation at 1 MHz the same in both
cables?
2. Channel distortion
Why do the corners of a square wave, when
received at the other end of a
communications channel (a twisted pair of
wires, for example), look “rounded”?
3. Unipolar codes #1
a. Given the bit sequence “1101001101”,
draw the corresponding waveforms for all
three unipolarcodes (NRZ, RZ, NRZ-I)
shown in Figure 6.5.
b. For each waveform, calculate the DC
(average) voltage.
c. For each waveform, calculate the density
of transitions.
4. Unipolar codes #2
a. Given the bit sequence “00000000”, draw
the corresponding waveforms for all three
unipolar codes (NRZ, RZ, NRZ-I) shown in
Figure 6.5.
b. For each waveform, calculate the DC
(average) voltage.
c. For each waveform, calculate the density
of transitions.
5. Unipolar codes #3
a. Given the bit sequence “11111111”, draw
the corresponding waveforms for all three
unipolar codes (NRZ, RZ, NRZ-I) shown in
Figure 6.5.
b. For each waveform, calculate the DC
(average) voltage.

--- Page 295 ---
c. For each waveform, calculate the density
of transitions.
d. Compare the results to those from the
previous two exercises. Which bit sequences
cause the minimum and maximum number
of transitions and the minimum and
maximum DC levels?
6. Polar codes #1
a. Given the bit sequence “1101001101”,
draw the corresponding waveforms for all
three polar codes (NRZ, RZ, NRZ-I) shown
in Figure 6.5.
b. For each waveform, calculate the DC
(average) voltage.
c. For each waveform, calculate the density
of transitions.
7. Polar codes #2
a. Given the bit sequence “00000000”, draw
the corresponding waveforms for all three
polar codes (NRZ, RZ, NRZ-I) shown in
Figure 6.5.
a. For each waveform, calculate the DC
(average) voltage.
c. For each waveform, calculate the density
of transitions.
8. Polar codes #3
a. Given the bit sequence “11111111”, draw
the corresponding waveforms for all three
polar codes (NRZ, RZ, NRZ-I) shown in
Figure 6.5.
b. For each waveform, calculate the DC
(average) voltage.

--- Page 296 ---
c. For each waveform, calculate the density
of transitions.
d. Compare the results to those from the
previous two exercises. Which bit sequences
cause the minimum and maximum number
of transitions and the minimum and
maximum DC levels?
9. Bipolar codes #1
a. Given the bit sequence “1101001101”,
draw the corresponding waveforms for the
two bipolar codes (NRZ, RZ) shown in
Figure 6.5.
b. For each waveform, calculate the DC
(average) voltage.
c. For each waveform, calculate the density
of transitions.
10. Bipolar codes #2
a. Given the bit sequence “00000000”, draw
the corresponding waveforms for the two
bipolar codes (NRZ, RZ) shown in Figure
6.5.
b. For each waveform, calculate the DC
(average) voltage.
c. For each waveform, calculate the density
of transitions.
11. Bipolar codes #3
a. Given the bit sequence “11111111”, draw
the corresponding waveforms for the two
bipolar codes (NRZ, RZ) shown in Figure
6.5.
b. For each waveform, calculate the DC
(average) voltage.

--- Page 297 ---
c. For each waveform, calculate the density
of transitions.
d. Compare the results to those from the
previous two exercises. Which bit sequences
cause the minimum and maximum number
of transitions and the minimum and
maximum DC levels?
12. Biphase/Manchester codes #1
a. Given the bit sequence “1101001101”,
draw the corresponding encoding
waveforms for the two Manchester codes
illustrated in Figure 6.5.
b. For each waveform, calculate the DC
(average) voltage.
c. For each waveform, calculate the density
of transitions.
13. Biphase/Manchester codes #2
a. Given the bit sequence “00000000”, draw
the corresponding encoding waveforms for
the two Manchester codes illustrated in
Figure 6.5.
b. For each waveform, calculate the DC
(average) voltage.
c. For each waveform, calculate the density
of transitions.
14. Biphase/Manchester codes #3
a. Given the bit sequence “11111111”, draw
the corresponding encoding waveforms for
the two Manchester codes illustrated in
Figure 6.5.
b. For each waveform, calculate the DC
(average) voltage.

--- Page 298 ---
c. For each waveform, calculate the density
of transitions.
d. Compare the results to those from the
previous two exercises. Which bit sequences
cause the minimum and maximum number
of transitions and the minimum and
maximum DC levels?
15. MLT-3 code
a. Given the 12-bit sequence
“110100110111”, draw the corresponding
MLT-3 encoded waveform (as in Figure 6.5).
b. Calculate the waveform’s DC (average)
voltage.
c. Write the 12-bit sequence that causes the
maximum number of transitions and draw
the corresponding MLT-3 waveform.
d. If the clock frequency in (c) is 100 MHz
(thus 100 Mbps are produced), what is the
frequency of the main harmonic?
e. Repeat part (c) for the sequence that
produces the minimum number of
transitions.
16. MLT-5 code
a. Given the 12-bit sequence
“110100110111”, draw the corresponding
MLT-5 encoded waveform (MLT-5 operates
with five sequential voltages, represented
by…, −2, −1, 0, +1, +2, +1, 0, −1, −2, …).
b. Calculate the waveform’s DC (average)
voltage.
c. Write the 12-bit sequence that causes the
maximum number of transitions and draw

--- Page 299 ---
the corresponding MLT-5 waveform.
d. If the clock frequency in (c) is 100 MHz
(thus 100 Mbps are produced), what is the
frequency of the main harmonic?
e. Repeat part (c) for the sequence that
produces the minimum number of
transitions.
17. 4B/5B code #1
a. If the serial bit sequence 0FE716 is applied
to the input of a 4B/5B encoder, what is the
bit sequence that it produces at the output?
b. Calculate the percentage of transitions
before and after encoding.
c. Calculate the DC voltage before and after
encoding.
18. 4B/5B code #2
a. If the serial bit sequence 000016 (= “00 …
0”) is applied to the input of a 4B/5B
encoder, what is the bit sequence that it
produces at the output?
b. Calculate the percentage of transitions
before and after encoding.
c. Calculate the DC voltage before and after
encoding.
19. 4B/5B code #3
a. If the serial bit sequence 11116 (= “11 …
1”) is applied to the input of a 4B/5B
encoder, what is thebit sequence that it
produces at the output?
b. Calculate the percentage of transitions
before and after encoding.

--- Page 300 ---
c. Calculate the DC voltage before and after
encoding.
20. 8B/10B code #1
Suppose that the running (accumulated)
disparity of an 8B/10B encoder is +2 and
that the next word to be transmitted is
“00000110”. Write the 10-bit codeword that
will actually be transmitted by the encoder.
21. 8B/10B code #2
Assume that the present running disparity
value of an 8B/10B encoder is +2.
a. Write the 20-bit sequence that will be
transmitted if the encoder receives the bit
sequence F8FF16.
b. Calculate the percentage of transitions
before and after encoding.
c. Calculate the DC voltage before and after
encoding.
22. 8B/10B code #3
Assume that the present running disparity
value of an 8B/10B encoder is +2.
a. Write the 30-bit sequence that will be
transmitted if the encoder receives the bit
sequence 00000316.
b. Calculate the percentage of transitions
before and after encoding.
c. Calculate the DC voltage before and after
encoding.
23. 2D-PAM5 code
The questions below refer to a
communications channel constructed with
two twisted pairs of wires, employing a 2D-

--- Page 301 ---
PAM5 (also called PAM5 × 5) encoder-
decoder pair at each end operating in full-
duplex mode (simultaneous communication
in both directions).
a. How many information bits are conveyed
by each encoder (channel) symbol?
b. If the information bits are fed to the
encoder at the rate of 200 Mbps, with what
symbol rate mustthe encoder operate? In
other words, after how many information
bits must one 2D symbol be transmitted?
c. Suppose that the following sequence of
symbols must be transmitted: (−2, +2), (0,
0), (+2, −2), (0, 0), (−2, +2), (0, 0), Draw the
corresponding waveform in each pair of
wires (use the clock period, T, as your time
unit).
24. 4D-PAM5 code #1
Show that the trellis encoder of Figure
6.14(b), when b7 b6 = “10 10 00 00 00 00 00
…”, produces b8 = “0 1 1 0 1 1 0 …”
(assuming that the initial state of all flip-
flops is zero).
25. 4D-PAM5 code #2
In Figures 6.11 and 6.15, it was shown that
the rate at which symbols are transmitted in
1000Base-T Ethernet is 125 MBaud. It was
also mentioned that the category 5e UTP is
recommended only for frequencies up to 100
MHz and that high-energy components
above 30 MHz should be avoided (for

--- Page 302 ---
irradiation purposes). The questions below
address these two constraints.
a. How are high-energy components
prevented in 1000Base-T Ethernet? In other
words, which block in Figure 6.11
randomizes the data sequence such that the
spectrum gets spread?
b. How are frequencies above 100 MHz
avoided? In other words, show that in Figure
6.15, even if the symbols transmitted in a
certain pair of wires are always from the X =
(−1, +1) set, the funda-mental (first)
harmonic still cannot be higher than 62.5
MHz.
26. 4D-PAM5 code #3
The questions below refer to the 4D-PAM5
encoder-decoder pair used in Ethernet
1000Base-T.
a. Explain why each encoder (channel)
symbol can convey a total of nine bits.
b. With what speed (in bps) are the
information bits fed to the encoder?
c. After every how many information bits
must the encoder transmit one 4D symbol?
d. Calculate and explain the resulting
symbol rate.
e. Suppose that the following sequence of
symbols is allowed and must be transmitted:
(−2, −1, +1, +2), (0, +1, −1, 0), (−2, −1, +1,
+2), (0, +1, −1, 0),…. Draw the
corresponding waveform in each pair of
wires using the clock period, T, of part (b)
above, as the time unit.

--- Page 303 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 304 ---
7
Error-Detecting/Correcting Codes
Chapter Contents
7.1 Codes for Error Detection and Error
Correction
7.2 Single Parity Check (SPC) Codes
7.3 Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC) Codes
7.4 Hamming Codes
7.5 Reed-Solomon (RS) Codes
7.6 Interleaving
7.7 Convolutional Codes
7.8 Viterbi Decoder
7.9 Turbo Codes
7.10 Low Density Parity Check (LDPC)
Codes
7.11 Exercises
Objective:
As mentioned in the previous chapter, modern digital designs often include
means for communications between distinct system parts, forming larger,
integrated networks. Large specialized means for data storage are generally
also required. To add protection against errors in such cases (data

--- Page 305 ---
communications and storage), error-detecting/correcting codes are often
employed, so a basic knowledge of such codes is highly desirable, and that is
the purpose of this chapter. This presentation, however, constitutes only an
introduction to the subject, which was designed to give the reader just the
indispensable background and motivation. The codes described for error
detection are SPC (single parity check) and CRC (cyclic redundancy check).
The codes described for error correction are Hamming, Reed-Solomon,
Convolutional, Turbo, and LDPC (low density parity check). Data
interleaving and Viterbi decoding are also included.
7.1 Codes for Error Detection and Error
Correction
In Chapter 2 we described several codes for representing
decimal numbers (sequential binary, Gray, BCD, floating-
point, etc.) and also codes for representing characters (ASCII
and Unicode). In Chapter 6, another group of codes was
introduced, collectively called line codes, which are used for
data transmission and storage. A final group of binary codes
is introduced in this chapter, collectively called error-
detecting/correcting codes. As the name says, they are used
for error detection or error correction, in basically the same
applications as line codes, that is, data transmission and data
storage.
In the case of line codes, we saw in Chapter 6 that the
encoder always modifies the data sequence, and in some
cases (mB/nB codes) it also introduces additional bits in the
data stream. The purpose of both (data modification and bit
inclusion) is to improve some of the data parameters, notably
transition density (increases) and DC voltage (decreases).
In the case of error-detecting/correcting codes, extra bits,
called redundancy bits or parity bits, are always introduced,

--- Page 306 ---
so the number of bits at the encoder’s output (n) is always
higher than at its input (k). The original bits might be
included in the new data sequence in modified or unmodified
form (if the latter occurs, the code is said to be systematic).
The purpose of such codes, however, is not to improve data
parameters, but to add protection against errors.
The use of error-correcting codes is illustrated in Figure 7.1.
The original data is x, which is converted into y (with more
bits) by the encoder. The latter is then transmitted through a
noisy channel, so a possibly corrupted version of y (called
y*) is actually received by the decoder (note that the third bit
was flipped during the transmission). Thanks to the
redundancy bits, the decoder might be able to reconstitute
the original data, x.
FIGURE 7.1  Typical usage of error-correcting codes.
The codes that will be seen in this chapter are listed below.
 For error detection:
 Single parity check (SPC) codes
 Cyclic redundancy check (CRC) codes
 For error correction:
 Hamming codes
 Reed-Solomon (RS) codes
 Convolutional codes and Viterbi decoder
 Turbo codes
 Low density parity check (LDPC) codes

--- Page 307 ---
7.2 Single Parity Check (SPC) Codes
SPC codes are the simplest error-detecting codes. An extra
bit is added to the original codeword so that the new
codeword always exhibits an even (or odd) number of ‘1’s.
Consequently, the code can detect one error, though it cannot
correct it. In such a case, the receiver can request the sender
to retransmit that codeword.
An example of SPC code is shown in Figure 7.2. It is called
PS/2 (personal system version 2) and was introduced by
IBM in 1987. Its main application is for serial data
communication between personal computers and PS/2
devices (keyboard and mouse).
FIGURE 7.2  PS/2 protocol (11-bit codeword), which is an
SPC code. In the example above, the make code for the “P”
keyboard key is shown.
As can be seen, the code consists of eight data bits (one byte)
to which three other bits are added, called start, parity, and
stop bits. The start bit is always ‘0’ and the stop bit is always
‘1’. Odd parity is employed, so the parity bit must be ‘1’
when the number of ‘1’s in the 8-bit data vector is even. As
mentioned in Chapter 2, Scan Code Set 2 is employed to

--- Page 308 ---
encode the keys of PS/2 keyboards, which consists of one or
two data bytes when a key is pressed (called make code) and
two or three bytes when it is released (called break code). In
the example of Figure 7.2, the make code for the keyboard
key “P” is shown, which is “01001101” (= 4Dh). Note that
the LSB is transmitted first.
To determine whether an error has occurred, the decoder
uses a parity-check equation. In the example of Figure 7.2,
the codeword of interest has nine bits, that is, c =
c1c2c3c4c5c6c7c8c9, where c1 to c8 are the actual data bits and
c9 is the parity bit (the start and stop bits do not take part in
the parity computation). If odd-parity is used, then the
corresponding parity-check equation is
    (7.1)
where ⊕  represents modulo-2 addition (XOR operation).
This equation is true only when an odd number of ‘1’s exist
in c. Consequently, any odd number of errors will be
detected, while any even number of errors (including zero)
will cause the received codeword to be accepted as correct.
In summary, this type of code can correctly detect up to one
error, though it cannot correct it.
7.3 Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC) Codes
CRC is a very popular method for detecting errors during
data transmission in computer-based applications. It consists
of including, at the end of a data packet, a special binary
word, normally with 16 or 32 bits, referred to as CRC value,
which is obtained from some calculations made over the
whole data block to be transmitted. The receiver performs

--- Page 309 ---
the same calculations over the received data and then
compares the resulting CRC value against the received one.
Even though not all error patterns cause a wrong CRC, most
do. This code is used, for example, in the IEEE 802.3
Ethernet frame, which can contain over 12 kbits with a 32-
bit CRC added to it (hence a negligible overhead).
The CRC code is identified by a generator polynomial, g(x).
Some common examples are listed below.
    (7.2)
    (7.3)
    (7.4)
    (7.5)
To calculate the CRC, the data string, d(x), is simply divided
by the generator polynomial, g(x), from which q(x)
(quotient) and r(x) (remainder) result. The remainder (not the
quotient) is the CRC value.
If the degree of g(x) is n, then the degree of r(x) can only be
smaller than n. In practice, n – 1 is always used, with the
MSBs filled with ‘0’s when the actual degree is smaller than
n − 1. After the whole data vector has passed through the

--- Page 310 ---
CRC calculator, a string with n ‘0’s must be entered to
complete the calculations. This is illustrated in the example
below.
To make the example simple, suppose that d(x) contains only
8 bits, “01100010”, and that CRC-8 is chosen (in practice,
the degree of d(x) is much higher than that of g(x), even by
several orders of magnitude). After including n = 8 ‘0’s on
the right of d(x), the polynomial becomes d(x) = “01100010
00000000” = x14 + x13 + x9. The division of d(x) by g(x) = x8
+ x2 + x + 1 is shown in Figure 7.3, from which q(x) = x6 +
x5 + x + 1 = “01100011” and r(x) = x5 + x3 + 1 = “00101001”
result. Hence CRC = r(x) = “00101001”.
FIGURE 7.3  Example of CRC calculation (mod2
polynomial division).
Even though this operation might look difficult to
implement, the physical circuit is very simple. As illustrated
in Figure 7.4, which shows the circuit for the CRC-CCITT-
16 encoder, it requires only an n-stage shift register (Section
4.11) plus a few XOR gates (Section 4.5). Because in this
case the generator polynomial is g(x) = 1 + x5 + x12 + x16, the
XOR gates are located at the outputs of flip-flops 5, 12, and
16. Note that the MSB of d(x) is entered first, and that n (=
16 in this example) zeros must be included at the end of the
data string. After the last zero has been entered, the CRC

--- Page 311 ---
value will be stored in the 16 flip-flops, with the MSB in
flip-flop 16. As indicated in the figure, N >> n (recall the
802.3 Ethernet frame mentioned above, whose N can be as
high as ∼ 12 kbits, while n is just 32 bits).
FIGURE 7.4  Circuit for the CRC-CCITT-16 encoder,
whose generator polynomial is g(x)=1 + x5 + x12 + x16. The
boxes marked from 1 to 16 are D-type flip-flops connected to
form shift registers (Section 4.11).
7.4 Hamming Codes
The two codes described above are only for error detection.
Hamming codes, like all the others that follow, allow error
correction, so they are more complex than those above.
Hamming codes [Hamming50] are among the simplest error-
correcting codes. The encoded codewords differ in at least
three bit positions with respect to each other, so the code is
said to exhibit a minimum Hamming distance dmin = 3.
Consequently, if during the transmission of a codeword the
communication channel introduces one error (that is, flips
the value of one bit), the receiver will be able to
unequivocally correct it.
Error-correcting codes are normally represented using the
pair (n, k), where k is the number of information bits (that is,
the size of the original information word, u = u1u2 … uk, that
enters the encoder) and n is the number of encoded bits (that
is, the size of the codeword c = c1c2 … cn that leaves the

--- Page 312 ---
encoder). Therefore, m = n − k is the number of redundancy
(or parity) bits. The ratio r = k/n is called the rate of the
code.
For any integer m > 1, a Hamming code exists, with n = 2m −
1, k = 2m − m − 1, r = k/n, and a total of M = 2k codewords.
Some examples are listed below (all with dmin = 3).
For m=3: n=7, k=4, r=4/7, M=16 → (7, 4)
Hamming code
For m=4: n=15, k=11, r=11/15, M=2048 → (15,
11) Hamming code
For m=5: n=31, k=26, r=26/31, M=67,108,864 →
(31, 26) Hamming code
The actual implementation will fall in one of the following
two categories: nonsystematic (the parity bits are mixed with
the information bits) or systematic (the parity bits are
separated from the information bits). An example of the
latter is shown in the table of Figure 7.5(a), with the original
words (called u, with k = 4 bits) shown on the left and the
encoded words (called c, with n = 7 bits) on the right. Note
that this code is systematic, because c1c2c3c4 = u1u2u3u4.
Note also that d≥3 between any two Hamming codewords,
and that the original words include the whole set of k-bit
sequences.

--- Page 313 ---
FIGURE 7.5  (a) Input and output codewords of a cyclic-
systematic (7, 4) Hamming encoder; Corresponding (b) parity
check and (c) generator matrices.
Because the code of Figure 7.5 must add m = 3 parity bits to
each k-bit input word, three parity-check equations are
needed, which, in the present example, are:
      (7.6a)
      (7.6b)
      (7.6c)
Above, ⊕  represents again modulo-2 addition (or XOR
operation, which produces output = ‘0’ when the number of
ones at the input is even, or ‘1’ when it is odd).

--- Page 314 ---
The parity-check equations above can be rewritten as:
      (7.7a)
      (7.7b)
      (7.7c)
From these equations, an equivalent representation, using a
matrix, results. It is called parity-check matrix (H), and it
contains m = 3 lines (one for each parity-check equation) and
n = 7 columns. Figure 7.5(b) shows H for the code described
by the equations above (whose codewords are those in
Figure 7.5(a)). Note, for example, that row 1 of H has ones
in positions 1, 2, 3, and 5, because those are the nonzero
coefficients in the first of the parity-check equations above.
Because the code in Figure 7.5 is systematic, H can be
divided into two portions: the left portion, called A,
corresponds to the original (information) bits and shows how
those bits participate in the parity-check equations; the right
portion, called Im, corresponds to the redundancy bits and is
simply an identity matrix of size m. Therefore, H can be
written as H = [AIm]. (Note: Any given matrix H can be
converted into the format shown in Figure 7.5(b) by
applying Gauss-Jordan transformation; however, this
normally includes column combinations/permutations, so an
equivalent but different set of codewords will be generated.)

--- Page 315 ---
The major use of H is for decoding because it contains the
parity-check equations. Because each row of H is one of
these equations, if c is a valid codeword then the following
results (where cT is the transpose of vector c):
    (7.8)
Still another representation for a linear code is by means of a
generator matrix (G). As illustrated in Figure 7.5(c), in the
case of systematic codes it is constructed from H using AT
(the transpose of A) and an identity matrix of size k (Ik), that
is, G = [IkAT].
While H is used for decoding the codewords, G is used for
generating them. As in any linear code, the codewords are
obtained by linear combinations among the rows of G (that
is, row1, row2, …, row1 + row2, …, row1 + row2 + row3 +
…). Because there are k rows in G, and the original words
(u) are k bits long and include all k-bit sequences, the direct
multiplication of u by G produces a valid codeword (thus the
name for G), that is:
    (7.9)
In summary, G is used for generating the codewords
(because c = uG), while H is used for decoding them
(because HcT = 0). Moreover, if the code is systematic, then
G = [IkAT] and H = [AIm], where A is the m-by-k matrix
containing the coefficients of the parity-check equations and
Ik and Im are identity matrices of sizes k and m, respectively.
The Hamming encoding-decoding procedure is illustrated in
Figure 7.6, which shows the encoder on the left and the

--- Page 316 ---
decoder on the right, interconnected by some type of (noisy)
communications channel. The encoder receives the
information word, u, and converts it into a Hamming
codeword, c, using G (that is, c = uG). The decoder receives
c*, which is a possibly corrupted version of c. It first
computes the syndrome, s, using H (that is, s = Hc*T). If s =
“00 … 0,” then no error has occurred, and c** = c* is sent
out, from which u is retrieved. Otherwise, if exactly one
error has occurred, s will be equal to one of the columns of
H. Suppose that it is the ith column, then the error is in the
ith bit of c*, which must then be reversed.
FIGURE 7.6  Hamming encoding-decoding procedure. The
encoder converts u (information codeword) into c (Hamming
codeword) using G. A possibly corrupted version of c (c*) is
received by the decoder, which computes the syndrome, s=Hc*T,
based on which the algorithm constructs c** (the decoded version
of c), from which u (hopefully without errors) is recovered.
As an example, consider that u = “0111”, so c = “0111010”,
and suppose that the channel corrupts the fourth bit of c
(from the left), so c* = “0110010” is received. The computed
syndrome is s = “011”, which coincides with the fourth
column of H (Figure 7.5(b)), indicating that the fourth bit of
c* must be corrected, thus resulting c** = “0111010”. Taking
the first four bits of c**, u = “0111” results.

--- Page 317 ---
Just as a final note, Hamming codes can also be cyclic
(besides being systematic), meaning that any circular shift of
a codeword results in another codeword (check, for instance,
the code of Figure 7.5). The advantage in this case is that the
encoder and decoder can be implemented using shift
registers (Section 4.11), which are simple and fast circuits.
7.5 Reed-Solomon (RS) Codes
The Reed-Solomon code [Reed60] is a powerful burst error-
correcting code largely used in storage media (CDs and
DVDs) and wireless communications systems. Its operation
is based on blocks of symbols rather than blocks of bits. The
notation (n, k) is again used, but now it indicates that the
code contains a total of n symbols in each block, among
which k are information symbols (hence m = n − k are parity
symbols). This code can correct m/2 symbols in each block.
If each symbol is composed of b bits, then 2b − 1 symbols
must be included in the block, resulting codewords of length
n = 2b − 1 symbols (that is, b(2b − 1) bits).
A popular example is the (255, 223) RS code, whose
symbols are b = 8 bits wide (1 byte/symbol). It contains 223
bytes of information plus 32 bytes of redundancy, being
therefore capable of correcting 16 symbols in error per
block.
The fact that RS codes can correct a symbol independently
from the number of bits that are wrong in it makes them
appropriate for applications where errors are expected to
occur in bursts rather than individually. One of the first
consumer applications using this code was in music CDs,
where errors are expected to occur in bursts (due to scratches

--- Page 318 ---
or stains, for example). The encoding, in this case, is a very
specialized one, as described below.
Audio CD encoding
Figure 7.7(a) illustrates the error-correcting
encoding used in conventional audio CDs
(commercial music CDs), which consists of a dual
RS encoding. The primary code is a (32, 28) RS
whose symbols are 8 bits wide (bytes). This is
depicted in the top box of Figure 7.7(a), where the
dark portion (with 28 B, where B means bytes)
represents the information bytes, while the clear
portion (with 4 B) represents the parity bytes. Each
of these 32 B symbols becomes then a single
symbol for the secondary code, a (28, 24) RS,
represented by the whole set of boxes of Figure
7.7(a). In summary, on average, for every three
information bytes, one parity byte is added, so the
code’s rate is 0.75 (note that the dark area is 75%
of the total area).

--- Page 319 ---
FIGURE 7.7  Audio CD recording. (a)
Simplified diagram illustrating the CIRC encoding,
capable of correcting error bursts of nearly 4 k bits;
(b) Detailed frame construction (CIRC + Subcode +
EFM + Sync), which contains six 16-bit samples of
stereo data (192 information bits out of 588 frame
bits); (c) A CD block or sector, which contains 98
frames.
Note that these two RS codes do not follow the
rule described earlier, which says that 2b − 1
symbols must be included in each block, where b
is the symbol size. These are actually special
versions, called shortened RS codes.
Between the two RS encodings, however,
interleaving (explained in the next section—not
shown in Figure 7.7) is applied to the data with the
purpose of spreading possible error bursts. In other
words, consecutive information bytes are not
placed sequentially in the CD, so a scratch or other

--- Page 320 ---
long-duration damage will not affect a long run of
consecutive bytes, thus improving the error-
correcting capability. This combination of dual RS
encoding plus interleaving is called CIRC (cross-
interleaved Reed-Solomon code), which is capable
of correcting error bursts of nearly 4k bits (caused
by a 2.7-mm-long scratch, for example).
The complete sequence of data manipulations that
occur before the audio is finally recorded on a CD
is illustrated in Figure 7.7(b). Recall that audio
signals are sampled at 44.1 kHz with 16
bits/sample in each channel (stereo system). A data
frame is a collection of six samples, that is, (6
samples × 16 bits/sample per channel × 2
channels) = 192 b = 24 B (where b = bit, B =
byte). This frame, after CIRC encoding, becomes
32 B wide (recall that, for every 3 B of
information, 1 B of parity is added).
Next, a subcoding byte is added to each frame, so
the new frame size is 33 B. Each bit of the
subcoding byte belongs to a different channel, so
there are eight channels that are constructed with
98 bits, picked one from each frame in a 98-frame
block (the construction of blocks is explained
below). However, only two of these eight channels
are currently used, called P (for music separation
and end of CD) and Q (disk contents, playing time,
etc.).
The 33 B frame is then passed through an EFM
(eight-to-fourteen modulation—explained below)
encoder, which converts every 8 bits into 14 bits,
then adds three more separation bits, hence
resulting in an 8-to-17 conversion. Thus the new

--- Page 321 ---
total is (33 bytes × 8 bits/byte × 17/8 for EFM) =
561 bits.
EFM is used to relax the optical specifications on
pits and lands (which can be damaged during
handling). It is simply a conversion table where, in
all codewords, two consecutive ‘1’s are separated
by at least two and at most ten ‘0’s. The actual
encoding then used to construct the pits is similar
to NRZ-I (Sections 6.3–6.4), where a ‘1’ is
represented by a pit to land or land to pit transition,
while a ‘0’ corresponds to no transition. Because
two consecutive ‘0’s become three consecutive
nontransition time slots after NRZ-I encoding, the
actual minimum distance between pits is 3 lands (3
clock cycles), which is the intended specification.
The upper limit in the number of ‘0’s (10) then
becomes 11 nontransitions, which is still small
enough to guarantee proper data recovery in the
CD player. Additionally, between two EFM
codewords a 3-bit space is left, so the code is
actually an 8-to-17 converter.
Finally, a 27-bit synchronization word is added to
each frame. This word is unique, not occurring in
any EFM codeword or overlapping codewords, so
it is used to indicate the beginning of a frame. This
completes the frame assembling with a total of 588
bits. In summary, 192 information bits are
converted into 588 disk (or channel) bits, called a
frame, which is the smallest CD entity. The actual
information rate in an audio CD is then just 33%.
As shown in Figure 7.7(c), the frames (with 588
bits each, of which 192 are information bits) are
organized into sectors (or blocks) of 98 frames.

--- Page 322 ---
Therefore, given that the playing speed of an audio
CD is 75 sectors/second, the following playing
information rate results: 75 sectors/second × 98
frames/sector × 192 bits/frame = 1,411,200 bps.
To verify whether the speed above is the
appropriate speed, we can compare the information
rate with the sampling rate (they must obviously
match), which is the following: 44,100
samples/second × 16 bits/sample per channel × 2
channels = 1,411,200 bps.
A final observation is that, besides being able to
correct error bursts of nearly 4k consecutive bits,
the CD player is also able to conceal error bursts
of up to ∼ 13 kbits. This, however, has nothing to
do with the encoding schemes; it is rather achieved
by interpolation with the missing (unrecoverable)
values replaced with the average of their
neighbors, thus introducing errors, but very
unlikely to be perceived by the human ear. (Some
other aspects regarding CD encoding will be seen
in the exercises section.)
7.6 Interleaving
Interleaving is not an error-correcting code; it is just a
permutation procedure whose main goal is to separate
neighboring bits or blocks of bits. This process is essential
for the performance of certain codes, like RS and turbo, so
interleaving is not used alone but as an auxiliary component
to other codes (as in the CD example above).
In general, interleaving uses a simple deterministic
reordering procedure, like that illustrated in the example

--- Page 323 ---
below, which is employed to break up error bursts.
Consider an encoder that produces 4-bit codewords, which
are transmitted over a communications channel to a
corresponding decoder that is capable of correcting one error
per codeword. This is illustrated in Figure 7.8(a), where a
sequence of four 4-bit codewords is shown. Say that a 3-bit
error burst occurs during transmission, corrupting the last
three bits of codeword c (that is, c2c3c4). Due to the
decoder’s limitation, this codeword cannot be corrected.
Consider now the situation depicted in Figure 7.8(b), where
the same codewords are transmitted and the same error burst
occurs. However, before transmission, interleaving is applied
to the codewords. The consequence of this procedure is that
the errors are spread by the de-interleaver, resulting in just
one error per codeword, which can then be properly
corrected by the decoder.
FIGURE 7.8  Interleaving used for spreading error bursts.
(a) System without interleaving; (b) System with interleaving.
Two other types of interleavers are depicted in Figure 7.9. In
Figure 7.9(a), a block interleaver is shown, consisting of a

--- Page 324 ---
two-dimensional memory array to which data are written
vertically but is read from horizontally. In Figure 7.9(b), a
pseudo-random interleaver is presented, which consists of
rearranging the bits in a pseudo-random order. Note that the
bits are not modified in either case, but they are just
repositioned.
FIGURE 7.9  (a) Block and (b) pseudo-random interleavers.
Data interleaving is sometimes confused with data
scrambling. The first difference between them is that the
latter is a randomization procedure (performed pseudo-
randomly), while the former can be deterministic (as in
Figure 7.8). The second fundamental difference is that
interleaving does not modify the data contents (it only
modifies the bit positions), while scramblers do modify the
data (a different number of ones and zeros normally results).
(Scramblers will be studied Section 14.8.)
7.7 Convolutional Codes
Contrary to the Hamming and RS codes seen above, which
operate with blocks of bits or symbols, convolutional codes
operate over a serial bit stream, processing one bit (or a
small group of bits) at a time.
An (n, k, K) convolutional code converts k information bits
into n channel bits, where, as before, m =n − k is the number

--- Page 325 ---
of redundancy (parity) bits. In most applications, k = 1 and n
= 2 are employed (that is, for every bit that enters the
encoder, two bits are produced at the output), so the code
rate is r = 1/2. The third parameter, K, is called constraint
length because it specifies the length of the convolved
vectors (that is, the number of bits from x, the input stream,
that are used in the computations). Consequently, in spite of
the encoding being serial, it depends on K − 1 past values of
x, which are kept in memory.
The name “convolutional” comes from the fact that the
encoder computes the convolution between its impulse
response (generator polynomial) and the input bit stream
(see Equation 7.10 below). This can be observed with the
help of the general architecture for convolutional encoders
depicted in Figure 7.10(a). The upper part shows a shift
register (Section 4.11), whose input is x, in which the last K
values of x are stored. The encoder’s output is y. Note the
existence of a switch at the output, which assigns n values to
y for every k (= 1 in this case) bits of x, resulting in a code
with rate k/n. The K past values of x (stored in the shift
register) are multiplied by the encoder’s coefficients, hij,
which are either ‘0’ or ‘1’, and are then added together to
produce yi (i = 1, …, n), that is:

--- Page 326 ---
FIGURE 7.10  (a) General architecture for (m, k=1, K)
convolutional encoders showing a K-stage shift register at the top,
K encoder coefficients (hii=‘0’ or ‘1’) per row, n rows, an array of
modulo-2 adders (XOR gates), and an output switch that assigns n
values to y for every bit of x (k=1 in this case); (b) A popular
implementation with k=1, n=2, and K=7.
    (7.10)
A popular implementation, with k = 1, n = 2, and K = 7 (used
by NASA in the Voyager spacecraft) is shown in Figure
7.10(b). Note again that K (constraint length) is the number
of bits from x that participate in the computations of y (the
larger K, the more errors the code can correct). The

--- Page 327 ---
coefficients in this example are h1 = (h11, h12, …, h17) = (1,
1, 1, 1, 0, 0 1) and h2 = (h21, h22, …, h27) = (1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1
1). Therefore:
    (7.11)
    (7.12)
Note that the leftmost stage in both diagrams of Figure 7.10
can be removed, resulting in a shift register with K − 1 flip-
flops instead of K. In this case, the inputs to the adders must
come from (x, x−1, x−2, …, x−(K−1)), that is, the current value
of x must participate in the computations. This produces
exactly the same results as the circuit with K stages, just one
clock cycle earlier. However, it is unusual in synchronous
systems to store only part of a vector, so the option with K
stages might be preferred.
Both options (with K − 1 and K flip-flops) are depicted in
Figure 7.11, which shows the smallest convolutional code of
interest, with k = 1, n = 2, K = 3, h1 = (1, 1, 1), and h2 = (1,
0, 1). As an example, suppose that the sequence “101000…”
is presented to this encoder (from left to right). The resulting
output is then y = “11 10 00 10 11 00….”

--- Page 328 ---
FIGURE 7.11  (a), (b) Convolutional encoder with k=1,
n=2, and K=3 implemented with two and three flip-flops,
respectively; (c) state transition diagram for the FSM in (a).
Any convolutional encoder can be represented by an FSM
(finite state machine—Chapter 15), so the state transition
diagram for the encoder of Figure 7.11(a) was included in
Figure 7.11(c) (the machine has 2K−1 = 4 states, called A, B,
C, and D). In this case, the current value of x must be treated
as an input to the FSM instead of simply a state-control bit,
causing each state to exhibit two possible values for y; for
example, when in state A, the output can be y = “00” (if x =
‘0’) or y = “11” (if x = ‘1’).
The FSM model can be used to determine the number of bits
that the code can correct, given by 
(dfree − 1)/2
, where dfree
is the code’s minimum free distance, that is, the minimum
Hamming distance between the encoded codewords. This
parameter is determined by calculating the Hamming weight
(w = number of ‘1’s) in y for all paths departing from A and
returning to A, without repetition. Due to the reason
mentioned above (dual output values), examining all paths in
the diagram of Figure 7.11(c) is not simple, so either the
extended version of the FSM diagram (Figure 7.11(b)) is

--- Page 329 ---
used (so all outputs have a fixed value) or a trellis diagram is
employed.
The latter is shown in Figure 7.12(a). Inside the circles are
the state values (contents of the K − 1 = 2 shift register
stages), and outside are the values of y (= y1y2) in each
branch. Note that each state has (as mentioned above) two
possible output values represented by two lines that depart
from each state; when x = ‘0’, the upper line (transition)
occurs, while for x = ‘1’ the lower transition happens. All
paths from A to A, without repetition, are marked with
thicker lines in Figure 7.12(b), where dashed lines indicate
dead ends (repetitions). Note that “repetition” means a
transition that has already occurred, like from node B to
node C (B → C), not the repetition of a node (because each
node allows two paths or two pairs of values for y). The
shortest path in Figure 7.12(b) is also the one with the
smallest w; the path is A → B → C → A, which produces y =
“11 10 11”, so w = 5 (= dfree). Therefore, this code can
correct 
(5 − 1)/2
 = 2 errors. However, for the code to
exhibit this free distance, a minimum run of bits is needed in
x; for example, this minimum is 2K − 1 bits when the last K
− 1 bits are a tail of zeros.

--- Page 330 ---
FIGURE 7.12  General trellis diagram for the K=3
convolutional encoder of Figure 7.11(a), constructed with K – 1=2
flip-flops in the shift register; (b) Single-pass paths departing from
A and returning to A (dashed lines indicate a dead end—a
repetition).
As mentioned above, the other option to examine the paths
from A to A is to use the expanded version (Figure 7.11(b))
of the FSM. This case is depicted in Figure 7.13(a), and the
corresponding trellis is in Figure 7.13(b). The system starts
in A, with all flip-flops reset, progressing to B at the next
clock transition if x = ‘1’ or remaining in A otherwise, with a
similar reasoning applicable to the other states. Note that the
output (y) in each state is now fixed, so following the
machine paths is easier. Starting from A, and returning to A
without repeating any node (now we look simply at nodes

--- Page 331 ---
instead of transitions between nodes), we find that the
following seven paths exist (the corresponding Hamming
weights are also listed):
Path 1: ABCEA (w=5)
Path 2: ABDGEA (w=6)
Path 3: ABDHGEA (w=7)
Path 4: ABDGFCEA (w=7)
Path 5: ABCFDGEA (w=7)
Path 6: ABDHGFCEA (w=8)
Path 7: ABCFDHGEA (w=8)

--- Page 332 ---
FIGURE 7.13  (a) State transition diagram for the expanded
version (with 2K= 8 states) of the FSM (Figure 7.11(b)), which
causes the output (y=y1y2) in each state to be fixed; (b)
Corresponding trellis diagram with the shortest path (from A to
A), plus one of the longest paths, and also a dead path (due to the
repetition of state D) highlighted.

--- Page 333 ---
The shortest path, one of the longest paths, and also a dead
path are marked with thicker lines in the trellis of Figure
7.13(b). Note that, as expected, the smallest w is still 5. In
this version of the FSM the longest path (without repetition)
cannot have more than eight transitions because there are
only eight states, so w≤8. Likewise, because there are K = 3
flip-flops in the shift register, at least K + 1 = 4 transitions
(clock cycles) are needed for a bit to completely traverse the
shift register, so the shortest path cannot have less than K + 1
= 4 transitions (note that path 1 above has only four
transitions, while paths 6–7 have eight).
Even though convolutional encoders are extremely simple
circuits, the corresponding decoders are not. The two main
types of decoders are called Viterbi decoder [Viterbi67] and
sequential decoder (of which the Fano algorithm [Fano63] is
the most common). In the former, the size grows
exponentially with K (which is consequently limited to
∼ 10), but the decoding time is fixed. The latter is more
appropriate for large Ks, but the decoding time is variable,
causing large signal latencies, so the Viterbi algorithm is
generally preferred. Moreover, in some applications small
convolutional codes have been concatenated with Reed-
Solomon codes to provide very small error rates. In such
cases, the decoder is referred to as a concatenated RSV
(Reed-Solomon-Viterbi) decoder.
7.8 Viterbi Decoder
As mentioned above, the Viterbi decoder is the most
common decoder for convolutional codes. It is a maximum-
likelihood algorithm (the codeword with the smallest
Hamming distance to the received word is taken as the

--- Page 334 ---
correct one), and it can be easily explained using the trellis
diagram of Figure 7.12.
Suppose that the K = 3 encoder of Figure 7.11(a) is
employed and receives the bit stream x = “0110000…”
(starting from the left) depicted in Figure 7.14. Using the
trellis of Figure 7.12(a), we verify that the sequence y = “00
11 01 01 00 11 00 00…” is produced by the encoder.
However, as shown in Figure 7.14, let us assume that two
errors are introduced by the channel, causing y* = “00 11 00
00 11 00 00…” to be actually received by the decoder.
FIGURE 7.14  Example of sequence processed by the K=3
convolutional encoder of Figure 7.11(a) with two errors
introduced in the communications channel.
The decoding procedure is illustrated in Figure 7.15 where
hard decision is employed (hard decision is called so
because it is based on a single decision bit, that is, zero or
one; Viterbi decoders can also operate with soft decision,
which is based on integers rather than on a zero-or-one
value, leading to superior performance).

--- Page 335 ---
FIGURE 7.15  Viterbi decoding procedure for the sequence
shown in Figure 7.14 (with two errors). The last trellis shows the
traceback, which produces the corrected codeword.

--- Page 336 ---
The encoder of Figure 7.15 was assumed to be initially in
state A. When the first pair of values (y* = “00”) is received
(Figure 7.15(a)), the Hamming distance (which constitutes
the code’s metric) between it and the only two branches of
the trellis allowed so far is calculated and accumulated. Then
the next pair of values (y* = “11”) is received (Figure
7.15(b)), and a similar calculation is developed with the new
accumulated metric now including all four trellis nodes. The
actual decisions will begin in the next iteration. When the
next pair of values (y* = “00”) is presented (Figure 7.15(c)),
each node is reached by two paths. Adding the accumulated
metrics allows each node to decide which of the two paths to
keep (the path with the smallest metric is chosen). This
procedure is repeated for the whole sequence, finally
reaching the situation depicted in Figure 7.15(g), where the
last pair of values is presented. Note the accumulated metric
in the four possible paths (one for each node). Because A is
the node with the smallest metric, the path leading to A is
taken as the “correct” codeword. Tracing back (see the thick
line in Figure 7.15(h)), y** = “00 11 01 01 11 00 00…”
results, which coincides with the transmitted codeword (y),
so the actual x can be recovered without errors in spite of the
two errors introduced by the channel (recall that the K “ 3
code can correct two errors even if they are close to each
other, or it can correct various groups of up to two errors if
the groups are far enough apart).
To recover the original sequence during traceback, all that is
needed is to observe whether the upper or lower branch was
taken in each transition. The first traceback step in Figure
7.15(h) is from A to A; note that, when going forward, from
node A the encoder can only move to node A (if input = ‘0’)
or B (if ‘1’), so the first traceback bit is ‘0’. The second
traceback step is also from A to A, so the second bit is also

--- Page 337 ---
‘0’. The third traceback step is from A to C; because node C
is connected to nodes A (for input = ‘0’) and B (for ‘1’), the
third bit is again ‘0’. Following this reasoning for all seven
traceback steps, the sequence “0110000” results (where the
first traced-back bit is the rightmost), which coincides with
the original sequence.
A fundamental issue regards the depth (L) of the decoder.
The more the decoder iterates before deciding to trace back
to find the (most likely) encoded sequence, the better. It was
shown [Viterbi67], however, that little gain occurs after ∼ 5K
iterations. For the K = 3 encoder, this means that L ∼  15
iterations should occur before any output is actually made
available. Likewise, for the K = 7 code of Figure 7.10(b),
about 35 iterations are required. Therefore, L determines the
amount of delay between the received and the decoded
codewords, as well as the amount of memory needed to store
the trellis states. These two parameters (delay and memory)
are therefore the ultimate deciding factors in the choice of K
in an actual application.
Another observation regards the traceback procedure. If the
sequence is simply truncated, then the starting node for
traceback is the output node with the smallest metric (node A
in the example of Figure 7.15(h)). However, determining the
node with the smallest metric requires additional
computation effort, which can be avoided with the inclusion
of a tail of K − 1 zeros at the end of the bit sequence, which
forces the final node to always be A, so traceback can always
start from it without any previous calculation.
7.9 Turbo Codes
A new class of convolutional codes, called turbo codes
[Berrou93], was introduced in 1993. Because it achieves

--- Page 338 ---
even better performance than the concatenated RSV code
mentioned earlier, intense research followed its publication.
Before we present its architecture, let us observe the
convolutional encoder of Figure 7.16. This circuit is
equivalent to that in Figure 7.11(a), also with k = 1, n = 2,
and K = 3 (note that the option with K − 1 = 2 flip-flops in
the shift register was employed, which does not alter the
encoding). The difference between these two circuits is that
the new one has a recursive input (that is, one of the outputs
is fed back to the input); moreover, the no longer existent
output was replaced with the input itself (so now y1 = x; note
that the other output, y2, is still computed in the same way).
The resulting encoder is then systematic (the information bits
are separated from the parity bits). Because it is recursive,
systematic, and convolutional, it is called RSC encoder. As
expected, the output sequence generated by this encoder is
different from that produced by the equivalent encoder of
Figure 7.11(a). In general, the RSC option tends to produce
codewords with higher Hamming weights, leading to a
slightly superior performance in low signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) channels.
FIGURE 7.16  Recursive systematic convolutional (RSC)
encoder with k=1, n=2, and K=3, equivalent to the nonrecursive
convolutional (NRC) encoder of Figure 7.11(a) (the case with K –
1=2 flip-flops in the shift register was used here). Note that y1 is
the input itself (systematic encoder), while y2 is still computed in
the same way.

--- Page 339 ---
Now we turn to the architecture of turbo codes. As shown in
Figure 7.17, it consists of two (normally identical) RSCs
connected in parallel. Note that there is also an interleaver at
the input of the second encoder, so it receives a different bit
sequence. Note also that each individual encoder has only
one output (y1 in encoder 1, y2 in encoder 2) because the
other output is the input itself. If the output sequence is …
xy1y2 xy1y2 xy1y2 …, then the overall code rate is r = 1/3.
FIGURE 7.17  Turbo encoder, which consists of two RSC
encoders connected in parallel (but separated by an interleaver).
A major advantage of this encoding scheme is that the
decoder is constructed with two individual (separated)
decoders, connected in series, plus a de-interleaver, so the
overall decoding complexity is not much higher than that of
convolutional codes alone. These convolutional decoders are
implemented using soft decision (Bahl algorithm and
others), achieving higher performance. In summary, the
overall complexity is comparable to that of the concatenated
RSV (Reed-Solomon-Viterbi) decoder mentioned earlier, but
the overall error-correcting capability is slightly superior.
The main disadvantage is in terms from latency.
Nevertheless, turbo codes are already used in several
applications, like third-generation cell phones and satellite

--- Page 340 ---
communications. Its growth, however, was overshadowed by
the rediscovery of LDPC codes only a few years later.
7.10 Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Codes
LDPC codes were developed by R. Gallager during his PhD
at MIT in the 1960s [Gallager63]. However, the discovery of
Reed-Solomon codes, with a simpler decoding procedure,
followed by concatenated RSV codes and eventually turbo
codes, caused LDPC codes to remain unnoticed until they
were brought to attention again in 1996 [MacKay96].
Subsequently, it was demonstrated that LDPC codes can
outperform turbo codes (and therefore any other code known
so far), being only a fraction of a decibel shy of the Shannon
limit. For that reason, LDPC codes tend to become the
industry standard for high-tech applications like digital video
broadcasting and next-generation cellular phones.
Like any other code, it can be represented by the pair (n, k),
where n indicates the number of channel bits for every k
information bits. Therefore, m = n − k is again the number of
parity (redundancy) bits. Additionally, like any linear code,
LDPC codes can be represented by a parity-check matrix, H,
whose dimension is again m-by-n. However, in the case of
LDPC, two additional conditions arise: (1) n is large (often
many thousand bits), and consequently so is m; (2) H
contains only a few ‘1’s per row or column. The latter
condition is referred to as parity-check sparsity and is
specified using wrow and wcol, which represent the Hamming
weights (number of ‘1’s) of the rows and columns of H,
respectively, with wrow 
  n and wcol 
  m.
When wrow and wcol are constant, the code is said to be
regular, while nonconstant values render an irregular code.

--- Page 341 ---
The codes originally proposed by Gallager fall in the former
category, but it has been demonstrated that very large n
irregular codes can achieve superior performance. An
example of regular code (from [Gallager63]) is shown in
Figure 7.18, with n = 20, m = 15 (so k = 5), wrow = 4, and
wcol = 3.
FIGURE 7.18  Example of low density parity check matrix,
with n=20, m=15 (so k=5), wrow=4, and wcol=3.
LDPC codes are normally described using a Tanner graph.
The construction of this type of graph is illustrated in Figure
7.19(b), which implements the parity-check matrix of Figure
7.19(a) (though this is not a low density matrix, it is simple
enough to describe the construction of Tanner graphs). As
usual, the dimension of H is m-by-n, so m = 4 and n = 6 in
this example. As can be seen, the graph contains m test-
nodes (shown at the top) and n bit-nodes (at the bottom).
Each test-node represents one parity-check equation (that is,
one row of H); test-node 1 has connections to bit-nodes 1, 2,
and 3 because those are the bits equal to ‘1’ in row 1 of H;
likewise, test-node 2 is connected to bit-nodes 1, 4, and 5
because those are the nonzero bits in row 2 of H, and so on.

--- Page 342 ---
FIGURE 7.19  (a) Parity-check matrix and (b)
corresponding Tanner graph.
Consequently, because each test-node represents one of the
parity-check equations, the set of tests performed by the test-
nodes is equivalent to computing HcT, which must be zero
when a correct codeword is received. In other words, the
parity-check tests performed by the four test-nodes in Figure
7.19(b) are described by the following modulo-2 sums (XOR
operations), which are all ‘0’ for a valid codeword:
      (7.13a)
      (7.13b)
      (7.13c)
      (7.13d)
Besides low density, another major requirement for H to
represent an LDPC code is the inexistence of 4-pass cycles

--- Page 343 ---
(also called short cycles). This is illustrated with thick lines
in Figure 7.20(b). This kind of loop can cause the code to get
stuck before the received codeword has been properly
corrected, or it can simply indicate that the received
codeword contains errors when it does not. (Note that there
is more than one 4-pass cycle in Figure 7.20(b).)
FIGURE 7.20  Example of Tanner graph with 4-pass cycle.
There are two main methods for generating LDPC codes,
called random designs and combinatorial designs. For large
n, the random generation of LDPC matrices normally leads
to good codes (pseudorandom methods are used in which 4-
pass cycles are prevented or eliminated afterward). In
combinatorial processes, more regular geometric structures
are created, adequate for small n. The example in Figure
7.18 falls in the latter category.
There are several algorithms for decoding LDPC codes,
collectively called message-passing algorithms, because they
pass messages back and forth in a Tanner graph. These
algorithms can be divided into two main types, called belief-
propagation (with hard or soft decision) and sum-product
(with soft decision only).
In belief-propagation, the information is passed either as a 1-
bit decision (zero or one, hence called hard decision) or as a
probability (called soft decision). If the logarithm of the
probability is used in the latter, then it is called sum-product

--- Page 344 ---
algorithm. Soft decision algorithms achieve better
performance than hard decision, but the general idea is
simpler to understand using the latter, which is described
below.
Consider once again the parity-check matrix and
corresponding Tanner graph seen in Figure 7.19. When a
codeword is received, the test nodes perform the tests t1 to t4
in (Equations 7.13(a)-(d)))). If all yield ‘0’, then the received
codeword is valid and the decoding procedure should end.
Otherwise, information passing must occur as follows. Test-
node 1 receives information (codeword values) from bit-
nodes 1, 2, and 3, which it uses to compute the information
that must be passed back to those same nodes. However, the
information returned to bit-node 1 (which is a modulo-2
sum, or XOR operation) cannot include the information
received from that node; in other words, the information
passed from test-node 1 to bit-node 1 is t11 = c2 ⊕  c3. The
same reasoning applies to the other nodes, so the complete
information set passed from the test- to the bit-nodes in
Figure 7.19(b) is the following:
      (7.14a)
      (7.14b)
      (7.14c)

--- Page 345 ---
      (7.14d)
Upon receiving this information, the bit-nodes must update
the codeword values. This is done using a majority function,
that is, a codeword bit is flipped if most of the information
bits that are received, which are assumed to be true (thus the
name belief-propagation) are in disagreement with the bit’s
current value. In summary, the set of computations
performed by the bit-nodes is the following:
      (7.15a)
      (7.15b)
      (7.15c)
      (7.15d)
      (7.15e)

--- Page 346 ---
      (7.15f)
As an example, suppose that the codeword c = “110100” was
transmitted (note that this is a valid codeword because HcT =
0), and that noise in the communications channel caused an
error in its second bit, so c’ = “100100” was received. The
decoding procedure is illustrated in Figure 7.21. In Figure
7.21(a), the received codeword is presented to the decoder
(at the bit-nodes), so ones (solid lines) and zeros (dashed
lines) are transmitted to the test-nodes. In Figure 7.21(b), the
test-nodes calculate t1, t2, t3, and t4 (Equations 7.13(a)-(d)),
resulting in “1010”. Because not all tests produced a zero,
there is at least one error in the received codeword, thus the
decoding procedure must continue. In Figure 7.21(c), the test
nodes produce the individual information bits tij to be sent to
the bit-nodes (Equations 7.14(a)–(d))); again, ones are
represented by solid lines, and zeros are represented by
dashed lines. In Figure 7.21(d), each bit-node computes the
majority function (Equations 7.15(a)–(f)) to update the
codeword bits (indicated by arrows). In Figure 7.21(e), the
new codeword values (“110100”) are sent back to the test-
nodes. Finally, in Figure 7.21(f), the test-nodes redo the
tests, now producing t1 = t2 = t3 = t4 = ‘0’, so the decoding
procedure is concluded and the decoded (corrected)
codeword is c = “110100”, which coincides with the
transmitted codeword.

--- Page 347 ---
FIGURE 7.21  Belief-propagation decoding procedure for
the LDPC code represented by the parity-check matrix of Figure
7.19(a). The received codeword is “100100”, which is decoded as
(corrected to) “110100”.
7.11 Exercises
1. Single parity check code
Assume that the character string “Hi!”, encoded
using the ASCII code, must be transmitted using an
asynchronous transmission protocol similar to that
seen in Figure 7.2, which includes start, stop, and
parity bits. Draw the corresponding 33-bit waveform.
2. CRC code #1
a. Make a sketch (like that in Figure 7.4) for
a circuit that implements the CRC-8
encoder.
b. Using the circuit drawn above, find the
CRC-8 value for the string d(x) =
“01100010”, previously calculated in Figure
7.3 using regular polynomial division.

--- Page 348 ---
Compare your result against that in Figure
7.3.
3. CRC code #2
Using the CRC-8 circuit drawn in part (a) of the
exercise above, find the CRC-8 value for the 14-bit
character string “Hi”, assuming that it has been
encoded using the ASCII code.
4. Error-correcting codes
a. Error-correcting codes are normally
represented by the pair (n, k). What is the
meaning of n and k?
b. What is the meaning of rate of a code?
Write its expression as a function of n and k.
c. Suppose that the minimum Hamming
distance between the codewords of a certain
code is dmin = 5. How many errors can it
correct and how many errors can it detect?
d. Repeat part (c) for dmin = 6.
5. Hamming code #1
a. How many errors can a Hamming code
correct?
b. If one is willing to add four redundancy
bits to each codeword to produce a system
capable of correcting one error per
codeword, what is the maximum length of
the final codeword (with the m =4 parity bits
included)?
c. For the case in (b), write the (n, k) pair for
the corresponding Hamming code.
d. Still regarding (b), what is the maximum
number of information codewords?
e. Finally, what is the code rate in (b)?

--- Page 349 ---
6. Hamming code #2
Consider the (7, 4) Hamming code defined by the
parity-check matrix H and generator matrix G of
Figure 7.5.
a. The codewords are seven bits long. How
many of these bits are information bits and
how many are parity bits?
b. What is the rate of this code?
c. Why is this particular case called
systematic?
d. Why is this particular case called cyclic?
Show some examples to illustrate your
answer.
7. Hamming code #3
Consider again the (7, 4) Hamming code of Figure
7.5.
a. If the information word “1111” is
presented to the encoder, what codeword
does it produce at the output? Determine the
codeword using the generator matrix, G,
then compare it to that listed in the table.
b. Suppose that this codeword is transmitted
over a noisy channel and is received by the
decoder at the other end with the rightmost
bit in error. Using the syndrome decoding
procedure (which employs the parity-check
matrix, H), show that the decoder is capable
of correcting it.
c. Suppose that now the last two bits are
received with errors. Decode the codeword
and confirm that two errors cannot be
corrected.

--- Page 350 ---
8. Hamming code #4
Consider the Hamming code defined by the parity-
check matrix of Figure E7.8 (note that the columns of
H are organized in increasing order of the
corresponding decimal values, that is, H = [1 2 3 4 5
6 7]).
a. What are the parameters k, n, m, and dmin
of this code?
b. How many errors can it correct?
c. Find a generator matrix, G, for this code.
d. Is this code systematic?
e. Is this code cyclic?
9. Reed-Solomon code
FIGURE E7.8
Suppose that a regular RS code is designed to operate
with blocks whose individual symbols are four bits
long (so b = 4).
a. What is the total number of symbols (n) in
this code?
b. If m = 4 symbols in each block are parity
(redundancy) symbols, what is the code’s (n,
k) specification?
c. How many symbols can the code above
correct?
d. Because each symbol contains four bits,
does it matter how many of these four bits
are wrong for the code to be able to correct a
symbol?

--- Page 351 ---
e. Why is it said that RS codes are
recommended for the correction of error
bursts?
10. Audio CD #1
a. What is the playing rate, in information
bits per second, of a conventional audio
CD?
b. What is its playing rate in CIRC-encoded
bits per second?
c. What is the playing rate in sectors per
second?
d. Given that the total playing time is 74
minutes, how many sectors are there?
11. Audio CD #2
a. Frame is the smallest entity of an audio
CD. Explain its construction.
b. Sector (or block) is the next CD entity.
What does it contain?
c. Given that the playing time of an audio
CD is around 75 minutes, what is its
approximate capacity in information bytes?
12. Audio CD #3
Given that a conventional audio CD plays at a
constant speed of approximately 1.3 m/s, prove the
following:
a. That the amount of information bits is
∼ 1.09 Mb/m.
b. That the amount of CIRC-encoded bits is
∼ 1.45 Mb/m.
c. That the amount of disk (or channel) bits
is ∼ 3.32 Mb/m.

--- Page 352 ---
d. That a 2.7-mm scratch can corrupt ∼ 3.9k
of CIRC-encoded bits.
13. Interleaving
Consider the block interleaving shown in Figure
E7.13 where data are written in vertically (one row at
a time) and read out horizontally (one column at a
time). The data written to the block are the ASCII
string “Hello!!” Read it out and check in the ASCII
table (Figure 2.11) the resulting (interleaved) seven-
character string.
14. Convolutional code #1
FIGURE E7.13
Consider the convolutional encoder with k = 1, n = 2,
and K = 7 of Figure 7.10(b).
a. What is the meaning of these parameters
(k, n, K)?
b. Suppose that the input (x) rate is 100
Mbps. With what frequency must the switch
(a multiplexer) that connects y1 and y2 to y
operate?
c. If the input sequence is x = “11000…”,
what is the output sequence?
d. The diagram shows a shift register with K
stages (flip-flops). However, we saw that an

--- Page 353 ---
equivalent encoder results with K − 1 stages.
Sketch such a circuit.
15. Convolutional code #2
A convolutional encoder with K = 7 was shown in
Figure 7.10(b), and another with K = 3 was shown in
Figure 7.11(a). Draw another convolutional encoder,
with K = 4 (k = 1, n = 2), given that its coefficients
are h1 = (h11, h12, h13, h14) = (1, 0, 1, 1) and h2 = (h21,
h22, h23, h24) = (1, 1, 0, 1). Make two sketches:
a. For K stages in the shift register.
b. For K − 1 stages in the shift register.
16. Convolutional code #3
Consider the convolutional encoder with k = 1, n = 2,
and K = 3 of Figure 7.11(a).
a. Given that the encoder is initially in state
A =“00” and that the sequence x =“101000
…” (starting from the left) is presented to it,
determine the corresponding (encoded)
sequence, y. (Use the trellis diagram of
Figure 7.12 to easily solve this exercise.)
b. Suppose now that the sequence y = “11 10
00 10 10 00 00 …” was produced and
subsequently transmitted over a noisy
channel and was received at the other end
with two errors, that is, y* = “10 11 00 10 10
00 00 ….” Using the Viterbi algorithm (as in
Figure 7.15), decode the received string and
check whether the decoder is capable of
correcting the errors (as you know, it should,
because this code’s free distance is 5).
17. Turbo codes

--- Page 354 ---
a. Why are turbo codes said to belong to the
family of convolutional codes?
b. Briefly describe the main components of a
turbo code. Why are the individual encoders
called RSC?
c. The convolutional encoder of Figure
7.10(b) is nonrecursive. Make the
modifications needed to make it usable in a
turbo code.
d. As we saw, turbo codes are quite new
(1993). Even though they could outperform
all codes in use at that time, why were they
overshadowed only a few years later?
18. LDPC code #1
Consider the parity-check matrix presented in Figure
7.18. If only the upper third of it were employed,
which would the code’s parameters (n, m, k, wrow,
wcol) be? Would it be a regular or irregular LDPC
code?
19. LDPC code #2
Consider a code represented by the parity-check
matrix of Figure E7.19 (this is obviously not an
actual low-density matrix, but it is simple enough to
allow the decoding procedure to be performed by
hand).
a. What are this code’s n, m, k, wrow, and
wcol parameters?
b. Draw the corresponding Tanner graph.
c. Show that this graph contains a 4-pass
cycle.
d. Check whether the codewords
“00111100” and “00111000” belong to this

--- Page 355 ---
code.
e. Suppose that the codeword “00111100” is
received by the decoder. Decode it using the
belief-propagation procedure described in
Figure 7.21. Compare the result with your
answer in part (d) above.
f. Repeat part (e) above for the case when
“00111000” is received. Even though this
codeword has only one error, can this
decoder correct it?
20. LDPC code #3
FIGURE E7.19
Consider a code represented by the parity-check
matrix of Figure E7.20.
a. What are the corresponding values of n,
m, k, wrow, and wcol? Is this code regular or
irregular?
b. Draw the corresponding Tanner graph.
Does it contain 4-pass cycles?
c. Check whether the codewords “0011011”
and “0011111” belong to this code.
d. Suppose that the codeword “0011011” is
received by the decoder. Decode it using the
procedure described in Figure 7.21.
Compare the result against your answer in
part (c) above.

--- Page 356 ---
e. Repeat part (d) above for the case when
“0011111” is received. Again, compare the
result against your answer in part (c).
FIGURE E7.20
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 357 ---
8
Bipolar Transistor
Chapter Contents
8.1 Semiconductors
8.2 The Bipolar Junction Transistor
8.3 I-V Characteristics
8.4 DC Response
8.5 Transient Response
8.6 AC Response
8.7 Modern BJTs
8.8 Exercises
Objective:
Transistors are the main components of digital circuits. Consequently, to truly
understand such circuits, it is indispensable to know how transistors are
constructed and how they function. Even though the bipolar transistor, which
was the first type used in digital circuits, is now used in fewer digital
applications, a study of it facilitates an understanding of the evolution of
digital logic and why MOS-based circuits are so popular. Moreover, the
fastest circuits are still built with bipolar transistors, and new construction
techniques have improved their speed even further (these new technologies

--- Page 358 ---
are also included in this chapter). It is also important to mention that for
analog circuits, the bipolar transistor still is a major contender.
8.1 Semiconductors
The preferred semiconductor for the fabrication of electronic
devices is silicon (Si) because Si-based processes are more
mature, and they cost less than other semiconductor
processes.
To construct transistors, diodes, or any other devices, the
semiconductor must be “doped,” which consists of
introducing controlled amounts of other materials (called
dopants) into the original semiconductor. In the case of Si,
which has four valence electrons, such materials belong
either to group III (like B, Al, Ga, In) or group V (P, As, Sb)
of the periodic table.
Semiconductor doping is illustrated in Figure 8.1. In Figure
8.1(a), a dopant with five valence electrons (phosphorus, P)
was introduced into the crystalline structure of Si. P forms
four covalent bonds with neighboring Si atoms, leaving its
fifth electron, which has a very small bonding energy, free to
wander around in the structure. As a result, the region
surrounding the P atom becomes positively charged (a fixed
ion), while the electron becomes a free charge. Because P
has “donated” an electron to the structure, it is said to be a
donor-type dopant, and because the free charge is negative,
the doped material is said to be an n-type semiconductor.

--- Page 359 ---
FIGURE 8.1  (a) Doping of silicon with a donor
(phosphorus), resulting in an n-type material; (b) Doping with an
acceptor (boron), resulting in a p-type material.
The reverse situation is depicted in Figure 8.1(b), where a
valence-3 atom (boron, B) was employed, creating a fixed
negatively charged region around the B atom plus a free
hole. Because B “accepts” an electron from the structure, it
is said to be an acceptor-type dopant, and because the free
charge is positive, the doped material is said to be a p-type
semiconductor.
Typical doping concentrations are ND = 1015 atoms/cm3 for
donors and NA = 1016 atoms/cm3 for acceptors. There are,
however, cases when the semiconductor must be heavily
doped (to construct wires or to create good ohmic contacts,
for example), in which concentrations around 1018
atoms/cm3 are employed (Si has a total of ∼ 1022
atoms/cm3). Heavily doped regions are identified with a “+”
sign after n or p (that is, n+ or p+).
Besides Si, Ge (germanium) and GaAs (gallium arsenide)
are also very important semiconductors for the construction
of electronic devices. A comparison between their electron
and hole mobilities (to which the device’s maximum
operating speed is intimately related) can be observed in
Figure 8.2.

--- Page 360 ---
FIGURE 8.2  Carrier mobility and intrinsic carrier
concentration of main semiconductors.
While GaAs has the highest electron mobility, it also
exhibits the poorest hole mobility, so for high-frequency
circuits, only electron-based GaAs devices are useful. Ge, on
the other hand, has good mobility for electrons and for holes.
Even though its intrinsic carrier concentration (Figure 8.2) is
too high for certain analog applications (like very-low-noise
amplifiers), that is not a problem for digital circuits. The
importance of these materials (GaAs and Ge) resides mainly
in the fact that they can be combined with Si in modern
construction techniques to obtain extremely fast transistors
(advanced bipolar transistors are described in Section 8.7,
and advanced MOS transistors are described in Section
10.8).
8.2 The Bipolar Junction Transistor
Transistors play the main role in any digital circuit. The first
logic families were constructed with bipolar junction
transistors (BJTs), while current digital integrated circuits
employ almost exclusively MOSFETs. The former is
described in this chapter, while the latter is discussed in
Chapter 9.
As mentioned in Section 1.1, the bipolar junction transistor,
also called bipolar transistor or simply transistor, was
invented at Bell Laboratories in 1947. As depicted in Figure

--- Page 361 ---
8.3(a), it consists of a very thin n-type region (called base),
sandwiched between a heavily doped p+ region (called
emitter) and a lightly doped p region (called collector). The
n+ and p+ diffusions at the base and collector provide proper
ohmic contacts. Because of its doping profile, this transistor
is called pnp, and it is represented by the symbol shown on
the left of Figure 8.3(b). The reverse doping profile
constitutes the npn transistor, represented by the symbol on
the right of Figure 8.3(b). Due to its higher speed and higher
current gain, the latter is generally preferred.
FIGURE 8.3  (a) Cross section of a pnp transistor; (b) pnp
and npn transistor symbols.
In digital applications, a BJT operates as a switch that closes
between collector and emitter when the base-emitter junction
is forward biased, which for silicon requires a voltage VBE ≈
0.7 V for npn or VBE ≈ −0.7 V for pnp transistors. This
behavior is illustrated in Figure 8.4. A simple switching
circuit is shown in Figure 8.4(a), which employs an npn
transistor, a load resistor (RC) at the collector, and a current-
limiting resistor (RB) at the base. In Figure 8.4(b), ‘0’ (0 V)
is applied to the circuit, causing the transistor to be cut off,
hence IC = 0 and, consequently, VO = VCC (= 5 V = ‘1’). The
OFF transistor is represented by an open switch on the right
of Figure 8.4(b). The reciprocal situation is depicted in
Figure 8.4(c), that is, a ‘1’ (VCC) is applied to the input,

--- Page 362 ---
which causes the transistor to be turned ON (because VCC >
0.7 V), hence allowing IB to flow and, consequently, causing
IC to also exist. The ON transistor is represented by a closed
switch on the right of Figure 8.4(c). (The actual value of VO
when the transistor is saturated is not exactly 0 V, but around
0.1 V to 0.2 V for low-power transistors.)
FIGURE 8.4  (a) Simple switching circuit with npn BJT; (b)
Cutoff mode (‘0’ applied to the input), represented by an open
switch; (b) Saturation mode (‘1’ applied to the input), represented
by a closed switch.
8.3 I-V Characteristics
Figure 8.5 shows typical I-V characteristics for a BJT. The
plots relate the collector signals (IC × VCE), with each curve
measured for a fixed value of IB. The plot contains two
regions that are called active and saturation. Linear (analog)
circuits operate in the former, while switching (digital)
circuits operate either in the latter or cut off.

--- Page 363 ---
FIGURE 8.5  Typical I-V characteristics of an npn bipolar
transistor.
To be in the active or in the saturation region, the transistor
must first be turned ON, which requires VBE ≈ 0.7 V (for a
silicon npn transistor). If IC is not too large, such that VCE ≥
VBE, then the transistor operates in the active region, where
the relationship between the base current, IB, and the
collector current, IC, is very simple, given by IC=βIB, where
β is the transistor’s current gain. Observe that β = 150 in
Figure 8.5 (just divide IC by IB in the active region). On the
other hand, if IC is large enough to cause VCE<VBE, then both
transistor junctions (base-emitter and base-collector) are
forward biased, and the transistor operates in the saturation
region (note the dividing, dashed curve corresponding to VCE
= VBE in the figure), in which IC = βIB no longer holds. In it,
IC < βIB because IC is prevented from growing any further,
but IB is not.
The transistor behavior described above can be summarized
by the following equations (where the junction voltage, Vj, is
∼ 0.7 V for Si or ∼ 0.2 V for Ge):
Cutoff region:

--- Page 364 ---
    (8.1)
Active region:
    (8.2)
Saturation region:
    (8.3)
As can be observed in Figure 8.5, the active region is
characterized by the fact that (ideally) IC is not affected by
VCE, that is, if IB stays constant, then IC stays constant too
(IC = βIB) for any VCE.
In the saturation region, however, VCE does affect IC.
Moreover, for IC > 0, VCE cannot decrease below ∼ 0.1 V to
0.2 V (for low-power transistors; higher values are exhibited
by high-power BJTs); this voltage is called VCEsat. To
simplify circuit analysis, the transistor is sometimes
considered to be saturated not when VCE reaches VBE but
when VCE cannot decrease any further (that is, when it
reaches VCEsat).
Another important aspect related to the saturation region is
derived from Equation 8.3; IB > IC/β implies that the higher
IB, the more saturated the transistor is. To indicate
approximately how deep into saturation the transistor is, the
following parameter can be employed:
Saturation factor:

--- Page 365 ---
    (8.4)
In the equation above, IB and IC are the actual values of the
base and collector currents, respectively. Therefore, α is the
ratio between the current that would occur in the collector
(βIB) in case the transistor had not been saturated and the
actual current there.
α = 1 occurs in the active region, whereas α > 1 indicates
that the transistor is saturated. For example, if α = 2, then the
value of IB is approximately twice the minimum value
needed to saturate the transistor (recall that, strictly
speaking, the transistor enters the saturation region when
VCE = VBE). For digital applications, α > 1 is necessary to
guarantee that the transistor remains saturated when β is
smaller than the estimated value (due to parameter
dispersion or temperature decrease) and also to turn the
transistor ON faster. On the other hand, a large α reduces the
OFF switching speed and increases power consumption. The
use of these equations will be illustrated shortly.
8.4 DC Response
As seen in Section 1.11, the three main types of circuit
responses are:
 DC response: Circuit response to a large slowly
varying or static stimulus (employed for any type
of circuit)
 Transient response: Circuit response to a large
fast-varying (pulsed) stimulus (normally employed
for switching circuits)

--- Page 366 ---
 AC response: Circuit response to a small
sinusoidal stimulus (employed for linear circuits)
The presentation starts with the DC response, which, using
the transistor’s I-V characteristics (Figure 8.5) or the
corresponding Equations 8.1-8.3 combined with the circuit’s
own parameters, can be easily determined. This can be done
analytically (using the equations) or graphically (using a
load line), as illustrated in the examples that follow.
EXAMPLE 8.1 DC RESPONSE #1
Suppose that the transistor in Figure 8.4 exhibits β = 125, Vj =
0.7 V, and VCEsat = 0.2 V. Given that VCC = 3.3 V, RB =
68kΩ, RC = 1 kΩ, and that VI is a slowly varying voltage in the
range 0 V ≤ VI ≤ VCC, calculate:
a. The range of VI for which the transistor is (i) cut
off, (ii) in the active region, and (iii) in thesaturation
region.
b. The saturation factor (α) when VI is maximum.
SOLUTION
Part (a):
i. According to Equation 8.1, the transistor is OFF
while VI<Vj, that is, for 0 ≤ VI <0.7 V.
ii. When VI grows, so does IC because IC = βIB and
IB = (VI – Vj)/RB. The growth of IC causes VCE to
decrease because VCE = VCC – RCIC. Eventually,
the point where VCE = VBE (or, equivalently, VCB =
0) is reached, after which the transistor leaves the
active for the saturation region. Using VCE = VBE (=
Vj), IC = (VCC – Vj)/RC = 2.6 mA results in the limit
between these regions, so IB = IC/β = 20.8 μ A and,
consequently, from IB = (VI – Vj)/RB, we obtain VI =

--- Page 367 ---
2.11 V. Therefore, the transistor operates in the active
region for 0.7V ≤ VI ≤ 2.11 V.
iii. Finally, the saturation region occurs for 2.11 V <
VI ≤ 3.3 V.
Note: As mentioned earlier, for (ii) a simplification is often
made in which saturation is considered when VCE = VCEsat
occurs instead of VCE = VBE. In that case, the (approximate)
results would be 0.7 V ≤ VI ≤2.39 V for the active region, so
2.39 V < VI ≤ 3.3 V for the saturation region.
Part (b):
When VI = 3.3 V (maximum), IB = (VI – Vj)/RB = 38.2 μA and
IC = (VCC – VCEsat)/RC = 3.1 mA. Therefore, α = βIB/IC =
125 × 0.0382/3.1 = 1.54, that is, the transistor operates with IB
approximately 54% higher than the minimum needed to fully
saturate it.
EXAMPLE 8.2 DC RESPONSE #2
This example illustrates how a graphical procedure (load line)
can help examine the DC response. Another common-emitter
(inverter) circuit is shown in Figure 8.6(a) with a slowly
varying voltage 0 V ≤ VB ≤ VCC applied to its input. Assume
that the transistor’s I-V characteristics are those in Figure 8.5
(repeated in Figure 8.6(b)), so β = 150. Moreover, assume that
Vj = 0.7 V and VCEsat = 0.2 V. Given that VCC = 5 V, RB = 43
kΩ, and RC = 470 Ω, do the following:
a. Write the equation for the circuit’s DC load line,
then draw it.
b. Check whether the transistor is saturated when the
input voltage is maximum.
c. Calculate the coordinates for the operating points
corresponding to cutoff and full saturation, then mark
them on the load line.
d. Calculate the coordinates for the point where the
transistor enters the saturation region, then mark it on

--- Page 368 ---
the load line.
e. Highlight the section of the load line that belongs
to the active region and comment on it.
FIGURE 8.6  DC response of Example 8.2: (a)
Basic common-emitter circuit; (b) Load line with
operating points.
SOLUTION
Part (a):
The load line equation involves the same signals
employed in the I-V characteristics, that is, IC and VCE.
The simplest way to write such an equation is by going
from VCC to GND through the collector. Doing so for the
circuit of Figure 8.6(a), VCC = RCIC + VCE is obtained.
To draw the line, two points are needed; taking those for
IC = 0 (point A) and for VCE = 0 (point E), the following
results: A(Ic = 0, VCE = VCC) = A(0 mA, 5 V) and E(IC =
VCC/RC, VCE = 0) = E(10.64 mA, 0 V). These two points
correspond to the ends of the load line shown in Figure
8.6(b).
Part (b):

--- Page 369 ---
When VB is maximum, IB = (VCC – Vj)/RB = 100 μA,
VCE = VCEsat = 0.2 V (assuming that the transistor is
fully saturated—checked below), and consequently IC =
(VCC – VCEsat)/RC = 10.21 mA. From Equation 8.4 we
then obtain α = βIB/IC = (150 × 0.100)/10.21 = 1.47, so
the transistor is indeed saturated and operating with a base
current roughly 47% higher than the minimum needed to
saturate it (recall that this is an approximate/conservative
estimate because the transistor indeed enters the saturation
region when VCE = VBE).
Part (c):
Both points were already determined above, that is, A(0
mA, 5 V) and D(10.21 mA, 0.2 V), and they are marked
on the load line of Figure 8.6(b). Note that D lies on the
intersection between the load line, and the I-V curve for IB
= 100 μA (because this in the transistor’s IB saturation
current).
Part (d):
It is important not to confuse the values of IC and VCE at
which the circuit enters the saturation region (this occurs
for VCE = VBE) with those where the circuit actually rests
within that region (normally at VCE = VCEsat). With VCE
= VBE, IC = (VCC – VBE)/R5 = 9.15 mA results, so the
coordinates are C(9.15 mA, 0.7 V).
Part (e):
The active region spans the range 0.7 V ≤ VCE ≤ 5 V or,
equivalently, 0 mA ≤ IC ≤ 9.15 mA. This portion of the
load line is highlighted by a gray area in Figure 8.6(b).
Switching (digital) circuits jump back and forth between

--- Page 370 ---
points A and D, while linear (analog) circuits, like
amplifiers and filters, operate in the active region (point B,
for example).
EXAMPLE 8.3 DC RESPONSE #3
The common-emitter circuit of Figure 8.7(a) served as the basis
for one of the first logic families, called DTL (diode-transistor
logic—Section 10.2). Suppose that it is part of a digital system
that operates with logic voltages ‘0’ = 0 V and ‘1’ = 5 V. To
examine its DC response, let us consider again the application
of a slowly varying voltage VB to its input, ranging between 0
V and 5 V.
a. Plot VBE as a function of VB.
b. Plot IB as a function of VB.
c. Plot IC as a function of VB.
d. Plot VCE as a function of VB.
FIGURE 8.7  DC response of Example 8.3: (a)
Common-emitter circuit to which a slowly varying
voltage VB is applied; (b) Corresponding VBE and
VCE plots; (c) Corresponding IB and IC plots.

--- Page 371 ---
SOLUTION
Part (a):
While the transistor is OFF, VBE is given by VBE = VBR2/(R1
+ R2) = 0.5 VB. When VBE reaches Vj = 0.7 V (which occurs
for VB = 2 VBE = 1.4 V), the transistor is turned ON. After that
point, VBE remains approximately constant at 0.7 V. The plot
of VBE is shown in Figure 8.7(b).
Part (b):
While VB < 1.4 V, the transistor is OFF, so IB = 0. For VB ≥
1.4 V, the transistor is ON, with VBE fixed at 0.7 V. Therefore,
I2 = VBE/R2 = 14.9 μA is constant. Because I1 = IB + I2,
where I1 = (VB – VBE)/R1, IB = (VB – VBE)/R1 – I2 results,
which is zero for VB < 1.4 V and 76.6 μA for VB = 5 V. The
plot of IB is shown in Figure 8.7(c).
Part (c):
While the transistor is OFF (VB < 1.4 V), IC = 0. When it is
turned ON, it operates initially in the active region, in which IC
= βIB and VCE is large. However, as IC grows, VCE decreases,
causing the transistor to eventually reach the point where VCE
= VBE (0.7 V), below which it operates in the saturation
region. As mentioned before, to simplify circuit analysis and
design, the active region is often considered up to the point
where VCE reaches VCEsat ( ∼ 0.2 V), an approximation that
will be adopted here. When VCE = VCEsat, the collector
current is IC = (VCC – VCEsat)/RC = 4.8 mA. With the
approximation mentioned above, this occurs for IB = IC/β =
4.8/150=32 μA, so VB = R1(IB + I2) + VBE = 2.9 V. After this
point, IC stays constant at 4.8 mA. The plot of IC is also shown
in Figure 8.7(c).
Part (d):
While the transistor is OFF, VCE = 5 V. In the active region,
VCE = VCC – RCIC, which lasts until VB = 2.9 V (recall the

--- Page 372 ---
approximation mentioned above). After that, VCE = VCEsat =
0.2 V. The plot of VCE is shown in Figure 8.7(b).
8.5 Transient Response
A circuit’s behavior in the face of a large pulse is called
transient response, which is a fundamental measure of the
dynamic (temporal) performance of switching (digital)
circuits.
This type of response is illustrated in Figure 8.8. In Figure
8.8(a), the test circuit is shown, while Figure 8.8(b) depicts
its respective input and output signals. In this example, the
input stimulus is the voltage vB (applied to the transistor’s
base through a current-limiting resistor RB) and the output
(response) is the collector current, iC. Note that lower case
instead of capital letters are used to represent temporal
(instantaneous) signals. Observe that the transitions of the
measured signal (iC) are composed of four time intervals,
called time delay (td), rise time (tr), storage delay time (ts),
and fall time (tf).

--- Page 373 ---
FIGURE 8.8  (a) Test circuit; (b) Transient response; (c)
BJT constructed with a Schottky diode between base and collector
to reduce the turn-off time; (d) TTL NAND gate.
As illustrated in Figure 8.6(b), when a transistor in a digital
circuit is turned ON, its operating condition is changed from
point A (cutoff) to point D (saturation). This process has
three phases: (i) from cutoff to the beginning of the active
region, (ii) through the active region, and (iii) through the
saturation region until the final destination within it. The
delay in (i) is td, that in (ii) is tr, and that in (iii) is of little
importance (for digital systems) because iC is then already
near its final value. In summary, the total time to turn the
transistor ON is approximately ton = td + tr.
td is the time needed to charge the emitter-base junction
capacitance from cutoff to the beginning of the active region.
After that, minority carriers (electrons in the case of an npn
transistor) start building up in the base, causing iC to grow
roughly in the same proportion. However, as iC grows, vCE
decreases, eventually reaching the point where VCE = VBE

--- Page 374 ---
( ∼ 0.7 V), thus concluding the passage through the active
region.
The time spent to traverse the active region is tr, which is
measured between 10% and 90% of iC’s static values. It is
important to recall that, even though iC cannot grow much
further in the saturation region, iB can, so charge continues
building up in the base (known as saturation buildup).
Because the amount of charge available affects the time
needed to charge the emitter-base junction capacitor (td) and
also the buildup of charges in the base (tr), the larger IB, the
smaller ton. Therefore, a heavily saturated transistor (high α)
is turned ON faster than a lightly saturated one.
Conversely to the process described above, to turn a
transistor OFF, its operating condition must be changed from
point D (saturation) back to point A (cutoff) in Figure 8.6(b).
This process also has three phases: (i) from saturation to the
beginning of the active region, (ii) through the active region,
and (iii) through the cutoff region until iC ceases completely.
The delay in (i) is ts, that in (ii) is tf, and that in (iii) is of
little importance because iC is already near its final value. In
summary, the total time to turn the transistor OFF is
approximately toff = ts + tf.
ts is the time needed to remove the charge previously stored
in the base during the saturation buildup process. When
enough charge has been removed, such that vCE = vBE, the
transistor enters the active region, during which the charge
stored in the base continues being removed but now with iC
decreasing roughly in the same proportion.
Similarly to tr, tf is the time taken to traverse the active
region, measured between 90% and 10% of the static values.
Due to the nature of ts, it is clear that a heavily saturated
transistor (high α) takes longer to be turned OFF (more
charge to be removed) than a lightly saturated one.

--- Page 375 ---
The storage delay (ts) is generally the dominant term in
conventional low-speed transistors (see Figure 8.9). A
classical technique for reducing it is to avoid deep-saturation
operation. A transistor for that purpose is depicted in Figure
8.8(c), constructed with a Schottky (clamp) diode connected
between base and collector. Such a diode is obtained from a
metal-semiconductor contact, leading to a very compact and
inexpensive structure with a low junction voltage, Vj ∼  0.4
V; therefore, VCE can never go below ∼ 0.3 V.
FIGURE 8.9  Transient delays and transition frequencies of
some commercial BJTs.
Figure 8.8(d) shows the circuit of an actual NAND gate
constructed with BJTs. This type of architecture is called
TTL (transistor-transistor logic) and will be discussed in
Chapter 10. TTL gave birth to the popular 74-series of digital
chips.
EXAMPLE 8.4 TIME-RELATED
TRANSISTOR PARAMETERS
Figure 8.9 shows the transient delays as well as the transition
frequency (described next) of several commercial transistors.
Even though improvements in the former tend to improve the
latter, note that the relationship between them is not linear.
Note also that, as expected, in low-speed transistors, ts is the
largest transient delay.

--- Page 376 ---
8.6 AC Response
The response of a circuit to a low-amplitude sinusoidal
signal is called AC response, which is a fundamental
measure of the frequency response of linear circuits. Even
though it is related to analog rather than to digital circuits
(except for fT, that indirectly applies to digital too), a brief
description is presented below.
To obtain the AC response of circuits employing BJTs, each
transistor must be replaced with the corresponding small-
signal model, after which the frequency-domain equations
are derived, generally written in factored form of poles and
zeros such that the corresponding corner frequencies and
Bode plots can be easily obtained. Typical circuit parameters
obtained from the AC response are voltage or current gain,
input impedance, and output impedance.
The BJT’s small-signal model is depicted in Figure 8.10. In
Figure 8.10(a), the model for low and medium frequencies
(no capacitors) is depicted, while Figure 8.10(b) exhibits the
high-frequency model (which includes the parasitic
capacitors). Note that in the former, the dependent current
source is controlled by the AC current gain, hfe, while in the
latter it is controlled by the transconductance factor, gm (a
relationship between them obviously exists, which is gm =
hfe/rπ, where hfe = β for low frequencies). The larger and Cπ
and Cμ, the slower the transistor. A traditional way of
measuring the effect of these capacitors is by means of a
parameter called transition frequency (fT), given by the
equation below.

--- Page 377 ---
FIGURE 8.10  BJT’s small-signal model (a) for low and
medium frequencies and (b) for high frequencies. The Bode plot
in (c) illustrates the measurement of fT (the frequency at which
hfe reduces to unity).
    (8.5)
The transconductance factor is determined by gm = IC/φt,
where φt = 26 mV is the thermal voltage at 25°C, hence gm =
39IC.
To measure fT, the frequency of the input signal (small-
amplitude sinusoid) is increased until the transistor’s AC
current gain (hfe, Figure 8.10(a)), which at low frequencies is
constant and large ( ∼ 100 to 200) is reduced to unity (0 dB).
This measurement is illustrated in the Bode plot of Figure
8.10(c), which shows frequency in the horizontal axis and hfe
(in decibels, that is, 20log10hfe) in the vertical axis (hfe = 150
was assumed at low frequency).
The value of fT depends on the transistor’s transit times
through the emitter, base, and collector regions, of which the
transit time (of minority carriers) through the base is

--- Page 378 ---
generally the largest. Therefore, to achieve high speed, that
delay must be minimized. Common techniques for that are
the use of a very thin base layer (see Figure 8.3(a)) and the
use of a graded doping in the base (higher concentration near
the emitter), which causes a built-in electric field that helps
accelerate the carriers. Moreover, because electrons are
about three times faster than holes (Figure 8.2), npn
transistors are preferred for high-speed applications (their
minority carriers in the base are electrons).
fT is an important parameter because it allows the parasitic
capacitors to be calculated (Equation 8.5), so the maximum
“usable” frequency in a given (linear) circuit can be
estimated. However, such a frequency depends not only on
the transistor parameters (Figure 8.10(b)) but also on other
circuit parameters, like resistor values. For example, for
common-emitter amplifiers, the cutoff frequency is normally
well below fT/10. Some examples of fT values were included
in Figure 8.9. With top-performance technologies (Section
8.7), fT > 200 GHz is already achievable.
It is important to mention that the higher fT, not only the
faster is a linear circuit constructed with that transistor, but
also a digital circuit that employs it. In summary, fT is the
main indicator of a transistor’s speed. For that reason, it is a
common practice for research groups looking for faster
transistors (like those described in the next section) to
announce their achievements using mainly the fT value.
8.7 Modern BJTs
To improve performance (notably speed), a series of
advanced devices were and are being developed. Some
important examples are described next.

--- Page 379 ---
8.7.1 Polysilicon-Emitter BJT
One way of boosting the speed of BJTs is depicted in
Figure 8.11, which shows a transistor fabricated with a
very shallow emitter (compare Figure 8.11 to Figure
8.3). The thin emitter, on the other hand, increases base-
emitter back charge injection, hence reducing the
emitter efficiency (γ) and, consequently, the current
gain (β). To compensate for the lower β, an also thin
polycrystalline Si film is deposited on top of the
crystalline emitter layer, resulting in a two-layer emitter
(polycrystalline-crystalline). Though the actual
compensation mechanism is rather complex, it is
believed that the lower mobility of polysilicon is
partially responsible for decreasing the charge back-
injection, thus reducing the shallow-emitter effects on
β.
FIGURE 8.11  Simplified cross section of a
polysilicon-emitter BJT.
8.7.2 Heterojunction Bipolar Transistor
A heterojunction bipolar transistor (HBT) is a transistor
in which at least one of the junctions is formed between
dissimilar materials. The dissimilar junction of interest
is the base-emitter junction. The material with the wider
energy gap is placed in the emitter, while the other
constitutes the base. The difference between the energy

--- Page 380 ---
gap of the two materials (which is zero in a regular
BJT) greatly improves the emitter efficiency (γ) by
preventing base-emitter back injection, which translates
into a much higher (up to three orders of magnitude)
current gain (β). As a result, the base can now be more
heavily doped to reduce its resistance (smaller transit
time), and the emitter can be less doped (reduced
capacitance), resulting in a faster transistor. Even
though β decreases as the base is more heavily doped (β
decreases in the same proportion as the base doping
concentration is elevated), this is viable because of the
enormous boost of β caused by the dissimilar material.
A major constraint, however, is that the two materials
must have similar lattice constants (similar atomic
distances) to avoid traps and generation-recombination
centers at their interface. Moreover, HBTs are often
constructed with materials that exhibit higher electron
mobility than Si, like Ge, GaAs, and other III–V
compounds. The two main HBT devices (GaAs-
AlGaAs HBT and Si-SiGe HBT) are described below.
GaAs-AlGaAs HBT: A heterojunction transistor having
GaAs as the main material and AlGaAs as the dissimilar
material is depicted in Figure 8.12. GaAs constitutes the
substrate, collector, and base, while AlxGa1−xAs (0 < x
< 1) is employed in the emitter (dark layer). The extra
n+ emitter layer provides a proper ohmic contact with
metal. The energy gap and the lattice constant of GaAs
are EG = 1.42 eV and α = 5.6533A°, respectively, while
those of Alx Ga1−xAs, for x = 1, are EG = 2.17 eV and α
= 5.6605A°. Therefore, these two materials have similar
lattice constants and, because the latter exhibits a higher
EG, it is located in the emitter. Notice in Figure 8.12

--- Page 381 ---
that to attain the extra benefit described above (higher
speed) the emitter is less doped, and the base is more
doped than in the regular BJT (Figure 8.3).
FIGURE 8.12  Simplified cross section of a GaAs-
AlGaAs HBT.
Si-SiGe HBT: Although more expensive than Si, more
difficult to process, and with an intrinsic carrier
concentration ( ∼ 1013 free electron hole pairs per cm3 at
25°C—see Figure 8.2) too high for certain analog
applications (e.g., very-low-noise amplifiers), Ge
exhibits higher electron and hole mobilities than Si.
And, more importantly, Ge can be incorporated into a
regular Si-based CMOS process with the simple
addition of a few extra fabrication steps, which is not
viable with GaAs. This combination of technologies is
crucial for SoC (system-on-chip) designs because it
makes possible the construction of highperformance
digital as well as analog circuits on the same die.
A simplified cross section of a Si-SiGe HBT is depicted
in Figure 8.13. The main material is Si (substrate,
collector, and emitter), while the dissimilar material is
Si1−xGex (base, indicated with a dark layer). To avoid an
undesirable energy-band discontinuity at the base-

--- Page 382 ---
emitter junction, a small value of x is used initially,
which increases gradually toward the collector
(typically up to ∼ 30%). The gradual increase of x
creates a built-in accelerating electric field that further
improves charge speed. As required, the two materials
have a relatively large difference in energy gap (1.12
eV for Si, 0.67 eV for Ge), and the material with the
wider energy gap (Si) is used in the emitter. Moreover,
to achieve the extra high-speed benefit described
earlier, the base is more doped, and the emitter is less
doped than in a regular BJT (Figure 8.3). The n+ layer
at the emitter provides the proper ohmic contact with
metal. Si and Ge, however, do not have similar lattice
constants (5.431A° for Si, 5.646A° for Ge). The
construction of Figure 8.13 is only possible because of
a phenomenon called semiconductor straining. When a
very thin (generally < 100nm, depending on x) SiGe
film is grown on top of a preexisting Si layer, the
former conforms with the atomic distance of the latter
(materials that conform with the lattice constant of
others are called pseudo-morphic). As a result,
construction defects at the Si-SiGe interface do not
occur. The resulting transistor exhibits a cutoff
frequency fT > 200 GHz, comparable to or even higher
than that of GaAs-based transistors.

--- Page 383 ---
FIGURE 8.13  Simplified cross section of a Si-SiGe
HBT.
Note: Even though in the approach described above Ge
was employed as a possible replacement for GaAs, such
is not possible in the fabrication of photo-emitting
devices (LEDs, laser diodes, etc.) because Ge and Si are
not direct-band devices, so they cannot emit light.
8.8 Exercises
1. Semiconductors
a. Briefly describe “semiconductor doping.”
b. Briefly compare Ge, Si, and GaAs. Which
can be used for very-low-noise amplifiers?
And for light-emitting devices? Why is Si
preferred whenever possible?
2. BJT #1
a. Make a sketch similar to that in Figure
8.3(a) but for an npn transistor instead of
pnp.
b. The thinness of one of its three layers is
what causes the BJT to exhibit a high current
gain. Identify that layer in Figure 8.3(a) as
well as in your sketch for part (a) above.

--- Page 384 ---
c. Briefly describe the BJT’s operation as a
switch.
3. BJT #2
Make a sketch for a pnp transistor operating as a
switch similar to that in Figure 8.4. (Suggestion: See
similar circuits, with MOSFETs, in Figures 4.1 and
4.2.)
4. DC response #1
The questions below refer to the circuit of Figure
E8.4, where VX is a slowly varying voltage from 0 V
to 10 V. Note the presence of a negative supply
(VBB), which reduces the turn-off time by providing a
negative voltage at the base when VX = 0.
a. For VX = 0 V, calculate VY, I1, I2, IB, IC,
and VZ.
b. Repeat the calculations above for VX = 10
V.
c. In part (b), is the transistor saturated?
What is the value of α?
5. DC response #2
FIGURE E8.4
The questions below pertain to the circuit of Figure
E8.4.
a. Plot VY as a function of VX.

--- Page 385 ---
b. Plot IB as a function of VX.
c. Plot IC as a function of VX.
d. Plot VZ as a function of VX.
e. For which values of VX is the transistor (i)
cut off, (ii) in the active region, and (iii)
saturated?
f. Draw the load line for this circuit and
mark on it (i) the cutoff point, (ii) the point
where the transistor enters the saturation
region, and (iii) the point where the
transistor rests while saturated.
6. DC response #3
Redo Exercise 8.4 with RC reduced to 500Ω.
7. DC response #4
Redo Exercise 8.5 with RC reduced to 500Ω
8. DC response #5
Redo Exercise 8.4 with R2 and VBB removed from
the circuit.
9. DC response #6
Redo Exercise 8.5 with R2 and VBB removed from
the circuit.
10. DC response #7
Redo Example 8.2 with RB = 39 kΩ instead of 43kΩ.
11. DC response #8
Redo Example 8.3 with R1 = R2 = 39 kΩ instead of
47 kΩ.
12. Dynamic transistor parameters
a. Check the datasheets for the traditional
2N3904 BJT, and write down its transient
delays (td, tr,ts, tf) and transition frequency
(fT).

--- Page 386 ---
b. Make a sketch for the transient response
of this transistor (as in Figure 8.8(b)).
c. Look for the commercial transistor with
the largest fT that you can find.
13. Transient response
Make a sketch for the transient response relative to
the circuit of Figure E8.4. Assume that VX is a 0 V/10
V pulse with frequency 100 MHz and that the
transistor switching delays are td = tr = 1 ns and ts = tf
= 2 ns. Using VX as reference, present three plots: for
VY (with no delays), for iC (with the delays above),
and finally one for vZ (derived from iC).
14. Switching speed-up technique
Figure E8.14 shows an old technique for reducing the
transistor’s turn-on and turn-off times, which consists
of installing a capacitor in parallel with the base
resistor. The advantage of this technique is that it
causes a brief positive spike on vB at the moment
when vI transitions from ‘0’ to ‘1’ and also a negative
spike when it transitions from ‘1’ to ‘0’, thus
reducing ton as well as toff without the need for an
extra supply (VBB). Using vI as reference, make a
sketch of vB to demonstrate that the spikes do indeed
happen. What is the time constant (τ = Req · Ceq)
associated with each spike?
FIGURE E8.14

--- Page 387 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 388 ---
9
MOS Transistor
Chapter Contents
9.1 Semiconductors
9.2 The Field-Effect Transistor (MOSFET)
9.3 I-V Characteristics
9.4 DC Response
9.5 CMOS Inverter
9.6 Transient Response
9.7 AC Response
9.8 Modern MOSFETs
9.9 Exercises
Objective:
Modern digital circuits are implemented using almost exclusively MOS
transistors. Therefore, to truly understand digital circuits, it is indispensable to
know how MOS transistors are constructed and work, which is the purpose of
this chapter. Basic circuit analysis is also included in the examples, as well as
a special section on new MOS construction technologies for enhanced high-
speed performance.
9.1 Semiconductors

--- Page 389 ---
Note: The material presented below, previously seen in
Section 8.1, is indispensable for a good understanding of the
sections that follow. For that reason, it is repeated here.
The preferred semiconductor for the fabrication of electronic
devices is silicon (Si), because Si-based processes are more
mature and cost less than other semiconductor processes.
However, to construct transistors, diodes, or any other
devices, the semiconductor must be “doped,” which consists
of introducing controlled amounts of other materials (called
dopants) into the original semiconductor. In the case of Si,
which has four valence electrons, such materials belong
either to group III (like B, Al, Ga, In) or group V (P, As, Sb)
of the periodic table.
Semiconductor doping is illustrated in Figure 9.1. In Figure
9.1(a), a dopant with five valence electrons (phosphorus, P)
was introduced into the crystalline structure of Si. P forms
four covalent bonds with neighboring Si atoms, leaving its
fifth electron, which has a very small bonding energy, free to
wander around in the structure. As a result, the region
surrounding the P atom becomes positively charged (a fixed
ion), while the electron becomes a free charge. Because P
has “donated” an electron to the structure, it is said to be a
donor-type dopant, and because the free charge is negative,
the doped material is said to be an n-type semiconductor.


--- Page 390 ---
FIGURE 9.1  (a) Doping of silicon with a donor
(phosphorus), resulting in an n-type material; (b) Doping with an
acceptor (boron), resulting in a p-type material; (c) Carrier
mobility and intrinsic carrier concentration of main
semiconductors.
The reverse situation is depicted in Figure 9.1(b), where a
valence-3 atom (boron, B) was employed, creating a fixed
negatively charged region around the B atom plus a free
hole. Because B “accepts” an electron from the structure, it
is said to be an acceptor-type dopant, and because the free
charge is positive, the doped material is said to be a p-type
semiconductor.
Typical doping concentrations are ND = 1015 atoms/cm3 for
donors and NA = 1016 atoms/cm3 for acceptors. There are,
however, cases when the semiconductor must be heavily
doped (to construct wires or to create good ohmic contacts,
for example), in which concentrations around 1018
atoms/cm3 are employed (Si has a total of ∼ 1022
atoms/cm3). Heavily doped regions are identified with a “+”
sign after n or p (that is, n+ or p+).
Besides Si, Ge (germanium) and GaAs (gallium arsenide)
are also very important semiconductors for the construction
of electronic devices. A comparison between their electron
and hole mobilities (to which the device’s maximum
operating speed is intimately related) is presented in Figure
9.1(c). While GaAs has the highest electron mobility, it also
exhibits the poorest hole mobility, so for high-frequency
circuits, only electron-based GaAs devices are useful. Ge, on
the other hand, has good mobility for electrons and for holes.
Even though its intrinsic carrier concentration is too high for
certain analog applications (like very-low-noise amplifiers),
that is not a problem for digital circuits. The importance of
these materials (GaAs and Ge) resides mainly on the fact

--- Page 391 ---
that they can be combined with Si in modern construction
techniques to obtain extremely fast transistors (described in
Sections 8.7, for bipolar transistors, and 9.8, for MOS
transistors).
9.2 The Field-Effect Transistor (MOSFET)
MOSFETs (metal oxide semiconductor field effect
transistors), also called MOS transistors, were introduced in
Section 4.1. They grew in popularity since the beginning of
the 1970s when the first integrated microprocessor (Intel
4004, ∼ 2300 transistors, 1971), employing only MOSFETs,
was introduced.
Such popularity is due to the fact that a minimum-size
MOSFET occupies much less space than a minimum-size
BJT, plus no resistors or any other biasing components are
needed in MOSFET-based digital circuits (thus saving
silicon space). More importantly, MOSFETs allow the
construction of logic circuits with virtually no static power
consumption, which is impossible with BJTs.
9.2.1 MOSFET Construction
Figure 9.2(a) shows the cross section of an n-channel
MOSFET (also called nMOS transistor). It consists of a
p-doped substrate in which two heavily doped n+
islands are created, which are called source and drain.

--- Page 392 ---
FIGURE 9.2  Cross sections of (a) n-channel (b) p-
channel MOSFETs; (c) Corresponding top view; (d)
MOSFET symbols.
A control plate, called gate, is fabricated parallel to the
substrate and is insulated from it by means of a very
thin (<100A° in deep-submicron devices) oxide layer.
The substrate region immediately below the gate (along
the substrate-oxide interface) is called channel because
it is in this portion of the substrate that the electric
current flows (this will be explained later). This
MOSFET is said to be of type n (n-channel or nMOS)
because the channel is constructed with electrons,
which are negative.
A similar structure, but with the opposite doping
profile, is depicted in Figure 9.2(b). This time the
substrate is of type n, so the channel is constructed with
holes (which are positive), so it is said to be a p-type
MOSFET (p-channel or pMOS). Symbols for both
transistors are shown in Figure 9.2(d).

--- Page 393 ---
A top view for any of the MOSFETs shown in Figures
9.2(a)–(b) is presented in Figure 9.2(c), where W is the
channel width and L is the channel length. Intuitively,
the larger the W and the shorter the L, the stronger the
current through the channel for the same external
voltages.
A fundamental parameter that identifies a MOS
technology is the smallest device dimension that can be
fabricated (normally expressed in micrometers or
nanometers), more specifically, the shortest possible
channel length (Lmin). This parameter was 8 μm in the
beginning of the 1970s and is now just 65 nm (and
continues shrinking, with 45 nm devices already
demonstrated and expected to be shipped in 2008). For
example, the top FPGA devices described in Chapter 18
(Stratix III and Virtex 5) are both fabricated using 65
nm MOS technology. One of the main benefits of
transistor downsizing is the increased transistor
switching speed because of reduced parasitic
capacitances and reduced path resistances.
In the design of ICs, the technology parameter
mentioned above is normally expressed by means of λ
(lambda), which is half the smallest technology
dimension. For example, λ = 60 nm for 130 nm
technology. The smallest channel dimension generally
is W/L = 3λ/2λ, where W/L is called channel width-to-
length ratio. As mentioned, the larger the W and the
smaller the L, the stronger the transistor (that is, the
higher its drain current for a fixed gate-to-source
voltage).
9.2.2 MOSFET Operation

--- Page 394 ---
The digital operation of MOS transistors was also
introduced in Section 4.1 (Figures 4.1–4.3 Figure 4.2
Figure 4.3). We now look at the physical structure of a
MOS transistor to explain its behavior.
An n-channel MOSFET is shown in Figure 9.3. In
Figure 9.3(a), the original structure is seen under
electrical equilibrium (no external electric fields), so the
transistor is OFF. In Figure 9.3(b), a positive voltage is
applied to the gate (note that the substrate is grounded).
Because of the insulating SiO2 layer under the gate, this
structure resembles a parallel-plate capacitor with the
gate acting as the positive plate and the substrate as the
negative one. The gate voltage causes electrons (which
are the minority carriers in the p-type substrate) to
accumulate at the interface between the substrate and
the oxide layer (channel) at the same time that it repels
holes. If the gate voltage is large enough to cause the
number of free electrons in the channel to outnumber
the free holes, then that region behaves as if its doping
were of type n. Because the source and drain diffusions
are also of type n, a path then exists for electrons to
flow between source and drain (transistor ready for
conduction). Finally, in Figure 9.3(c), another positive
voltage is applied, this time between drain and source,
so electrons flow from one to the other through the
channel (the actual direction of the electrons is from S
to D, so the arrow goes from D to S because it is always
drawn as if the carriers were positive). When the gate
voltage is removed, the accumulated electrons diffuse
away, extinguishing the channel and causing the electric
current to cease. In summary, the transistor can operate

--- Page 395 ---
as a switch that closes between terminals D and S when
a positive voltage is applied to terminal G.
FIGURE 9.3  MOSFET operation: (a) Original
structure with no external electric fields (transistor OFF);
(b) A positive gate voltage creates a “channel” between
source and drain (the transistor is ready to conduct); (c) The
addition of a voltage between the drain and source causes
electrons to flow through the channel.
If the MOSFET in Figure 9.3 were of type p, then a
negative voltage would be needed at the gate to attract
holes to the channel. This, however, would require an
additional (negative) power supply in the system, which
is obviously undesirable. To circumvent that problem,
the substrate is connected to a positive voltage (such as
VDD=3.3 V) instead of being connected to GND;
consequently, any voltage below VDD will look like a
negative voltage to the gate.
The minimum gate voltage required for the channel to
“exist” is called threshold voltage (VT). In summary, for
an nMOS, VGS≥VT is needed to turn it ON, while for a
pMOS, VGS≤VT (VT is negative) is needed. Typical
values of VT are 0.4 V to 0.7 V for nMOS and −0.5 V to
−0.9 V for pMOS.
From the above it can be seen that a MOS transistor has
a gate voltage controlling the drain to source current,

--- Page 396 ---
whereas in a BJT a base current controls the current
flow from collector to emitter. So a BJT is a current-
controlled device and a MOS transistor is a voltage-
controlled device.
The qualitative MOS behavior described above will be
translated into mathematical equations in the next
section.
9.3 I-V Characteristics
Figure 9.4 depicts typical I-V characteristics for an nMOS
transistor. In each curve the drain-to-source current (ID) is
plotted as a function of the drain-to-source voltage (VDS) for
a fixed value of the gate-to-source voltage (VGS).
FIGURE 9.4  Typical I-V characteristics of an nMOS
transistor.
Figure 9.4 is divided into two regions by the saturation
curve (given by VDSsat = VGS − VT). The region on the right
is called saturation region, while that on the left is called
linear (or triode) region. In the saturation region, ID is
practically constant (that is, independent from VDS), hence
the name saturation, while in the linear region the

--- Page 397 ---
dependence of ID on VDS is roughly linear (though only for
very small values of VDS).
There is a third region, called subthreshold region, which is
below the curve for VGS = VT. Even though ID is near zero in
it, the tanh (hyperbolic tangent) behavior of ID in it makes it
suitable for certain analog applications, like neural networks.
For digital applications, that region is normally disregarded.
Note that the saturation and linear regions of a MOSFET
correspond to the active and saturation regions of a BJT,
respectively (these names can lead to confusion). Note also
in Figure 9.4 that the I-V behavior of a MOSFET is inferior
to that of a BJT in the sense that its saturation region is
smaller than a BJT’s active region (compare the position of
the saturation curve in Figure 9.4 against that in Figure 8.5).
The I-V characteristics of Figure 9.4 can be summarized by
the following equations:
Cutoff region:
    (9.1)
Saturation region:
    (9.2)
Linear region:
    (9.3)

--- Page 398 ---
β in the equations above is measured in A/ V2 (not to be
confused with β of BJTs) and is determined by β =
μCox(W/L), where μ is the electron (for nMOS) or hole (for
pMOS) mobility in the channel, Cox is the gate oxide
capacitance per unit area, and W/L is the channel width-to-
length ratio. Cox can be determined by Cox = εox/tox, where
εox = 3.9 ε0 is the permittivity of SiO2, ε0 = 8.85 · 10−14 F/cm
is the permittivity in vacuum, and tox is the thickness of the
gate oxide. For example, Cox=1.73 fF/μm2 results for
tox=200 A°.
If it is an n-type MOSFET, electrons are responsible for the
current, whose mobility is given in Figure 9.1(c) (1400
cm2/Vs for silicon). However, because the channel is formed
at the Si-SiO2 interface, defects and scattering at the
interface (the structure of SiO2 does not match the crystalline
structure of Si) cause the actual mobility (called effective
mobility) to be much lower ( ∼ 50%) than that in the bulk.
Moreover, the mobility decreases a little as VGS increases.
Assuming μn = 700 cm2/Vs, β = 121(W/L) μA/V2 is
obtained. The same reasoning applies to p-type MOSFETs.
However, it is very important to observe that because of its
lower mobility (Figure 9.1(c)), the value of β for a pMOS is
about 2.5 to 3 times smaller than that of a same-size nMOS
(that is, βn ≈ 2.5βp).
The curve shown in Figure 9.4 that separates the triode from
the saturation regions is called saturation curve and obeys
the expression below.
Saturation curve:
9.4 


--- Page 399 ---
An important circuit parameter is the value of VDS (or ID) at
the interface between these two regions. Such value is
determined by finding the point where the circuit’s load line
(explained in Example 9.2) intercepts the saturation curve. If
the circuit’s load is written in the form of Equation 9.5, with
parameters a and b, then Equation 9.6 results:
Circuit’s load line:
    (9.5)
Saturation-triode boundary:
    (9.6)
The use of all equations above will be illustrated shortly.
9.4 DC Response
As seen in Section 1.11, the three main types of circuit
responses are:
 DC response: Circuit response to a large slowly
varying or static stimulus (employed for any type
of circuit)
 Transient response: Circuit response to a large
fast-varying (pulsed) stimulus (normally employed
for switching circuits)
 AC response: Circuit response to a small
sinusoidal stimulus (employed for linear circuits)

--- Page 400 ---
The presentation starts with the DC response, which, using
the transistor’s I-V characteristics (Figure 9.4), or the
corresponding Equations (9.1-9.3), combined with the
circuit’s own parameters, can be easily determined. This can
be done analytically (using the equations) or graphically
(using a load line) as illustrated in the examples that follow.
EXAMPLE 9.1 DC RESPONSE #1
A basic common-source (inverting) circuit is depicted in Figure
9.5(a). It consists of a MOSFET with a load resistor RD
connected to the drain and an input-impedance determining
resistor RG connected to the gate. The circuit is called
common-source because the source terminal is connected to a
fixed voltage (ground in this case). Assuming that a slowly
varying voltage VG in the range from 0 V to VDD is applied to
the circuit, answer the following:
a. For which range of VG is the transistor in the
cutoff region?
b. For which range of VG is the transistor in the
saturation region?
c. For which range of VG is the transistor in the
triode/linear region?
d. Plot ID as a function of VG.
e. Plot VDS as a function of VG.
FIGURE 9.5  DC response of Example 9.1: (a)
Common-source circuit to which a slowly varying

--- Page 401 ---
voltage VG is applied; (b) ID × VG plot; (c) VDS ×
VG plot.
SOLUTION
Part (a):
According to Equation 9.1, the transistor remains OFF while
VGS < VT. Because in this circuit VGS = VG, the cutoff region
is for 0 V ≤ VG < 1 V. (Note: In practice, it is not totally OFF,
but operating in the subthreshold region, where the currents are
extremely small, hence negligible for most applications.)
Part (b):
According to Equation 9.2, the transistor remains in the
saturation region while VDS ≥ VGS – VT. Therefore, using ID
= (β/2)(VGS – VT)2 combined with VDS = VDD – RDID, plus
the condition VDS = VGS – VT, we obtain VGS = 2.79 V.
Therefore, the transistor operates in the saturation region while
VG is in the range 1 V ≤ VG ≤ 2.79 V. For VG = 2.79 V, ID =
3.21 mA and VDS = 1.79 V.
Part (c):
According to Equation 9.3, the transistor operates in the triode
(or linear) region when VDS < VGS – VT, which occurs for any
VG > 2.79 V. For VG = 5V, we obtain ID = 4.4 mA and VDS =
0.6 V.
Part (d):
The plot of ID is shown in Figure 9.5(b). From 0 V to 1 V the
transistor is OFF, so ID = 0. From 1 V to 2.79 V it is in the
saturation region, so Equation 9.2 was employed to sketch the
current. Finally, above 2.79 V it operates in triode mode, so
Equation 9.3 was used for ID. As mentioned above, ID = 3.21
mA for VG = 2.79 V, and ID = 4.4 mA for VG = 5 V.
Part (e):

--- Page 402 ---
The plot of VDS is shown in Figure 9.5(c). It is straightforward
because VDS = VDD − RDID The main values of VDS are 5 V
while the transistor is OFF, 1.79 V for VG=2.79 V, and finally
0.6 V for VG=5 V.
EXAMPLE 9.2 DC RESPONSE #2
This example presents a graphical solution (with a load line)
for the problem seen above (similarly to what was done for a
BJT-based circuit in Example 8.2). The circuit was repeated in
Figure 9.6(a).
a. Write the equation for the circuit’s DC load line
and draw it.
b. Calculate the coordinates for the point where the
transistor enters the linear region and mark it onthe
load line.
c. Check whether the transistor is in the linear region
when the input voltage is maximum. Calculate the
coordinates of this point and mark it on the load line.
d. Highlight the section of the load line that belongs
to the saturation region (called active region for
BJTs) and comment on it.
FIGURE 9.6 DC response of Example 9.2.
SOLUTION

--- Page 403 ---
Part (a):
The load line equation involves the same signals employed in
the I-V characteristics (Figure 9.6(b)), that is, ID and VDS. The
simplest way to write such an equation is by going from VDD
to GND through the drain. Doing so for the circuit of Figure
9.6(a), VDD = RDID + VDS is obtained. To draw the load line,
two points are needed; taking those for ID = 0 (point A) and for
VDS = 0 (point E), the following results: A(ID = 0, VDS =
VDD)=A(0 mA, 5 V) and E(ID = VDD/RD, VDS = 0) = E(5
mA, 0 V). These two points correspond to the ends of the load
line shown in Figure 9.6(b).
Part (b):
The intersection between the load line and the saturation curve
(point C in Figure 9.6(b)) can be determined using Equations
9.5 and 9.6. To do so, the load line must be expressed in the
form VDS = a · ID + b, hence a = −RD and b = VDD. With
these values, Equation 9.6 produces VDS = 1.79 V, from which
ID = (VDD − VDS)/RD=3.21 mA is obtained. The value of
VGS for this point, C(3.21 mA, 1.79 V), is 2.79 V, because
VDS = VGS − VT for all points of the saturation curve.
Part (c):
Because VGS = 5 V>2.79 V, the transistor is in the linear
region. Equation 9.3 must then be employed, along with VDS =
VDD – RDID, resulting in ID = 4.4 mA and VDS = 0.6 V. This
point (D) is also shown in Figure 9.6(b). Note that, as expected,
it falls on the intersection between the load line and the curve
for VGS = 5 V.
Part (d):
The saturation region spans the range 1.79 V ≤ VDS ≤ 5 V or,
equivalently, 0 mA ≤ ID ≤ 3.21 mA. This portion of the load
line is highlighted by a gray area in Figure 9.6(b). Note that it is
proportionally poorer (shorter) than the active region for a BJT

--- Page 404 ---
(compare Figures 9.6(b) and 8.6(b)). If this circuit were
employed as a switching (digital) circuit, then it would jump
back and forth between points A and D. However, if employed
as a linear (analog) circuit, it would operate in the saturation
region (point B, for example).
9.5. CMOS Inverter
The CMOS inverter was introduced in Section 4.2, where its
operation, power consumption, and timing diagrams were
described. Now that we know more about MOS transistors,
other aspects can be examined. More specifically, its
construction, main parameters, DC response, and transition
voltage will be seen in this section, while its transient
response will be seen in Section 9.6.
A CMOS inverter is shown in Figure 9.7(a). As seen in
Section 4.2, CMOS stands for complementary MOS,
meaning that for each nMOS transistor there also is a pMOS
one. The CMOS inverter is therefore the smallest circuit in
this family because it contains only one transistor of each
type (identified as Mn for nMOS and Mp for pMOS).
FIGURE 9.7  CMOS inverter: (a) Circuit; (b) Cross section
view.

--- Page 405 ---
Its physical implementation is illustrated in the cross section
of Figure 9.7(b), showing the nMOS on the left (constructed
directly into the substrate) and the pMOS on the right (a
large n-type region, called n-well, is needed to construct this
transistor; this region acts as a substrate for pMOS
transistors). Observe that the actual substrate is connected to
GND, while the n-well is connected to VDD (as explained
earlier, the latter avoids the use of negative voltages because
any voltage lower than VDD will automatically look negative
to the pMOS transistor).
The operation of this circuit is as follows. Suppose that the
threshold voltages of the nMOS and pMOS transistors are
VTn = 0.6 V and VTp = −0.7 V, respectively, and that VDD=5
V. In this case, any VI around or greater than 0.6 V will turn
the nMOS transistor ON (because its source is connected to
GND), while any voltage around or below 4.3 V will turn the
pMOS transistor ON (because its source is connected to
VDD). Therefore, for VI < 0.6 V, only the pMOS will be ON,
which guarantees that the output node (with the parasitic
capacitance C) gets fully charged to VDD. Likewise, when VI
> 4.3 V, only the nMOS will be ON, hence completely
discharging C and guaranteeing a true zero at the output.
Note that when the input remains at ‘0’ or ‘1’, there is no
static current flowing between VDD and GND (because one
of the transistors is necessarily OFF), which constitutes the
main attribute of this kind or architecture (called CMOS
logic). This means that the circuit consumes virtually no
power while there is no activity at the input (except for very
small leakage currents).
The DC response of this circuit is illustrated in Figure 9.8(a).
Portion I of the transfer curve corresponds to VI < VTn, so VO
= VDD because only Mp is ON; it operates in linear mode
because VGSp = −5 V and VDSp = 0 V. Portion II corresponds

--- Page 406 ---
to VTn ≤ VI < VTR, so Mn and Mp are both ON. However,
because VI is small and VO is still high, Mn operates in
saturation mode, while Mp continues in linear mode. In
portion III, both Mn and Mp operate in saturation, so the
voltage gain is maximum and the transition is sharper
(ideally, this portion of the curve should be vertical). Next,
the circuit enters portion IV of the transfer curve, that is, VTR
< VI ≤ VDD + VTp, where VO is low and VI is high, so Mn
changes to linear mode, while Mp remains in saturation.
Finally, portion V occurs when VI > VDD + VTp, in which Mp
is turned OFF, so Mn produces VO = 0 V; Mn is in the linear
region because VI = 5 V and VO = 0 V.
FIGURE 9.8  DC response of a CMOS inverter: (a)
Operating regions and transition voltage; (b) Measurement of
low/high input/output voltages.
An important design parameter related to the DC response
described above is the transition voltage (VTR), which is
measured at 50% of the logic range, as depicted in Figure
9.8(a). Because in this point both transistors operate in
saturation, the equation for VTR can be easily obtained by
equating the drain currents of Mn and Mp (using Equation
9.2), resulting in (see Exercise 9.14):

--- Page 407 ---
    (9.7)
where k=(βp/βn)1/2. This equation shows that, as expected, a
strong nMOS (small k) pulls VTR toward 0 V, while a strong
pMOS (large k) pulls it toward VDD. If k=1 and VTn = VTp,
then VTR = VDD/2.
The DC response is repeated in Figure 9.8(b) to illustrate
how the low and high switching voltages are determined.
The measurements are taken at the points where the tangent
to the transfer curve is at 135°. The meanings of the voltages
shown in the plots were introduced in Section 1.8 and will be
seen again in Chapter 10 when discussing noise margins.
EXAMPLE 9.3 CMOS INVERTER
PARAMETERS
Suppose that Mn and Mp in the circuit of Figure 9.7(a) are
designed with (W/L)n = 3/2 and (W/L)p = 6/2 (in units of
lambda), and are fabricated using a silicon process whose gate
oxide thickness is tox = 100 A° and threshold voltages are VTn
= 0.6 V and VTp = −0.7 V. Assuming that the effective mobility
(in the channel) is ∼ 50% of that in the bulk (see table in Figure
9.1(c)), determine:
a. The value of β for the nMOS transistor (βn).
b. The value of β for the pMOS transistor (βp).
c. The inverter’s transition voltage (VTR).
SOLUTION
Part (a):
With βn = μnCox(W/L)n, where μn = 700 cm2/Vs (50% of
Figure 9.1(c)), Cox=εox/tox, εox=3.9ε0, and ε0 = 8.85 ·

--- Page 408 ---
10−14F/cm, βn = 0.242(W/L)n mA/V2 results, hence βn =
0.363 mA/V2.
Part (b):
With βp = μpCox(W/L)p, where μp = 225 cm2/Vs (50% of
Figure 9.1(c)), βp = 0.078(W/L)p mA/V2 results, hence
βp, = 0.234 mA/V2.
Part (c):
k = (βp/βn)1/2 = 0.8. Therefore, using Equation 9.7, VTR
= 2.24 V is obtained. Note that, as expected, VTR is below
VDD/2 because the nMOS transistor is stronger than the
pMOS one (that is, βn > βp).
9.6 Transient Response
As mentioned earlier, transient response is the behavior of a
circuit in the face of a large rapidly varying stimulus
(generally a square pulse) from which the temporal
performance of the circuit can be measured. This type of
response is illustrated in Figure 9.9. In Figure 9.9(a), a
CMOS inverter is shown with a load capacitance CL, and in
Figure 9.9(b) its typical response to a voltage pulse is
depicted. The circuit was assumed to operate with VDD = 5V.
For simple logic circuits, the transient response is dominated
by the rise (tr) and fall (tf) times, so the propagation delays
high-to-low (tpHL) and low-to-high (tpLH) are approximately
tpHL≈tf /2 and tpLH ≈ tr/2.

--- Page 409 ---
FIGURE 9.9  Transient response of a CMOS inverter.
To determine tf, suppose that vI in Figure 9.9(b) has been at 0
V long enough for CL to be fully charged (by Mp) to VDD
(=5 V), as illustrated in Figure 9.9(c). Then the situation of
Mn right before the pulse occurs (at time t0) is that depicted
in Figure 9.9(d), where still vO=5 V and iD = 0. However, at
t0+ (Figure 9.9(e)), Mn is turned ON, causing iD > 0, which
discharges the capacitor and consequently lowers vO.
Suppose that VTn = 0.6 V. Because vI is now 5 V, only for vO
in the range 4.4 V ≤ vO ≤ 5 V will Mn operate in the
saturation region, after which it enters the linear region. In
the former the current is large and constant (Equation 9.2),
while in the latter it falls with vO (Equation 9.3). To
determine tf the current must be integrated in the range 4.5 V
= vO = 0.5 V (that is, between 90% and 10% of the static
values, as shown in Figure 9.9(b)). After integration and
some approximations, the equation below results for tf.

--- Page 410 ---
Because the circuit is symmetrical, the same reasoning can
be applied for tr.
    (9.8)
    (9.9)
EXAMPLE 9.4 TRANSIENT RESPONSE
OF A CMOS INVERTER
As mentioned above, during the discharge of CL in Figure 9.9
the current is higher (and constant) while Mn is in saturation.
Determine new equations for tf and tr adopting the
(“optimistic”) approximation that saturation indeed occurs
during the whole discharge of CL. The delays obtained here are
obviously smaller than the actual values. Compare them to
those obtained from Equations 9.8–9.9 (which are also
approximate). Assume that VTn = 0.6 V, VTp = −0.7 V, βn = 2
mA/V2, βp = 1 mA/V2, CL = 10 pF, and VDD= 5 V.
SOLUTION
This problem deals with the charge/discharge of a capacitor by
a constant current. The accumulated charge in the capacitor
when fully charged is Q = CLVDD. Dividing both sides by t,
and recalling that Q/t is current, t = CL VDD/I results. In our
particular problem, I = ID = (β/2)(VGS – VT)2 (Equation 9.2),
so the time taken to completely discharge CL is t=CLV/[(β/2)
(VGS – VT)2]. With the values given above (for the nMOS),
tf=2.58 ns results. A similar analysis for the pMOS transistor

--- Page 411 ---
(to charge the capacitor) produces tr=5.41 ns. The values from
Equations 9.8 and 9.9 are tf=4 ns and tr = 8 ns, respectively.
Power-delay product
The power-delay (PD) product is an important
measure of circuit performance because it
combines information related to the circuit’s speed
with its corresponding power consumption. A
discussion on the PD product of a CMOS inverter,
extensive to CMOS logic in general, is presented
in Section 4.2.
9.7 AC Response
The response of a circuit to a low-amplitude sinusoidal
signal is called AC response, which is a fundamental
measure of the frequency response of linear circuits. Even
though it is related to analog rather than to digital circuits
(except for fT, which indirectly applies to digital too), a brief
description is presented below.
To obtain the AC response of circuits employing MOSFETs,
the procedure is exactly the same as that seen for circuits
with BJTs in Section 8.6, that is, each transistor must be
replaced with the corresponding small-signal model, after
which the frequency-domain equations are derived, generally
written in factored form of poles and zeros such that the
corresponding corner frequencies and Bode plots can be
easily obtained. The most common parameters obtained from
the AC response are voltage and current gain, input
impedance, and output impedance.
The MOSFET’s small-signal model is depicted in Figure
9.10. In Figure 9.10(a), the model for low and medium

--- Page 412 ---
frequencies (no capacitors) is depicted, while Figure 9.10(b)
exhibits the high-frequency model (which includes the gate-
source and gate-drain parasitic capacitors). The dependent
current source is controlled by the transconductance gm (not
to be confused with gm of BTJs).
FIGURE 9.10  MOSFET’s small-signal model (a) for low
and medium frequencies and (b) for high frequencies.
In summary, the AC response of a MOSFET is determined
by four parameters: Cgs, Cgd, rd, and gm (Figure 9.10(b)). Cgs
is proportional to the gate capacitance (CoxWL); Cgd is
proportional to the gate-drain overlap, and even though its
value is small it strongly affects the high-frequency
response; rd is inversely proportional to the Early voltage
(channel-length modulation), so for long transistors it is
normally negligible (typically over 50 kΩ) finally, gm can be
determined as explained below.
If rd → ∞ in Figure 9.10(a), then id=gmvgs, that is, gm =
id/vgs. Because id and vgs are small AC signals, id/vgs can be
obtained by taking the derivative of ID/VGS, that is,
id/vgs=dID/dVGS. Using Equation 9.2, the following results:
    (9.10)
A last MOSFET parameter, which relates three of the
parameters seen above (gm, Cgs, and Cgd), is called transition

--- Page 413 ---
frequency (fT), and it has a meaning similar to fT for BJTs
(Equation 8.5). Note in Figure 9.10(b) that, contrary to
Figure 9.10(a), the input current (ig) is no longer zero, and it
grows with frequency because the reactances (XC = 1/2πfC)
of the capacitors decrease. Defining the transition frequency
as that at which the magnitude of the current gain 
id/ig
,
under ideal conditions (short-circuited output), is reduced to
unity, the following equation is obtained:
    (9.11)
9.8 Modern MOSFETs
Similarly to what was done for the BJT in Section 8.7, we
conclude this chapter by describing some modern MOSFET
construction approaches for enhanced speed. They are:
 Strained MOSFETs
 SOI MOSFETs
9.8.1 Strained Si-SiGe MOSFETs
Besides geometry downsizing, another technique
employed to increase the performance of MOSFETs is
semiconductor straining, which consists of enlarging or
compressing the atomic distance of the semiconductor
that constitutes the channel. This technique is very
recent (introduced by IBM and others in 2001) and has
already been incorporated into several 90 nm and 65 nm
devices.

--- Page 414 ---
Its basic principle is very simple and is illustrated in
Figure 9.11(a). In this case, the preexisting layer (Si1-
xGex) has a larger atomic distance than the epitaxial
layer (Si) that will be grown on top of it. If the epitaxial
layer is kept thin (below an experimentally determined
critical thickness, which depends on x, usually <50 nm),
its atoms align with the underlying layer, hence
resulting in a “stretched” (strained) Si layer. Because of
reduced charge scattering and lower effective mass in
the direction parallel to the interface, electrons travel
faster in this structure. The underlying layer does not
change its atomic distance, so is called a relaxed layer,
while the epitaxial layer is called a strained layer. Note
that, as the epitaxial layer stretches horizontally, elastic
forces cause it to compress slightly vertically.
FIGURE 9.11  (a) Illustration of semiconductor-
strain phenomenon; (b) Tensile strained Si-SiGe nMOS
transistor; (b) Compressive strained Si-SiGe pMOS
transistor.

--- Page 415 ---
An n-channel MOSFET constructed using this principle
is shown in Figure 9.11(b). As seen in the study of
HBTs, the lattice constant of Ge (a = 5.646 A°) is
bigger than that of Si (a=5.431 A°), so the atomic
distance of a thick Si1–xGex (x > 0) film is bigger than
that of Si alone, causing the Si epitaxial layer to stretch.
Common values of x in the relaxed SiGe layer are 0.2 to
0.3, while the epitaxial layer thickness is typically 10
nm to 20 nm, from which an increase around 10% to
20% in electron mobility results.
The strain described above expands the atomic
distances, so it is called tensile strain. Even though it
has a positive effect on electrons, the opposite occurs
with holes, which exhibit more mobility when the
structure is compressed. Therefore, for p-channel
MOSFETs, compressive strain is needed. One approach
(introduced by Intel) is depicted in Figure 9.11(c),
where the source and drain diffusions are made of SiGe.
If the channel is very short, the net result is a
compressed Si lattice in the channel, which increases
the hole mobility around 20% to 25%.
A concluding remark regards the use of other materials
rather than SiGe to strain the channel. For example, a
high-stress silicon nitride (Si3N4) cap layer (covering
basically the whole transistor) has been successfully
used by Intel to induce tensile strain in the channel of
nMOS devices.
9.8.2 SOI MOSFETs
SOI (silicon-on-insulator) devices are constructed over
a buried oxide (insulator) layer. The most common
insulators are Al2O3 (sapphire), Si3N4 (silicon nitride),

--- Page 416 ---
and more recently SiO2 (silicon dioxide). A simplified
view of a SOI chip utilizing SiO2 as insulator is
depicted in Figure 9.12, where an nMOS and a pMOS
transistor can be observed.
FIGURE 9.12  Cross section of n- and p-channel SOI
MOSFETs.
This approach has several benefits. Due to individual
device isolation, wells are no longer needed to construct
pMOS transistors, hence leading to denser devices. It
also reduces the drain and source parasitic capacitances,
therefore improving speed. Additionally, the latch-up
phenomenon proper of conventional MOSFETs is
eliminated. Finally, the small Si volume for electron-
hole pair generation makes it appropriate for radiation-
intense environments (space applications). Like the
strained MOSFETs described above, SOI MOSFETs
have already been incorporated into many high-
performance deep-submicron devices.
9.8.3 BiCMOS Technologies
A BiCMOS process is one that allows the fabrication of
both types of transistors (BJT and MOS) in the same
chip. This is desirable because their distinct
characteristics can be combined to achieve better design

--- Page 417 ---
solutions. Such designs include high-speed logic
systems where large currents must be delivered and,
especially, high-speed systems that combine analog and
digital circuits on the same die. A good example is the
implementation of wireless systems operating in the
microwave range, where BJTs are needed for the RF
and other analog sections, while CMOS is employed in
the digital and mixed-mode parts. A BiCMOS process
can include any combination between BJT- and
MOSFET-based technologies, from conventional
(Sections 8.2 and 9.2) to advanced (Sections 8.7 and
9.8).
9.9 Exercises
1. MOSFET substrate versus MOSFET channel
Why is a MOSFET constructed in a p-doped
substrate (Figure 9.2(a)) called n-channel and in an n-
doped substrate (Figure 9.2(b)) called p-channel?
2. MOS technology
a. When it is said that a certain technology is
“65 nm CMOS,” what does it mean?
b. Check the data sheets for the FPGAs
Stratix III (from Altera) and Virtex 5 (from
Xilinx) and confirm that they are
manufactured with 65 nm CMOS
technology. What is the supply voltage for
these chips?
c. Check the same parameters (technology
node and supply voltage) for the previous
versions of these devices (Stratix II and
Virtex 4).

--- Page 418 ---
3. PMOS operation
a. Make a sketch like that in Figure 9.3 for a
pMOS transistor, with the substrate
connected to ground, then use it to explain
how this transistor works. In this case, must
the gate voltage to turn it ON bepositive or
negative? What types of carriers (electrons
or holes) are needed to form the channel?
b. Repeat the exercise above for the
substrate connected to the positive supply
rail (VDD). In this case, does the gate voltage
to turn the transistor ON need to be
negative?
4. I-V characteristics
a. Make a sketch for the I-V characteristics
(similar to that in Figure 9.4) for an nMOS
transistor with β = 5 mA/V2 and VT = 0.6 V.
Include in your sketch curves for the
following values of VGS:0.6 V, 1.1 V, 1.6 V,
2.1 V, and 2.6 V.
b. Also draw the saturation curve.
c. Suppose that a circuit has been designed
with the transistor operating with the load
line VDD = RDID + VDS, where VDD = 10 V
and RD = 1 kΩ. Include this load line in your
sketch.
d. Calculate the coordinates for the point of
the load line that falls on the limit between
the saturation and triode regions (Equation
9.6), then mark it in your sketch.
e. What are the ranges for VDS and ID in the
saturation region?

--- Page 419 ---
f. Calculate the coordinates for the point
where the transistor rests when VGS = 1.8 V,
then mark it in your sketch. Is this point in
the triode or saturation region?
5. β parameter
Calculate the value of β for a pMOS silicon transistor
whose gate oxide thickness is 120A° and whose
channel width and length are 2μm and 0.4 μm,
respectively. Consider that the carrier mobility in the
channel is 50% of that in the bulk.
6. DC response #1
A slowly varying voltage 0 V < VI ≤ 5 V is applied to
the circuit of Figure E9.6.
a. For which range of VI is the transistor in
the cutoff region?
b. For which range of VI is the transistor in
the saturation region?
c. For which range of VI is the transistor in
the triode/linear region?
d. Verify the correctness of the ID plot in
Figure E9.6(b).
e. Verify the correctness of the VO plot in
Figure E9.6(b).
7. DC response #2


--- Page 420 ---
FIGURE E9.6
Redo Example 9.1 for β = 1 mA/V2 and RD = 1.8 kΩ.
8. DC response #3
Redo Example 9.1 for RD = 2.7 kΩ and VDD = 10 V.
9. DC response #4
The questions below refer to the circuit in Figure
E9.9.
a. Calculate ID. (Suggestion: Assume that
the transistor is operating in saturation (so
employ Equation 9.2), then afterwards check
whether your assumption was true, that is, if
VDS≥VGS–VT.)
b. Calculate VDS.
c. Draw a load line for this circuit as in
Example 9.2 (the I-V curves are not needed).
d. Calculate the point (ID, VDS) at the
intersection between the triode and
saturation regions (Equation 9.6), then mark
it in your sketch. Does it fall on the load
line?
e. What are the ranges for VDS and ID in the
saturation region?
f. Include in your sketch the point (ID, VDS)
calculated in parts (a–b). Is the transistor
operating insaturation or triode mode?
10. Drain current in saturation mode

--- Page 421 ---
FIGURE E9.9
Prove that, when the transistor in the self-biased
circuit of Figure E9.10 operates in saturation mode,
its drain current is given by Equation 9.12 below,
where VG is determined by Equation 9.13.
FIGURE E9.10
    (9.12)
    (9.13)
11. DC response #5
Say that the circuit of Figure E9.10 is constructed
with VDD = 12 V, R1 = 200 kΩ, R2 = 100 kΩ, RD = 2
kΩ, and RS=500Ω. Assume also that the transistor
exhibits VT=1 V and β=4 mA/V2. Do the following:

--- Page 422 ---
a. Calculate VG and ID (see suggestion in
Exercise 9.9 and also Equations 9.12–13).
b. Calculate VS and VDS.
C. Write the equation for the load line of this
circuit (note the presence of RS), then draw
it similarlyto what was done in Example 9.2
(the I-V curves are not needed).
d. Calculate the point (ID, VDS) at the
intersection between the triode and
saturation regions (Equation 9.6), then mark
it in your sketch.
e. What are the ranges for VDS and ID in the
saturation region?
f. Include the point (ID, VDS) calculated in
parts (a)–(b) in your sketch. Is the transistor
in this circuit operating in saturation or
triode mode?
12. MOS triode-saturation boundary
Prove Equation 9.6.
13. MOS transconductance parameter
Prove Equation 9.10.
14. CMOS inverter #1
Prove Equation 9.7 for the transition voltage of a
CMOS inverter. (Hint: Equate the currents of Mn and
Mp with VI = VO so both transistors are in
saturation).
15. CMOS inverter #2
Consider the CMOS inverter shown in Figure E9.15.
Suppose that Mn was designed with a minimum size,
that is, (W/L)n = 3λ/2λ, and that the pMOS transistor
was designed with a minimum length, Lp = 2λ.

--- Page 423 ---
a. Assuming that the mobility of electrons in
the channel is about three times that of
holes, what must the width of the pMOS
transistor (Wp) be for the two transistors to
exhibit the same transconductance factors
(that is, βn = βp)?
b. Intuitively, without inspecting Equation
9.7, would you expect the transition voltage
to changetoward 0 V or VDD when (W/L)n is
increased with respect to (W/L)p? Explain.
c. If βn >βp, assuming that VTn = VTp, do you
expect the transition voltage to be higher or
lower than VDD/2?
16. CMOS inverter #3
FIGURE E9.15
Consider again the CMOS inverter of Figure E9.15.
When VI changes and the circuit passes through the
point of transition (that is, VO = VI = VTR), prove that
the current is given by Equation 9.14 below.
    (9.14)
17. CMOS inverter #4
Suppose that Mn and Mp in the CMOS inverter of
Figure E9.15 are designed with (W/L)n = 3/2 and

--- Page 424 ---
(W/L)p = 8/2 (in units of lambda) and are fabricated
using a silicon process whose gate oxide thickness is
tox=150A°. Assuming that the effective mobility (in
the channel) is ∼ 50% of that in the bulk, calculate
the values of βn and βp.
18. CMOS inverter #5
Consider the CMOS inverter shown in Figure E9.18.
Using the values given for the parameters, determine
the fall and rise times and then make a sketch of the
transient response (a sketch of vO as a function of vI).
Try to draw it as much to scale as possible, assuming
that each horizontal division in the plots is 5 ns (thus
the 5V-part of vI lasts 30 ns).
19. nMOS inverter #1
FIGURE E9.18
The inverter in Figure E9.19 is called nMOS inverter
because it employs only nMOS transistors. Its main
disadvantage with respect to the CMOS inverter is
that it does consume static power. Explain when that
happens. (In other words, for VI = ‘0’ or ‘1’ does ID ≠
0 occur?)
20. nMOS inverter #2

--- Page 425 ---
FIGURE E9.19
The questions below still regard the nMOS inverter
of Figure E9.19.
a. Why is transistor M2 always ready to
conduct and can only operate in saturation
mode?
b. When VI = 0 V (= ‘0’), is M1 ON or OFF?
Does this cause VO to be high or low? Why?
c. Explain why M1 and M2 are both ON
when VI = VDD (assume 3.3 V), hence ID ≠ 0
results.
d. Prove that in (c) above the output voltage
is given by Equation 9.15 below, where β1
and β2 are the transconductance factors of
transistors M1 and M2, respectively. (Hint:
Equate the currentsof M1 and M2, with M1
in triode (Equation 9.3) and M2 in saturation
(Equation 9.2).)
    (9.15)
e. If β1= 3β2, VDD = 3.3 V, and VT = 0.5 V,
calculate VO when VI = VDD.
f. In (e) above, check whether M1 is indeed
in triode mode and M2 is in saturation.
g. What is the value of ID in (e) above
(assume that β1 = 0.1 mA/V2). Using the

--- Page 426 ---
voltage VO obtainedin (e), calculate ID using
the expression for M1 (triode) as well for
M2 (saturation). Are the resultsalike?
21. nMOS inverter #3
The questions below refer to the nMOS inverter of
Figure E9.19.
a. The transition voltage is normally defined
as the input voltage that causes the output
voltage to reach 50% (midpoint) between
the two logic voltages (GND and VDD).
Adopting this definition, prove that the
transition voltage is given by Equation 9.16
below, where k = (β2/β1)1/2. (Hint: Equate
the currents of M1 and M2 with both in
saturation and with VO = VDD/2.)
    (9.16)
b. Another definition for the transition
voltage, particularly useful when the actual
‘0’ and ‘1’ voltages are not true-rail voltages
(as in the present circuit, where VO is never
truly 0 V) is that in which VO = VI. If this
definition is adopted, then prove that VTR is
given by Equation 9.17, where again k = (β2/
β1)1/2.
    (9.17)
c. If β1=3β2, VDD = 5 V, and VT = 0.6 V,
calculate VTR in both cases above.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 427 ---
10
Logic Families and I/Os
Chapter Contents
10.1 BJT-Based Logic Families
10.2 Diode-Transistor Logic
10.3 Transistor-Transistor Logic (TTL)
10.4 Emitter-Coupled Logic
10.5 MOS-Based Logic Families
10.6 CMOS Logic
10.7 Other Static MOS Architectures
10.8 Dynamic MOS Architectures
10.9 Modern I/O Standards
10.10 Exercises
Objective:
This chapter describes the main logic families, including BJT-based as well as
MOS-based architectures. In the former, DTL, TTL, and ECL are included. In
the latter, not only is the traditional CMOS architecture presented but also
pseudo-nMOS logic, transmission-gate logic, footed and unfooted dynamic
logic, domino logic, C2MOS logic, and BiCMOS logic. Additionally, a
section describing modern I/O standards, necessary to access such ICs, is also

--- Page 428 ---
included, in which LVCMOS, SSTL, HSTL, and LVDS I/Os are described,
among others.
10.1 BJT-Based Logic Families
The first part of this chapter (Sections 10.2 to 10.4) describes
logic circuits constructed with BJTs (bipolar junction
transistors).
Digital ICs sharing the same overall circuit architecture and
electrical specifications constitute a digital logic family. The
first digital families (DTL, TTL, and ECL) were constructed
with BJTs. However, the large silicon area required to
construct the components of these families (transistors plus
associated resistors), and especially their high power
consumption, led to their almost complete replacement with
MOSFET-based families.
In spite of the limitations above, the analysis of BJT-based
families is important because it helps us to understand the
evolution of digital technology. Moreover, one of the BJT-
based families, called ECL (emitter-coupled logic), is still in
use and is the fastest of all logic circuits.
The following BJT-based logic families are described in the
sections that follow:
 DTL (diode-transistor logic)
 TTL (transistor-transistor logic)
 ECL (emitter-coupled logic)
10.2 Diode-Transistor Logic
The first BJT-based logic family was DTL, which was
developed in the 1950s. However, because its circuits

--- Page 429 ---
involve diodes, a brief recap of diodes is presented first.
An experiment, showing the measurement of a diode’s I-V
characteristic, is depicted in Figure 10.1. The circuit is
shown in Figure 10.1(a), with the diode submitted to a
slowly varying DC voltage Vtest, which causes the current ID
and voltage VD through/across the diode. In Figure 10.1(b),
the measured values of ID and VD are plotted. When the
diode is forward biased (that is, VD is positive), a large
current flows after VD reaches the diode’s junction voltage,
Vj ( ∼ 0.7 V for silicon diodes). Due to the sudden increase of
ID, the series resistor employed in the experiment is essential
to limit the current, otherwise the diode could be damaged.
On the other hand, when VD is negative, practically no
current flows through it (given that VD is kept below the
diode’s maximum reverse voltage, VRmax, which is many
volts). In summary, roughly speaking, the diode is a short
circuit (though with 0.7 V across it) when forward biased or
an open circuit when reverse biased.
FIGURE 10.1  I-V characteristic of a common diode: (a)
Experimental circuit; (b) Measurements.
The DTL family was derived from a previous family, called
DL (diode logic), which employed only resistors and diodes.

--- Page 430 ---
Two DL gates are illustrated in Figures 10.2(a)–(b), which
compute the AND and OR functions, respectively.
FIGURE 10.2  DL and DTL architectures: (a) DL AND
gate; (b) DL OR gate; (c) DTL NAND gate.
The AND gate constructed with DL logic of Figure 10.2(a)
operates as follows. Suppose that a = 0 V, then diode D1 is
forward biased (through the path VCC – R – D1 – a), so the
voltage across it is 0.7 V (= Vj), causing y = 0.7 V = ‘0’ at the
output. Note that this situation holds for a or b or both low.
On the other hand, if both inputs are high (= VCC), the diodes
are both OFF, so no current can flow through R, resulting in
y = VCC = ‘1’. It is obvious that when a load is connected to
node y, the node’s voltage gets reduced; calling IL the load
current, y = VCC – RIL results. A similar analysis can be
made for the OR gate of Figure 10.2(b), which is left to the
reader.
We turn now to the DTL family. Its construction consists of a
DL circuit followed by a bipolar transistor, with the latter
propitiating the needed current gain and circuit isolation.
An example of a DTL gate is shown in Figure 10.2(c) (note
the similarity between this circuit and that in Figure 8.7), in
which the DL circuit is the AND gate of Figure 10.2(a).

--- Page 431 ---
Therefore, given that a common-emitter BJT is inherently an
inverter (because when the base voltage grows, the collector
voltage decreases), a NAND results from this association
(AND + inverter). This can also be understood by simply
observing the voltage on node x; when it is high, the BJT is
turned ON, so y = VCEsat ( ∼ 0.2 V) results, while a low
voltage on x turns the transistor OFF, raising the voltage of y
towards VCC.
DTL circuits are slow, require high-value resistors (thus
consuming large silicon space), and dissipate considerable
static power. For these reasons, they were never adequate for
integrated circuits.
10.3 Transistor-Transistor Logic (TTL)
The second bipolar family, called TTL, was developed in the
1960s. It was the first built on ICs and attained enormous
commercial success.
10.3.1 TTL Circuit
A TTL example is depicted in Figure 10.3, which shows
a NAND gate. The circuit contains four BJTs, where Q1
is a multiemitter transistor (similar to that in Figure
8.3(a) but with two electrical connections to the emitter
region). The operation of this gate is described below.

--- Page 432 ---
FIGURE 10.3  NAND circuit constructed with TTL
logic.
When a and b are both high, Q1 is turned OFF, so VCC
is applied to the base of Q2 through R1 and the base-
collector junction of Q1, turning Q2 ON. With Q2 ON,
current flows through R3, raising the base voltage of Q4,
which is then turned ON. This current, also flowing
through R2, lowers the collector voltage of Q2, keeping
Q3 OFF. In summary, due to Q3 OFF and Q4 ON, the
output voltage is low (as seen in Chapter 8, this voltage
is not truly 0 V, but VCEsat ( ∼ 0.2 V)).
When a or b or both are low, the base-emitter junction
of Q1 is forward biased, causing its collector voltage to
be lowered toward VCEsat ( ∼ 0.2 V), hence turning Q2
OFF. With no current flowing through R2 and R3, the
voltage at the base of Q3 is raised, turning it ON, while
the voltage at the base of Q4 is 0 V, turning it OFF. In
summary, now Q3 is ON and Q4 is OFF, raising the
output voltage toward VCC, which completes the NAND
function.
Note above the following major limitation of TTL:
When y = ‘1’, the output voltage, instead of true VCC, is
y = VCC– VR2 – 2 (where VR2 is the voltage drop on R2
caused by the base current of Q3, and Vj = 0.7 V is the

--- Page 433 ---
junction voltage of Q3 and also of the series diode).
Consequently, given that this family operates with a
nominal supply VCC = 5 V, y < 3.6 V results at the
output. In summary, the TTL family has a relatively fine
‘0’ (= VCEsat) but a poor ‘1’ (< 3.6 V).
The TTL architecture gave origin to the very popular
74-series of logic ICs, which includes all kinds of basic
circuits. For example, the 7400 chip contains four
NAND gates; the 7401, four open-collector NAND
gates; the 7402, four NOR gates; and so on.
Many TTL chips are constructed with 14 or 16 pins,
encased using the DIP (dual in-line package) option
seen in Figure 1.10. Two examples (with 14 pins) are
shown in Figure 10.4. On the left, the 7400 IC is
depicted, which contains four 2-input NAND gates,
while the 7404 IC, with six inverters, is seen on the
right. Pins 7 and 14 are reserved for GND (0 V) and
VCC (5 V).
FIGURE 10.4  Examples of TTL chips (7400 and
7404).
10.3.2 Temperature Ranges
Chips from the 74-series are offered for two
temperature ranges, called commercial and industrial.
The 74-series also has an equivalent series, called 54,
for operation in the military temperature range (for each

--- Page 434 ---
chip in the 74-series there also is one in the 54-series).
In summary, the following is available:
 Commercial temperature range (0°C to
70°C): 74-series.
 Industrial temperature range (−40°C to
85°C): 74-series.
 Military temperature range (−55°C to
125°C): 54-series.
10.3.3 TTL Versions
To cope with the low speed and high power
consumption of the original TTL family, several
improvements were introduced throughout the years.
The complete list is presented below (where 74 can be
replaced with 54).
 74: Standard TTL
 74S: Schottky TTL
 74AS: Advanced Schottky TTL
 74LS: Low-power Schottky TTL
 74ALS: Advanced low-power Schottky
TTL
 74F: Fast TTL
To identify the technology employed in a particular
chip, the representation 74XXxx (or 54XXxx) is
adopted, where XX is the technology and xx is the
circuit. For example, the 7400 chip shown in Figure
10.4(a) is identified as 7400 (for standard TTL), 74S00

--- Page 435 ---
(Schottky TTL), 74AS00 (Advanced Schottky TTL),
etc.
To construct the circuits for the 74S version, the starting
point was the standard TTL circuits (like that in Figure
10.3), to which Schottky (clamp) diodes (described in
Chapter 8—see Figure 8.8(c)) were added. Such a diode
exhibits a low junction voltage (Vj-Schottky ≈ 0.4 V), thus
preventing the collector voltage from going below ∼ 0.3
V (VCEmin = VBE – Vj-Schottky ≈ 0.7 – 0.4 V = 0.3 V),
hence avoiding deep saturation. Because the less a
transistor saturates, the faster it is turned OFF, the
resulting turn-off time (which is usually larger than the
turn-on time) is reduced.
A comparison between the TTL versions is presented in
Figure 10.5. Note, for example, the different current
capacities, speeds, and power consumptions. For
example, the last TTL version (F) has the lowest delay-
power product among the fast versions. Other
parameters from this table will be examined below.


--- Page 436 ---
FIGURE 10.5  Main parameters of TTL technologies
used in the 74/54 series of digital ICs.
10.3.4 Fan-In and Fan-Out
Fan-in is the number of ports (inputs) of a gate. For
example, the NAND gate of Figure 10.3 has a fan-in of
2.
Fan-out is the number of input ports that an output port
can drive. For example, Figure 10.5 says that the
maximum output current that can be sourced by a
conventional TTL gate when high (IOH) is 0.4 mA,
while the maximum current that a similar gate might
sink at the input when high (IIH) is 0.04 mA. The
conclusion is that one TTL output can source 10 TTL
inputs. This situation is illustrated in Figure 10.6(a).
FIGURE 10.6  Illustration of fan-out: (a) Output
high (the gate sources up to 0.4 mA to other gates); (b)
Output low (the gate sinks up to 16 mA from other gates).
In this example (conventional TTL) the fan-out is 10.
Figure 10.5 also says that the maximum current that a
conventional TTL gate can sink at the output when low
(IOL) is 16 mA, while the maximum current that a

--- Page 437 ---
similar gate might source at the input when low (IIL) is
1.6 mA. The conclusion is that again one TTL output
can drive 10 TTL inputs. This situation is illustrated in
Figure 10.6(b).
The worst (smallest) of these two values (current source
versus current sink) is taken as the actual fan-out.
Because they are both equal to 10 in the example above,
the fan-out of a conventional TTL gate is said to be 10.
In other words, the output of any conventional TTL gate
can be directly connected to up to 10 inputs of other
conventional TTL gates.
Because of the fact that there are several TTL options, a
standard load was defined for fan-out comparisons. The
chosen load is LS TTL. Because the input of an LS gate
sinks at most 0.02 mA (when high) and sources at most
0.4 mA (when low), the resulting fan-out for a
conventional TTL gate (with respect to LS TTL) is
0.4/0.02 = 20 or 1.6/0.4 = 40; taking the worst case,
fan-out = 20 results. In other words, a conventional
TTL output can be directly connected to up to 20 LS
inputs.
10.3.5 Supply Voltage, Signal Voltages, and
Noise Margin
The supply voltage and minimum/maximum allowed
signal voltages constitute another important set of
parameters for any logic family because they determine
the power consumption and the noise margins.
The voltages for the TTL family are depicted in Figure
10.7(a), where gate A communicates with gate B. The
detail in the center shows two bars, each with two
voltage ranges. The bar on the left shows the voltage

--- Page 438 ---
ranges that can be produced by A, while the bar on the
right shows the voltage ranges that are acceptable to B.
The nominal supply voltage is VCC = 5 V, and the
allowed maximum/minimum signal voltages are VOL =
0.4 V, VOH = 2.4 V, VIL = 0.8 V, and VIH = 2.0 V.
FIGURE 10.7  (a) Supply and minimum/maximum
signal voltages for the TTL family; (b) Corresponding noise
margins.
The meaning of the parameters above was seen in
Section 1.8 and is repeated below.
 VIL: Maximum input voltage guaranteed to
be interpreted as ‘0’.
 VIH: Minimum input voltage guaranteed to
be interpreted as ‘1’.
 VOL: Maximum output voltage produced by
the gate when low.
 VOH: Minimum output voltage produced by
the gate when high.
The noise margin can then be determined as follows,
where NML represents the noise margin when low and

--- Page 439 ---
NMH represents the noise margin when high.
    (10.1)
    (10.2)
For TTL, NML = NMH = 0.4 V results. This means that
any noise added to the input signals, when having an
amplitude under 0.4 V, is guaranteed not to corrupt the
system.
10.4 Emitter-Coupled Logic
The last BJT-based family is ECL, which was developed for
high-speed applications. Due to its permanent emitter
current, it belongs to a category called CML (current-mode
logic). In spite of its large power consumption and large
silicon area (for transistors and resistors), ECL has the
advantage of being the fastest of all logic circuits (employed,
for example, in the construction of very fast registers, shown
in Chapter 13).
An OR gate, constructed with traditional ECL, is depicted in
Figure 10.8. The supply voltage is VEE = –5.2 V, and the
circuit also contains a reference voltage of –1.3 V. The logic
levels are also unusual, ‘0’ = –1.7 V and ‘1’ = –0.9 V. Its
operation is based on a differential amplifier (formed by
BJTs with coupled emitters), having on the right side a fixed
input, VREF, and on the left side the input signals proper. In
this example, it suffices to have one of the inputs high to turn
the transistor on the right OFF, so its collector voltage grows,

--- Page 440 ---
turning the output transistor ON, which in turn raises the
output voltage (hence y = a + b).
FIGURE 10.8  OR gate constructed with traditional ECL
logic.
ECL attains high speed by not allowing the transistors to
ever go into saturation, thus making the switching from one
logic state to the other much faster (gate delays well under 1
ns). However, it consumes even more power than TTL, and
the circuits again require large silicon areas (for BJTs and
resistors). Additionally, because of its low signal excursion
(0.8 V), a small noise margin results ( ∼ 0.25 V). Application
examples for this architecture (with some circuit variations)
will be presented in Chapter 13 when examining the
construction of very high speed registers.
10.5 MOS-Based Logic Families
The next part of this chapter (Sections 10.6 to 10.8)
describes logic circuits constructed with MOSFETs (metal
oxide semiconductor field effect transistors).
MOS-based logic circuits occupy much less space than BJT-
based circuits and, more importantly, can operate with
virtually no static power consumption (CMOS family).

--- Page 441 ---
Moreover, aggressive downsizing has continuously
improved their performance. For instance, as mentioned in
Section 9.2, MOS technology is often referred to by using
the smallest transistor dimension that can be fabricated
(shortest transistor channel, for example), whose evolution
can be summarized as follows: 8 μm (1971), …, 0.18 μm
(2000), 0.13 μm (2002), 90nm (2004), and 65 nm (2006).
The 45 nm technology is expected to be shipped in 2008.
To enhance performance even further, copper (which has
lower resistivity) is used instead of aluminum to construct
the internal wires in top-performance chips. Moreover, the
addition of SiGe to obtain strained transistors and the use of
SOI implementations (both described in Section 9.8) have
further improved their high-frequency behavior.
The following static MOS-based architectures are described
in this chapter:
 CMOS logic
 Pseudo-nMOS logic
 Transmission-gate logic
 BiCMOS logic (mixed)
The following dynamic MOS-based architectures are also
included:
 Dynamic logic
 Domino logic
 C2MOS logic
10.6 CMOS Logic

--- Page 442 ---
CMOS stands for complementary MOS because for each
nMOS transistor there also is a pMOS transistor. The most
fundamental attribute of this arrangement is that it allows the
construction of digital circuits with the smallest power
consumption of all digital architectures.
10.6.1 CMOS Circuits
CMOS logic was introduced in Chapter 4, in which all
gates (inverter, AND, NAND, OR, NOR, etc.) were
illustrated using the corresponding CMOS circuit.
In particular, the CMOS inverter was examined in detail
in Sections 4.2, 9.5, and 9.6. More specifically, its
operation, power consumption, and timing diagrams
were described in Section 4.2; its construction, main
parameters, DC response, and transition voltage were
presented in Section 9.5; and finally, its transient
response was shown in Section 9.6.
As a brief review, three of the CMOS circuits studied in
Chapter 4 are shown in Figure 10.9, which contains a
CMOS inverter, a 3-input NAND/AND gate, and a 3-
input NOR/OR gate. Other CMOS circuits will be seen
later, like the construction of registers, in Chapter 13.

--- Page 443 ---
FIGURE 10.9  CMOS gates: (a) Inverter; (b) 3-input
NAND/AND; (c) 3-input NOR/OR.
10.6.2 HC and HCT CMOS Families
We describe next two 5 V CMOS families, called HC
and HCT, both employed in the 74/54-series of digital
ICs.
The HC family is the CMOS counterpart of the TTL
family. Like TTL, its nominal supply voltage is 5 V
(though it can operate anywhere in the 2 V–6 V range).
However, not all of its input voltages are compatible
with TTL, so HC and TTL gates cannot be mixed
directly. To cope with this limitation, a TTL-compatible
version of HC, called HCT, also exists. The main
parameters of these two families are listed in Figure
10.10, extracted from the JEDEC JESD7A standard of
August 1986.

--- Page 444 ---
FIGURE 10.10  Main parameters of the HC and
HCT CMOS families employed in the 74/54-series of
digital ICs.
Compared to TTL, these families exhibit approximately
the same speed but lower power consumption and wider
output voltages (‘0’ is closer to GND and ‘1’ is closer to
VDD than in any TTL version). Moreover, the input
current is practically zero, allowing many CMOS gates
to be driven by a single gate.
Besides HC and HCT, there are also other, less popular
5 V CMOS versions. However, 5 V logic is nearly
obsolete, with modern designs employing almost
exclusively LVCMOS (low-voltage CMOS) and other
low-voltage standards (described in Section 10.9), so 5
V chips are currently used almost only as replacement
parts.
10.6.3 CMOS-TTL Interface

--- Page 445 ---
The output of an HC or HCT chip can be connected
directly to any TTL input because the corresponding
voltages are compatible (observe in Figure 10.10 that
VOH and VOL of CMOS fall within the allowed ranges
of VIH and VIL for TTL, shown in Figure 10.5) and so is
the fan-out (= 10 LS loads). On the other hand, a TTL
output cannot be connected directly to an HC input
because one the output voltages (VOH) of the former
falls in the forbidden range of the latter (note in Figure
10.5 that VOH of TTL can be as low as 2.4 V, while HC
requires at least 3.5 V for a high input). Consequently, if
TTL and HC must be interconnected, then a voltage
shifter must be employed (for example, an open-
collector buffer with a pull-up resistor or a specially
designed level translator). Another solution is the
replacement of HC with HCT, in which case full
compatibility occurs.
10.6.4 Fan-In and Fan-Out
The definitions of fan-in and fan-out were seen in
Section 10.3 (see Figure 10.6). As mentioned there, LS
TTL (Figure 10.5) is used as the standard load for fan-
out comparison. Because an LS input can sink 20 μA or
source 0.4 mA, while an HC/HCT output can source or
sink 4 mA, the HC/HCT’s fan-out is 10 (which is the
smallest of 4/0.4 and 4/0.02).
10.6.5 Supply Voltage, Signal Voltages, and
Noise Margin
The supply voltage and maximum/minimum allowed
signal voltages constitute another important set of
parameters for any logic family because they determine

--- Page 446 ---
the power consumption and the noise margins. For
example, it was seen in Section 4.2 that the dynamic
power consumption of a CMOS inverter is given by
Equation 4.6, so any change of VDD highly impacts the
power consumption.
It was also seen in Section 10.3 that the noise margins
when low and when high are given by NML = VIL – VOL
and NMH = VOH – VIH, respectively. For the HG family,
these calculations are illustrated in Figure 10.11(a),
where gate A communicates with gate B. The bar on the
left shows the voltage ranges that can be produced by
A, while the bar on the right shows the voltage ranges
that are acceptable to B. The nominal supply voltage is
VDD = 5 V, and the worst case (4 mA) allowed
maximum/minimum signal voltages are VOL = 0.26 V,
VOH = 4.48 V, VIL = 1 V, and VIH = 3.5 V. Consequently,
NML = 1 – 0.26 = 0.74 V and NMH = 4.48 – 3.5 = 0.98
V result, which are listed in Figure 10.11(b).
FIGURE 10.11  (a) Voltage ranges for the HC
CMOS family; (b) Corresponding noise margins.

--- Page 447 ---
Note that in Figure 10.11(a) it was assumed that gate A
is sourcing/sinking a high current to/from gate B, so the
output voltages are relatively far from GND and VDD
(observe in Figure 10.10 that two sets of values were
defined for VOL and VOH, one for low current, the other
for high current). In case B were a CMOS gate (or
several CMOS gates), A would operate with very small
currents, so VOL and VOH would be at most 0.1 V far
from the rail voltages, yielding higher noise margins.
10.6.6 Low-Voltage CMOS
As mentioned above, modern designs employ almost
exclusively low-voltage CMOS circuits. Even though
their general architecture is still that seen in Chapters 4,
9, and again in this chapter, the supply voltage was
reduced from 5 V to 3.3 V, then to 2.5 V, 1.8 V, and 1.5
V. Recently, it was further reduced to 1.2 V and, in state
of the art chips (like top-performance FPGAs, described
in Chapter 18), it is just 1 V. Corresponding I/O
standards were needed to interface with chips from
these families, which are described in Section 10.9.
10.6.7 Power Consumption
Power consumption is a crucial specification in modern
digital systems, particularly for portable (battery-
operated) devices. A discussion on the power
consumption (both static and dynamic) of CMOS logic
is included in Section 4.2.
10.6.8 Power-Delay Product

--- Page 448 ---
The power-delay (PD) product is another important
measure of circuit performance because it combines
information related to the circuit’s speed with its
corresponding power consumption. A discussion on the
PD product of a CMOS inverter, extensive to CMOS
logic in general, is also included in Section 4.2.
10.7 Other Static MOS Architectures
CMOS is the most popular logic architecture because of its
practically zero static power consumption. However, there
are applications (like gates with large fan-ins, shown later in
the construction of memories) where other approaches are
more appropriate.
In addition to CMOS, six other MOS-based architectures
will be introduced in this chapter. Three of them are static,
like CMOS, while the other three are dynamic (clocked). The
first group is described in this section, while the second is
seen in the next. These six architectures are listed below.
 Static: Pseudo-nMOS logic, transmission-gate
logic, and BiCMOS logic
 Dynamic: Dynamic logic, domino logic, and
C2MOS logic
10.7.1 Pseudo-nMOS Logic
Two gates constructed with pseudo-nMOS logic are
depicted in Figure 10.12. The circuit in (a) is a 4-input
NAND/AND, while that in (b) is a 4-input NOR/OR.
To construct a pseudo-nMOS gate, we simply replace
all pMOS transistors in the corresponding CMOS
circuit with just one pMOS whose gate is permanently

--- Page 449 ---
connected to ground (thus always ON). The pMOS acts
as a pull-up transistor and must be “weak” compared to
the nMOS transistors (that is, must have a small
channel width-to-length ratio, W/L—Sections 9.2–9.3),
such that whenever nMOS and pMOS compete, the
former wins.
Note that the nMOS part of Figure 10.12(a) is similar to
the nMOS part of the circuit in Figure 10.9(b), that is,
the transistors are connected in series, which
characterizes a NAND/AND gate (Section 4.3).
Likewise, the nMOS part of Figure 10.12(b) is similar
to the nMOS part of Figure 10.9(c), that is, the
transistors are connected in parallel, which
characterizes a NOR/OR gate (Section 4.4).
FIGURE 10.12  (a) NAND/AND and (b) NOR/OR
gates constructed with pseudo-nMOS logic.
The main advantages of this approach are its reduced
circuit size ( ∼ 50% smaller than CMOS) and the
possibility of constructing NOR/OR gates with a large
fan-in (because there are no pilled transistors). On the
other hand, the static power consumption is no longer
zero (note in Figure 10.12(b) that it suffices to have one
input high for static current to flow from VDD to

--- Page 450 ---
ground). Moreover, the rising transition can be slow if
the parasitic capacitance at the pull-up node is high
(because the pull-up transistor is weak). The same can
occur with the falling transition because of the
contention between the pMOS and nMOS transistors.
This contention also prevents the output voltage from
reaching 0 V, so true rail-to-rail operation is not
possible.
10.7.2 Transmission-Gate Logic
Figure 10.13(a) shows a switch implemented using a
single MOSFET. This switch (called pass transistor)
has two main problems: Poor ‘1’ and slow upward
transition. Suppose that our circuit operates with 3.3 V
(= ‘1’) and that VT = 0.6 V (where VT is the transistor’s
threshold voltage—Sections 9.2–9.3). When sw = ‘1’ (=
3.3 V) occurs, the transistor is turned ON, so if x = ‘1’
the output capacitor is charged toward 3.3 V. However,
this voltage cannot grow above VDD – VT = 2.7 V (poor
‘1’) because at this point the transistor is turned OFF.
Additionally, as the voltage approaches 2.7 V, the
current decreases (because VGS decreases—see
Equation 9.2), slowing down the final part of the
transition from ‘0’ to ‘1’.


--- Page 451 ---
FIGURE 10.13  (a) Pass transistor; (b) Transmission
gate (TG); (c) TG symbols; (d) A multiplexer implemented
with TGs.
The circuit of Figure 10.13(b), known as transmission
gate (TG), solves both problems presented by the pass
transistor. It consists of a CMOS switch, that is, a
switch constructed with an nMOS plus a pMOS
transistor. While the former has a poor ‘1’ and a slow
upward transition, the latter exhibits a poor ‘0’ and a
slow downward transition. However, because both
transistors are turned ON at the same time and operate
in parallel, no matter in which direction the transition is
one of them guarantees the proper logic level as well as
a fast transition. Two TG symbols are shown in Figure
10.13(c). In the upper symbol, the switch closes when
sw = ‘1’ (as in Figure 10.13(b)), while in the other it
closes when sw = ‘0’.
With TGs plus inverters, any logic gate can be
constructed. An application example is depicted in
Figure 10.13(d), in which two TGs are used to
implement a multiplexer (y = a when sel = ‘0’ or y = b
if sel = ‘1’; in other words, y = sel′ · a + sel · b).
10.7.3 BiCMOS Logic
BiCMOS (bipolar+CMOS) logic gates should not be
confused with BiCMOS technology (seen in Section
9.8). BiCMOS logic is an application of BiCMOS
technology because it combines BJTs and MOSFETs in
the same chip. The use of BiCMOS gates is desirable,
for example, when the circuit must deliver high output
currents (to drive large capacitive load or feed high-

--- Page 452 ---
current buses), because for high currents BJTs can be
smaller and faster than MOSFETs.
Two BiCMOS gates are depicted in Figure 10.14. In
Figure 10.14(a), an inverter is shown, where the small
inverter unit connected to the upper BJT’s base is a
CMOS inverter (Figure 10.9(a)). In Figure 10.14(b), a
NAND gate is presented, where the small NAND unit
connected to the upper BJT is a CMOS NAND (Figure
10.9(b)). Notice that in both cases the BJTs appear only
at the output and are all of npn type (faster than pnp).
FIGURE 10.14  Digital BiCMOS gates: (a) Inverter;
(b) NAND.
Like TTL, these circuits exhibit a poor ‘1’ because the
base-emitter junction voltage ( ∼ 0.7 V) of the upper
BJT limits the output voltage to VDD – 0.7 V. This poor
‘1’ was acceptable in old designs (VDD = 5 V), but is a
problem in present low-power designs (VDD ≤ 2.5 V).
For that reason, BJTs are being replaced with deep-
submicron MOSFETs, which are now competitive even
in relatively high-current applications.
10.8 Dynamic MOS Architectures

--- Page 453 ---
We introduce now the last three MOS-based architectures.
These are distinct from the others in the sense that they are
dynamic, hence they are controlled by a clock signal.
10.8.1 Dynamic Logic
Two basic dynamic gates (NAND and NOR) are shown
in Figure 10.15(a). Note that these circuits are similar to
the pseudo-nMOS gates seen in Figure 10.12, except
for the fact that the pull-up transistor is now clocked
(and strong) instead of being permanently connected to
ground.
FIGURE 10.15  (a) Dynamic NAND and NOR
gates; (b) Dynamic footed NAND and NOR gates.
These circuits operate in two phases, called precharge
(for clock = ‘0’) and evaluation (for clock = ‘1’). When
clock=‘0’, the pull-up transistor is turned ON, which,

--- Page 454 ---
being strong, precharges the output node (y) to a voltage
near VDD. Next, clock=‘1’ occurs, turning the pMOS
transistor OFF, so y is conditionally (it depends on the
inputs) discharged to GND.
The advantages of this approach over pseudo-nMOS are
a smaller static power consumption and a faster upward
transition. The former is due to the fact that the pull-up
transistor now only remains ON while clock = ‘0’. The
latter is due to the fact that the pMOS transistor is now
strong (large W/L).
The same two gates are shown in Figure 10.15(b), but
now with both power-supply connections clocked. This
is called footed dynamic logic and exhibits even faster
output transitions and essentially zero static power
consumption. On the other hand, the circuit is slightly
more complex and clock loading is also higher.
The dynamic gates of Figure 10.15 present a major
problem, though, when the output of one gate must be
connected to the input of another, solved with the use of
domino logic (described below).
10.8.2 Domino Logic
The dynamic gates of Figure 10.15 present a major
problem when the output of one gate must be connected
to the input of another. This is due to the fact that
during the evaluation phase the inputs must never
change from high to low because this transition is not
perceived (recall from Chapter 9 that an nMOS
transistor is turned ON when a positive voltage is
applied to its gate). This is called monotonicity
condition (the inputs are required to be monotonically
rising).

--- Page 455 ---
A simple way of solving the monotonicity problem is
with a static (CMOS) inverter placed between dynamic
stages, as shown in Figure 10.16. Because during the
precharge phase the output voltage of any dynamic gate
is elevated by the pull-up transistor, the output of the
inverter will necessarily be low. Therefore, during
evaluation, this signal can only remain low or change
from low to high, so the undesirable high to low
transition is prevented.
FIGURE 10.16  Domino logic (static inverters are
placed between dynamic stages; the latter can be footed or
unfooted).
Such architecture is called domino and is depicted in
Figure 10.16 for a domino OR gate followed by a
domino AND gate (the dynamic parts of the domino
gates can be either footed or unfooted). Other variations
of domino also exist, like NP, NORA, and Zipper
domino, which, due to major drawbacks, never enjoyed
much success in commercial chips.
10.8.3 Clocked-CMOS (C2MOS) Logic
Still another dynamic architecture is the so-called
C2MOS logic. In it, a pair of clocked transistors is

--- Page 456 ---
connected directly to the output node, driving it into a
high-impedance (floating) state every time the
transistors are turned OFF (this type of logic was seen
in the construction of tri-state buffers in Section 4.8).
A dynamic D-type latch constructed with C2MOS logic
is depicted in Figure 10.17 (D latches will be studied in
Section 13.3). When clock = ‘1’, both clocked
transistors are ON, causing the circuit to behave as a
regular CMOS inverter (the latch is said to be
“transparent” in this situation because any change in d
is seen by q). However, when clock = ‘0’, both
transistors are turned OFF, causing node q to float, so
changes in d do not disturb q (the latch is said to be
“opaque“). Typically, this situation can only last a few
milliseconds because the parasitic capacitor (which is
responsible for storing the data bit) is generally very
small. Note that the circuit of Figure 10.17 is similar to
that of a 3-state buffer (see Figure 4.18), but to operate
as a latch, the output node cannot be shared with other
circuits (that is, no other circuit is allowed to feed that
node).
FIGURE 10.17  Dynamic D-type latch constructed
with C2MOS logic.
10.9 Modern I/O Standards

--- Page 457 ---
Having seen the main architectures used inside digital ICs,
we turn now to the discussion on how such circuits can be
accessed. A set of rules specifying how the input/output
accesses can be done is called an I/O standard.
There are several I/O standards for communicating with
integrated circuits, which vary in supply voltage, allowed
signal ranges, and maximum speed, among other factors. For
general applications at relatively low speeds, the most
common are TTL, LVTTL, CMOS, and LVCMOS (where
LV stands for low voltage). For higher speeds and more
specific applications, more complex standards exist, like
SSTL, HSTL, LVPECL, and LVDS.
Even though the TTL and CMOS I/O standards were derived
from the respective 5 V families described earlier, it is
important not to confuse I/O standards with logic families.
When it is said that a certain chip complies with the TTL I/O
standard, it does not mean that the chip is constructed with
TTL circuits but simply that its input/output electrical
parameters are compatible with those defined for the TTL
family. In other words, logic family refers to the internal
physical circuits, while I/O standard regards how such
circuits can be accessed.
In summary, a chip can contain any of the logic architectures
described earlier (TTL, CMOS, pseudo-nMOS, domino,
etc.), which are in principle independent from the I/O type
chosen to access them. A good example is the set of I/Os
used in state of the art CPLD/FPGA chips (Chapter 18),
which include basically all I/Os that will be described here,
among them TTL and LVTTL, though the internal circuits
are constructed using only MOS transistors.
The I/O standards presented in this section are listed in
Figure 10.18 along with typical application examples. As can

--- Page 458 ---
be seen, they are divided into three categories, as follows:
 Single-ended standards: One input, one output,
with no reference voltage or termination resistors.
 Single-ended voltage-referenced terminated
standards: One input, one output, with termination
resistors to reduce reflections at high speeds due to
impedance mismatch (printed circuit board traces
are treated as transmission lines). The input stage
is a differential amplifier, so a reference voltage is
needed.
 Differential standards: Two inputs, two outputs
(complemented), with termination resistors (with
the purpose described above). The input stage is
again a differential amplifier, but now with both
inputs used for signals (then the reference voltage
is no longer needed). These standards are designed
to operate with low voltage swings (generally well
under 1 V) to achieve higher speeds and cause low
electromagnetic interference. Additionally, by
being differential, they exhibit higher noise
immunity.

--- Page 459 ---
FIGURE 10.18  List of modern (except TTL and CMOS)
I/O standards described in this section.
10.9.1 TTL and LVTTL Standards
TTL
This is an old single-ended 5 V I/O standard for
general-purpose applications at relatively low
speeds (typically under 100 MHz). Its
voltage/current specifications were borrowed from
the standard TTL family, described in Section
10.3. However, as already mentioned, if an
integrated circuit requires the TTL I/O standard to
communicate it does not mean that its internal
circuitry employs bipolar transistors or TTL
architecture. This I/O’s main parameters are
summarized in Figure 10.19. (TTL and CMOS are

--- Page 460 ---
the only old I/Os still sometimes used in modern
designs.)
FIGURE 10.19  Main parameters of TTL and
CMOS I/O standards.
3.3 V LVTTL
The 3.3 V LVTTL (low-voltage TTL) is another
single-ended I/O standard for general applications
at relatively low speeds (typically under 200
MHz). Like CMOS, the input driver is generally a
CMOS inverter, while the output driver is a CMOS
push-pull or inverter circuit (depicted in Figure
10.20, which shows an output of IC1 to be
connected to an input of IC2).
FIGURE 10.20  Typical output and input
circuits for CMOS, LVTTL, and LVCMOS I/Os.

--- Page 461 ---
The main parameters for the 3.3 V LVTTL I/O are
summarized in Figure 10.21. As shown in the
figure, they were defined by the JEDEC JESD8C
standard of September 1999, last revised in June
2006.
FIGURE 10.21  Main parameters for the
standard 3.3 V LVTTL I/O.
10.9.2 CMOS and LVCMOS Standards
CMOS
Like TTL, this is an old 5 V I/O standard for
general-purpose applications at relatively low
speeds. Its voltage/current specifications were
borrowed from the HC CMOS family, described in
Section 10.6 and repeated in Figure 10.19 (defined
in the JEDEC JESD7A standard of August 1986).
3.3 V LVCMOS
3.3 V LVCMOS (low-voltage CMOS) is another
single-ended I/O standard whose applications are
similar to those of 3.3 V LVTTL, just with
different I/O signal ranges. The internal circuits are
also similar to those in Figure 10.20. The main

--- Page 462 ---
parameters for this I/O, defined in the same
JEDEC standard as 3.3 V LVTTL, are summarized
in Figure 10.22.
FIGURE 10.22  Main parameters for the
standard 3.3 V LVCMOS I/O.
2.5 V LVCMOS
This I/O is an evolution of 3.3 V LVCMOS, again
single-ended and for the same types of
applications, but operating with 2.5 V instead of
3.3 V. The internal circuits are similar to those in
Figure 10.20. The main parameters for this I/O,
defined in the JEDEC JESD8-5A standard of
October 1995 and last revised in June 2006, are
summarized in Figure 10.23.

--- Page 463 ---
FIGURE 10.23  Main parameters for the
standard 2.5 V LVCMOS I/O.
1.8 V LVCMOS
This I/O is an evolution of 2.5 V LVCMOS, again
single-ended and for the same types of
applications, but operating with 1.8 V instead of
2.5 V. The internal circuits are similar to those in
Figure 10.20. The main parameters for this I/O,
defined in the JEDEC JESD8-7A standard of
February 1997 and last revised in June 2006, are
summarized in Figure 10.24.


--- Page 464 ---
FIGURE 10.24  Main parameters for the
standard 1.8 V LVCMOS I/O.
1.5 V LVCMOS
This I/O is an evolution of 1.8 V LVCMOS, again
single-ended and for the same types of
applications, but operating with 1.5 V instead of
1.8 V. The internal circuits are similar to those in
Figure 10.20. The main parameters for this I/O,
defined in the JEDEC JESD8-11A standard of
October 2000 and last revised in November 2005,
are summarized in Figure 10.25.
FIGURE 10.25  Main parameters for the
standard 1.5 V LVCMOS I/O.
1.2 V LVCMOS
This I/O is an evolution of 1.5 V LVCMOS, again
single-ended and for the same types of
applications, but operating with 1.2 V instead of
1.5 V. The internal circuits are similar to those in
Figure 10.20. The main parameters for this I/O,
defined in the JEDEC JESD8-12A standard of
May 2001 and last revised in November 2005, are
summarized in Figure 10.26.

--- Page 465 ---
FIGURE 10.26  Main parameters for the
standard 1.2 V LVCMOS I/O.
1V LVCMOS
This I/O is an evolution of 1.2 V LVCMOS, again
single-ended and for the same types of
applications, but operating with 1 V instead of 1.2
V. The internal circuits are similar to those in
Figure 10.20. The main parameters for this I/O,
defined in the JEDEC JESD8-14A standard of
December 2001 and last revised in November
2005, are summarized in Figure 10.27.
FIGURE 10.27  Main parameters for the
standard 1V LVCMOS I/O.
10.9.3 SSTL Standards

--- Page 466 ---
SSTL (stub series terminated logic) is a technology-
independent I/O standard for high-speed applications
(400 Mbps to 1.6 Gbps), used mainly for interfacing
with memory ICs (SSTL_2 for DDR, SSTL_18 for
DDR2, and SSTL_15 for DDR3 SDRAM—these
memories are described in Chapter 16).
The first difference between this I/O and LVCMOS can
be observed in Figure 10.28 where the output and input
buffers are shown. The former is still a push-pull or
CMOS inverter, but the latter is a differential amplifier
(note that there are two input transistors, which have
their source terminals tied together to a current source).
This circuit exhibits high voltage gain and also
propitiates the use of two inputs. Indeed, the output of
this circuit is not determined by the absolute value of
any of the inputs but rather by the difference between
them (that is why it is called differential amplifier). If
the positive input (indicated with a “+” sign) is higher,
then the output voltage is high; otherwise, it is low.
When operating in differential mode, both inputs are
connected to incoming wires, while when operating in
single-ended mode the negative input is connected to a
reference voltage.


--- Page 467 ---
FIGURE 10.28  Typical output and input circuits for
differential I/Os (SSTL, HSTL, LVDS, etc.).
Another fundamental difference is that this I/O employs
a supply voltage (normally called VDDO—see Figure
10.28) that is independent from that of the IC (so is
technology independent), giving the designer more
flexibility. Moreover, it includes termination resistors to
reduce reflections in the PCB lines, improving high
speed operation. As mentioned above, it allows single-
ended as well as differential operation.
Depending on how the termination resistors are
connected, the circuit is classified as class I or class II.
This is shown in Figure 10.29. The class I circuit has a
series resistor at the transmitting end and a parallel
resistor at the receiving end, while the class II circuit
includes an additional parallel resistor at the
transmitting end (these are just typical arrangements;
other variations exist in the corresponding JEDEC
standards). Note that the parallel termination resistors
are connected to a termination voltage, VTT, which
equals VREF.

--- Page 468 ---
FIGURE 10.29  Typical usage of SSTL I/Os (single-
ended and differential, classes I and II).
Another particularity of this I/O is its set of
specifications regarding the electrical parameters at the
receiving end. As illustrated in Figure 10.30, two sets of
values are defined for VIH/VIL, called “dc” and “ac”
values. According to the corresponding JEDEC
standards (JESD8-8, –9B, and –15A), the signal should
exhibit a minimum slope of 1 V/ns over the whole “ac”
range, and should switch state when the “ac” value is
crossed, given that the signal remains above the “dc”
threshold. This definition is a little confusing because it
might suggest the use of two hysteresis ranges when

--- Page 469 ---
only one would probably do and also because there is a
subtle but important difference in this definition
between standards. Consequently, it might occur that
actual implementations are done slightly different,
using, for example, only one hysteresis range and
considering only the “dc” values.
FIGURE 10.30  Input signals to the SSTL I/O
buffer.
As mentioned above, SSTL is another I/O standardized
by JEDEC. It is presented in three versions, called
SSTL_3, SSTL_2, and SSTL_18, whose main electrical
parameters are summarized below.
SSTL_3
This was the first SSTL I/O. It operates with VDDO
= 3.3 V and is specified in the JEDEC JESD8-8
standard of August 1996. Its main parameters are
shown in Figure 10.31.

--- Page 470 ---
FIGURE 10.31  Main parameters for the
standard SSTL_3 I/O.
SSTL_2
This was the second SSTL I/O. It operates with
VDDO = 2.5 V and is commonly used for
interfacing with DDR SDRAM memory chips
(Chapter 16) operating with a 200 MHz clock,
transferring data at both clock edges (400 MTps—
see Figure 16.13). Its main parameters, specified in
the JEDEC JESD8-9B standard of May 2002 and
revised in October 2002, are shown in Figure
10.32.

--- Page 471 ---
FIGURE 10.32  Main parameters for the
standard SSTL_2 I/O.
SSTL_18
This was the third SSTL I/O. It operates with VDDO
= 1.8 V and is commonly used for interfacing with
DDR2 SDRAM memory chips (Chapter 16)
operating with a 400 MHz clock, transferring data
at both clock edges (800 MTps—see Figure
16.13). Its main parameters, specified in the
JEDEC JESD8-15A standard of September 2003,
are shown in Figure 10.33.

--- Page 472 ---
FIGURE 10.33  Main parameters for the
standard SSTL_18 I/O.
SSTL_15
Even though this standard has not been completed
yet, the semiconductor industry is already using it
for interfacing with DDR3 SDRAM memory chips
(Chapter 16). This circuit operates with VDDO =
1.5 V and an 800 MHz clock, transferring data at
both clock edges (1.6 GTps—see Figure 16.13).
One final remark regarding the termination
resistors shown in Figure 10.29 is that they were
initially installed off-chip, which became
increasingly problematic in FPGA-based designs
because of the large number of I/O pins. For that
reason, OCT (on-chip termination) is used in
modern FPGAs with the additional and very
important feature of being automatically calibrated
(this technique is called DCI (digitally controlled
impedance)), thus optimizing the impedance
matching between the circuit’s output and the

--- Page 473 ---
transmission line for reduced signal reflection,
hence improving the high-frequency performance.
10.9.4 HSTL Standards
HSTL (high-speed transceiver logic) is very similar to
SSTL (they were developed at almost the same time).
Its main application is for interfacing with QDR SRAM
chips (described in Chapter 16).
Originally, only HSTL-15 was defined (for VDDO = 1.5
V) through the JEDEC JESD8-6 standard of August
1995. However, at least two other versions, called
HSTL-18 (for VDDO = 1.8 V) and HSTL-12 (for VDDO =
1.2 V), are in use.
Like SSTL, HSTL is technology independent (VDDO
separated from VDD), specifies “dc” and “ac” signal
values, allows single-ended and differential operation,
and is intended for high-frequency applications (over
200 MHz).
Like SSTL, it employs termination resistors to reduce
transmission-line reflections, hence improving high-
frequency performance. Depending on how these
resistors are connected, four classes of operation are
defined, which are summarized in Figure 10.34 (only
single-ended mode is shown in the figure; for
differential mode, the same reasoning of Figures
10.29(c)–(d) can be adopted).

--- Page 474 ---
FIGURE 10.34  Typical usage of HSTL I/Os (only
single-ended options shown).
10.9.5 LVDS Standard
LVDS (low-voltage differential signaling) is a popular
differential I/O standard for general-purpose high-speed
applications (for distances up to ∼ 10 m). It is specified
in the TIA/EIA-644-A (Telecommunications Industry
Association/Electronic Industries Alliance no. 644-A)
standard.
Some of the LVDS parameters are shown in Figure
10.35. In Figure 10.35(a), an LVDS link is depicted,
which consists of a driver-receiver pair, operating in

--- Page 475 ---
differential mode and having a 100 O resistor installed
at the receiving end. The driver’s output waveform is
depicted in Figure 10.35(b), showing the allowed offset
voltage VOS = 1.25 V ± 10% and the differential output
voltage 0.247 V ≤ VOD ≤ 0.454 V (nominal = 0.35 V).
In Figure 10.35(c), corresponding receiver
specifications are shown, saying that the receiver must
be capable of detecting a differential voltage VID as low
as 100 mV over the whole 0 V to 2.4 V range.
FIGURE 10.35  (a) LVDS link; (b) Driver
waveform; (c) Corresponding receiver specifications.
Because the voltage swing is small (as seen above, the
TIA/EIA-644-A standard defines a nominal differential
voltage VOD = 0.35 V), the driver is fast and produces a
negligible electromagnetic field (low EMI). Moreover,
because the signaling is differential, it is highly immune
to noise.
LVDS is one of the lowest-power I/Os in its category.
To attain a nominal differential voltage VOD = 0.35 V
over a 100 Ω resistor, 3.5 mA must be delivered by the
LVDS driver, which results in just 1.23 mW of power
consumption.

--- Page 476 ---
This is also a fast I/O. The specified minimum rise/fall
time is 0.26 ns, which gives a theoretical maximum
speed of 1/(2 × 0.26) = 1.923 Gbps (for example, LVDS
I/Os operating at 1.25 Gbps have been available in
modern FPGAs for some time). However, the enormous
technological evolution since this limit (0.26 ns) was
established in the 1990s, combined with other versions
of LVDS that were tailored for particular applications
(like Bus LVDS and others), already led to speeds over
2 Gbps.
Finally, Figure 10.36 shows the four LVDS operating
modes, called point-to-point simplex (unidirectional,
like that in Figure 10.35(a)), point-to-point half-duplex
(bidirectional, but one direction at a time), multidrop
(simplex with several receivers), and multipoint (half-
duplex with several driver-receiver pairs).

--- Page 477 ---
FIGURE 10.36  LVDS and M-LVDS configurations.
The last configuration (Figure 10.36(d)) is officially
called M-LVDS (multipoint LVDS), and it is defined in
a separate standard called TIA/EIA-899. It specifies, for
the driver, a higher current, a higher differential voltage
(0.48 V ≤ VOD ≤ 0.65 V over 50 O), and a much higher
tolerance to offsets (0.3 V < VOS < 2.1 V). For the
receiver, it specifies a higher sensitivity (50 mV) and
also a wider range of operation (−1.4 V to 3.8 V instead
of 0 to 2.4 V). However, M-LVDS is slower ( ∼ 500
Mbps) than point-to-point LVDS.
To conclude this section, a high-speed application
where LVDS is employed is described.

--- Page 478 ---
10.9.6 LVDS Example: PCI Express Bus
PCI Express (peripheral computer interface express—
PCIe) is an I/O standard for personal computers,
employed for backplane communication between the
CPU and expansion cards (video, memory, etc.). It was
introduced by Intel in 2004 and is much faster than
previous PCI versions, so it is rapidly replacing PCI,
PCI-X, and AGP (accelerated graphics port, for video
cards) interfaces.
Each PCIe link is composed of 1, 4, 8, 16, or 32 lanes.
A single lane is depicted in Figure 10.37, which consists
of two pairs of wires for data, each operating in
unidirectional mode using the differential signaling
standard LVDS described above. The data rate in each
direction is 2.5 Gbps. However, the data are encoded
using the 8B/10B code described in Chapter 6, thus the
net bit rate is 2.5 × 8/10 = 2 Gbps. With 1 up to 32
lanes, the net bit rate in a PCIe link can go from 2 Gbps
up to 64 Gbps. Version 2.0 of PCIe, released in 2007,
doubles its speed, from 2.5 Gbps to 5 Gbps in each
lane, hence the net transfer rate can be as high as 128
Gbps.
FIGURE 10.37  PCIe lane (2.5 Gbps in each
direction, 8B/10B encoded, net rate of 2 Gbps).

--- Page 479 ---
As an illustration, Figure 10.38 shows two PCIe boards,
the first with one lane (top left) and the second with 16
lanes (top right). The 16-lane option is very common
for video boards. At the bottom left, four PCIe
connectors are shown for 1, 4, 8, and 16 lanes (36 to
166 pins), while at the bottom right a conventional PCI
connector (120 pins) is depicted for comparison.
FIGURE 10.38  PCI Express boards and
motherboard connectors. One-lane data-acquisition card
shown on top left, and a popular 16-lane video card on top
right. PCI express connectors (36 to 166 pins) shown on
bottom left, and the standard PCI (120 pins), for
comparison, on bottom right.
10.10 Exercises
1. Logic circuit #1
The questions below refer to the circuit of Figure
E10.1.
a. To which logic family does the part within
the dark box belong?

--- Page 480 ---
b. To which logic family does the overall
circuit belong?
c. Analyze the circuit and write down its
truth table. What type of gate is this?
2. Logic circuit #2
FIGURE E10.1
The questions below refer to the circuit of Figure
E10.2.
a. To which logic family does the part within
the dark box belong?
b. To which logic family does the overall
circuit belong?
c. Analyze the circuit and write down its
truth table. What type of gate is this?
3. Logic circuit #3
FIGURE E10.2

--- Page 481 ---
The questions below refer to the circuit of Figure
E10.3.
a. To which logic family does the part within
the dark box belong?
b. To which logic family does the overall
circuit belong?
c. Analyze the circuit and write down its
truth table. What type of gate is this?
4. 54-series
a. What are the differences between the 54-
and 74-series?
b. Is LS TTL available in both series?
c. Are HC and HCT CMOS available in both
series?
5. 74-series #1
a. What ICs from the 74-series contain 4-
input NOR gates?
b. And inverters with hysteresis?
c. And D-type flip-flops?
d. And 4-bit synchronous counters?
6. 74-series #2
FIGURE E10.3
Which ICs from the 74-series are needed to
implement the circuit of Figure E10.6?

--- Page 482 ---
7. In-out voltages
FIGURE E10.6
In the specifications of any logic family, input and
output voltage-related parameters are always
included. What are the meanings of the parameters
VIL, VIH, VOL, and VOL (used, for example, in the
TTL, LVTTL, CMOS, and LVCMOS families)?
8. In-out currents
a. Similarly to the question above, what are
the meanings of the current-related
parameters IIL, IIH, IOL, and IOL?
b. Two of them are always negative. Which
and why?
9. Fan-out #1
Suppose that the ICs of a certain logic family exhibit
IIL = –0.1 mA, IIH = 0.2 mA, IOL = 1.2 mA, and IOH
= –1.6 mA.
a. Draw a diagram similar to that in Figure
10.6.
b. What is the fan-out of this logic family
(with respect to itself)?
c. What is its fan-out with respect to LS
TTL?
10. Fan-out #2

--- Page 483 ---
Suppose that the ICs of a certain logic family exhibit
IIL = –0.2 mA, IIH = 0.1 mA, IOL = 1.2 mA, and IOH
= –1.6 mA.
a. Draw a diagram similar to that in Figure
10.6.
b. What is the fan-out of this logic family
(with respect to itself)?
c. What is its fan-out with respect to LS
TTL?
11. Noise margin
Suppose that a certain logic family exhibits VIL = 1
V, VIH = 3.8 V, VOL = 0.3 V, and VOH = 4.7 V.
a. Draw a diagram similar to that in Figure
10.7.
b. Calculate this family’s noise margin when
low and when high.
12. 3.3 V LVCMOS
a. Draw a diagram similar to that in Figure
10.7 for the 3.3 V LVCMOS I/O standard.
Assume thatVDD is exactly 3.3 V.
b. Calculate this family’s noise margin when
low and when high.
13. 2.5 V LVCMOS
a. Draw a diagram similar to that in Figure
10.7 for the 2.5 V LVCMOS I/O standard.
Assume thatVDD is exactly 2.5 V and that IO
=|1 mA|.
b. Calculate this family’s noise margin when
low and when high.
14. 1.8 V LVCMOS
a. Draw a diagram similar to that in Figure
10.7 for the 1.8 V LVCMOS I/O standard.

--- Page 484 ---
Assume thatVDD is exactly 1.8 V and that IO
= |2 mA|.
b. Calculate this family’s noise margin when
low and when high.
15. 1.5 V LVCMOS
a. Draw a diagram similar to that in Figure
10.7 for the 1.5 V LVCMOS I/O standard.
Assume thatVDD is exactly 1.5 V and that IO
= |2 mA|.
b. Calculate this family’s noise margin when
low and when high.
16. 1.2 V LVCMOS
a. Draw a diagram similar to that in Figure
10.7 for the 1.2 V LVCMOS I/O standard.
Assume thatVDD is exactly 1.2 V and that IO
= |2 mA|.
b. Calculate this family’s noise margin when
low and when high.
17. 1 V LVCMOS
a. Draw a diagram similar to that in Figure
10.7 for the 1 V LVCMOS I/O standard.
Assume thatVDD is exactly 1 V and that IO =
|2 mA|.
b. Calculate this family’s noise margin when
low and when high.
18. Loaded LVCMOS gate #1
Figure E10.18 shows a 2.5 V LVCMOS gate. In (a),
it feeds a pull-up load RL, while in (b) it feeds a pull-
down load RL. Assume that VDD is exactly 2.5 V.
Using the parameters given for this I/O in Figure
10.23, answer the questions below.

--- Page 485 ---
a. Estimate the minimum value of RL in (a)
such that the voltage at node y, when y = ‘0’,
is nothigher than 0.4 V.
b. Estimate the minimum value of RL in (b)
such that the voltage at node y, when y = ‘1’,
is not lowerthan 2 V.
c. In (a) and (b) above is it necessary to
establish a limit for the maximum value of
RL? Explain.
19. Loaded LVCMOS gate #2
FIGURE E10.18
The questions below refer to the circuits seen in
Figure E10.18, which can be answered using the
parameters given for the 2.5 V LVCMOS I/O in
Figure 10.23. If RL = 3.3 kΩ is employed in both
circuits, estimate the voltage (or voltage range) of
node y in the following cases:
a. For circuit (a) when y = ‘0’.
b. For circuit (a) when y = ‘1’.
c. For circuit (b) when y = ‘0’.
d. For circuit (b) when y = ‘1’.
20. NOR gate
Draw the MOS-based circuit for a 3-input NOR gate
using:
a. CMOS logic

--- Page 486 ---
b. Pseudo-nMOS logic
c. Dynamic footed logic
21. XOR gate
Draw the MOS-based circuit for a 2-input XOR gate
using:
a. CMOS logic
b. Pseudo-nMOS logic
c. Dynamic footed logic
22. XNOR gate
Draw the MOS-based circuit for a 2-input XOR gate
using:
a. CMOS logic
b. Pseudo-nMOS logic
c. Dynamic footed logic
23. AND gate with 3-state output
Using CMOS and C2MOS logic, draw an AND gate
with tri-state output. (Suggestion: see Section 4.8.)
24. NAND gate with 3-state output
Using CMOS and C2MOS logic, draw a NAND gate
with tri-state output. (Suggestion: see Section 4.8.)
25. XOR with TGS
Using transmission-gate (TG) logic, draw a circuit
for a 2-input XOR gate.
26. XNOR with TGS
Using transmission-gate (TG) logic, draw a circuit
for a 2-input XNOR gate.
27. CMOS inverter
If not done yet, solve the following exercises relative
to the CMOS inverter:
a. Exercise 9.14
b. Exercise 9.15

--- Page 487 ---
c. Exercise 9.16
d. Exercise 9.17
e. Exercise 9.18
28. nMOS inverter
If not done yet, solve the following exercises relative
to the nMOS inverter:
a. Exercise 9.19
b. Exercise 9.20
c. Exercise 9.21
29. Pseudo-nMOS NOR #1
Consider the N-input pseudo-nMOS NOR gate
depicted in Figure E10.29, and say that M (0 ≤ M ≤
N) represents the number of inputs that are high.
a. Discuss: Why do the nMOS transistors
that are ON always operate in the triode
mode? Andwhy can the pMOS transistor
operate in either (saturation or triode) mode?
b. When the pMOS transistor operates in
triode mode, prove that the output voltage is
given bythe expression below, where k =
Mβn/βp
FIGURE E10.29
    (10.3)

--- Page 488 ---
c. When the pMOS transistor operates in
saturation, prove that
    (10.4)
30. Pseudo-nMOS NOR # 2
The questions below regard again the circuit of
Figure E10.29.
a. Intuitively, what voltage do you expect at
node y when x1 = x2 = … = xN=‘0’?
b. Say that N = 4 and that all transistors have
the same size (recall from chapter 9 that in
this case βn ≈ 3βp). Consider also that VTn =
0.6 V, VTn = – 0.7 V, and VDD = 5 V.
Calculate the output voltage(Vy) for M = 0,
M = 1, M = 2, M = 3, and M = 4 using both
expressions given in the previous exercise.
c. Comment on the results above: Did they
match your expectations? In each case, is the
pMOS transistor actually operating in triode
or saturation? Why are the results from the
two expressions almost alike?
d. Why cannot Vy ever be 0 V?
31. Pseudo-nMOS NOR # 3
Suppose that you are asked to design the circuit gate
of Figure E10.29 such that the worst-case output
voltage is Vy ≤ 1 V.
a. What is the worst case? That is, for what
value of M should you develop the design?

--- Page 489 ---
In this case, in which mode do the nMOS
and pMOS transistors operate?
b. Determine the relationship βn/βp needed
to fulfill the specification above (Vy ≤ 1 V).
Use thesame circuit and transistor
parameters listed in the previous exercise.
32. Pseudo-nMOS NAND #1
Consider the N-input pseudo-nMOS NAND gate
depicted in Figure E10.32. Prove that the voltage at
node y is given by the same two equations of
Exercise 10.29 but with k=βn/βp.
33. Pseudo-nMOS NAND #2
FIGURE E10.32
The questions below regard again the circuit of
Figure E10.32.
a. Intuitively, what voltage do you expect at
node y when at least one input is ‘0’?
b. Say that N = 4 and that (W/L)n – 3(W/L)p
(recall from chapter 9 that in this case βn ≈
9βp). Consider also that VTn = 0.6 V, VTn=–
0.7 V, and VDD = 5 V. Calculate the output

--- Page 490 ---
voltage (Vy) usingboth expressions seen in
the previous exercise.
c. Comment on the results above. Did they
match your expectations? In which regime
(saturationor triode) do the nMOS and
pMOS transistors actually operate?
d. Why cannot Vy ever be 0 V?
34. Pseudo-nMOS NAND #3
Determine the relationship βn/βp needed to guarantee
that Vy ≤ V in the pseudo-nMOS NAND gate of
Figure E10.32 when all inputs are high (use the same
parameters listed in the previous exercise).
35. SSTL
Check the documentation of at least one of the
following JEDEC standards for SSTL I/Os and
compare the values given there against those listed in
the figures of Section 10.9.
a. JESD8-8 standard (for SSTL_3, Figure
10.31)
b. JESD8-9B standard (for SSTL_2, Figure
10.32)
c. JESD8-15A standard (for SSTL_18,
Figure 10.33)
36. HSTL
Check the documentation of the JEDEC standards
JESD8-6, which defines the HSTL-15 I/O, and do the
following:
a. Construct a table for it similar to what was
done for SSTL in Figures 10.31-10.33.
b. Check in it the four operating modes
depicted in Figure 10.34.

--- Page 491 ---
c. Draw a figure similar to Figure 10.34 but
for the differential versions of HSTL instead
of singleended.
37. LVDS
a. Examine the TIA/EIA-644-A standard,
which specifies the LVDS I/O. Check in it
the information given in Figure 10.35.
b. Examine also the TIA/EIA-899 standard,
for M-LVDS, and write down its main
differences withrespect to regular LVDS.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 492 ---
11
Combinational Logic Circuits
Chapter Contents
11.1 Combinational versus Sequential Logic
11.2 Logical versus Arithmetic Circuits
11.3 Fundamental Logic Gates
11.4 Compound Gates
11.5 Encoders and Decoders
11.6 Multiplexer
11.7 Parity Detector
11.8 Priority Encoder
11.9 Binary Sorter
11.10 Shifters
11.11 Nonoverlapping Clock Generators
11.12 Short-Pulse Generators
11.13 Schmitt Triggers
11.14 Memories
11.15 Exercises
11.16 Exercises with VHDL
11.17 Exercises with SPICE

--- Page 493 ---
Objective:
Chapters 1 to 10 introduced fundamental concepts, indispensable devices,
basic circuits, and several applications of digital electronics. From this chapter
on, we focus exclusively on circuit analysis, design, and simulation.
Digital circuits can be divided into two main groups, called combinational
and sequential. The former is further divided into logical and arithmetic,
depending on the type of function (i.e., logical or arithmetic) that the circuit
implements. We start by studying combinational logic circuits in this chapter,
proceeding to combinational arithmetic circuits in the next, and then
sequential circuits in the chapters that follow. This type of design
(combinational logic) will be further illustrated using VHDL in Chapter 20.
11.1 Combinational versus Sequential Logic
By definition, a combinational logic circuit is one in which
the outputs depend solely on its current inputs. Thus the
system is memoryless and has no feedback loops, as in the
model of Figure 11.1(a). In contrast, a sequential logic
circuit is one in which the output does depend on previous
system states, so storage elements are necessary, as well as a
clock signal that is responsible for controlling the system
evolution. In this case, the system can be modeled as in
Figure 11.1(b), where a feedback loop, containing the
memory elements, can be observed. For example, without
feedback, the circuit of Figure 11.1(c) would be purely
combinational, but the presence of such a loop converts it
into a sequential circuit (a D-type latch, Section 13.3),
because now its output does depend on previous states.

--- Page 494 ---
FIGURE 11.1  (a) Combinational logic and (b) sequential
logic models; (c) The feedback loop converts the circuit from
combinational to sequential (D latch).
It is important to observe, however, that not all circuits that
possess storage capability are sequential. ROM memories
(Chapter 17) are good examples. From the memory-read
point of view, they are combinational circuits because a
memory access is not affected by previous memory accesses.
11.2 Logical versus Arithmetic Circuits
The study of combinational circuits is separated into two
parts, called combinational logic circuits (Chapter 11) and
combinational arithmetic circuits (Chapter 12).
As the name says, the first of these types implements logical
functions, like AND, OR, XOR, multiplexers, address
encoders/decoders, parity detectors, barrel shifters, etc.,
while the second implements arithmetic functions, like
adders, subtracters, multipliers, and dividers. In an actual
design it is important that the designer understand in which
of these areas every major section of a project falls because
distinct analysis and implementation approaches can be
adopted.
11.3 Fundamental Logic Gates

--- Page 495 ---
Fundamental logic gates were already described in Chapters
4 and 10. As a review, they are summarized in Figure 11.2,
which shows their symbols and some MOS-based
implementations.
 Inverter: y = x′ (CMOS circuit included in Figure
11.2)
 Buffer: y = x (if noninverting, two inverters in
series can be used to implement it with the second
stage often stronger to provide the required I/O
parameters)
 Switches: y = sw′ · Z + sw · a (pass-transistor
(PT) and transmission-gate (TG) switches are
shown in Figure 11.2)
 Tri-state buffer: y = ena′ · Z + ena · a (two
implementations are shown in Figure 11.2, with
TG-logic and C2MOS logic; note that the former is
inverting)
 NAND: y = (a · b)′ (CMOS circuit shown in
Figure 11.2)
 AND: y = a · b (this is a NAND gate followed by
an inverter)
 NOR: y = (a + b)′ (CMOS circuit shown in
Figure 11.2)
 OR: y = a + b (this is a NOR gate followed by an
inverter)
 XOR: y = a + b = a′ · b + a · b′ (two
implementations are presented in Figure 11.2, one
with CMOS logic, the other with TG-logic)
 XNOR: y = (a + b)′ = a′ · b′ + a · b (again, two
implementations are included in Figure 11.2, one

--- Page 496 ---
with CMOS logic, the other with TG-logic)
FIGURE 11.2  Fundamental logic gates (symbols followed
by examples of MOS-based implementations).
11.4 Compound Gates
Having reviewed the fundamental logic gates, we now
examine the constructions of larger gates. Because they
combine functions performed by different basic gates
(notably AND, OR, and inversion), they are referred to as
compound gates.

--- Page 497 ---
It was seen in Chapter 5 that any logic function can be
expressed as a sum-of-products (SOP), like y = a · b + c · d,
or as a product-of-sums (POS), like y = (a + b) · (c + d). In
this section we show how to draw a circuit for each of these
expressions.
11.4.1 SOP-Based CMOS Circuit
Given a Boolean function in SOP form, each term is
computed using an AND-like circuit (transistors in
series) in the lower (nMOS) side, and an OR-like circuit
(transistors in parallel) in the upper (pMOS) side of the
corresponding CMOS architecture. All AND branches
must be connected in parallel, and all OR sections must
be in series. Moreover, the output needs to be inverted.
This procedure is illustrated in Figure 11.3(a) for the
function y = a · b + c · d. Note that its inverted version,
y′ = (a′ + b′) · (c′ + d′), which is also produced by the
circuit, is indeed the POS implementation for the
inverted inputs.
FIGURE 11.3  (a) SOP-based CMOS circuit for y =
a · b + c · d; (b) POS-based CMOS circuit for y = (a + b) ·
(c + d).

--- Page 498 ---
11.4.2 POS-Based CMOS Circuit
Given a Boolean function in POS form, each term is
computed using an AND-like circuit (transistors in
series) in the upper (pMOS) side, and an OR-like circuit
(transistors in parallel) in the lower (nMOS) side of the
corresponding CMOS architecture. All AND branches
must be connected in parallel, and all OR sections must
be connected in series. Moreover, the output needs to be
inverted.
This procedure is illustrated in Figure 11.3(b) for the
function y = a + b · c + d. Note that its inverted version,
y′ = a′ · b′ + c′ · d′, which is also produced by the
circuit, is indeed the SOP implementation for the
inverted inputs.
EXAMPLE 11.1 SOP-BASED CMOS
CIRCUIT
Draw CMOS circuits that implement the following
Boolean functions (note that they are all in SOP format):
a. y = a · b · c + d · e
b. y = a′ · b + a · b′
c. y = a + b · c
SOLUTION
The circuits, implemented using the first of the two
procedures described above, are shown in Figure 11.4.
Note that in Figure 11.4(b) the inverter was not
employed because y′ = a′ · b′ + a · b was implemented
instead (y is indeed the XOR function—compare this
circuit to the XOR circuit in Figure 11.2).

--- Page 499 ---
FIGURE 11.4  CMOS implementations for
(a) y = a · b · c + d · e, (b) y = a′ · b + a · b′,
and (c) y = a + b · c.
EXAMPLE 11.2 POS-BASED CMOS
CIRCUIT
Draw CMOS circuits that implement the following
Boolean functions (note that they are all in POS format):
a. y = (a + b + c) · (d + e)
b. y = (a′ + b) · (a + b′)
c. y = a · (b + c)
SOLUTION
The circuits, implemented using the second of the two
procedures described above, are shown in Figure 11.5.
Note in Figure 11.5(b) that again the inverter was not
employed because y′ = (a′ + b′) · (a + b) was
implemented instead (y is the XNOR function).
Comparing the CMOS circuits of Figure 11.5 with those
in Figure 11.4, we observe that, as expected, they are
vertically reflected.

--- Page 500 ---
FIGURE 11.5  CMOS implementations for
(a) y = (a + b + c) · (d+e), (b) y = (a′ + b) · (a
+ b′), and (c) y = a · (b + c)
The migration of any design from CMOS to other MOS
architectures seen in Sections 10.7–10.8 is
straightforward. As an example, the circuit of Figure
11.4(a) was converted from CMOS to pseudo-nMOS
logic (Section 10.7) in Figure 11.6(a), obtained by
simply replacing all pMOS transistors with just one
weak pMOS whose gate is permanently connected to
ground. The same circuit was also converted to footed
domino logic (Section 10.8) in Figure 11.6(b), in which
both connections to the power supply rails are clocked.
FIGURE 11.6  Implementations of y = a · b · c + d · e
with (a) pseudo-nMOS logic and (b) footed domino logic.
11.5 Encoders and Decoders

--- Page 501 ---
The encoders/decoders treated in this section are simply
parallel logic translators, having no relationship with other
encoders/decoders described earlier (like those for line
codes, seen in Chapter 6).
11.5.1 Address Decoder
One of the most common decoders in this category is
called address decoder because it is employed in
memory chips (Chapters 16 and 17) to activate the word
line corresponding to the received address vector. This
type of circuit converts an N-bit input into a 2N-bit
output, as shown in the three equivalent symbols of
Figure 11.7(a), with the output having only one bit
different from all the others (either low or high).
FIGURE 11.7  (a) Address decoder symbols; (b)
Truth table for N = 3, with the dissimilar bit equal to ‘1’
(“one-hot” code).
The address decoder’s operation can be observed in the
truth table of Figure 11.7(b) for the case of N = 3 and
with the dissimilar bit high (this type of code is called
one-hot and will be seen in the implementation of finite
state machines in Chapters 15 and 23). As can be
observed in the truth table, the input is the address of
the dissimilar bit with address zero assigned to the
rightmost bit.

--- Page 502 ---
Four address decoder implementations, for N = 2, are
depicted in Figure 11.8. From the truth table in Figure
11.8(a), the following Boolean expressions are obtained
for y:
FIGURE 11.8  Address decoder implementations for
N = 2: (a) Truth table; (b) SOP-based implementation with
AND gates; (c) POS-based CMOS implementation
(columns are NOR gates); (d) POS-based pseudo-nMOS
implementation (again columns are NOR gates); (e) SOP-
based footed dynamic implementation (columns are NAND
gates). The dissimilar bit is high in all circuits except in (e).


--- Page 503 ---
The circuit shown in Figure 11.8(b) is a direct
implementation of the SOP expressions listed above
using AND gates. In Figure 11.8(c), a CMOS
architecture is depicted, which was obtained using the
POS equations and the procedure described in Section
11.4 (notice that some of the transistors are shared
between adjacent branches), thus resulting in a NOR
gate in each column. In Figure 11.8(d), pseudo-nMOS
logic was employed instead of CMOS, again based on
the POS expressions (so each column is still a NOR
gate). Finally, in Figure 11.8(e), footed dynamic logic
was employed, and the implementation was based on
the SOP expressions instead of POS, thus resulting in
NAND gates in the columns (in this case, the dissimilar
bit is low instead of high).
11.5.2 Address Decoder with Enable
Figure 11.9(a) shows an address decoder with an
output-enable (ena) port. As described in the truth table,
the circuit works as a regular decoder while ena = ‘1’,
but turns all outputs low when ena = ‘0’, regardless of
the input values.

--- Page 504 ---
FIGURE 11.9  Address decoder with enable.
This case, with N = 2, can be easily designed using
Karnaugh maps to find the Boolean expressions for the
outputs. Such maps are shown in Figure 11.9(b), from
which the following equations result:
An implementation for these equations using AND
gates is depicted in Figure 11.9. The translation from
this diagram to any of the transistor-level schematics of
Figure 11.8 is straightforward.
11.5.3 Large Address Decoders

--- Page 505 ---
We describe now the construction of larger address
decoders from smaller ones. Suppose that we want to
build the decoder of Figure 11.10(a), which has N = 4
inputs and, consequently, 2N = 16 outputs, and that we
have 2-bit decoders (Figure 11.9(a)) available.
FIGURE 11.10  4-bit address decoder constructed
using 2-bit decoders.
A solution is depicted in Figure 11.10(b), where four
decoders are used to provide the 16-bit output. The
same two bits (x1x0) are fed to all of them. However, a
fifth decoder, receiving the other two inputs (x3 x2),
controls their enable ports. Because only one of the four
decoders will be enabled at a time, the proper output
signals are produced.

--- Page 506 ---
Note that if only decoders without enable were
available, a layer of AND gates at the output would also
do. This, as will be shown in the next exetion, is
equivalent to using a multiplexer to select which
decoder should actually be connected to the output
(Exercises 11.14–11.15).
11.5.4 Timing Diagrams
When a circuit is operating near its maximum
frequency, the inclusion of internal propagation delays
in the analysis is fundamental. Timing diagrams for that
purpose were introduced in Section 4.2, with three
simplified styles depicted in Figure 4.8. In the example
below, one of such diagrams is employed in the timing
analysis of an address decoder.
EXAMPLE 11.3 ADDRESS-DECODER
TIMING DIAGRAM
Figure 11.11 shows a 2-bit address decoder (borrowed
from Figure 11.8). Given the signals x1 and x0 shown in
the upper two plots, draw the resulting waveforms at the
outputs. Adopt the simplified timing diagram style seen
in Figure 4.8(b), with the following propagation delays
in the inverters and AND gates: tp_INV = 1 ns, tp_AND
= 2 ns. Assume that the vertical lines are 1 ns apart and
observe that x1 and x0 do not change exactly at the same
time, which is indeed the case in real circuits.

--- Page 507 ---
FIGURE 11.11  Timing diagram for a 2-bit
address decoder implemented with
conventional gates.
SOLUTION
The solution is included in Figure 11.11. Note that, to
make it easier to follow, plots for x1′ and x0′ were also
included. As can be observed, only one output is high at
a time. However, depending on the specific
implementation and its propagation delays, glitches
might occur during the transitions (which are generally
acceptable in this type of circuit).
11.5.5 Address Encoder
An address encoder does precisely the opposite of what
an address decoder does, that is, it converts a 2N-bit
input that contains only one dissimilar bit into an N-bit
output that encodes the position (address) of the
dissimilar bit. Figure 11.12 shows three equivalent
address encoder symbols plus the truth table for N = 2
and also an implementation example (for N = 2) using
OR gates.

--- Page 508 ---
FIGURE 11.12  (a) Address encoder symbols; (b)
Truth table for N = 2; (c) Implementation example with OR
gates.
Many other parallel encoders/decoders exist besides the
address encoder/decoder. An example is given below.
EXAMPLE 11.4 SSD DECODER
Figure 11.13(a) shows a seven-segment display (SSD),
often used to display BCD-encoded numeric digits from
0 to 9 and also other characters. Two common
technologies employed in their fabrication are LEDs
(light emitting diodes) and LCD (liquid crystal display).
The segments have one end in common, as illustrated for
LED-based SSDs in Figures 11.13(b)–(c). In the
common-cathode case, the cathode is normally
connected to ground, so a segment is turned ON when
the bit feeding it is ‘1’. In the common-anode
configuration, the anode is normally connected to VDD,
so the opposite happens, that is, a segment is turned ON
when its corresponding bit is ‘0’ (inverted logic). In this
example, we are interested in using SSDs to display the
output of a BCD counter (decimal digits from 0 to 9).
Each digit is represented by 4 bits, while an SSD
requires 7 bits to drive a digit (or 8 if the decimal point is
also used). Therefore, a BCD-to-SSD converter (also
called SSD driver or SSD decoder) is needed. A symbol

--- Page 509 ---
for such a converter appears in Figure 11.13(d), and the
corresponding truth table, for positive logic (that is,
common-cathode) in Figure 11.13(e). Design a decoder
to perform the BCD-to-SSD conversion. Recall that
Karnaugh maps can be helpful to obtain an optimal
(irreducible) SOP or POS expression for the segments
(a, b, …, g).
FIGURE 11.13 (a) Seven-segment display
(SSD); (b) Common-cathode configuration;
(c) Common-anode configuration; (d) BCD-
to-SSD converter symbol; (e) Truth table for
common-cathode decoder.
SOLUTION
The input bits are represented by ABCD in the truth
table, and the output bits by abcdefg. For each output bit,
a corresponding Karnaugh map is shown in Figure
11.14, from which we obtain the following equations:
a = A + C + B · D + B′ · D′
b = B′ + C · D + C′ · D′
c = (A′ · B′ · C · D′)′

--- Page 510 ---
d = A + B′ · C + B′ · D′ + C · D′ + B · C′ · D
e = B′ · D′ + C · D′
f = A + B · C′ + B · D′ + C′ · D′
g = A + B · C′ + B′ · C + C · D′
An AND-OR implementation for each of these
expressions is shown along with the Karnaugh maps in
Figure 11.14. Another implementation, using only
NAND gates, is shown at the bottom of Figure 11.14.

--- Page 511 ---
FIGURE 11.14 BCD-to-SSD converter of
Example 11.4 (for common-cathode display).
11.6 Multiplexer

--- Page 512 ---
Multiplexers are very popular circuits for data manipulation.
They act as switches that allow multiple choices of data
paths.
11.6.1 Basic Multiplexers
The symbol for a single-bit two-input multiplexer (thus
called 2 × 1 mux) is presented on the left of Figure
11.15(a), followed by a conceptual circuit constructed
with switches, and finally the corresponding truth table.
The circuit has two main inputs (a, b), plus an input-
select port (sel), and one output (y). When sel = ‘0’, the
upper input is connected to the output, so y = a;
otherwise, if sel = ‘1’, then y = b. The corresponding
Boolean function then is y = sel′ · a + sel · b.
FIGURE 11.15  (a) Two-input multiplexer with one
bit per input (2 × 1 mux); (b) Four-input multiplexer with
one bit per input (4 × 1 mux). Each figure shows the
multiplexer’s symbol, a conceptual circuit implemented
with switches, and the corresponding truth table.

--- Page 513 ---
Another multiplexer is depicted in Figure 11.15(b), this
time with four single-bit inputs (4 × 1 mux). A
conceptual circuit, implemented with switches, is again
shown, followed by the circuit’s truth table. As depicted
in the figure, y = a occurs when sel = “00” (decimal 0),
y = b when sel = “01” (decimal 1), y = c when sel =
“10” (decimal 2), and finally y = d when sel = “11”
(decimal 3). The corresponding Boolean function then
is y = sel1′ · sel0′ · a + sel1′ · sel0 · b + sel1 · sel0′ · c +
sel1 · sel0 · d, where sel1 and sel0 are the two bits of sel.
When a multiplexer is implemented with switches, like
in the central part of Figure 11.15, TGs (transmission
gates, Figure 11.2) are normally employed.
EXAMPLE 11.5 NAND-BASED
MULTIPLEXER
Draw a circuit that implements the 2 × 1 multiplexer of
Figure 11.15(a) using regular NAND gates.
SOLUTION
We saw in Section 5.5 that any SOP equation can be
implemented by a two-layer circuit containing only
NAND gates (see Figure 5.8), and possibly inverters.
The mux’s equation, in SOP format, was already seen to
be y = sel′ · a + sel · b. Therefore, the circuit of Figure
11.16(a) results.
FIGURE 11.16 2 × 1 multiplexer
implemented with (a) NAND gates, (b) TGs,

--- Page 514 ---
and (c) PTs.
EXAMPLE 11.6 TG- AND PT-BASED
MULTIPLEXER
Draw circuits that implement the 2 × 1 multiplexer of
Figure 11.15(a) using TGs (transmission gates) and PTs
(pass-transistors).
SOLUTION
TG and PT switches were seen in Figure 11.2. The
corresponding multiplexers are depicted in Figures
11.16(b) and (c), respectively.
11.6.2 Large Multiplexers
We illustrate now the construction of larger
multiplexers from smaller ones. Two cases arise: (i)
with more bits per input or (ii) with more inputs (or
both, of course). Both cases are depicted in the
examples below.
EXAMPLE 11.7 MUX WITH LARGER
INPUTS
Suppose that we want to build the 2 × 3 mux (with 2
inputs of 3 bits each) of Figure 11.17(a), and we have 2
× 1 muxes available. Show a solution for this problem.

--- Page 515 ---
FIGURE 11.17 2 × 3 mux constructed with
2 × 1 muxes.
SOLUTION
A 2 × 3 mux is shown in Figure 11.17(b), constructed
with three 2 × 1 muxes associated in parallel. Note that
because each unit has only two inputs, sel is still a
single-bit signal. (A common, simplified representation
for the input-select line was employed in the figure,
running under all multiplexers but obviously connected
only to the sel port of each unit.)
EXAMPLE 11.8 MUX WITH MORE
INPUTS
Suppose that now we want to build the 4 × 1 mux (with
4 inputs of 1 bit each) shown in Figure 11.18(a), and we
have 2 × 1 muxes available. Show a solution for this
problem.

--- Page 516 ---
FIGURE 11.18 4 × 1 mux constructed with
2 × 1 muxes.
SOLUTION
The 4 × 1 mux is shown in Figure 11.18(b), constructed
with two 2 × 1 muxes in parallel and one in series. Note
that now the inputs are still single-bit, but sel is multibit,
with its LSB controlling the first layer of muxes and the
MSB controlling the second layer.
11.6.3 Timing Diagrams
As mentioned earlier, when a circuit is operating near
its maximum frequency, the inclusion of internal
propagation delays in the analysis is fundamental.
Timing diagrams for that purpose were introduced in
Section 4.2, with three simplified styles depicted in
Figure 4.8. In the example below, two of such diagrams
are employed in the functional and timing analysis of a
multiplexer.
EXAMPLE 11.9 MULTIPLEXER
FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS
Figure 11.19(a) shows a 2 × 1 multiplexer (seen in
Figure 11.15(a), to which the first three stimuli plotted in
Figure 11.19(b) are applied. Assuming that the circuit is

--- Page 517 ---
operating in low frequency so the internal propagation
delays are negligible, draw the corresponding waveform
at the output.
FIGURE 11.19 Timing diagrams for a 2 ×
1 multiplexer (Examples 11.9 and 11.10).
SOLUTION
The waveform for y is included in Figure 11.19(b).
When sel = ‘0’, y is a copy of a, while sel = ‘1’ causes it
to be a copy of b. In both cases, there is no time delay.
EXAMPLE 11.10 MULTIPLEXER
TIMING ANALYSIS
Consider now that the 2 × 1 multiplexer of Figure
11.19(a) is operating near its maximum frequency, so the
internal propagation delays must be considered. Using
the simplified timing diagram style seen in Figure 4.8(b),
draw the waveform for y with the circuit submitted to the
same stimuli of Example 11.9. Adopt the following
propagation delays through the multiplexer:
From data (a or b) to y: tp_data = 2 ns (either up or
down).

--- Page 518 ---
From select (sel) to y: tp_sel = 1 ns (either up or down).
SOLUTION
The waveform for y is included in Figure 11.19(c),
where the distance between the vertical lines is 1 ns.
Gray shades were employed to highlight the propagation
delays. When an input bit changes its value during a
selected state, the delay is 2 ns, while a bit value already
available when the mux changes its state exhibits a delay
of 1 ns.
11.7 Parity Detector
A parity detector is a circuit that detects whether the number
of ‘1’s in a binary vector is even or odd. Two implementation
examples, employing 2-input XOR gates, are shown in
Figure 11.20, both producing y = ‘1’ if the parity of x is odd,
that is, y = x0 + x1 + … + x7. In Figure 11.20(a), the time
delay is linear (the number of layers is N – 1, where N is the
number of input bits). In Figure 11.20(b), a time-wise more
efficient implementation is depicted, which employs just
log2N layers, with no augment of fan-in or number of gates.
FIGURE 11.20  Odd-parity detectors with (a) linear and (b)
logarithmic time delays.

--- Page 519 ---
11.8 Priority Encoder
Priority encoders are used to manage accesses to shared
resources. If two or more requests are received, the role of a
priority encoder is to inform which of the inputs (requests)
has higher priority. In the description that follows, it is
assumed that the priority grows toward the MSB.
Two priority encoder structures are represented in Figure
11.21. In Figure 11.21(a), the size of y (output) is equal to
the size of x (input), and only one bit of y is high at a time,
whose position corresponds to the position of the input bit
with higher priority (see truth table). The structure in Figure
11.21(b) is slightly different; the output displays the address
of the input bit of highest priority, with y = “000” indicating
the nonexistence of requests.
FIGURE 11.21  Priority encoder symbols and truth tables.
We describe next two implementations for the circuit in
Figure 11.21(a). To convert it into that of Figure 11.21(b), an
address encoder (Section 11.5) can be employed. The

--- Page 520 ---
Boolean equations for the circuit of Figure 11.21(a) can be
easily derived from the truth table, resulting in:
Two implementations for these equations are depicted in
Figure 11.22. In Figure 11.22(a), a ripple-type circuit is
shown, which has the simplest structure but the largest time
delay because the last signal (y0) has to propagate (ripple)
through nearly N gates, where N is the number of bits
(inputs). The circuit in Figure 11.22(b) does not require
much more hardware than that in Figure 11.22(a), and it has
the advantage that the number of gate delays is
approximately log2N (for N = 7 there are 3 layers, shown
within dashed boxes, plus the inverter layer and the output
layer).

--- Page 521 ---
FIGURE 11.22  Priority encoder implementations with (a)
linear and (b) logarithmic time delays.
11.9 Binary Sorter
A binary (or bit) sorter organizes the input bits in decreasing
order, that is, all ‘1’s then all ‘0’s. A modular circuit of this
type is illustrated in Figure 11.23, where each cell is
composed simply of two 2-input gates (AND + OR). In this
example, the input vector is x = “01011”, from which the
circuit produces y = “11100” at the output. Note that the
hardware complexity is quadratic with respect to the number
of bits (the number of cells is (N – 1)N/2, where N is the
number of bits).

--- Page 522 ---
FIGURE 11.23  Five-bit binary sorter.
EXAMPLE 11.11 MAJORITY AND
MEDIAN FUNCTIONS
A majority function outputs a ‘1’ whenever half or more of its
input bits are high.
a. How can the binary sorter seen above be used to
compute the majority function?
b. How many basic cells (within dashed boxes in
Figure 11.23) are needed?
c. The median of a binary vector is the central bit
(assuming that N is odd) of the ordered (sorted) set. If
N is odd, what is the relationship between computing
the majority function and computing the median of
the input vector?
SOLUTION
a. All that is needed is to take as output the bit of y at
position (N + 1)/2, starting from the top in Figure
11.23, if N is odd, or at position N/2, if N is even. If

--- Page 523 ---
that bit is ‘1’, then one-half or more of the input bits
are high.
b. The cells below the row mentioned above are not
needed. Therefore, the total number of cells is 3(N2 −
1)/8 ≈ 3N2/8 when N is odd, or (3N − 2)N/8 ≈ 3N2/8
when N is even.
c. In this case, they coincide.
11.10 Shifters
The main shift operations were described in Section 3.3 and
are summarized below.
 Logical shift: The binary vector is shifted to the
right or to the left a certain number of positions,
and the empty positions are filled with ‘0’s.
 Arithmetic shift: As mentioned in Section 3.3,
there are conflicting definitions regarding
arithmetic shift, so the VHDL definition will be
adopted. It determines that the empty positions be
filled with the original rightmost bit value when
the vector is shifted to the left or with the leftmost
bit value when shifted to the right.
 Circular shift (or rotation): This case is similar to
logical shift except for the fact that the empty
positions are filled with the removed bits instead
of ‘0’s.
Circuits that perform the shift operations described above are
often called barrel shifters. However, two definitions are
commonly encountered. In the more restrictive one, a barrel
shifter is a circuit that implements only rotation, while in the
more general definition it is a circuit that can implement any
of the shift operations.

--- Page 524 ---
Figure 11.24 shows a circular right shifter. The circuit has a
4-bit input x = x3 x2 x1 x0 and a 4-bit output y = y3 y2 y1 y0.
The amount of shift is determined by a 2-bit signal which,
after going through an N = 2 address decoder (Figure 11.8),
produces the signal sh = sh3 … sh0 shown in Figure 11.24.
The relationship between inputs and outputs is specified in
the truth table. For simplicity, single-transistor switches were
employed in the circuit, though TGs (transmission gates,
Figure 11.2) are generally preferred (they are faster and
avoid poor ‘1’s). Because only one bit of sh is high at a time,
only one of the columns will be activated, thus connecting
the corresponding values of x to y. One interesting feature of
this circuit is that, independently from the amount of
rotation, each signal goes through only one switch. On the
other hand, its size (number of columns) is linearly
dependent on the maximum amount of shift desired (N
columns for a full rotator, where N is the number of input
bits).
FIGURE 11.24  Right rotator (linear size, address decoder
needed).
An arithmetic right shifter is shown in Figure 11.25. The
circuit has a 6-bit input x = x5 … x1x0 and a 6-bit output y =
y5 … y1y0. The amount of shift is determined by sh =
sh2sh1sh0. The switches can be PTs or TGs (Figure 11.2).

--- Page 525 ---
The relationship between input and output is described in the
truth table. Note that as the vector is shifted to the right, the
empty positions are filled with the MSB value as required in
arithmetic right shifters. Differently from the shifter of
Figure 11.24, the size here is logarithmic (log2N columns for
a full rotator), and an address decoder is not needed.
FIGURE 11.25  Arithmetic right shifter (logarithmic size,
address decoder not needed).
We know from Section 11.6 that each pair of switches in
Figure 11.25 is indeed a multiplexer. However, because
multiplexers can be implemented in other ways, it is
sometimes preferable to simply show multiplexer symbols
rather than switches in the schematics of shifters. This
approach is illustrated in Figure 11.26, which shows an 8-bit
logical left shifter. Notice that its size is logarithmic and that
the empty positions are filled with ‘0’s, as required in logical
shifters. The corresponding truth table is also included in the
figure.

--- Page 526 ---
FIGURE 11.26  Logical left shifter (logarithmic size,
address decoder not needed).
11.11 Nonoverlapping Clock Generators
As will be shown in Section 13.5, nonoverlapping clocks are
employed sometimes to prevent clock-skew in flip-flops.
Two examples of nonoverlapping clock generators are
depicted in Figure 11.27. The circuit in Figure 11.27(a)
employs two NOR gates (with delay d2) plus an inverter
(with delay d1). As can be seen in the timing diagram, the

--- Page 527 ---
nonoverlapping time interval between ø1 and ø2 is d2 on both
sides, and the dislocation of the generated signals with
respect to the clock is d2 on the left (where ø1 is the first to
change) and is d1 + d2 on the right (where ø2 is the first to
change).
FIGURE 11.27  Nonoverlapping clock generators.
The circuit in Figure 11.27(b) operates with AND gates (with
delay d2) and inverters (again with delay d1). As shown in
the accompanying timing diagram, the nonoverlapping time
interval between ø1 and ø2 is d1 on the left and 3d1 on the
right. Moreover, the dislocation of the generated signals with
respect to the clock is d1 + d2 on the left (where ø2 is the first
to change) and d2 on the right (where ø1 is the first to
change).
The circuit in Figure 11.27(a) has superior signal symmetry,
requires less transistors (10 against 22), and has more
reliable outputs (the feedback loop causes signal

--- Page 528 ---
interdependencies, so ø1 can only go up after ø2 has come
down, and vice versa).
11.12 Short-Pulse Generators
Short pulses, derived from the clock, are needed for driving
pulse-based flip-flops (Section 13.6). This type of circuit
falls in one of two categories: single-pulse generator
(generates a pulse only at one of the clock transitions—see
ø1 in Figure 11.28) or dual-pulse generator (generates pulses
at both clock transitions—see ø2 in Figure 11.28). The
former is employed with single-edge flip-flops, while the
latter is used with dual-edge flip-flops. Circuits that generate
the waveforms of Figure 11.28 will be presented in Section
13.6, relative to pulse-based flip-flops (see Figure 13.18).
FIGURE 11.28  Single (ø1) and dual (ø2) pulses generated
from clk for pulse-based flip-flops (these circuits will be studied
in Section 13.6—see Figure 13.18).
11.13 Schmitt Triggers
In Chapter 14, which deals with sequential digital circuits,
we will present a circuit called PLL (phase locked loop) that
is not completely digital. The reason for including it in this
book is that PLLs are now common units in advanced digital
systems (mainly for clock multiplication and clock filtration,
as will be seen, for example, in the study of FPGAs in
Chapter 18). The same occurs with Schmitt triggers (STs),
that is, even though they are not completely digital, their
increasing presence in digital systems (as noise filters in the

--- Page 529 ---
pads of modern digital ICs) makes it necessary to understand
how they are constructed and work.
An ST is simply a noninverting or inverting buffer that
operates with some hysteresis, generally represented by one
of the symbols shown in Figure 11.29(a). The transfer
characteristics are depicted in Figure 11.29(b) (for the
noninverting case), showing two transition voltages, called
VTR1 and VTR2′, where VTR2 > VTR1. When VIN is low, it must
grow above VTR2 for the output to switch from ‘0’ to ‘1’;
conversely, when VIN is high, it must decrease below VTR1
for the output to switch from ‘1’ to ‘0’. Therefore, ΔV = VTR2
– VTR1 constitutes the gate’s hysteresis, which prevents noise
(up to a certain level, of course) from inappropriately
switching the circuit. This fact is illustrated in Figure
11.29(c), where the noisy signal is VIN and the clean one is
VOUT. Schmitt triggers are employed in the pads of modern
digital ICs (like CPLDs, Section 18.3) to reduce the effect of
noisy inputs.
FIGURE 11.29  Schmitt trigger (a) symbols, (b) voltage
transfer characteristics, and (c) effect on noise.
Three CMOS implementations of STs are shown in Figure
11.30, all requiring the same number of transistors (six).
Note that the circuit in Figure 11.30(a) is inverting, while
those in Figures 11.30(b)–(c) are noninverting.

--- Page 530 ---
FIGURE 11.30  Three CMOS implementations of Schmitt
trigger circuits.
The circuit in Figure 11.30(a) was one of the first CMOS
STs and was employed in the old 74HC14 integrated circuit
of the popular 74-series described in Section 10.6 (which
used VDD = 5 V). However, because of its 4-transistor pile-
up, it is not well suited for present day low-voltage (VDD ≥
2.5 V) applications. Its operation is straightforward. When
VIN is low, M1-M2 are OFF and M3-M4 are ON, causing
VOUT to be high, hence turning M5 ON (though its source is
floating) and M6 OFF. M5 pulls the node between M1-M2 to
a high voltage (VDD – VT, where VT is the threshold voltage
of M5—Sections 9.2–9.3). When VIN increases, it eventually
turns M1-M2 ON and M3-M4 OFF. However, because the
source of M2 was charged to a high voltage by M5, only
after that voltage is lowered by M1 (or VIN is high enough)
M2 can be turned ON, producing VOUT = 0 V. Because the
circuit is horizontally symmetric, the reciprocal behavior
occurs when VIN is high, that is, M1-M2 are ON and M3-M4
are OFF, causing VOUT to be low, thus turning M6 ON (with
the source floating) and M5 OFF. M6 lowers the voltage on
the node between M3-M4 to VT (where VT is now the
threshold voltage of M6). Therefore, when VIN decreases, it
can only turn M3 ON after that node’s voltage is increased
by M4 (or VIN is low enough). In summary, M5 and M6
cause the gate’s upward and downward transition voltages to

--- Page 531 ---
be different, with the latter always smaller that the former
(Figure 11.29(b)). The difference between these two voltages
constitutes the gate’s hysteresis.
Contrary to the ST of Figure 11.30(a), that in Figure 11.30(b)
is adequate for low-voltage systems. It employs three regular
CMOS inverters, with one of them (M3-M4) forming a
feedback loop. Moreover, the inverter M1-M2 is stronger
than M3-M4 (that is, the transistors have larger channel
width-to-length ratios, W/L—Section 9.2). Its operation is as
follows. When VIN is low, M1 is OFF and M2 is ON, causing
VOUT to be low too, hence turning M3 OFF and M4 ON.
Note that M4 reinforces the role of M2, that is, helps keep
the feedback node high. When VIN grows, it must lower the
voltage on the feedback node for VOUT = VDD to eventually
occur. However, for that voltage to change from high to low,
it is one nMOS transistor (M1) against two pMOS transistors
(M2, M4). Note that a reciprocal behavior occurs when VIN
is high, that is, for the voltage on the feedback node to be
turned from low to high it is one pMOS transistor (M2)
against two nMOS ones (M1, M3). Such arrangement causes
the gate’s upward and downward transition voltages to be
inevitably different, with the latter again always smaller than
the former.
The ST of Figure 11.30(c) is also adequate for low-voltage
applications. Its main difference from the previous STs is
that contention between transistors no longer occurs, hence
increasing the transition speed. Contention is avoided by
allowing the circuit to go into a “floating” state before
finally settling in a static position. The circuit contains two
regular CMOS inverters (M1-M2 and M3-M4), connected to
a push-pull stage (Mn-Mp). Note that the transition voltages
of the inverters are different; in Figure 11.30(c), VTR1 = 1 V
and VTR2 = 2 V, with VDD = 3 V. Consequently, when VIN = 0

--- Page 532 ---
V, VN = VP = 3 V result, so only Mn is ON, causing VOUT = 0
V. Similarly, when VIN = 3 V, VN = VP = 0 V occur, thus only
Mp is ON, resulting in VOUT = 3 V. Because each inverter
has a distinct transition voltage, as VIN grows from 0 V to 3
V it first deactivates Mn, thus causing the output transistors
(Mn-Mp) to be both momentarily OFF (for 1 V < VIN < 2 V).
Only when VIN reaches 2 V Mp is turned ON, thus
preventing any contention between Mn and Mp, resulting in
a fast transition. A similar analysis can be made for VIN when
returning from 3 V to 0 V. The amount of hysteresis is given
by VTR2 – VTR1. (The determination of VTR for a CMOS
inverter was seen in Section 9.5—see Equation 9.7.)
11.14 Memories
Viewed from a memory-read point of view, traditional
memories (RAM, ROM) are combinational circuits because
their output depends solely on their current input (that is, a
memory-read access is not affected by previous memory-
read accesses). Therefore, such memory circuits could be
covered in this chapter. However, due to their complex and
specialized construction, they are described in two separate
chapters, one for volatile memories (Chapter 16) and the
other for nonvolatile memories (Chapter 17). Additionally, in
Chapter 20 it is also shown how VHDL can be used to infer
memories.
11.15 Exercises
1. Combinational × sequential logic
The circuit of Figure E11.1 is similar to that in Figure
11.1(c). Write the equation for y with the switch in
position (1), then with it in position (2). Compare the

--- Page 533 ---
two results. Is the first circuit combinational and the
second sequential? (Hint: If the function is
combinational, the expression for y is nonrecursive,
that is, y appears only on one side of the expression.)
2. Compound-gate #1
FIGURE E11.1
Write the equation for the function y implemented by
each circuit of Figure E11.2 (note that one does not
contain an inverter at the output).
3. Compound-gate #2
FIGURE E11.2
Draw the CMOS circuit for the following functions:
a. y = a + b · c + d · e · f
b. y = a · (b + c) · (d + e + f)
c. Are there any similarities between the
resulting circuits?
4. Compound-gate #3

--- Page 534 ---
Consider the function y = a · b · c.
a. Draw its CMOS circuit using the SOP-
based procedure described in Section 11.4,
Figure 11.3(a).
b. Draw its CMOS circuit using the POS-
based procedure described in Section 11.4,
Figure 11.3(b). Draw it employing the
equivalent equation y = (a + 0) · (b + 0) · (c
+ 0), and show that exactly the same circuit
results as that in part (a) above.
5. Compound-gate #4
Consider the function y = a · (b + c′) · (a′ + b′ + c).
a. Simplify it to a minimum SOP format
then draw the corresponding CMOS circuit.
b. Simplify it to a minimum POS format
then draw the corresponding CMOS circuit.
(Suggestion: Recall that u′ · v′ + u · v = (u′ +
v) · (u + v′).)
6. Compound-gate #5
Convert both CMOS circuits designed in the exercise
above to pseudo-nMOS logic, then compare and
comment on the results.
7. Compound-gate #6
Consider the 3-input XOR function y = a ⊕  b ⊕  c.
a. Manipulate this expression to obtain the
corresponding irreducible SOP equation.
b. Draw a circuit that implements the
resulting equation using pseudo-nMOS
logic.
c. Repeat part (b) for dynamic unfooted
logic.
8. Address decoder symbol

--- Page 535 ---
Suppose that a memory chip has capacity for 64 k
bits, divided into 4 k words of 16 bits each. Knowing
that an address decoder is used to activate the word
lines, do the following:
a. Draw a symbol for this address decoder.
b. What is the value of N in this case?
9. Address decoder with NAND gates
Figure E11.9 shows an N = 3 address decoder and
corresponding truth table.
a. Obtain the (optimal) Boolean expression
for each output (Karnaugh maps can be
helpful).
b. Implement the circuit using only NAND
gates (plus inverters, if necessary).
10. Address decoder with enable #1
FIGURE E11.9
Modify your solution to the exercise above to
introduce an output-enable (ena) port, as in Figure
11.9, which should cause the circuit to operate as a
regular decoder when asserted (ena = ‘1’), but turn
all outputs low when unasserted.
11. Address decoder with enable #2
Similarly to the exercise above, but without
modifying your solution to Exercise 11.9, introduce

--- Page 536 ---
additional gates, as indicated in Figure E11.11, to
allow the inclusion of an output-enable (ena) port, so
the circuit operates as a regular decoder when ena =
‘1’, or lowers all outputs when ena = ‘0’.
12. Address decoder with high-impedance
output
FIGURE E11.11
Still regarding the address decoder of Figures E11.9
and E11.11, assume that now the enable port, when
unasserted, must turn the outputs into a high-
impedance state (see tri-state buffers in Section 4.8)
instead of turning them low. Include the appropriate
circuit for that to happen in the box marked with a
question mark in Figure E11.11.
13. Address decoder with pseudo-nMOS logic
For the N = 3 address decoder of Figure E11.9, after
obtaining the corresponding output equations, draw a
NOR-type implementation using pseudo-nMOS logic
(as in Figure 11.8(d)).
14. Address decoder with more inputs #1
Construct a 5-bit address decoder using only 3-bit
address decoders.

--- Page 537 ---
FIGURE E11.14
15. Address decoder with more inputs #2
Construct a 5-bit address decoder using only 3-bit
address decoders.
16. Address-decoder functional analysis
Redo the plots of Example 11.3 (Figure 11.11), this
time considering that the circuit is operating in low
frequency, so all internal propagation delays are
negligible.
17. Address-decoder timing analysis
Redo the plots of Example 11.3 for the circuit
operating in high frequency and with the following
gate delays: tp_INV = 2 ns, tp_AND = 3 ns.
18. SSD decoder
In Example 11.4, the design of an SSD decoder,
using positive logic, was seen. Repeat that design,
this time for inverted logic (that is, common-anode,
in which case the segments are lit with ‘0’ instead of
with ‘1’). Start by writing the truth table, then draw
Karnaugh maps and extract the optimal equations for
the segments, and finally draw the corresponding
circuit.
19. Address encoder
For an N = 3 address encoder, do the following:
a. Draw a symbol for it (as in Figure 11.12).

--- Page 538 ---
b. Write the corresponding truth table.
c. Write the (optimal) Boolean expression
for each output bit.
d. Draw a circuit for it using regular gates.
20. Multiplexer symbols
Draw the symbols for the following multiplexers
(make sure to show or indicate the number of pins in
each input and output):
a. 5 × 1 mux
b. 5 × 8 mux
c. 8 × 16 mux
21. Multiplexer with NAND gates
Draw a circuit for a 4 × 1 multiplexer using only
NAND gates (plus inverters, if necessary).
22. Multiplexer with TGs
Draw a circuit for a 4 × 1 multiplexer using TGs
(plus inverters, if necessary). Include a buffer at the
output.
23. Multiplexer with more inputs
Using only 4 × 1 multiplexers, construct the 8 × 1
multiplexer shown in Figure E11.23.
24. Multiplexer with more bits per input
FIGURE E11.23

--- Page 539 ---
Using only 4 × 1 multiplexers, construct the 4 × 2
multiplexer shown in Figure E11.24.
25. Multiplexer with high-impedance output #1
FIGURE E11.24
The multiplexer of Figure E11.25 is the same as that
in Figure E11.23. However, an additional block is
shown at the output, which must cause y to go into a
high-impedance state when desired. Include that part
of the circuit in your solution to Exercise 11.23.
26. Multiplexer with high-impedance output #2
FIGURE E11.25
Similarly to the exercise above, the multiplexer of
Figure E11.26 is the same as that in Figure E11.24.
However, an additional block is shown at the output,
which must cause y to go into a high-impedance state

--- Page 540 ---
when desired. Include that part of the circuit in your
solution to Exercise 11.24.
27. Multiplexer functional analysis
FIGURE E11.26
Figure E11.27 shows a 2 × 1 multiplexer constructed
with conventional gates. Supposing that the circuit is
submitted to the signals depicted in the
accompanying timing diagram, draw the waveforms
at all circuit nodes. Assume that the propagation
delays are negligible (functional analysis).
28. Multiplexer timing analysis
FIGURE E11.27
Figure E11.28 shows the same 2 × 1 multiplexer seen
in the previous exercise. Suppose now that it is
operating near its maximum frequency, so the

--- Page 541 ---
internal propagation delays must be considered. Say
that they are tp_INV = 2 ns and tp_NAND = 3 ns. Draw
the remaining waveforms using the simplified style
seen in Figure 4.8(b) and considering that the vertical
lines are 1 ns apart.
29. Parity detector
FIGURE E11.28
Consider a 4-bit even parity detector (the circuit must
produce ‘1’ at the output when the number of inputs
that are high is even).
a. Write its Boolean expression without
using the XOR operator ( ⊕ ).
b. Draw a circuit for it using only NAND
gates (plus inverters, if necessary).
30. Priority encoder
Two implementations for the priority encoder of
Figure 11.21(a) were shown in Figure 11.22, both
employing AND gates. Draw an equivalent
implementation, but using only OR and/or NOR
gates instead (inverters are allowed). Moreover, the
dissimilar bit should be low instead of high.
31. Binary sorter

--- Page 542 ---
With respect to the binary sorter seen in Section 19.9,
write the expressions below as a function of N:
a. How many cells are needed to construct a
full N-bit sorter?
b. How many cells are needed to construct
an N-bit majority function?
c. How many cells are needed to construct
an N-bit median function?
32. Logical rotator
In Figure 11.24, the implementation of a logical right
rotator with linear size (N columns, where N is the
number of inputs) was shown. And, in Figure 11.25,
an arithmetic right shifter with logarithmic size
(log2N columns) is depicted. Implement an N = 4
logical right rotator with logarithmic size.
33. Logical shifter
In Figure 11.26, the implementation of a generic
logical left shifter was presented. Modify it to
became a logical right shifter.
34. Nonoverlapping clock generators
The questions below regard the nonoverlapping clock
generators seen in Section 11.11.
a. What happens to ø1 and ø2 in Figure
11.27(a) if the NOR gates are replaced with
NAND gates?
b. What happens to ø1 and ø2 in Figure
11.27(b) if the AND gates are replaced with
OR gates?
35. Schmitt trigger
Examine the datasheets of modern CPLD/FPGA
chips and find at least two devices that employ STs in
their pads. What is the amount of hysteresis

--- Page 543 ---
(normally in the 50 mV–500 mV range) of each
device that you found?
11.16 Exercises with VHDL
See Chapter 20, Section 20.7.
11.17 Exercises with SPICE
See Chapter 25, Section 25.13.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 544 ---
12
Combinational Arithmetic Circuits
Chapter Contents
12.1 Arithmetic versus Logic Circuits
12.2 Basic Adders
12.3 Fast Adders
12.4 Bit-Serial Adder
12.5 Signed Adders/Subtracters
12.6 Incrementer, Decrementer, and Two’s
Complementer
12.7 Comparators
12.8 Arithmetic-Logic Unit
12.9 Multipliers
12.10 Dividers
12.11 Exercises
12.12 Exercises with VHDL
12.13 Exercises with SPICE
Objective:
The study of combinational circuits is divided into two parts. The first part,
called combinational logic circuits, deals with logical functions and was the

--- Page 545 ---
subject of Chapter 11. The second part, called combinational arithmetic
circuits, deals with arithmetic functions and is the subject of this chapter. This
type of design will be further illustrated using VHDL in Chapter 21.
12.1 Arithmetic versus Logic Circuits
The study of combinational circuits is divided into two parts
depending on the type of function that the circuit
implements.
The first part, called combinational logic circuits, was seen
in the previous chapter. As the name indicates, such circuits
implement logical functions, like AND, OR, XOR,
multiplexers, address encoders/decoders, parity detectors,
barrel shifters, etc.
The second part is called combinational arithmetic circuits
and is discussed in this chapter. Again, as the name says,
such circuits implement arithmetic functions, like adders,
subtracters, multipliers, and dividers. A wide range of
circuits will be presented along with discussions on signed
systems and application alternatives.
12.2 Basic Adders
Several adder architectures will be presented and discussed
in this chapter. The discussion starts with a review of the
fundamental single-bit unit known as full-adder, followed by
the most economical multibit architecture (in terms of
hardware), called carry-ripple adder, then proceeding to
high performance structures, like Manchester adder, carry-
skip adder, and carry-lookahead adder. A bit-serial adder is
also included. Finally, the adder-related part is concluded
with a section on signed adders/subtracters.

--- Page 546 ---
In summary, the following adder-related circuits will be
seen:
 Full-adder unit (Section 12.2)
 Carry-ripple adder (Section 12.2)
 Manchester carry-chain adder (Section 12.3)
 Carry-skip adder (Section 12.3)
 Carry-select adder (Section 12.3)
 Carry-lookahead adder (Section 12.3)
 Bit-serial adder (Section 12.4)
 Signed adders/subtracters (Section 12.5)
 Incrementer and decrementer (Section 12.6)
12.2.1 Full-Adder Unit
A full-adder (FA) unit is depicted in Figure 12.1. Two
equivalent symbols are shown in Figures 12.1(a)–(b),
and the circuit’s truth table is shown in Figure 12.1(c).
The variables a and b represent the input bits to be
added, cin is the carry-in bit (to be also added to a and
b), s is the sum bit, and cout is the carry-out bit. As
shown in Figure 12.1(c), s must be high whenever the
number of inputs that are high is odd (odd-parity
function), while cout must be high when two or more
inputs are high (majority function).


--- Page 547 ---
FIGURE 12.1  (a)–(b) Full-adder symbols and (c)
truth table.
From the truth table of Figure 12.1(c), the following
SOP expressions are obtained for s and cout:
    (12.1)
    (12.2)
Implementation examples for both expressions are
depicted in Figure 12.2. In Figure 12.2(a), the sum is
computed by a conventional XOR gate and the carry-
out bit is computed by conventional NAND gates. In
Figure 12.2(b), a more efficient (transistor-level)
CMOS design is shown, where the computation of the
sum and carry-out are combined (that is, the
computation of s takes advantage of computations that
are necessary for cout, which reguires 28 transistors. In
Figure 12.2(c), a mux-based full-adder is shown, which
requires 18 transistors if the multiplexers are
implemented with TGs (Figure 11.16(b)) or just 8
transistors (at the expense of speed) if implemented
with PTs (Figure 11.16(c)).


--- Page 548 ---
FIGURE 12.2  Full-adder implementations: (a) Sum
and carry-out computed by conventional gates; (b) 28T
CMOS design, with combined computations for s and cout;
(c) Mux-based full-adder, which requires 18T when the
multiplexers are constructed as in Figure 11.16(b) or just
8T (at the expense of speed) if implemented as in Figure
11.16(c).
12.2.2 Carry-Ripple Adder
Fundamental concepts related to addition and
subtraction were studied in Sections 3.1–3.2. Figure
12.3(a) illustrates the operation of a multibit adder. The
values in the gray area are given, while the others must
be calculated. The inputs are a = a3a2a1a0 and b = b3
bb2b1b0, plus the carry-in bit, c0. The outputs are the
sum and carry vectors, that is, s = s3s2s1s0 and c =
c4c3c2c1, where c4 is the carry-out bit.
FIGURE 12.3  (a) In-out signals in a multibit adder;
(b) Carry-ripple adder (4 bits); (c) Carry-ripple adder
without the inverters in the FA units (Figure 12.2(b)) to
reduce the delay of the critical path.

--- Page 549 ---
The simplest multibit adder is the carry-ripple adder,
shown in Figure 12.3(b). For an N-bit circuit, it consists
of N full-adder units connected in series through their
carry-in/carry-out ports. Each FA adds three bits to
produce sum and carry-out bits. Because the carry must
propagate (ripple) through all stages serially, this is the
slowest adder architecture. Roughly speaking, the time
required by the FA unit to compute the carry bit is two
gate delays (see Figure 12.2(a)). Therefore, the total
delay in the carry-ripple adder is of the order of 2N gate
delays. On the other hand, this is the most economical
adder in terms of silicon area and, in general, also in
terms of power consumption.
Because the critical path in any adder involves the
computation of the carry (because any stage needs
information regarding all preceding stages to compute
its own sum and carry-out bits), anything that can be
removed from that path reduces the internal delay and,
consequently, improves the adder’s speed. This
situation is depicted in Figure 12.3(c), where the
inverters at the sum (s) and carry-out (cout) outputs (see
Figure 12.2(b)) of all FA units were removed (FA′
denotes an FA without these two inverters). Even
though this implies that some inverters are now needed
for a and b, and that some inverters for s must be
reincluded (in every other unit), they are not in the
critical path, so do not affect the speed. Note also that
the final carry-out bit only needs an inverter if the
number of FA′ units is odd.
EXAMPLE 12.1 SIGNED/UNSIGNED
ADDITION

--- Page 550 ---
Suppose that a = “0001”, b = “0110”, c = “1011”, and
cin = ‘0’. Determine a + b, a + c, and b + c in Figure
12.3 for the following cases:
a. Assuming that the system is unsigned
b. Assuming that the system is signed
SOLUTION
As seen in Sections 3.1–3.2, the adder operation is
independent from the signs of a and b (that is,
independent from the fact that the system is signed or
unsigned). What changes from one case to the other is
the meaning of the binary words, that is, for an unsigned
4-bit system, the range of any number is from 0 to 15,
while for a signed 4-bit system it is from −8 to +7. In
this example, the adder’s outputs are:
a. Interpretation of the results above when the
system is 4-bit unsigned:
b. Interpretation of the results above when the
system is 4-bit signed:


--- Page 551 ---
12.3 Fast Adders
We start this section by describing three signals (generate,
propagate, and kill) that help in understanding the internal
structure of adders. Their usage in the implementation of
higher performance adders will be shown subsequently.
12.3.1 Generate, Propagate, and Kill Signals
To help the study of adders, three signals are often
defined, called generate, propagate, and kill.
Generate (G): Must be ‘1’ when a carry-out
must be produced regardless of carry-in. For
the FA unit of Figure 12.1, this should occur
when a and b are both ‘1’, that is:
    (12.3)
Propagate (P): Must be ‘1’ when a or b is ‘1’,
in which case cout = cin, that is, the circuit
must allow cin to propagate through.
Therefore:
    (12.4)
Kill (K): Must be ‘1’ when a carry-out is
impossible to occur, regardless of carry-in,
that is, when a and b are both ‘0’.
Consequently:

--- Page 552 ---
    (12.5)
The use of these signals is illustrated in Figure 12.4,
where a static CMOS implementation is shown in
Figure 12.4(a), and a dynamic (footed) option is shown
in Figure 12.4(b). In Figure 12.4(c), the left half of
Figure 12.2(b) (carry part of the FA circuit) was copied
to illustrate the “built-in” computations of G, P, and K.
FIGURE 12.4  (a) Static and (b) dynamic carry
circuits operating with the G, P, and K signals defined by
Equations 12.3-12.5; (c) Built-in G, P, and K signals in the
carry section of the FA unit of Figure 12.2(b).
These signals can be related to those in the full-adder
circuit seen in Figure 12.1, resulting in:
    (12.6)
    (12.7)
Note the equality a · b + (a + b) · cin=a · b + (a ⊕  b) ·
cin employed in Equation 12.7, which can be easily

--- Page 553 ---
verified with a Karnaugh map.
The equations above can be extended to multibit
circuits, like that in Figure 12.3. The resulting
generalized expressions are (i represents the adder’s ith
stage):
    (12.8)
    (12.9)
Where:
    (12.10)
    (12.11)
The computation of the carry vector for a 4-bit adder is
then the following (Equation 12.9):
    (12.12)
    (12.13)
    (12.14)

--- Page 554 ---
    (12.15)
    (12.16)
Developing the equations above, the following
expressions result:
    (12.17)
    (12.18)
    (12.19)
    (12.20)

--- Page 555 ---
where Gi : j and Pi : j are called group generate and
group propagate, respectively. Notice that neither
depends on carry-in bits, so they can be computed in
advance. These signals (P, G, K, and their derivations)
will be used in the analysis of all adder architectures
that follow.
12.3.2 Approaches for Fast Adders
The bottleneck of any adder relates to the fact that any
stage needs information regarding all preceding bits to
be able to compute its own sum and carry-out bits. The
carry-ripple adder seen earlier constitutes the simplest
architecture in which the information (carry) is passed
from stage to stage, thus demanding a larger time to
complete the computations.
Any architecture intended to make the circuit faster
falls in one of the following two general categories: (i)
faster carry propagation (reduction of the time required
for the carry signal to propagate through the cell) or (ii)
faster carry generation (local computation of the carry,
without having to wait for signals produced by
preceding stages).
Both approaches are depicted in Figure 12.5, with
Figure 12.5(a) indicating a faster carry propagation and
Figure 12.5(b) indicating a faster carry generation
(each stage generates its own carry-in bit). To attain a
high performance adder, both aspects must be
considered. However, some emphasize mainly a faster
carrier transmission (e.g., Manchester carry-chain
adder), while others concentrate fundamentally on
faster carry generation (e.g., carry-lookahead adder).

--- Page 556 ---
FIGURE 12.5  General approaches for the design of
fast adders: (a) Faster carry propagation (reduction of time
needed for the carry to propagate through the cells) and (b)
faster carry generation (each stage computes its own carry-
in bit).
12.3.3 Manchester Carry-Chain Adder
The Manchester carry-chain adder falls in the category
of fast adders depicted in Figure 12.5(a), that is, it is a
carry-propagate adder in which the delay through the
carry cells is reduced. It can be static or dynamic. An
example of the latter is presented in Figure 12.6(a),
where the individual cells are from Figure 12.4(b). This
circuit implements Equations 12.13-12.16, with G and
P given by Equations 12.10–12.11. Alternatively, Pi =
ai + bi can be used to compute P. Thanks to these
parameters (G and P), the delay in each cell is just one
gate-delay, which is an improvement over the carry-
ripple adder seen earlier. The critical path corresponds
to P0 = P1 = P2 = P3 = … = ‘1’and G0 = G1 = G2 = G3
= … = ‘0’, in which case all P-controlled transistors are

--- Page 557 ---
serially inserted into the carry path (that is, the last
carry bit is determined by cin). However, the parasitic
capacitance of this long line limits the usefulness of this
approach to about 4 to 8 bits. (Note that c0 is just a
buffered version of cin.)
FIGURE 12.6  (a) Dynamic Manchester carry-chain
adder (the cells are from Figure 12.4(b)), where Gi = ai · bi
and Pi = ai © bi or Pi = ai + bi; (b) Another representation
for the same circuit highlighting the critical (longest) path.
Another representation for the Manchester carry-chain
adder is presented in Figure 12.6(b), in which the
critical (longest) path mentioned above can be easily
observed.
12.3.4 Carry-Skip Adder
Suppose that we want to construct a 4-bit (adder) block,
which will be associated to other similar blocks to attain

--- Page 558 ---
a larger adder. We mentioned in the description of the
Manchester carry-chain adder above that its critical path
corresponds to P0 = P1 = P2 = P3 = ‘1’ because then the
last carry bit (cout = c4) is determined by the first carry
bit (c0 = cin), meaning that such a signal must traverse
the complete carry circuit. Because this only occurs
when c4 = c0, a simple modification can be introduced
into the original circuit, which consists of bypassing the
carry circuit when such a situation occurs. This
modification is depicted in Figure 12.7, which is called
carry-skip or carry-bypass adder. For simplicity, only
the carry circuit is shown in each block, with the GP
section (circuit that generates the G and P signals) and
the sum section omitted. A multiplexer was included at
the output of the carry circuit, which selects either the
carry generated by the circuit (when P3:0 = ‘0’) or
directly selects the input carry (when P3:0 = ‘1’), thus
eliminating the critical path described above.
FIGURE 12.7  Carry-skip (also called carry-bypass)
adder.
By looking at a single block, the overall reduction of
propagation delay is of little significance because now a
multiplexer was introduced into the new critical path.
However, when we look at the complete system (with
several blocks, as in Figure 12.7), the actual benefit
becomes apparent. Suppose that our system contains 4

--- Page 559 ---
blocks of 4 bits each and that the last carry bit has been
generated by the second stage of the first block (which
is now the critical path). Even though the reduction in
the propagation delay in the first block might be
negligible (because one stage was traded for one
multiplexer), the bypass structure will cause this carry
bit to skip all the other blocks. In other words, the total
carry delay in an n-block system cannot be larger than
that of one block plus n multiplexers (note that this is
the critical carry delay; the total delay is this plus that
needed by the last sum section to compute the sum
vector).
12.3.5 Carry-Select Adder
Another fast adder architecture is depicted in Figure
12.8. In a traditional adder (like Manchester carry-
chain) each block consists of three sections: GP section
(where G and P are generated), carry circuit (which
generates the carry bits), and the sum section (where the
output signals—sum bits—are computed). The
difference between this traditional architecture and that
of Figure 12.8 is that the latter contains two carry
sections per block instead of one, and it also contains a
multiplexer. One of the carry circuits operates as if the
carry-in bit were ‘0’, while the other operates as if it
were ‘1’, so the computations can be performed in
advance. The actual carry bit, when ready, is used at the
multiplexer to select the right carry vector, which is fed
to the sum section where the output vector is finally
computed. The carry-out bit from one block is used to
operate the multiplexer of the subsequent block. Note
that in the first block the use of two carry sections is

--- Page 560 ---
actually not needed because c0 (the global carry-in bit)
is already available at the beginning of the
computations. The main drawback of the carry-select
architecture is the extra hardware (and power
consumption) needed for the additional sections.
FIGURE 12.8  Carry-select adder.
12.3.6 Carry-Lookahead Adder
In the carry-skip circuit (Figure 12.7), each block
contained a carry-propagate type of adder (e.g., carry-
ripple adder, Figure 12.3, or Manchester carry-chain
adder, Figure 12.6). Therefore, the internal block
operation requires the carry to propagate through the
circuit before the sum can actually be computed. The
fundamental difference between that approach and the
carry-lookahead approach is that in the latter each stage
computes its own carry-in bit without waiting for
information from preceding stages. This approach,
therefore, corresponds to that depicted in Figure
12.5(b).
Mathematically speaking, this means that the circuit
implements Equations 12.17-12.20 instead of Equations

--- Page 561 ---
12.13-12.16, that is, each stage computes its own group
generate and group propagate signals, which are
independent from carry (so can be computed in
advance). When these expressions (which produce the
carry vector) are implemented, Equation 12.8 can be
employed to obtain the sum vector. This architecture is
depicted in Figure 12.9, where two 4-bit blocks are
shown.
FIGURE 12.9  Carry-lookahead adder.

--- Page 562 ---
In the first block of Figure 12.9, the first stage
computes the pair (G0:0, P0:0) in the GP layer, from
which the carry bit c1 is obtained in the carry layer,
eventually producing s1 in the sum layer. A similar
computation occurs in the succeeding stages, up to the
fourth stage, where the pair (G3:0, P3:0) is computed in
the GP layer, producing c4 in the carry layer, which
propagates to the next block. The main drawbacks of
this approach are the large amount of hardware needed
to compute Gi:j and also its high fan-in (which reduces
its speed), hence limiting its usefulness to blocks of
about 4 bits. These limitations will be illustrated in the
example that follows.
EXAMPLE 12.2 FOUR-BIT CARRY-
LOOKAHEAD CIRCUIT
a. Based on the discussion above, draw a
circuit for a 4-bit carry-lookahead adder. Even
thoughoptimal implementations are developed
at transistor-level rather than at gate-level (see,
for example, Figure 12.2), use conventional
gates to represent the circuit.
b. Explain why the carry-lookahead approach
is limited to blocks of about 4 bits (check the
size of the hardware and also the fan-in of the
resulting circuit; recall that the time delay
grows with fan-in, so the latter is an important
parameter for high-speed circuits).
c. Compare its time dependency with that of a
carry-ripple adder.
SOLUTION
Part (a):
The circuit is shown in Figure 12.10.

--- Page 563 ---
FIGURE 12.10 Complete 4-bit carry-
lookahead adder of Example 12.2.
Part (b):
The limitations of this approach can be easily observed
in Figure 12.10. First, the hardware grows nearly
exponentially with the number of bits (compare the size
of the carry cells from c1 to c4), which increases the cost
and the power consumption. Second, for a gate not to be
too slow, its fan-in (number of inputs) is normally
limited to about four or five. However, in the
computation of c4, two gates have already reached the
limit of five.
Part (c):

--- Page 564 ---
A time-dependency comparison between carry-
lookahead and carry-ripple adders is presented in Figure
12.11. In the latter, the fan-in of each carry cell is fixed
(two in the first gate, three in the second—see the circuit
for cout in Figure 12.2(a)), but the number of layers
(cells) grows with N (number of bits); this situation is
depicted in Figure 12.11(a). On the other hand, the
number of layers (cells) is fixed in the carry-lookahead
adder (see in Figure 12.10 that the computation of any
carry bit requires only one cell, composed of three layers
of gates, one for GP and the other two for the carry bits),
but the fan-in grows with N, hence affecting the adder’s
speed. This case is illustrated in Figure 12.11(b), which
shows a fixed number of gate layers (three) in all carry
cells but with an increasing fan-in (maximum of two in
the first stage and five in the fourth).
FIGURE 12.11  Illustration of gate-delay
versus fan-in for (a) a carry-ripple adder and
(b) a carry-lookahead adder. The fan-in is
fixed in the former, but the number of layers
grows with N, while the opposite happensin
the latter.

--- Page 565 ---
12.4 Bit-Serial Adder
Contrary to all adders described above, which are parallel
and truly combinational (they require no storage cells), the
adder described in this section is serial and requires memory.
Because its next computation depends on previous
computations, it is a sequential circuit. Nevertheless, it is
included in this chapter to be shown along with the other
adder architectures.
The bit-serial adder is depicted in Figure 12.12. It consists of
a FA unit plus a D-type flip-flop (DFF, studied in Chapter
13). The inputs are the vectors a and b, whose bits are
applied to the circuit serially, that is, a0 and b0, then a1 and
bl, etc., from which the sum bits (s0, then s1 etc.) and the
corresponding carry-out bits are obtained. Note that the
carry-out bit is stored by the DFF and is then used as the
carry-in bit in the next computation.
FIGURE 12.12  Serial adder (a sequential circuit).
12.5 Signed Adders/Subtracters
Signed addition/subtraction was described in Section 3.2.
Conclusions from that section are now used to physically
implement signed adders/subtracters.
12.5.1 Signed versus Unsigned Adders

--- Page 566 ---
Suppose that a and b are two N-bit numbers belonging
to a signed arithmetic system. If so, any positive value
is represented in the same way as an unsigned value,
while any negative number is represented in two’s
complement form. To add a and b, any regular adder
can be used (like those seen above) regardless of a
and/or b being positive or negative because when a
number is negative it is already represented in two’s
complement form, so straight addition must be
performed. For example, consider that N = 4, a = 5
(“0101”), and b = −7 (“l00l”); then a + b = (5) + (−7) =
“0101” + “l00l” = “1110” = −2. On the other hand, to
subtract b from a, b must first undergo two’s
complement transformation and then be added to a,
regardless of b being positive or negative. As an
example, consider N = 4, a = 5 (“0101”), and b = −2
(“1110”); then a − b = (5) − (−2) = (5) + (2) = “0101” +
“00100” = “0111” = 12.
Suppose now that a and b belong to an unsigned
system. The only difference is that both are necessarily
nonnegative, so the overflow checks are slightly
different, as described in Section 3.1. The rest is exactly
the same, that is, to add a and b, any adder is fine, while
to subtract b from a, b must first be two’s
complemented, then added to a.
In conclusion, to perform addition and subtraction of
signed and unsigned numbers all that is needed is a
conventional adder (like any of those seen above) plus
two’s complement circuitry (plus distinct overflow
checks, of course). The insertion of two’s complement
is explained below.

--- Page 567 ---
12.5.2 Subtracters
As described above, a subtracter can be obtained by
simply combining a two’s complementer with an adder.
A circuit of this type is depicted in Figure 12.13(a),
which allows two types of operations, defined by a ± b.
When the operator (op) is ‘0’, the outputs of the XOR
gates are equal to the inputs, and cin = ‘0’, so regular
addition occurs. On the other hand, when op = ‘l’, the
XOR gates complement the inputs, and because now
cin = ‘l’, a + b’ + l = a − b results. A possible
implementation for the XOR gate, based on
transmission gates (TGs, Figure 11.2), is shown in the
inset on the right of Figure 12.13(a). Two alternatives
for overflow check are also included (one based on
carry and the other based on operands, as described in
Section 3.2) where the system was considered to be
signed.

--- Page 568 ---
FIGURE 12.13  Adder/subtracter circuits that
compute (a) a ± b and (b) ± a ± b (the original signs of a
and b can be either).
Another circuit of this type is shown in Figure 12.13(b),
which is a completely generic adder/subtracter (it can
perform all four operations defined by ± a ± b with
carry-in). A two’s complementer is now included in the
system with all inputs going through it and also going
directly to the adder. A series of multiplexers, controlled
by the operators op_a and op_b, are then used to select
which of these signals should eventually enter the adder
(addition is selected when the operator is low, and
subtraction is selected when it is high). The overflow
check is similar to that in the previous circuit. A
possible implementation for the multiplexers (Section

--- Page 569 ---
11.6) is included in the inset on the right of Figure
12.13(b).
EXAMPLE 12.3 SIGNED/UNSIGNED
ADDITION/SUBTRACTION
Suppose that a = “1001”, b = “0101”, and cin = ‘0’.
Determine the outputs produced by the circuit of Figure
12.13(b) for:
a. Assume that it is a 4-bit unsigned system.
b. Assume that it is a 4-bit signed system.
SOLUTION
As in Example 12.1, the adder operation is independent
from the system type (signed or unsigned); the only
difference is in the way the numbers are interpreted. The
results produced by the circuit of Figure 12.13(b) are the
following:
a. Interpretation of the results above when the
system is unsigned (so a = 9 and b = 5):
b. Interpretation of the results above when the
system is signed (so a = −7 and b = 5):


--- Page 570 ---
12.6 Incrementer, Decrementer, and Two’s
Complementer
12.6.1 Incrementer
To increment a number (that is, add 1), the circuit of
Figure 12.14(a) could be used, which is just a regular
adder (carry-ripple type in this case, Section 12.2) to
which cin = ‘1’ and b = “0 … 00” were applied, thus
resulting in s = a + 1 at the output. This, however, is a
very inefficient implementation because too much
(unnecessary) hardware is employed in it. It is
important to observe that when a number is
incremented by one unit the only thing that happens to
it is that all bits up to and including its first (least
significant) ‘0’ are inverted. For example, “00010111”
+ 1 = “00011000”. Therefore, a circuit like that in
Figure 12.14(b) can be used, which computes b = a + 1
and is much more compact than the adder approach of
Figure 12.14(a).

--- Page 571 ---
FIGURE 12.14  (a) Area-inefficient adder-based
incrementer implementation; More efficient (b)
incrementer, (c) decrementer, and (d) two’s complementer
circuits.
12.6.2 Decrementer
A similar behavior occurs in a decrementer. To subtract
one unit from a number is the same as adding “1 … 11”
to it. Therefore, all that needs to be done is to invert all
bits up to and including its first (least significant) ‘1’.
For example, “00111100” − 1 = “00111011”. This can
be achieved with the circuit of Figure 12.14(c), which
computes b = a − 1 and is also much more compact
than the adder-based approach.
12.6.3 Two’s Complementer

--- Page 572 ---
Another circuit that falls in this category is the two’s
complementer (needed to represent negative numbers).
Its operation consists of inverting all input bits then
adding 1 to the result, that is, b = a’ + 1. However,
because a′ = 2N − 1 − a, the problem can be rewritten as
b = a′ + 1 = 2N − 1 − a + 1 = 2N − 1 − (a − 1) = 2N − 1 −
adecrem = adecrem′. Consequently, all that is needed is to
invert the outputs of the decrementer, thus resulting in
the circuit shown in Figure 12.14(d).
12.7 Comparators
An equality comparator is illustrated in Figure 12.15(a). The
circuit compares two vectors, a and b, bit by bit, using XOR
gates. Only when all bits are equal is the output ‘1’.
FIGURE 12.15  (a) Equality comparator; (b) Unsigned
adder-based magnitude and equality comparator; (c) Unsigned
mux-based magnitude comparator.
Another comparator, which is based on an adder, is shown in
Figure 12.15(b). It compares two unsigned (nonnegative)
numbers, a and b, by performing the operation a − b = a + b′

--- Page 573 ---
+ 1. If the carry-out bit of the last adder is ‘1’ then a ≥ b.
Moreover, if all sums are ‘0’, then a and b are equal.
Finally, another unsigned magnitude comparator is shown in
Figure 12.15(c), which, contrary to the circuit in Figure
12.15(b), is not adder-based (it employs multiplexers instead,
which are controlled by XOR gates). By changing a
reference bit from ‘0’ to ‘1’ the circuit can compute a > b as
well as a ≥ b, respectively.
EXAMPLE 12.4 SIGNED COMPARATOR
Modify the traditional unsigned comparator of Figure 12.15(b)
so it can process signed numbers.
SOLUTION
We saw in Section 3.2 that when adding two N-bit signed
numbers to produce an (N + 1)-bit output the last carry bit must
be inverted if the signs of the inputs are different. Hence, for
the circuit of Figure 12.15(b) to be able to process signed
numbers, c4 must be inverted when a3 and b3′ are different
because they represent the signs of the values that actually
enter the adder. The corresponding truth table is shown in
Figure 12.16(a), which shows the original and the corrected
values of c4. Note in the truth table that the upper part of the
latter is equal to the lower part of the former and vice versa.
Therefore, if we simply invert c3, the right values are
automatically produced for c4. The resulting circuit is depicted
in Figure 12.16(b). Because c4 now represents the sign of a −
b, c4 = ‘0’ signifies that a ≥ b, while c4 = ‘1’ implies that a < b
(hence the latter appears in the figure). Finally, observe that the
inversion of c3 causes s3 to be inverted as well, so another
inverter is needed to correct s3, as shown in Figure 12.16(b).

--- Page 574 ---
FIGURE 12.16 Signed comparator of Example
12.4.
12.8 Arithmetic-Logic Unit
A typical arithmetic-logic unit (ALU) symbol is shown in
Figure 12.17. It contains two main inputs (a, b) plus an
operation-select port (opcode) and a main output (y). The
circuit performs general logical (AND, OR, etc.) and
arithmetic (addition, subtraction, etc.) operations, selected by
opcode. To construct it, a combination of circuits is
employed, particularly logic gates, adders, decoders, and
multiplexers.

--- Page 575 ---
FIGURE 12.17  ALU symbol and ALU specifications
example.
An example of ALU specifications is included in Figure
12.17. In this case, opcode contains 4 bits, so up to 16
operations can be selected. In the upper part of the table,
eight logical operations are listed involving inputs a and b,
either individually or collectively. Likewise, in the lower
part of the table, eight arithmetic operations are listed,
involving again a and b, either individually or collectively;
in one of them, cin is also included. Note that the MSB of
opcode is responsible for selecting whether the logic (for ‘0’)
or arithmetic (for ‘1’) result should be sent out.
The construction of an ALU is depicted in Figure 12.18,
which implements the functionalities listed in Figure 12.17.
In Figure 12.18(a), a conceptual circuit is shown, which
serves as a reference for the actual design. It contains one
multiplexer in each section (logic at the top, arithmetic at the
bottom), connected to an output multiplexer that selects one
of them to be actually connected to y.

--- Page 576 ---
FIGURE 12.18  Circuit for the ALU specified in Figure
12.17: (a) Conceptual circuit; (b) Construction example; (c)
Specifications for the instruction decoder.
Circuit details are shown in Figure 12.18(b). Thick lines
were employed to emphasize the fact that ALUs are
normally multibit circuits. The upper (logic) section is a
straight implementation of the equations listed in the
specifications of Figure 12.17 with all gates preceding the
multiplexer. The arithmetic section, however, was designed

--- Page 577 ---
differently. Due to the adder’s large circuit (seen in Sections
12.2–12.3), it is important not to repeat it, so the
multiplexers were placed before the adder. This, on the other
hand, causes the instruction decoder, which takes opcode and
converts it into commands for the switches (multiplexers), to
be more complex.
The figure also shows that a and b can be connected to the
adder directly or through a two’s complementer (for
subtraction, as discussed in Section 12.5). Note that the
multiplexers also have an input equal to zero (an actual
adder must not operate with inputs floating) and that
multiplexer D is a single-bit mux.
Finally, the specifications for the instruction decoder are
listed in Figure 12.18(c), showing which switches
(multiplexer sections) should be closed in each case. This
circuit can be designed using the procedure presented in
Section 11.5 (as in Example 11.4). Note that the MSB of
opcode can be connected directly to multiplexer E.
12.9 Multipliers
Binary multiplication was discussed in Sections 3.4–3.5. The
traditional multiplication algorithm of Figure 3.8(a) was
repeated in Figure 12.19. The inputs are a = a3a2a1a0
(multiplier) and b = b3b2b1b0 (multiplicand), while the
output is p = p7 … p1p0 (product). For N-bit inputs, the
output must be 2N bits wide to prevent overflow. Because
the multiplication algorithm involves logical multiplication
plus arithmetic addition, AND gates plus full-adder units,
respectively, can be used to implement it.

--- Page 578 ---
FIGURE 12.19  Traditional unsigned multiplication
algorithm.
12.9.1 Parallel Unsigned Multiplier
A parallel-input parallel-output circuit (also known as
array multiplier) that performs the operations depicted
in Figure 12.19 is shown in Figure 12.20. The circuit is
combinational because its output depends only on its
current inputs. As expected, it employs an array of
AND gates plus full-adder units. Indeed, p0 = a0b0, p1 =
a0b1 + a1b0, p2 = a0b2 + a1b1 + a2b0 + carry(p1), etc.
This circuit operates only with positive (unsigned)
inputs, also producing a positive (unsigned) output.

--- Page 579 ---
FIGURE 12.20  Parallel-input parallel-output
unsigned multiplier.
12.9.2 Parallel Signed Multiplier
If the system is signed (that is, contains positive and
negative numbers, with the latter expressed in two’s
complement form), then the circuit of Figure 12.20
requires some modifications. The simplest way is by
converting any negative number into a positive value
(by going through a two’s complementer) and
remembering the sign of the inputs. If the signs of a and
b are different, then the multiplier’s output must also
undergo two’s complement transformation to attain a

--- Page 580 ---
negative result. For example, to multiply (3) × (−6), the
following must happen: (“0011”) × (“1010” → “0110”)
= (“00010010” → “11101110” = −18), where the
arrows indicate two’s complement transformations.
Another way of obtaining a signed multiplier was
depicted in Figure 3.10 of Section 3.5, which was
repeated in Figure 12.21 below. Comparing Figures
12.21 and 12.19, we verify that several most-significant
partial products were inverted in the former and also
that two ‘1’s were included (shown within gray areas)
along the partial products. These little changes can be
easily incorporated into the hardware of Figure 12.20 to
attain a programmable signed/unsigned circuit.
FIGURE 12.21  Signed multiplication algorithm (for
positive and negative inputs).
12.9.3 Parallel-Serial Unsigned Multiplier
Figure 12.22 shows a mixed parallel-serial multiplier.
One of the input vectors (a) is applied serially, while the
other (b) is connected to the circuit in parallel. The
output (p) is also serial. Although this is not a purely
combinational circuit (it is a clocked circuit whose
output does depend on previous inputs), it is shown
here to provide an integrated coverage of multipliers.

--- Page 581 ---
Like the serial adder of Figure 12.12, the circuit
employs D-type flip-flops (DFFs, studied in Chapter
13) in the feedback loops to store the carry bits. DFFs
are also used to store of the sum bits.
FIGURE 12.22  Mixed parallel-serial unsigned
multiplier (a sequential circuit).
EXAMPLE 12.5 PARALLEL-SERIAL
MULTIPLIER FUNCTIONAL
ANALYSIS
Figure 12.23 shows a 3-bit parallel-serial multiplier.
Assuming that the system has been reset upon
initialization, show that the result produced by this
circuit is p = “011110” when submitted to the inputs
shown in the figure.


--- Page 582 ---
FIGURE 12.23 3-bit parallel-serial
multiplier of Example 12.5.
SOLUTION
Initially, q4 = q3 = q2 = q1 = q0 = ‘0’. After a0 = ‘1’ is
presented, the AND gates produce x2x1x0 = “110”, thus
resulting in d4 = x2 = ‘1’, d3 = carry(x1, q4, q3) = ‘0’,
d2 = (x1 + q4 + q3) = ‘1’, d1 = carry(x0, q2, q1) = ‘0’,
and d0 = (x0 + q2 + q1) = ‘0’. These values of d are
transferred to q at the next positive clock edge, resulting
in q4q3q2q1q0 = “10100”. Next, a1 = ‘0’ is presented,
so the AND gates produce x2x1x0 = “000”, thus
resulting in d4 = ‘0’, d3 = ‘0’, d2 = ‘1’, d1 = ‘0’, d0 =
‘1’, which are transferred to q at the next rising clock
edge, that is, q4q3q2q1q0 = “00101”. The last bit, a2 =
‘1’, is presented next, so the AND gates produce x2x1x0
= “110”, resulting in d4 = ‘1’, d3 = ‘0’, d2 = ‘1’, d1 =
‘0’, d0 = ‘1’, which are again stored by the flip-flops at
the next rising clock edge, that is, q4q3q2q1q0 =
“10101”. Now three zeros must be entered in the serial
input (a) to complete the multiplication. In these three
clock cycles the following values are produced for
q4q3q2q1q0: “00101”, “00001”, and “00000”. Because
q0 is the actual output, its sequence of values represents
the product. From the values of q0 above, we conclude
that p = “011110” (observe that the first value of q0 to
come out represents p0, not p5; in summary, “101”(= 5)
× “110” (= 6) = “011110” (= 30)).
EXAMPLE 12.6 PARALLEL-SERIAL
MULTIPLIER TIMING ANALYSIS
Assume now that the adder of Figure 12.23 is operating
near its maximum frequency, so internal propagation

--- Page 583 ---
delays must be taken into consideration. Using the
simplified timing diagram style seen in Figure 4.8(b),
draw the waveforms at all adder’s nodes. Adopt a clock
period of 10 ns and the following propagation delays:
Through the AND gates: tp = 1 ns.
Through the full-adder units: tp_carry = 1 ns
for the carry and tp_sum = 2 ns for the sum.
Through the flip-flops: tpCQ = 1 ns.
SOLUTION
The corresponding timing diagram is shown in Figure
12.24. Gray shades were employed to highlight the
propagation delays (1 ns and 2 ns).
FIGURE 12.24 Timing diagram for the 3-
bit parallel-serial multiplier of Figure 12.23.
12.9.4 ALU-Based Unsigned and Signed
Multipliers

--- Page 584 ---
Most dedicated hardware multipliers implemented from
scratch (at transistor- or gate-level) are straight
implementations of the basic algorithm depicted in
Figure 12.19 (for example, see the circuits of Figures
12.20 and 12.22). However, as seen in Sections 3.4–3.5,
multiplication (and division) can also be performed
using only addition plus shift operations. This approach
is appropriate, for example, when using a computer to
do the multiplications because its ALU (Section 12.8)
can easily do the additions, while the control unit can
easily cause the data registers to be shifted as needed.
To distinguish this kind of approach from those at the
transistor or gate level, we refer to the former as ALU-
based algorithms.
Two such multiplication algorithms were described in
Sections 3.4–3.5, one for unsigned numbers (Figure
3.9) and the other for signed systems (Booth’s
algorithm, Figure 3.12). In either case, the general
architecture is that depicted in Figure 12.25, with the
ALU shown in the center. The product register has
twice the size of the multiplicand register, with no
register needed for the multiplier because it is loaded
directly into the right half of the product register upon
initialization (see Figures 3.9 and 3.12). Depending on
the test result, the ALU adds the multiplicand (it might
also subtract it in the case of Booth’s algorithm) to the
left half of the product register and writes the result
back into it. The control unit is responsible for the tests
and for shifting the product register as needed, as well
as for defining the operation to be performed by the
ALU (add/subtract).

--- Page 585 ---
FIGURE 12.25  ALU-based multiplier (the
algorithms are described in Figures 3.9 and 3.12 for
unsigned and signed systems, respectively).
12.10 Dividers
Binary division was studied in Sections 3.6–3.7. Due to the
complexity of division circuits, ALU-based approaches are
generally adopted. For unsigned systems, an ALU-based
division algorithm was described in Figure 3.14, which
utilizes only addition/subtraction plus logical shift. This
algorithm can be implemented with the circuit of Figure
12.25, where the product register becomes the quotient plus
remainder register. At the end of the computation, the
quotient appears in the right half of that register, and the
remainder appears in its left half.
For signed systems, the common approach is to convert
negative numbers into positive values, then perform the
division as if the numbers where unsigned. However, if the
dividend and the divisor have different signs, then the
quotient must be negated (two’s complement), while the
remainder must always carry the same sign as the dividend
(in other words, if the dividend is negative, then the
remainder must also undergo two’s complement
transformation to convert it into a negative number).

--- Page 586 ---
12.11 Exercises
1. Full-adder operation
Check whether the CMOS full-adder circuit of Figure
12.2(b) actually complies with the truth table of
Figure 12.1(c).
2. Carry-ripple adder #1
a. Briefly explain how the carry-ripple adder
of Figure 12.3(b) works.
b. Why is it more compact than other
multibit adders?
c. Why is it normally slower than other
multibit adders?
3. Carry-ripple adder #2
Figure E12.3 shows a 4-bit carry-ripple adder with a
= “0101”, b = “1101”, and cin = ‘1’ applied to its
inputs. Based on the FA’s truth table (Figure 12.1),
write down the values produced for the sum and
carry bits. Check whether the result matches the
expected result (that is, 5 + 13 + 1 = 19).
4. Carry-ripple adder #3
FIGURE E12.3
Repeat the exercise above but now using the circuit
of Figure 12.3(c).
5. Carry-ripple-adder timing diagram

--- Page 587 ---
Figure E12.5 shows a 3-bit carry-ripple adder with a
= “011”, b = “100”, and cin = ‘0’ applied to its
inputs. Assuming that the propagation delay through
the full-adder unit is tp_carry = 3 ns for the carry and
tp_sum = 4 ns for the sum, complete the timing
diagram of Figure E12.5, where the carry-in bit
changes from ‘0’ to ‘1’. Assume that the vertical lines
are 1 ns apart. Does the carry-out propagation delay
accumulate?
6. Fast adder
FIGURE E12.5
Figure E12.6 shows one of the general approaches
for the construction of fast adders.
a. Briefly compare it to the carry-ripple
adder (Figure 12.3). Why is it generally
faster? Why doesit require more silicon area
to be implemented? Why is its usage limited
to only a few bits?

--- Page 588 ---
b. Suppose that a = “0101”, b = “1101”, and
cin = ‘1’. Write the values that the circuit
must produce ateach node (sum and carry
bits), then check whether the sum matches
the expected result (thatis, 5 + 13 + 1 = 19).
7. Manchester carry-chain adder
a. Explain why the Manchester carry-chain
circuit of Figure 12.6(a) falls in the general
architecture of Figure 12.5(a).
b. Verify its operation by applying a =
“0101”, b = “1101”, and cin = ‘1’ to its
inputs and calculating the corresponding
carry-out bits. Do the results match the
expected values?
8. Carry-lookahead adder
a. Explain why the carry-lookahead circuit
of Figure 12.10 falls in the general
architecture of Figure 12.5(b).
b. Verify its operation by applying a =
“0101”, b = “1101”, and cin = ‘1’ to its
inputs and calculating the corresponding
sum and carry-out bits. Check whether the
sums matches the expected value(that is, 5 +
13 + 1 = 19).
9. Serial-adder timing diagram #1


--- Page 589 ---
FIGURE E12.6
Figure E12.9 shows a serial adder to which a =
“0110” (= 6) and b = “0011” (= 3) are applied. These
signals are included in the accompanying timing
diagram. Assuming that it is operating in low
frequency (so the internal propagation delays are
negligible), complete the timing diagram by drawing
the waveforms for cin, s, and cout (adopt the style
seen in figure 4.8(a)). Does the result match the
expected value (that is, 6 + 3 = 9)?
10. Serial-adder timing diagram #2
FIGURE E12.9
Figure E12.10 shows again a serial adder to which a
= “0110” (= 6) and b = “0011” (= 3) are applied
(these signals are shown in the accompanying timing
diagram). Assuming that now the circuit is operating
near its maximum frequency, so internal propagation
delays must be taken into consideration, complete the
timing diagram. Consider that the propagation delay
through the adder is tp_carry = 2 ns for the carry and
tp_sum = 3 ns for the sum, and the propagation delay
from clk to q in the DFF is tpCQ = 2 ns. Adopt the
simplified timing diagram style seen in Figure 4.8(b),

--- Page 590 ---
and assume that the clock period is 10 ns. Does the
result match the expected value (6 + 3 = 9)?
11. Serial-adder timing diagram #3
FIGURE E12.10
Repeat Exercise 12.9 for a = “1100” (= 12) and b =
“0110” (= 6). Does the result match your expectation
(that is, 12 + 6 = 18)?
12. Serial-adder timing diagram #4
Repeat Exercise 12.10 for a = “1100” (= 12) and b =
“0110” (= 6). Does the result match your expectation
(that is, 12 + 6 = 18)?
13. Incrementer
a. Write the Boolean expressions (in SOP
format) for the incrementer seen in Figure
12.14(b).
b. Suppose that a = “10110” (= 22). Apply it
to the circuit and check whether it produces
the expected result (that is, b = 23).
c. Repeat part (b) above for a = “11111” (=
31). What is the expected result in this case?
14. Decrementer
a. Write the Boolean expressions (in SOP
format) for the decrementer seen in Figure
12.14(c).

--- Page 591 ---
b. Suppose that a = “10110” (= 22). Apply it
to the circuit and check whether it produces
the expected result (that is, b = 21).
c. Repeat part (b) above for a = “00000” (=
0). What is the expected result in this case?
15. Two’s complementer
a. Write the Boolean expressions (in SOP
format) for the two’s complementer seen in
Figure 12.14(d).
b. Suppose that a = “01101” (= 13). Apply it
to the circuit and check whether it produces
the expected result (that is, b = “10011” =
−13).
c. Repeat part (b) above for a = “11111” (=
−1). What is the expected result in this case?
16. Comparator equation and design
Consider the 3-bit equality comparator of Figure
12.15(a).
a. Write its Boolean expression without
using the XOR operator ( ⊕ ).
b. Draw a circuit for it using only NAND
gates (plus inverters, if necessary).
17. Unsigned comparator operation #1
Verify the operation of the unsigned comparator of
Figure 12.15(b) by applying the values below to its
inputs and checking the corresponding results. What
are the decimal values corresponding to a and b?
a. a = “1010”, b = “1101”
b. a = “1010”, b = “0111”
c. a = “1010”, b = “1010”
18. Unsigned comparator operation #2

--- Page 592 ---
Repeat the exercise above, this time for the
comparator of Figure 12.15(c). Check both control
options (a > b and a ≥ b).
19. Complete unsigned comparator
The unsigned comparator of Figure 12.15(b) has two
outputs, one that is ‘1’ when a ≥ b and another that is
‘1’ when a = b. Draw the gates needed for the circuit
to also compute a ≤ b.
20. Signed comparator operation
Repeat Exercise 12.17 for the signed comparator of
Figure 12.16(b). Note that some of the decimal
values corresponding to a and b are now different (it
is a signed system).
21. Absolute-value comparator
Based on the material in Section 12.7, design an
absolute-value comparator (that is, a circuit that
produces a ‘1’ at the output whenever a = b or a =
−b).
22. Parallel multiplier operation
Verify the operation of the array multiplier of Figure
12.20. Apply a = “0101” (= 5) and b = “1101” (= 13)
to the circuit, then follow each signal and check
whether the proper result occurs (that is, 5 × 13 =
65).
23. Parallel-serial multiplier operation
Verify the operation of the parallel-serial multiplier
of Figure 12.22. Consider the case of 3 bits, as in
Figure 12.23. Apply a = “011” (= 3) and b = “101” (=
5) to the circuit, then follow the signals at each node
during six clock periods and check whether the
proper result occurs (that is, 3 × 5 = 15).

--- Page 593 ---
24. Parallel-serial multiplier timing diagram
In continuation to the exercise above, assume that the
adder is operating near its maximum frequency, so
internal propagation delays must be taken into
consideration (as in Example 12.6). Using the
simplified timing diagram style seen in Figure 4.8(b),
draw the waveforms at all adder’s nodes (as in Figure
12.24). Adopt a clock period of 30 ns and the
following propagation delays:
Through the AND gates: tp = 1 ns.
Through the full-adder units: tp_carry = 3 ns
for the carry and tp_sum = 4 ns for the sum.
Through the flip-flops: tpCQ = 2 ns.
12.12 Exercises with VHDL
See Chapter 21, Section 21.6.
12.13 Exercises with SPICE
See Chapter 25, Section 25.14.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 594 ---
13
Registers
Chapter Contents
13.1 Sequential versus Combinational Logic
13.2 SR Latch
13.3 D Latch
13.4 D Flip-Flop
13.5 Master-Slave D Flip-Flops
13.6 Pulse-Based D Flip-Flops
13.7 Dual-Edge D Flip-Flops
13.8 Statistically Low-Power D Flip-Flops
13.9 D Flip-Flop Control Ports
13.10 T Flip-Flop
13.11 Exercises
13.12 Exercises with SPICE
Objective:
Complex large designs are normally synchronous, with sequential circuits
generally accounting for a large portion of the system. To construct them,
registers are needed. For that reason, the discussion on sequential circuits,
which spans Chapters 13–15, starts with the study of registers. Such units can

--- Page 595 ---
be separated into two kinds, called latches and flip-flops. The former can be
further divided into SR and D latches, while the latter can be subdivided into
SR, D, T, and JK flip-flops. All six are studied in this chapter, but special
attention is given to the D latch and to the D flip-flop, because they are
responsible for almost the totality of register-based applications.
13.1 Sequential versus Combinational Logic
As described in Section 11.1, a combinational logic circuit is
one in which the outputs depend solely on the current inputs.
Thus the system is memoryless and has no feedback loops,
as in the model of Figure 13.1(a). In contrast, a sequential
logic circuit is one in which the outputs do depend on
previous system states, so storage elements are necessary, as
well as a clock signal that is responsible for controlling the
system evolution. In this case, the system can be modeled as
in Figure 13.1(b), where a feedback loop, containing the
storage elements, can be observed.
FIGURE 13.1  (a) Combinational versus (b) sequential
logic.
The storage capability in sequential circuits is normally
achieved by means of flip-flops. Depending on their
functionalities, such storage elements (globally referred to as
registers) can be classified in one of the following four

--- Page 596 ---
categories: D (data), T (toggle), SR (set-reset), or JK (Jack
Kilby) flip-flops. However, modern designs employ almost
exclusively the D-type flip-flop (DFF), with the T-type flip-
flop (TFF) coming in second place but way behind DFF.
TFFs are used mainly in the implementation of counters,
while DFFs are general purpose flip-flops spanning a much
wider range of applications, including counters, because a
DFF can be easily converted into a TFF. For example, DFFs
are normally the only kind of register prefabricated in
programmable logic devices (CPLDs and FPGAs, Chapter
18). DFFs and TFFs are studied in detail in this chapter,
while the other two are seen in the exercises section
(Exercises 13.4–13.5).
Latches constitute another popular kind of storage cell. They
can be divided into two groups called D (data) and SR (set-
reset) latches. Like the D-type flip-flop (DFF), the D-type
latch (DL) finds many more applications than the SR latch
(SRL). Both are studied in this chapter.
13.2 SR Latch
An SR latch (SRL) is a memory circuit with two inputs,
called s (set) and r (reset), and two outputs, called q and q′.
When s = ‘1’ occurs, it “sets” the output, that is, forces q to
‘1’ and, consequently, q′ to ‘0’. Likewise, when r = ‘1’
occurs, it “resets” the circuit, that is, it forces q to ‘0’ and,
therefore, q′ to ‘1’. These inputs are not supposed to be
asserted simultaneously.
Two SRL implementations are depicted in Figure 13.2. In
Figure 13.2(a), a NOR-based circuit is shown along with its
truth table (where q+ represents the next state of q), symbol,
and corresponding CMOS circuit (review the

--- Page 597 ---
implementation of NOR gates in Section 4.4). A NAND-
based implementation is depicted in Figure 13.2(b), again
accompanied by the respective truth table, symbol, and
CMOS circuit (see CMOS NAND in Section 4.3). Note that
the former operates with regular input-output values (as
defined above), while the latter operates with inverted values
(that is, a ‘0’ is used to set or reset the circuit), hence having
its inputs represented by s′ and r′ instead of s and r.
FIGURE 13.2  Asynchronous SR latch implementations: (a)
NOR-based; (b) NAND-based. In each case the corresponding
truth table, symbol, and CMOS circuit are also shown.
Contrary to the circuits above, which are asynchronous, a
clocked (or gated) version is presented in Figure 13.3. A
NAND-based implementation is depicted in Figure 13.3(a).
When clk = ‘0’, the latch remains in the “hold” state,
whereas clk = ‘1’ causes it to operate as a regular SR latch.
This means that if set or reset is asserted while the clock is
low, it will have to wait until the clock is raised for the
output to be affected. The corresponding truth table and
symbol are shown in Figures 13.3(b)–(c). Another circuit for
this same function, but requiring less transistors, is presented

--- Page 598 ---
in Figure 13.3(d) (7 transistors in Figure 13.3(d) against 16
in Figure 13.3(a)).
FIGURE 13.3  Synchronous SR latch: (a) NAND-based
implementation, (b) truth table, (c) symbol, and (d) SSTC-based
implementation (studied in Section 13.3).
13.3 D Latch
13.3.1 DL Operation
A D-type latch (DL) is a level-sensitive memory circuit
that is “transparent” while the clock is high and
“opaque” (latched) when it is low or vice versa.
Corresponding symbols and truth tables are depicted in
Figures 13.4(a)–(b). The circuit has two inputs, called d
(data) and clk (clock), and two outputs, q and its
complement, q′. The DL in Figure 13.4(a) is transparent
(that is, q = d) when clk = ‘1’, so it is said to be a
positive-level DL (or, simply, positive DL), whereas that
in Figure 13.4(b) is transparent when clk = ‘0’ (denoted
by the little circle at the clock input), so it is known as
negative-level DL (or, simply, negative DL). When a
DL is transparent, its output is a copy of the input (q =
d), while in the opaque state the output remains in the
same state that it was just before the clock changed its
condition (represented by q+ = q in the truth tables,
where q+ indicates the DL’s next state).

--- Page 599 ---
FIGURE 13.4  Symbol and truth table for (a)
positive- and (b) negative-level DLs.
EXAMPLE 13.1 DL FUNCTIONAL
ANALYSIS
Figure 13.5(a) shows a positive DL. Assuming that it is
submitted to the clk and d signals shown in Figure
13.5(b), draw the corresponding output waveform, q.
Consider that the internal propagation delays are
negligible (functional analysis).
FIGURE 13.5 (a) D latch; (b) Functional
analysis of Example 13.1; (c) Timing
analysis of Example 13.2.
SOLUTION
The last plot of Figure 13.5(b) shows q. The DL’s initial
state was assumed to be q = ‘0’. During the semiperiods
(1) and (3) the clock is low, so the circuit is opaque and

--- Page 600 ---
retains its previous state, regardless of what happens
with d. In (2) and (4) the DL is transparent, hence q is a
copy of d (in this example the propagation delays were
omitted; see Example 13.2 for a more realistic timing
analysis, which is plotted in Figure 13.5(c)).
13.3.2 Time-Related Parameters
Sequential circuits are clocked, so the clock period
becomes a very important parameter because any
sequential unit must complete its operations within a
certain time window. DLs are sequential, so several
time-related parameters must be specified to
characterize their performance. These parameters fall
into three categories, called contamination delays,
propagation delays, and data-stable requirements. The
four most important parameters, which belong to the
last two categories, are described below and are
illustrated in Figure 13.6 (for a positive-level DL).
tpCQ (propagation delay from clk to q): This is
the time needed for a value that is already
present in d to reach q when the latch
becomes transparent (that is, when the clock
is raised if it is a positive DL). Depending on
the circuit, the low-to-high and high-to-low
values of tpCQ can be different.
tpDQ (propagation delay from d to q): This is
the time needed for a change in d to reach q
while the latch is transparent (that is, while
the clock is high if it is a positive DL).
Depending on the circuit, the low-to-high and
high-to-low values of tpDQ can be different.

--- Page 601 ---
tsetup (setup time): This is the time during
which the input (d) must remain stable before
the latch becomes opaque (that is, before the
clock is lowered if it is a positive DL).
thold (hold time): This is the time during
which the input (d) must remain stable after
the latch becomes opaque (that is, after the
clock is lowered if it is a positive DL).
FIGURE 13.6  Main DL time parameters.
Note: Even though combinational circuits are not
clocked, more often than not they are part of sequential
systems, so determining their propagation and
contamination delays is indispensable (timing diagrams
for combinational circuits were introduced in Section
4.2—see Figure 4.8—and used extensively in Chapters
11 and 12).
EXAMPLE 13.2 DL TIMING
ANALYSIS
Consider again the DL of Figure 13.5(a), for which the
output waveform must be drawn. However, assume that
the circuit is operating near its maximum frequency, so

--- Page 602 ---
its propagation delays must be taken into account. Draw
the waveform for q knowing that tpCQ = 2 ns and tpDQ
= 3 ns. Assume that the clock period is 20 ns and that the
DL’s initial state is q = ‘0’. To draw the waveform, adopt
the simplified timing diagram style seen in Figure 4.8(b).
SOLUTION
The solution is depicted in Figure 13.5(c). Gray shades
were employed to highlight the propagation delays (2 ns
and 3 ns).
13.3.3 DL Circuits
A series of D-type latches are examined below, which
were divided into two main groups, called static (can
hold its state indefinitely as long as the power is not
turned off) and dynamic (requires periodic refreshing).
The static latches are further divided into three
subgroups, called multiplexer-based, RAM-type, and
current-mode DLs. The complete list is shown in the
table of Figure 13.7, which contains also, in the last
column, the respective references.

--- Page 603 ---
FIGURE 13.7  List of DLs that are examined in
Section 13.3.
13.3.4 Static Multiplexer-Based DLs
The SOP (sum-of-products, Section 5.3) expression for
any DL can be easily derived from the truth tables in
Figure 13.4. For example, for the DL of Figure 13.4(a),
q = clk′ · q + clk d results (notice that this function is
recursive, which is proper of sequential circuits—see
Exercise 11.1). Because this expression is similar to that
of a multiplexer (Section 11.6), it immediately suggests
an approach (called mux-based) for the construction of
DLs.
Several static multiplexer-based DLs are depicted in
Figures 13.8(a)–(d). In Figure 13.8(a), a generic
multiplexer is shown, with d feeding one input and q
feeding the other, thus producing q = q when clk = ‘0’
and q = d when clk = ‘1’.

--- Page 604 ---
FIGURE 13.8  Static positive-level DL
implementations. Circuits (a)-(d) are mux-based, (e)-(k) are
RAM-type, and (l) and (m) are current-mode DLs. (a)
Generic mux-based approach; (b) STG (static transmission-
gate-based) latch (mux constructed with TGs); (c) TG-
C2MOS latch (TG used in the forward path, C2MOS logic
in the feedback path); (d) With mux constructed using
NAND gates; (e) Traditional 6T SRAM cell (Section 16.2);
(f) S-STG (simplified STG) latch with weak inverter in the
feedback path; (g) Jamb latch, used in synchronizers; (h)
and (i) S-CVSL (static cascode voltage switch logic) latch
and its ratio-insensitive counterpart, SRIS (static ratio
insensitive) latch; (j) and (k) SSTC1 and SSTC2 (static
single transistor clocked) latches; (l) and (m) ECL and SCL

--- Page 605 ---
latches (very fast DLs implemented with emitter- and
source-coupled logic, respectively).
In Figure 13.8(b), the STG (static transmission-gate-
based) latch is shown. Here the multiplexer was
constructed with TGs (transmission-gates—see the dark
area in the first part of Figure 13.8(b)) surrounded by
inverters operating as buffers. In the center, the circuit
was reorganized to show its most common
representation. Finally, a detailed schematic is shown
on the right. When clk = ‘1’, the input switch is closed
and the loop switch is open, causing the circuit to be
transparent (thus q = d). When clk = ‘0’, the input
switch is open and the loop switch is closed, so the ring
formed by the two back-to-back inverters holds the
previous value of d (that is, q = q). If the q′ output is
used, noise from that node can reach the input node
through the feedback path. To increase noise immunity,
the extra inverter (drawn with dashed lines) can be used
to produce q′. This latch is relatively compact and fast,
though it requires both clock phases (clk and clk′) and
has a total of four clocked transistors, which constitute
a relatively large clock load.
Another static DL is depicted in Figure 13.8(c). The
only difference with respect to the latch in Figure
13.8(b) is that C2MOS logic (seen in Section 10.8) is
employed in the feedback path instead of an inverter
and a TG. This reduces the circuit size slightly with a
very small speed reduction. For obvious reasons, it is
called TG-C2MOS latch. Like the DL in Figure 13.8(b),
this too is a popular latch implementation.
Finally, in Figure 13.8(d) the multiplexer (latch) was
constructed using conventional NAND gates.

--- Page 606 ---
13.3.5 Static RAM-Type DLs
In the transmission-gate latches seen above, a switched
ring of inverters constitutes the memory. RAM-type
latches are based on the same principle. However, the
ring is permanently closed (that is, there is no switch to
open or close it), which reduces the size of the hardware
but makes writing to the memory a little more difficult
due to the contention that occurs between the input
signal and the stored signal when their values differ.
Several RAM-type latches are presented in Figures
13.8(e)–(k). Again, all examples are positive-level
latches. However, contrary to the TG-based latches seen
above, except for the circuit in Figure 13.8(f), all new
circuits are single phase (that is, clk′ is not needed).
The DL in Figure 13.8(e) is the classical 6T SRAM cell
(discussed in Section 16.2—see Figure 16.1), with the
ring of inverters (permanently closed) shown in the
center. It is a very simple circuit, though it requires d
and d′ (differential inputs) to minimize the effect caused
by the inexistence of a loop switch. Both sides of the
ring are active, that is, when clk = ‘1’ both sides are
effectively connected to data signals, causing the
transitions to be fast. As can be seen, this latch requires
only one clock phase.
A simplified version of the STG latch (referred to as S-
STG) is shown in Figure 13.8(f). It is similar to the
STG latch but without the loop switch, thus rendering a
more compact (but slower) circuit. The feedback
inverter is weaker than the forward one in order to
reduce the contention between d and the stored value.
The input switch can be a single transistor (in which
case only one clock phase is necessary) or, to improve

--- Page 607 ---
speed, a TG (a dual-phase clock is then needed). As will
be shown later, the ring of inverters (without the input
switch) is often used in flip-flops to staticize them, so is
sometimes referred to as staticizer.
The circuit in Figure 13.8(g) is known as jamb latch
(indeed, all latches that operate with a ring of inverters
fall somehow in this category). The jamb latch is
normally employed in the implementation of flip-flops
for synchronizing circuits. Contrary to the previous and
next latches, all transistors in the cross-connected
inverters are normally designed with the same size. As
can be seen, data (d) are applied to only one side (the
clocked one, so it is synchronous) of the memory ring,
while reset (asynchronous) is connected to the other. In
this case, a ‘0’ that is preceded by a ‘1’ can only be
written into this DL by a reset pulse.
We will describe later (Figure 13.9(e)) a dynamic latch
that employs a kind of logic known as CVSL (cascode
voltage switch logic), so is referred to as CVSL latch.
Even though static CVSL does not exist, the latch of
Figure 13.8(h) will be referred to as S-CVSL (static
CVSL) because it is precisely the static counterpart of
the true CVSL latch. Like the previous latch, this too is
a compact single-phase circuit. Note that, for rail-to-rail
input voltages, only one side of the ring is actually
active (that with d or d′ high). To reduce contention
(and preserve speed), the nMOS transistors in the cross-
connected inverters are made weaker than the pMOS
ones (they serve simply to staticize the circuit). The
other nMOS transistors, however, must be stronger than
the pMOS.

--- Page 608 ---
FIGURE 13.9  Dynamic positive-level DL
implementations: (a) DTG1 (dynamic TG-based 1) latch
with unbuffered input and buffered output; (b) DTG2 latch
with buffered input and unbuffered output, allowing tri-
state operation; (c) C2MOS latch, similar to (b), but with
C2MOS logic instead of TG logic; (d) TSPC (true single
phase clock) latch; (e) CVSL (cascode voltage switch logic)
latch, which is the dynamic counterpart of that in Figure
13.8(h); (f) and (g) DSTC1 and DSTC2 (dynamic single
transistor clocked) latches, which are the dynamic
counterparts of those in Figures 13.8(j) and (k).
The circuit in Figure 13.8(i) is known as SRIS (static
ratio insensitive) latch. It is the ratio-insensitive version
of that in Figure 13.8(h), that is, in this case the nMOS
transistors (in the vertical branches) do not need to be
stronger than the pMOS ones. This is achieved with the
addition of three p-type transistors in the circuit’s upper
part. Notice that this is a positive-level DL. To obtain its
negative counterpart, the pMOS transistors must be
replaced with nMOS ones, and vice versa, and GND
must be interchanged with VDD. In this new circuit it is

--- Page 609 ---
the pMOS transistors that must be stronger than the
nMOS ones, which is more difficult to accomplish than
the other way around because nMOS is inherently about
2.5 to 3 times stronger than pMOS (for same-size
transistors—Sections 9.2–9.3). It is in this kind of
situation that the SRIS approach is helpful. However, it
requires more silicon space than that in Figure 13.8(e),
for example, with no relevant performance advantage in
rail-to-rail applications.
The latch in Figure 13.8(j) is similar to that in Figure
13.8(h) but with the clocked transistors merged to
reduce clock loading. Because it contains only one
clocked transistor, it is called SSTC1 (static single
transistor clocked 1) latch. If operating with rail-to-rail
voltages, it does not tolerate large data skew (delay
between d and d′) or slow data transitions because then
both inputs might be momentarily high at the same
time, causing a brief short circuit over the inverters,
which might corrupt the stored values. Another version
(called SSTC2) of this latch is presented in Figure
13.8(k). Like all the other latches in Figure 13.8, this
too is a positive-level DL. As will be seen in Section
13.4, to construct a flip-flop two DLs are required (in
the master-slave approach), one being positive level and
the other negative level. As will be shown, the
architecture in Figure 13.8(k) eases the construction of
the negative-level DL.
13.3.6 Static Current-Mode DLs
Finally, Figures 13.8(l)–(m) show two DLs that do not
employ a ring of cross-connected inverters to store
information. The two circuits are indeed similar, but

--- Page 610 ---
while one employs bipolar transistors (npn only, which
are faster—Section 8.2), the other uses MOSFETs
(nMOS only, also faster—Section 9.2). The former
employs emitter-coupled logic (ECL), so it is known as
ECL latch. For a similar reason, because it employs
source-coupled logic (SCL), the latter is referred to as
SCL latch. These DLs operate with two differential
amplifiers, one at the input, which is active when clk =
‘1’, and the other at the output (memory), which is
active when clk = ‘0’. They are the fastest structures
currently in use, and when the transistors are fabricated
using advanced techniques like those described in
Sections 8.7 and 9.8 (GaAs, SiGe, SOI, strained silicon,
etc.), flip-flops for prescalers (Section 14.6) operating
with input frequencies over 30 GHz with SCL
[Sanduleanu 2005, Kromer 2006, Heydari 2006] or over
50 GHz with ECL [Griffith 2006, Wang 2006] can be
constructed. Their main drawbacks are their relatively
high power consumption (because of the static bias
current) and the wide silicon space needed to construct
them.
13.3.7 Dynamic DLs
All DLs in Figure 13.8 are static (that is, they retain
data even if the clock stops as long as the power is not
turned off). To save space and increase speed, in many
designs dynamic latches are preferred. The main
drawback of dynamic circuits is that they need to be
refreshed periodically (typically every few
milliseconds) because they rely on charge stored onto
very small (parasitic) capacitors. Refreshing demands
additional power and does not allow the circuit to

--- Page 611 ---
operate with very low clock frequencies, which is
desirable during standby/sleep mode.
Several dynamic DLs are depicted in Figure 13.9. The
first three are dual-phase circuits, while the other four
are single phase. All seven are positive-level latches. In
the DTG1 (dynamic transmission-gate-based 1) latch,
depicted in Figure 13.9(a), the switch is followed by an
inverter, so charge is stored onto the parasitic capacitor
at the inverter’s input. Due to its buffered output, noise
from the output node is prevented from corrupting the
stored charge. Being compact and fast, this is a
common dynamic DL implementation.
The dynamic DL of Figure 13.9(b) has the switch
preceded by an inverter, so charge is stored at the output
node. Because of its buffered input and unbuffered
output, only input noise is prevented from corrupting
the stored charge. On the other hand, it allows tri-state
(high-impedance, or floating-node) operation. Like the
latch above, this circuit is also very compact and fast.
Because it is dynamic and is also constructed with a
TG, it is referred to as DTG2 latch.
The next DL (Figure 13.9(c)) is equivalent to that
above, but it employs C2MOS logic (Section 10.8) to
construct the inverter plus the switch (hence it is called
C2MOS latch). It renders a slightly more compact
circuit because the physical connection at the node
between the inverter and the switch is split horizontally,
diminishing the number of electrical contacts. However,
due to the two transistors in series in each branch, it is
slightly slower.
The circuit in Figure 13.9(d) is known as TSPC (true
single phase clock) latch, and it was one of the first

--- Page 612 ---
latches to operate with a single clock phase. Like the
previous latch, it too is dynamic and allows tri-state
operation. Several variations of this structure exist,
some of which are appropriate for the construction of
relatively high-speed flip-flops, as will be shown in
Section 14.6.
The next latch (Figure 13.9(e)) employs a type of logic
called CVSL (cascode voltage switch logic), so it is
known as CVSL latch (its static counterpart was seen in
Figure 13.8(h), from which the nMOS transistors of the
cross-connected inverters were removed). The same
observations made there are valid here. An extension of
that architecture is depicted in Figure 13.9(f), which is
called DSTC1 (dynamic single transistor clocked 1)
latch. In it, the clocked transistors were merged to
reduce the clock load. This circuit is the dynamic
counterpart of the static SSTC1 latch seen in Figure
13.8(j), so here too the same observations apply.
Finally, Figure 13.9(g) presents the DSTC2 (dynamic
single transistor clocked 2) latch, which is the dynamic
counterpart of the static SSTC2 latch seen in Figure
13.8(k). Like all the other latches in Figure 13.9, this
too is a positive-level DL. As will be seen in Section
13.4, to construct a flip-flop two DLs are required (in
the master-slave approach), one being positive-level
and the other negative level. The architecture in Figure
13.9(g) eases the construction of the negative-level DL.
13.4 D Flip-Flop
As mentioned in the introduction of this chapter, D-type flip-
flops (DFFs) are the most commonly used of all registers
because they are perfectly suited for the construction of

--- Page 613 ---
sequential circuits. Due to their importance, a detailed
analysis is presented in this chapter, which is divided into
several sections as follows:
 Fundamental DFF concepts (Section 13.4)
 Analysis of DFFs constructed using the master-
slave technique (Section 13.5)
 Analysis of DFFs constructed using the short-
pulse technique (Section 13.6)
 Analysis of dual-edge DFFs (Section 13.7)
 Analysis of statistically low-power DFFs
(Section 13.8)
 Introduction of DFF control ports—reset, preset,
enable, clear (Section 13.9)
13.4.1 DFF Operation
Differently from latches, which are level sensitive, flip-
flops are edge sensitive. In other words, while a D latch
is transparent during a whole semiperiod of the clock, a
D flip-flop is transparent only during one of the clock
transitions (either up or down). If the DFF transfers the
input value to the output during the clock’s rising
transition it is said to be a positive-edge triggered D
flip-flop (or simply positive-edge DFF); otherwise, it is
said to be a negative-edge triggered D flip-flop (or
simply negative-edge DFF). Corresponding symbols
and truth tables are depicted in Figure 13.10.

--- Page 614 ---
FIGURE 13.10  Symbol and truth table for (a) a
positive-edge DFF and (b) a negative-edge DFF.
EXAMPLE 13.3 DFF FUNCTIONAL
ANALYSIS
Figure 13.11(a) shows a positive-edge DFF to which the
clk, rst, and d waveforms of Figure 13.11(b) are applied.
Assuming that the propagation delay through the flip-
flop is negligible (functional analysis), draw the
waveform for q.
FIGURE 13.11  (a) Positive-edge DFF; (b)
Functional analysis of Example 13.3; (c)
Timing analysis of Example 13.4.
SOLUTION
The last plot of Figure 13.11(b) shows q. The DFF’s
initial state was assumed to be q = ‘0’. Every time a
positive clock edge occurs, the value of d is copied to q

--- Page 615 ---
without any delay. When reset is asserted, the output is
lowered immediately and asynchronously.
13.4.2 Time-Related Parameters
DFFs are the most common sequencing units. Like
DLs, DFFs are also characterized by a series of time
parameters, which again fall into three categories,
called contamination delays, propagation delays, and
data-stable requirements. The three most important
parameters, which belong to the last two categories, are
described below and are illustrated in Figure 13.12 (for
a positive-edge DFF).
tpCQ (propagation delay from clk to q): This is
the time needed for a value present in d to
reach q when the clock is raised. Depending
on the circuit, the low-to-high and high-to-
low values of tpCQ can be different.
tsetup (setup time): This is the time during
which the input (d) must remain stable before
the clock is raised.
thold (hold time): This is the time during
which the input (d) must remain stable after
the clock is raised.


--- Page 616 ---
FIGURE 13.12  Main DFF time parameters.
Another important parameter is the actual width of the
transparency window. Though theoretically near zero,
depending on the flip-flop implementation it might be
relatively large. This is particularly true when a
technique called pulsed latch (described later) is
employed to construct the DFF. The consequence of a
too large window can be observed with the help of
Figure 13.13. In Figure 13.13(a), two DFFs are
interconnected directly without any combinational logic
in between. If the transparency window is too large, the
voltage transferred from d to x might have time to
propagate through the second DFF as well (from x to q),
causing an incorrect operation. This is less likely to
happen in Figure 13.13(b) due to the extra delay from x
to y caused by the combinational logic block. On the
other hand, if the window is too short, d might not have
time to reach x, which also would cause an error. To
make things even more difficult, the transparency
window in a pulsed latch varies with temperature and
process parameters. In summary, careful and detailed
timing analysis is indispensable during the design of
sequential systems. In some cases, race-through is
prevented by intentionally installing a block referred to
as deracer (illustrated later) between adjacent flip-flops.

--- Page 617 ---
FIGURE 13.13  Flip-flops connected (a) directly and
(b) with combinational logic in between.
The use of some of the time-related parameters
described above is illustrated in the example that
follows.
EXAMPLE 13.4 DFF TIMING
ANALYSIS
Consider again the DFF of Figure 13.11, for which the
output waveform must be drawn. However, assume that
the circuit is operating near its maximum frequency, so
its propagation delays must be taken into account.
Assume that the propagation delay from clk to q is tpCQ
= 2 ns and from rst to q is tpRQ = 1 ns, and that the
clock period is 10 ns. Consider that the DFF’s initial
state is q = ‘0’ and adopt the simplified timing diagram
style seen in Figure 4.8(b) to draw the waveform for q.
SOLUTION
Figure 13.11(c) shows q. Gray shades were employed to
highlight the propagation delays (1 ns and 2 ns).
13.4.3 DFF Construction Approaches

--- Page 618 ---
Figure 13.14 shows two classical approaches to the
construction of DFFs. The architecture in Figure
13.14(a) is called master-slave, and it consists of two
DLs connected in series with one transparent during
one semiperiod of the clock and the other transparent
during the other semiperiod. In Figure 13.14(a), the
master DL is transparent when clk = ‘0’ (indicated by
the little circle at the clock input), while the slave DL is
transparent when clk = ‘1’, so the resulting DFF is a
positive-edge DFF (the master’s output is copied to the
actual output, q, by the slave when the latter becomes
transparent).
FIGURE 13.14  Construction techniques for D-type
flip-flops: (a) With master-slave DLs; (b) With a pulsed
DL. DFF symbols for either case are depicted in (c).
A different construction technique is depicted in Figure
13.14(b), which employs only one DL. Its operation is
based on a short pulse (represented by φ in the figure),
derived from the clock, that causes the latch to be
transparent during only a brief moment. This approach
is called pulsed latch or pulse-based flip-flop. Its main

--- Page 619 ---
advantages are the reduced circuit size and the
possibility to operate with negative setup times. On the
other hand, the hold time is larger than that of a true
(master-slave) DFF, which, as seen in Figure 13.13,
might cause errors, so it must be carefully designed.
13.4.4 DFF Circuits
Several flip-flop implementations, including both
architectures of Figure 13.14, will be examined in the
sections that follow. The complete list is shown in the
table of Figure 13.15, which contains also, in the last
column, the respective references.

--- Page 620 ---
FIGURE 13.15  List of DFFs examined in Sections
13.5-13.8.
13.5 Master-Slave D Flip-Flops
As shown in Figure 13.14, master-slave is one of the
techniques used to implement DFFs. Its main advantage over
the other (pulse-based) technique is that the DFF’s timing
behavior is simpler (safer). On the other hand, pulse-based
DFFs tend to be more compact and might also consume less
power. The former are examined in this section, while the
latter are seen in the next.

--- Page 621 ---
13.5.1 Classical Master-Slave DFFs
Figure 13.16 shows four classical DFFs, all
implemented using the master-slave approach (Figure
13.14(a)) and MOS technology (Sections 10.5–10.8).
Their fundamental components are transmission-gates
(TGs), inverters, and tri-state buffers (all seen in Figure
11.2).
FIGURE 13.16  Conventional master-slave positive-
edge DFFs: (a) DTG (dynamic TG-based) flip-flop, which
employs the latch of Figure 13.9(a); (b) Dynamic C2MOS
flip-flop, which uses the latch of Figure 13.9(c) (two
equivalent representations are shown); (c) STG (static TG-
based) flip-flop, which employs the latch of Figure 13.8(b);
(d) Static TG-C2MOS-based flip-flop, using the latch of
Figure 13.8(c); In (e), three alternatives against clock skew
and slow clock transitions are shown. All inverters are
regular CMOS inverters.

--- Page 622 ---
The first circuit (Figure 13.16(a)) is dynamic and is
obtained by cascading two dynamic DLs of Figure
13.9(a). An extra inverter can be placed at the input to
reduce noise sensitivity. Because of the use of TGs
(transmission-gates), it is called DTG (dynamic TG-
based) flip-flop. When clk = ‘0’, the first TG is closed
and the second is open, so the master DL is transparent,
causing node X to be charged with the voltage of d,
whereas the slave DL is opaque, hence resulting at the
output in a fixed voltage determined by the voltage
previously stored on node Y. When clk transitions to
‘1’, it opens the first TG, turning the master DL opaque,
while the second TG closes and copies the voltage of X
to Y (inverted, of course), which in turn is transferred to
the output by the second inverter. In other words, the
input is copied to the output at the positive edge of the
clock. Ideally, when clk returns to ‘0’, no path between
d and q (that is, no transparency) should exist.
However, that is not necessarily the case here because
this circuit is sensitive to clock skew (see comments on
clock skew ahead). This circuit is also sensitive to slow
clock transitions, so careful timing analysis is
indispensable.
Figure 13.16(b) shows another conventional dynamic
DFF, which employs the C2MOS latch of Figure 13.9(c)
to construct its master-slave structure. This flip-flop,
contrary to that described above, is not susceptible to
clock skew (this also will be explained ahead).
However, due to the two transistors in series in each
branch, it is slightly slower.
One of the drawbacks of dynamic circuits is that they
need to be refreshed periodically (every few
milliseconds), which demands power. Due to their

--- Page 623 ---
floating nodes, they are also more susceptible to noise
than their static counterparts. On the other hand, static
circuits are normally a little slower and require more
silicon space. The DFF of Figure 13.16(c) is precisely
the static counterpart of that seen in Figure 13.16(a),
and it results from the association of two static DLs of
Figure 13.8(b). Again, an extra inverter can be placed at
its input to reduce noise sensitivity. For obvious
reasons, it is called STG (static transmission-gate-
based) flip-flop, and it is also a common DFF
implementation.
Finally, Figure 13.16(d) shows the TG-C2MOS flip-
flop, which employs the static DL of Figure 13.8(c) to
build its master-slave structure. The circuit contains
TGs in the forward path and C2MOS gates in the
feedback path. The latter reduces the circuit size
slightly with a negligible impact on speed. This DFF
was employed in the PowerPC 603 microprocessor.
13.5.2 Clock Skew and Slow Clock Transitions
Flip-flops are subject to two major problems: Clock
skew and slow clock transitions. Clock skew effects can
occur when the clock reaches one section of the circuit
much earlier than it reaches others, or, in dualphase
circuits, when clk and clk′ are too delayed with respect
to each other. Slow clock transition effects, on the other
hand, can occur when the clock edges are not sharp
enough. The main consequence of both is that a section
of the circuit might be turned ON while others, that
were supposed to be OFF, are still partially ON, causing
internal signal races that might lead to incorrect
operation.

--- Page 624 ---
To illustrate the effect of clock skew, let us examine the
DFF of Figure 13.16(a). When clk changes from ‘0’ to
‘1’, the input is copied to the output. However, when
clk changes from ‘1’ to ‘0’, we want the circuit to
remain opaque. If the delay (skew) between clk and clk′
is significant, clk = ‘0’ might occur while clk′ is still
low, hence causing the pMOS transistor in the slave TG
to still be ON when the pMOS transistor of the master
TG is turned ON. This creates a momentary path
between d and q (undesired transparency) at the falling
edge of the clock (incorrect operation).
Contrary to the other three flip-flops in Figure 13.16,
the dynamic C2MOS circuit in Figure 13.16(b) is not
susceptible to clock skew. This is due to the fact that in
the latter the input signal is inverted in each stage, so no
path between d and q can exist when clk and clk′ are
both momentarily low (note that when clk = clk′ = ‘0’
only the upper part of each DL is turned ON, so q
cannot be affected). The other problem (slow clock
transition), however, is still a concern (it can affect all
four flip-flops in Figure 13.16 as well as several from
Figure 13.17) because it can cause all clocked
transistors to be partially ON at the same time.

--- Page 625 ---
FIGURE 13.17  Special master-slave positive-edge
DFF implementations: (a) Dynamic TSPC (true single
phase clock) flip-flop, constructed with the latch of Figure
13.9(d)—skew free but subject to glitches; (b) E-TSPC is
an enhanced (faster) version of (a), still subject to glitches;
(c) GF-TSPC is a glitch-free version of (b); (d) DSTC
(dynamic single transistor clocked) flip-flop, constructed
with the latches of Figures 13.9(f) and (g); (e) SSTC (static
single transistor clocked) flip-flop, which employs the
latches of Figures 13.8(j) and (k); (f) SAFF (sense-
amplifier-based flip-flop) or StrongARM flip-flop (with

--- Page 626 ---
dashed transistor included) and their modified (only the
slave) versions for higher speeds; (g) The fastest DFF,
which is constructed with the ECL (emitter-coupled logic)
latch of Figure 13.8(l); (h) Similar to (g), but with MOS
transistors instead of bipolars (the latches are from Figure
13.8(m); a simplified SCL results when the tail currents are
suppressed—dashed lines to GND).
Three alternatives against the problems described above
are depicted in Figure 13.16(e). The first (and
guaranteed) solution, shown on the left, is to employ
nonoverlapping clocks. This, however, complicates
clock distribution and reduces the maximum speed,
being therefore of little interest for actual designs. The
second solution (shown in the center) is the most
common. Two inverters are constructed along each flip-
flop, which sharpen the clock edges and are carefully
designed to minimize clock skew. Finally, two pairs of
inverters are shown on the right, which serve to shape
the clock waveforms and also to delay the master’s
clock with respect to the slave’s. Because in this case
the slave enters the opaque state before the master
changes to the transparent state, the momentary
transparency during the high-to-low clock transition
described above can no longer occur. This, however,
increases the hold time, plus it demands more space and
power.
13.5.3 Special Master-Slave DFFs
Several high-performance DFFs are depicted in Figure
13.17, all constructed using the master-slave approach
of Figure 13.14(a). Notice that, except for the last two,
all the others are single-phase circuits (that is, do not
require clk′).

--- Page 627 ---
A dynamic TSPC (true single phase clock) flip-flop is
shown in Figure 13.17(a), which is constructed using
the DL of Figure 13.9(d). Due to internal redundancy, a
total of three stages instead of four results from the
association of two such DLs. The inexistence of clk′
helps the design of high speed circuits because it
simplifies the clock distribution and also reduces the
possibility of skew. The operation of this DFF can be
summarized as follows. During the precharge phase (clk
= ‘0’), node Y is charged to VDD, regardless of the value
of d. Y is then conditionally discharged to GND (if d =
‘0’) or not (if d = ‘1’) during the evaluation phase (clk =
‘1’). In the case of d = ‘1’, M1 is ON, discharging node
X to GND, which turns M5 OFF, preventing the
discharge of Y when clk changes to ‘1’, so with M7 and
M8 ON, q′ = 0 V results. On the other hand, in the case
of d = ‘0’, X is precharged to VDD (through M2–M3)
while clk = ‘0’, turning M5 ON, which causes Y to be
discharged to GND (through M4–M5) when clk = ‘1’
occurs, hence raising q′ to VDD (because M7 is OFF and
M9 is ON).
In spite of its skew-free structure, the TSPC DFF of
Figure 13.17(a) exhibits a major problem, which
consists of a glitch at the output when d stays low for
more than one clock period. This can be observed as
follows. As seen above, if d = ‘0’, then node Y is
discharged towards GND when clk = ‘1’ occurs,
causing q′ = ‘1’ at the output. It was also seen that
during the precharge phase node Y is always precharged
to VDD. If in the next cycle d remains low, X remains
charged, keeping M5 ON. When clk = ‘1’ occurs again,
it turns M4 and M8 ON simultaneously. However,
because Y will necessarily take some time to discharge,

--- Page 628 ---
for a brief moment M7 and M8 will be both ON (until
the voltage of Y is lowered below the threshold voltage
of M7), thus causing a momentary glitch (toward 0 V)
on q′. A solution for this problem is shown below.
However, it is important to observe that if this DFF is
used as a divide-by-two circuit (in a counter, for
example), then the glitch is not a problem (it does not
occur), because the value of d changes after every clock
cycle. In summary, depending on the application, no
modifications are needed in the TSPC flip-flop of
Figure 13.17(a).
An enhanced version (E-TSPC) of the DFF above is
shown in Figure 13.17(b). In it, the switched transistors
were moved close to the VDD and GND rails (M2
interchanged with M3, M8 interchanged with M7),
resulting in a circuit with less conflicting transistors-
sizing requirements and slightly faster. It also allows
extra gates (for imbedded logic) to be more easily
incorporated into the flip-flop, which is desirable to
reduce propagation delays in high-speed applications.
This circuit, however, is subject to the same glitch
problem described above.
A glitch-free version (GF-TSPC) is presented in Figure
13.17(c). It requires three extra transistors (two for the
CMOS inverter, plus one at the output), though they do
not introduce significant extra delays because the
inverter operates in parallel with the second stage, so
only the output transistor needs to be considered. Due
to its compactness, simple clock distribution, low power
consumption, and the high performance of current (65
nm) MOS technology, this, as well as the other TSPC
DFFs above, have been used in the implementation of

--- Page 629 ---
prescalers (Section 14.6) with input frequencies in the 5
GHz range [Shu 2002, Ali 2005, Yu 2005].
Another dynamic flip-flop, called DSTC (dynamic
single transistor clocked), is shown in Figure 13.17(d),
which is constructed with the DSTC1 (slave) and
DSTC2 (master) latches of Figures 13.9(f)–(g). Note
that the master has to be a negative-level DL for the
resulting circuit to be a positive-edge DFF. This flip-
flop is also very compact and needs only one clock
phase. However, contrary to the TSPC flip-flops seen
above, it does not operate using the precharge-evaluate
principle, thus saving some power. Another interesting
feature is that the output transitions of each latch are
always high-to-low first, which helps the setup time of
following DFFs, that is, when a positive clock edge
occurs the flip-flop outputs can only remain as they are
or have the high output go down before the other comes
up. Because only a high input can affect any succeeding
DFFs, the direct interconnection of such units is safe.
The flip-flop of Figure 13.17(e) is the static counterpart
of that in Figure 13.17(d), so it has lower noise
sensitivity and does not require refreshing, at the
expense of size and speed. A final note regards the
names of these two flip-flops, which were derived from
the latches used in their constructions; these have only
one clocked transistor, so despite their names, the
resulting flip-flops have a total of two clocked
transistors each.
Another popular DFF, called SAFF (sense-amplifier-
based flip-flop), is depicted in Figure 13.17(f). The
construction of the master stage is based on a sense
amplifier similar to that used in volatile memories.
Because it operates in differential mode, this circuit is

--- Page 630 ---
able to detect very small differences ( ∼ 100 mV)
between d and d′, so it can be used with low-swing
(faster) logic. Its operation is based on the precharge-
evaluate principle. During the precharge phase (clk =
‘0’), both nodes (s′ = set, r′ = reset) are raised to VDD.
Then in the evaluation phase (clk = ‘1’), one of the
nodes (that with the higher input voltage) is discharged
towards GND. These values (s′ and r′) are then stored
by the slave SR-type latch. Though fast, a major
consequence of the precharge-evaluate operation is its
high power consumption because one of the output
nodes is always discharged at every clock cycle, even if
the input data have not changed. Even though the
circuit as a whole is static (it can hold data even if the
clock stops) because of the fact that the master is
dynamic and the slave is static, this DFF is normally
referred to as semidynamic (this designation is extended
to basically all circuits whose master latch operates
using the precharge-evaluate principle, even when a
staticizer is added to it).
The SAFF circuit described above was used in the
StrongARM 110 processor but with the addition of a
permanently ON transistor (M6), and operating with
rail-to-rail input voltages. The role of M6 is to provide a
DC path to GND for the discharged node (s′ or r′). Its
operation is as follows. Suppose that d = ‘1’, so s′ is
lowered during the evaluation phase. In this case, a path
from s′ to GND exists through M1–M3–M5. If, while
clk is still high, d changes to ‘0’, no DC path to GND
will exist because then M3 will be OFF. In this case,
current leakage (important in present 65 nm devices)
might charge this floating node to a high voltage. Even
though this is not a major problem because after

--- Page 631 ---
evaluation any transition from low to high will not
affect the information stored in the slave latch, it
renders a pseudo-static circuit, which is more
susceptible to noise. M6 guarantees a permanent
connection between the discharged node and GND, now
through M1–M6–M4–M5.
In the original SAFF the slave was implemented using a
conventional SR latch (see Slave 1 in Figure 13.17 and
compare it to Figure 13.2(b)), whose delay is near two
NAND-gate delays because q depends on q′ and vice
versa. To reduce it, several improved SR latches were
developed subsequently and are also depicted in Figure
13.17(f). Notice in Slave 2 that the transistors drawn
with solid lines correspond to the original solution (that
is, Slave 1), to which the other transistors (with dashed
lines) were added. Even though it is not immediately
apparent from the circuit, now the values of q and q′ are
computed by q+ = s + r′ · q and q+′ = r + s′ · q′ instead
of q+ = (s′ · q′)′ and q+′ = (r′ · q)′ (where q+ is the next
state of q). In other words, q can be computed without
the value of q′ being ready, and vice versa, increasing
the slave’s speed. Notice, however, that this latch
requires an extra inverter (extra delay) to compute s and
r from s′ and r′. A slightly simpler solution, which does
not require the inverter, is shown in the next SR latch
(Slave 3). This circuit, however, presents a major
problem, which consists of a glitch at the output. This
can be observed as follows. Suppose that d = ‘0’, q =
‘0’, and q′ = ‘1’, so r′ must be lowered during
evaluation, while s′ remains high, such that no
alteration should occur on q and q′. However, clk = ‘1’
occurs before r′ is lowered, which causes q′ to be
momentarily lowered to ‘0’ (see the second half of

--- Page 632 ---
Slave 3) before returning to its previous value (‘1’).
Note that even if clk in the slave were delayed the
problem would persist (then at the other end of the
clock pulse). Another limitation of this circuit is the
presence of staticizers (rings of inverters), which reduce
the speed slightly. A faster, glitch-free SR latch is
presented in Slave 4, which requires neither the
inverters nor the staticizers.
Finally, Figures 13.17(g)–(h) show two similar circuits
that employ CML (current-mode logic). As all the other
DFFs in Figure 13.17, they too are master-slave flip-
flops. The first is constructed with bipolar transistors
and uses the static ECL (emitter-coupled logic) latch of
Figure 13.8(l), while the second utilizes MOS
transistors and the SCL (source-coupled logic) latch of
Figure 13.8(m). These circuits operate with differential
amplifiers and, like the SAFF, are capable of detecting
very small voltage differences between the inputs,
hence allowing operation with small voltage swings,
which increases the speed. The large stack of (four)
transistors (one for IBIAS, one for clk, one for d, plus
another to implement the resistor, which can also be
implemented passively), however, makes this structure
unsuitable for very low ( ∼ 1 V) supply voltages, in
which case the tail currents are normally eliminated
(indicated by the dashed lines to GND in the figure)
with some penalty in terms of speed and noise (current
spikes); this new structure is called S-SCL (simplified
SCL). As mentioned in Section 13.3, ECL and SCL are
the fastest flip-flops currently in use, and when the
transistors are fabricated using advanced techniques
like those described in Sections 8.7 and 9.8 (GaAs,
SiGe, SOI, strained silicon, etc.), flip-flops for

--- Page 633 ---
prescalers (Section 14.6) operating with input
frequencies over 15 GHz with S-SCL [Ding 2005,
Sanduleanu 2005], over 30 GHz with SCL [Kromer
2006, Heydari 2006], or over 50 GHz with ECL
[Griffith 2006, Wang 2006] can be constructed. Their
main drawbacks are their relatively high power
consumption and the relatively wide silicon space
needed to construct them.
13.6 Pulse-Based D Flip-Flops
The second technique depicted in Figure 13.14 for the
construction of DFFs is called pulsed latch or pulse-based
flip-flop. Its operation is based on a short pulse, derived from
the clock, which causes a latch to be transparent during only
a brief moment, hence behaving approximately as if it were a
true flip-flop.
13.6.1 Short-Pulse Generators
Some short-pulse generators are depicted in Figure
13.18. The most common case appears in Figure
13.18(a), which consists of an AND gate to which clk
and x (where x is an inverted and delayed version of
clk) are applied, giving origin to φ. The delay relative to
the inverters was labeled d1, while that relative to the
AND was called d2. The resulting waveforms are
shown in the accompanying timing diagram.

--- Page 634 ---
FIGURE 13.18  Short-pulse generators: (a) AND-
based, (b) AND-based with feedback, and (c) XOR-based
(frequency doubler).
Another short-pulse generator, also based on an AND
gate, but having a feedback loop, is depicted in Figure
13.18(b). This circuit, employed in the implementation
of a NEC RISC microprocessor (see EP/TG-C2MOS
flip-flop in Figure 13.19(a)), produces relatively larger
pulses. Its timing diagram is also included in the figure.

--- Page 635 ---
FIGURE 13.19  Pulse-based positive-edge DFF
implementations: (a) Explicit-pulsed TG-C2MOS-based
flip-flop, used in a NEC RISC processor (the latch is from
Figure 13.8(c)); (b) HLFF (hybrid latch flip-flop), or
Partovi flip-flop, used in an AMD K6 processor; (c) Self-
resetting DFF also used in an AMD K6 processor; (d)
SDFF (semi-dynamic flip-flop), or Klass flip-flop; (e)
DSETL (dual-rail static edge-triggered latch); (f) EP latch
used in the Itanium 2 and Itanium Montecito processors
(partial scan circuitry included, along with respective pulse
generator and deracer).
Finally, an XOR-based circuit is shown in Figure
13.18(c). Note that in this case x is a delayed but not
inverted version of clk. As shown in the accompanying
timing diagram, this circuit not only generates a short

--- Page 636 ---
pulse but also doubles the clock frequency, being
therefore useful for the implementation of dual-edge
triggered DFFs.
13.6.2 Pulse-Based DFFs
A series of pulse-based flip-flops (also called pulsed
latches) are depicted in Figure 13.19. This type of
circuit is often classified as explicit-pulsed (EP) or
implicit-pulsed (IP), depending on whether the pulse
generator is external to the latch or embedded in it,
respectively. The former occupies more space and
consumes more power, but if shared by several latches
it might be advantageous.
The first circuit in Figure 13.19 was used in a NEC
RISC processor. It is a pulsed latch that belongs to the
EP category. It is simply the TG-C2MOS latch of Figure
13.8(c) to which short pulses are applied instead of a
regular clock. The short-pulse generator is also shown
and corresponds to that previously seen in Figure
13.18(b) (with a latch-enable input included). Because
this latch is dual-phase, φ and φ′ are both needed (note
the arrangement used to keep these two signals in
phase, which consists of two inverters for φ and an
always-ON TG plus an inverter for φ′).
The DFF in Figure 13.19(b) was originally called HLFF
(hybrid latch flip-flop), because it is a latch behaving as
a flip-flop. It has also been called ETL (edge-triggered
latch) or Partovi flip-flop. Despite its name, it is a
regular pulsed latch. The short-pulse generator is built-
in, so the circuit belongs to the IP category. Its
operation is as follows. When clk = ‘0’, the NAND
produces X = ‘1’. Because M3 and M4 are then OFF, q

--- Page 637 ---
is decoupled from the main circuit, so the staticizer
holds its previous data. When clk rises, X either goes to
‘0’ (if d = ‘1’) or remains high (if d = ‘ 0′). This
situation, however, only lasts until clk has had time to
propagate through the trio of inverters, after which X =
‘1’ again occurs. This constitutes the transparency
window (hold time) of the flip-flop. If X is lowered
during that window, then M4 is turned ON and M2 is
turned OFF, causing q = ‘1’ at the output. Otherwise
(that is, if X remains high during the window), q goes to
‘0’, because then M1, M2, and M3 are ON. Node X is
static because it is a CMOS NAND (Figure 4.10(b)),
while node q is staticized by the pair of cross-connected
inverters, so the overall circuit is static. To prevent
back-driven noise (from q′), an additional inverter
(drawn with dashed lines) can be used at the output.
Note that this circuit allows operation with negative
setup time (that is, allows data to arrive after the
positive clock transition has occurred). It was originally
designed with a transparency window of 240 ps and
tpCQ = 140 ps, resulting in a margin (negative setup
time) of ∼ 100 ps. Though this prevents clock-skew
effects and allows soft clock edges, a minimum of three
gate delays were needed in between two consecutive
DFFs (as in Figure 13.13(b)) to prevent race-through.
Note that, contrary to conventional precharge circuits,
this flip-flop has no node that is unconditionally
discharged at every clock cycle, thus saving power. This
DFF was used in the AMD K6 microprocessor.
Another pulse-based DFF, also employed in an AMD
K6 microprocessor, is depicted in Figure 13.19(c).
However, differently from all the previous circuits, this
is a self-resetting DFF. This too is an IP circuit. Its

--- Page 638 ---
operation, based on the precharge-evaluate principle, is
as follows. Suppose that clk = ‘0’, so M1 is OFF, and
assume that nodes X and Y (which are staticized by
back-to-back inverters) have been precharged to VDD.
In this case, q = q′ = ‘0’, so Z = ‘1’ results, which keeps
M8–M9 OFF. When the clock rises, it turns M1 ON.
Because M2–M3 were already ON, the circuit
evaluates, pulling X or Y down (depending on whether d
or d′ is high, respectively). This situation lasts only until
the clock propagates through the three inverters
connected to M2–M3, after which these transistors are
turned OFF. This time interval constitutes the circuit’s
transparency window (hold time). When X (or Y) is
lowered, q (or q′) is raised, causing, after a brief delay
(due to the NOR gate plus two inverters), Z = ‘0’, which
turns M8–M9 ON, precharging X and Y back to VDD,
hence self-resetting both q and q′ to zero. After q and q′
are reset, Z returns to ‘1’, disabling M8–M9 once again.
In other words, only a brief positive pulse occurs on q
or q′ at every clock cycle.
Note that this circuit, as a whole, is static, because it
can hold its state indefinitely if the clock stops.
However, the original circuit, which operates in
precharge-evaluate mode, is dynamic, to which two
staticizers were added. For that reason, as mentioned
earlier, this kind of architecture is normally referred to
as semidynamic.
The pulsed latch of Figure 13.19(d) is called SDFF
(semi-dynamic flip-flop), also known as Klass flip-flop.
The reason for the “semidynamic” designation is that
explained above, being the actual circuit static. Its
operation is as follows. When clk = ‘0’, M1 is OFF and
M4 is ON, so X is precharged to VDD. This keeps M7

--- Page 639 ---
OFF, and because M6 is also OFF (due to clk = ‘0’), q
is decoupled from X and holds the previous data. When
the clock rises, node X is either discharged (if d = ‘1’)
or remains high (if d = ‘0’). If X stays high, the NAND
produces a ‘0’ after the clock propagates through the
pair of inverters, turning M3 OFF. This guarantees that
X will remain high while clk is high even if d changes
to ‘1’ after the evaluation window has ended. This ‘1’
turns M5 ON, so q = ‘0’ is stored by the staticizer. On
the other hand, if X is discharged, as soon as it is
lowered below the NAND’s threshold voltage it forces
M3 to continue ON, even if the evaluation window
ends, so M3 will complete the discharge of X. This
allows the transparency window (hold time) to be
shortened. X = ‘0’ turns M7 ON and M5 OFF, so q = ‘1’
is stored by the staticizer. Note that this circuit also
allows negative setup time, but only for rising inputs.
Therefore, though slightly faster than HLFF, this DFF is
more susceptible to clock skew.
Another fast and compact pulsed latch is depicted in
Figure 13.19(e), originally called DSETL (dual-rail
static edge-triggered latch), which also belongs to the IP
category. As before, the short pulses are generated by a
built-in AND-type gate (transistors M1 to M4). This
DFF does not operate using the precharge-evaluate
principle (important for power saving) and accepts
negative setup times. During the transparency window
(hold time), X and Y are connected to d and d′, whose
values are transferred to q and q′, respectively. Each
output is staticized by an inverter plus an nMOS
transistor. Note that this is equivalent to the two-
inverter staticizer seen before. (This can be observed as
follows: when X = ‘0’, q too is low, so on the right-hand

--- Page 640 ---
side M6 is ON and M8 is OFF; when X = ‘1’, q is high,
so this time M6 is OFF and M8 is ON; in summary, M6
and M8 perform the function of the missing cross-
connected inverter on the right, while M5 and M7 do
the same on the left.) Observe that the general
architecture of this circuit is RAM-type with a structure
similar to the SRAM cell of Figure 13.8(e), just with
short pulses applied to the gating transistors instead of a
regular clock.
Finally, Figure 13.19(f) shows a pulsed latch employed
in the Itanium 2 microprocessor and, subsequently, in
the Itanium Montecito microprocessor (with some
changes in the peripheral circuitry). This latch is very
simple. Note that, apart from the scan circuitry (which
is intended for testability), with Sh′ = ‘1’ the latch
reduces to that seen in Figure 13.8(c), just with one
pMOS transistor removed for compactness from the
feedback C2MOS gate. The short-pulse generator for
this explicit-pulsed latch is also shown in the figure (it
includes a latch-enable input). The deracer circuit, used
between two DFFs (as in Figure 13.13(b)) to prevent
race-through, is also included.
13.7 Dual-Edge D Flip-Flops
In modern high-speed systems, a large fraction of the power
( ∼ 30%) can be dissipated in the clock distribution network.
In these cases, dual-edge flip-flops can be an interesting
alternative because they are able to store data at both clock
transitions, so the clock frequency can be reduced by a factor
of two.

--- Page 641 ---
Two classical implementation techniques for dual-edge DFFs
are depicted in Figure 13.20. The first technique (called
conventional or multiplexer-based) is depicted in Figures
13.20(a)–(b), while the second (called pulse-based) is
illustrated in Figures 13.20(c)–(e).
FIGURE 13.20  Positive dual-edge flip-flops: (a)
Conventional (mux-based) implementation technique, exemplified
in (b) using the TG-C2MOS latch of Figure 13.8(c) and the
multiplexer of Figure 11.16(b); (c) Implicit-pulsed SRAM-based
latch (Figure 13.8(e)), whose pulse generator produces two pulses
per clock period; (d) DSPFF (dual-edge-triggered static pulsed
flip-flop), which also employs the SRAM latch of Figure 13.8(e)
along with another dual-pulse generator; (e) DESPFF (dual-edge-
triggered static pulsed flip-flop), which uses the SSTC1 latch of
Figure 13.8(j) and the same pulse generator shown in (d).
As can be seen in Figure 13.20(a), the multiplexer-based
approach consists of two DLs, one positive and the other

--- Page 642 ---
negative, connected to a multiplexer whose function is to
connect the DL that is opaque to the output (q). Basically
any DL can be employed in this kind of circuit. An example,
using the TG-C2MOS latch of Figure 13.8(c) and the
multiplexer of Figure 11.16(b), is shown in Figure 13.20(b).
Pulse-based dual-edge DFFs are similar to pulse-based
single-edge DFFs, with the exception that now the short-
pulse generator must generate two pulses per clock period.
This type of generator normally relies on an XOR or XNOR
gate (as opposed to AND/NAND gates), as previously
illustrated in Figure 13.18(c). Three examples are presented
in Figure 13.20. In Figure 13.20(c), an IP (implicit-pulsed)
circuit is shown. As can be seen, the latch proper is simply
the SRAM cell of Figure 13.8(e) with the switches
implemented by four nMOS transistors each, which are
controlled by several delayed versions of the clock jointly
producing the desired dual pulse. The case in Figure
13.20(d), named DSPFF (dual-edge-triggered static pulsed
flip-flop) is again a straightforward application of the SRAM
latch of Figure 13.8(e), this time using an EP (explicit-
pulsed) arrangement. Finally, the DESPFF (dual-edge-
triggered static pulsed flip-flop) circuit shown in Figure
13.20(e) is a direct application of the SSTC1 latch
previously seen in Figure 13.8(j), and employs the same
dual-pulse generator seen in Figure 13.20(d).
13.8 Statistically Low-Power D Flip-Flops
Three main approaches have been taken recently to reduce
the power consumption of flip-flops while trying to maintain
(or even increase) their speeds. They are called energy
recovery, clock gating, and conditional capture.

--- Page 643 ---
The first approach (energy recovery) is based on dual
transmission-gates with a pulsed power supply [Athas 1994],
though in practice it has contemplated mainly the use a
sinusoidal global clock [Voss 2001, Cooke 2003], which is
applied directly to some of the flip-flops studied above
(either without any or with minor modifications).
The second approach (clock gating) consists of blocking the
clock when q and d are equal because then d does not need
to be stored.
Finally, conditional capture prevents certain internal
transitions when q and d are equal.
The last two categories mentioned above belong to a general
class called statistical power reduction because the power is
only reduced if the amount of activity is low (typically
below 20 to 30 percent), that is, if d does not change
frequently. This is due to the fact that, besides the power
needed to process q, additional power is necessary in these
new circuits to feed the additional gates.
The clock-gating approach is illustrated in Figure 13.21(a).
As can be seen, the XOR gate enables the AND gate only
when d ≠ q. It is important to observe, however, that this
approach is not recommended for any DFF. For example, for
truly static flip-flops (no precharge-evaluate operation) with
only one or two clocked transistors, the net effect of clocking
the actual DFF might be not much different from that of
clocking the clock-gating AND gate.

--- Page 644 ---
FIGURE 13.21  Flip-flops with statistical power reduction:
(a) GCFF (gated-clock flip-flop); (b) CCFF (conditional-capture
flip-flop); DCCER (differential conditional-capture energy-
recovery) flip-flop.
The conditional-capture approach is depicted in Figure
13.21(b). As in the case above, it too blocks unnecessary
internal transitions, but its action does not involve the clock
signal. In the case of Figure 13.21(b), the first stage is a
pulsed latch, while the second is an unclocked SR latch. The
circuit operates using the precharge-evaluate principle, so
two additional nMOS transistors, controlled by NOR gates,
are inserted between the precharge transistors and the input
transistors. This arrangement prevents the set/reset nodes
from being discharged during evaluation when q = d (that is,
in this case d is not captured).
Another conditional-capture flip-flop is shown in Figure
13.21(c). The first stage is a dynamic implicit-pulsed latch
that again operates using the precharge-evaluate principle
and has its outputs stored by a conventional SR latch. As
usual, the lower part constitutes the short-pulse generator,
while the upper part (pMOS transistors) is the precharge
transistors (in this case these transistors are permanently ON
instead of being clocked). Conditional capture is achieved
with the use of d in series with q′ and d′ in series with q,

--- Page 645 ---
preventing the set/reset nodes from being discharged when d
= q. Energy recovery is achieved by using a sinusoidal clock
instead of a square-ware clock.
13.9 D Flip-Flop Control Ports
Finally, we discuss the introduction of control ports to DFFs,
namely for reset, preset, enable, and clear.
13.9.1 DFF with Reset and Preset
In many applications it is necessary to reset (that is,
force the output to ‘0’) or preset (force the output to
‘1’) the flip-flops. These inputs (reset, preset) can
normally be introduced with very simple modifications
in the original circuit. As an example, Figure 13.22(a)
shows the conventional DFF seen in Figure 13.16(c),
which had its inverters replaced with 2-input NAND
gates. It is easy to verify that rst′ = ‘0’ forces q = ‘0’,
whereas pre′ = ‘0’ forces q = ‘1’ (in this example, if rst′
= pre′ = ‘0’, then pre′ wins). The corresponding DFF
symbol is also included in the figure.

--- Page 646 ---
FIGURE 13.22  Introduction of flip-flop-control
inputs: (a) reset and preset, (b) enable, and (c) clear.
13.9.2 DFF with Enable
Flip-flops may also need an enable input. When enable
is asserted, the DFF operates as usual; when not, the
circuit retains its state (that is, remains opaque). A basic
way of introducing an enable port is by means of a
multiplexer (Section 11.6), as shown in Figure 13.22(b).
The symbol shown on the right corresponds to the flip-
flops normally available in CPLD/FPGA chips (Chapter
18), which contain, besides the indispensable in/out
ports (d, clk, and q), reset, preset, and enable ports. (For
another way of introducing enable, see Exercises 13.19
and 13.20.)
13.9.3 DFF with Clear

--- Page 647 ---
In our context, the fundamental difference between
reset and clear is that the former is asynchronous (that
is, does not depend on clk), while the latter is
synchronous. The introduction of a flip-flop clear port is
illustrated in Figure 13.22(c), which consists of simply
ANDing d and clr′. When clr′ = ‘1’, the DFF operates
as usual, but if clr′ = ‘0’, then the output is zeroed at the
next rising edge of the clock.
13.10 T Flip-Flop
The internal operation of most counters is based on the
“toggle” principle. A toggle flip-flop (TFF) is simply a
circuit that changes its output (from ‘0’ to ‘1’ or vice versa)
every time a clock edge (either positive or negative,
depending on the design) occurs, remaining in that state until
another clock edge of the same polarity happens. This is
illustrated in Figure 13.23 for a positive-edge TFF. Notice in
the truth table that t is simply a toggle-enable input, so the
circuit operates as a TFF when t = ‘1’, or it remains in the
same state (represented by q+ = q) when t = ‘0’.
FIGURE 13.23  Symbol and truth table for a positive-edge
TFF (t is just a toggle-enable port).
CPLDs and, specially, FPGAs (Chapter 18) are rich in DFFs,
which are used as the basis to implement all kinds of flip-
flops. Indeed, a DFF can be easily converted into a TFF, with
four classical conversion schemes depicted in Figure 13.24.

--- Page 648 ---
FIGURE 13.24  Conversion schemes from DFF to TFF: (a)
Without toggle-enable input; (b) With toggle-enable input; (c)
With toggle-enable and clear inputs. The toggle-enable input is
represented by t in the symbols on the right.
In Figure 13.24(a), a DFF is converted into a TFF by simply
connecting an inverted version of q to d (this circuit was
seen in Example 4.9). In this case, the flip-flop has no
toggle-enable input.
In Figure 13.24(b), two options with toggle-enable capability
are shown. In the upper figure, an inverted version of q is
connected to d, and the enable (ena) input of the DFF is used
to connect the toggle-enable signal (assuming that the DFF
does have an enable port). In the lower diagram of Figure
13.24(b), the DFF has no enable input, hence an XOR gate is
needed to introduce the toggle-enable signal. In both cases, if

--- Page 649 ---
toggle_ena = ‘1’, then the circuit changes its state every time
a positive clock edge occurs, or it remains in the same state
if toggle_ena = ‘0’ (toggle-enable is represented simply by t
in the TFF symbol shown on the right). Finally, in Figure
13.24(c), the circuit has an additional input, called clear (see
Figure 13.22(c)); recall also that the fundamental difference
between reset and clear is that the former is asynchronous
while the latter is synchronous. If clear = ‘0’, then the output
is synchronously forced to ‘0’ at the next positive transition
of the clock.
EXAMPLE 13.5 ASYNCHRONOUS
COUNTER
Figure 13.25(a) shows two negative-edge TFFs connected in
series. The clock is applied only to the first stage, whose output
(q0) serves as clock to the second stage. Using the clock
waveform as the reference, draw the waveforms for the output
signals (q0 and q1).
FIGURE 13.25 Asynchronous counter of
Example 13.5.
SOLUTION
The solution is depicted in Figure 13.25(b). Because the
circuits are negative-edge TFFs, arrows were used in the
corresponding waveforms to highlight the only points where
the flip-flops are transparent. The TFFs′ initial state was

--- Page 650 ---
assumed to be q0 = q1 = ‘0’. The first stage is similar to that in
Example 4.9 (except for the fact of being now negative-edge),
so a similar analysis produces the waveform for q0 shown in
the second plot of Figure 13.25(b), a little delayed with respect
to clk. The same can be done for the second stage, which has q0
as clock, resulting in the waveform shown in the last plot, with
q1 a little delayed with respect to q0. Looking at q0 and q1, we
observe that this circuit is an upward binary counter because
the outputs are q1q0 = “00” (= 0), then “01” (= 1), then “10” (=
2), then “11” (= 3), after which it restarts from “00”. This
circuit is called asynchronous because clk is not connected to
all flip-flops (counters will be discussed in detail in Chapter
14). As can be observed in the plots, a counter is indeed a
frequency divider because fq0 = fclk/2 and fq1 = fclk/4.
13.11 Exercises
1. From SR latch to D latch
Even though from a VLSI design perspective a D
latch is rarely implemented with conventional gates
(see Figures 13.8 and 13.9), playing with gates is
useful to master logic analysis. In this sense, modify
the SR latch of Figure 13.3(a) to convert it into a D
latch (see the truth table in Figure 13.4(a)).
2. DL timing analysis
Figure E13.2 shows a DL to which the signals clk
and d also shown in the figure are applied. Assuming
that the DL’s propagation delays (see Figure 13.6) are
tpCQ = 2 ns and tpDQ = 1 ns, draw the waveform for q.
Assume that the initial value of q is ‘0’ and that the
clock period is 10 ns.
3. Bad circuit

--- Page 651 ---
FIGURE E13.2
Figure E13.3 shows a D latch with q′ connected to d.
Try to draw d and q and explain why this circuit is
unstable.
4. SR flip-flop
FIGURE E13.3
Figure E13.4 shows the symbol for a positive-edge
set-reset flip-flop (SRFF), along with its truth table.
It also shows a possible implementation, derived
from a DFF, which has a section of combinational
logic (marked with a question mark—notice that it is
not clocked). The purpose of this exercise is to design
that section.
a. Based on the truth table of Figure E13.4,
briefly explain how the SRFF works.
b. Draw a corresponding circuit.
5. JK flip-flop

--- Page 652 ---
FIGURE E13.4
This exercise is similar to that above, but it deals
with a JKFF instead of a SRFF.
Figure E13.5 shows the symbol for a positive-edge
JK flip-flop (JKFF), along with its truth table. It also
shows a circuit for a JKFF, derived from a DFF,
which has a section of combinational logic (marked
with a question mark) that we want to design.
a. Based on the truth table of Figure E13.5,
briefly explain how a JK flip-flop works.
b. Draw a corresponding circuit.
6. From DFF to DL
FIGURE E13.5
Consider the “downward” conversion of a D flip-flop
into a D latch. Can it be done? Explain.
7. TFF timing analysis
Figure E13.7 shows a DFF operating as a TFF.
Assuming that the propagation delays are tpCQ = 2 ns
(for the DFF) and tp_inv = 1 ns (for the inverter), draw

--- Page 653 ---
the waveforms for d and q. Assume that the initial
value of q is ‘0’ and that the clock period is 16 ns.
Adopt the simplified timing diagram style of Figure
4.8(b).
8. DFF functional analysis
FIGURE E13.7
Figure E13.8 shows a positive-edge DFF that
receives the signals clk, rst, and d included in the
figure. Assuming that the propagation delays are
negligible, draw the waveform for q. Assume that
initially q = ‘0’.
9. DFF timing analysis
FIGURE E13.8
Figure E13.9 shows the same DFF and input signals
seen in the previous exercise. Assuming that the
DFF’s propagation delay from clk to q is tpCQ = 5 ns
and from rst to q is also tpRQ = 5 ns, draw the
resulting waveform for q. Consider that the clock
period is 50 ns and that the DFF’s initial state is q =
‘0’.

--- Page 654 ---
10. Modified DFF/TFF
FIGURE E13.9
This exercise relates to the circuit shown in Figure
E13.10.
a. With the switch in position A, draw the
waveforms at points q, d, and x. Use the
clock as reference. What kind of circuit is
this? Is it a frequency divider?
b. Repeat the exercise above but now with
the switch in B. Analyze the resulting
waveforms. Is ita frequency divider?
11. Master-slave DFFs
a. Draw the schematics for a negative-edge
DFF implemented according to the master-
slaveapproach using the dynamic latch of
Figure 13.9(a) for the master and the static
latch ofFigure 13.8(b) for the slave.
b. Repeat the exercise above using the static
latch of Figure 13.8(f) in both stages.
12. Implicit-pulsed DFF


--- Page 655 ---
FIGURE E13.10
Figure 13.20(e) shows a dual-edge flip-flop that uses
an EP (explicit-pulsed) arrangement to clock the
circuit. Using the same latch (SSTC1), convert it into
an IP (intrinsic-pulsed) single-edge DFF.
(Suggestion: examine the lower part of the pulse-
based DFF in Figure 13.19(c) and consider the
possibility of including just two transistors, like M2–
M3, to implement the built-in short-pulse generator.)
13. Precharge-evaluate flip-flops
a. Which among all (master-slave) DFFs in
Figure 13.17 operate using the precharge-
evaluate principle?
b. Which among all (pulse-based) DFFs in
Figure 13.19 operate using the precharge-
evaluate principle?
14. Dual-edge DFF with multiplexers
The dual-edge DFF of Figure 13.20(a) was
implemented with two DLs and a multiplexer. How
can a similar flip-flop be constructed using only
multiplexers? Draw the corresponding circuit. What
is the minimum number of multiplexers needed?
15. Dual-edge DFF with single-edge DFFs
The dual-edge DFF of Figure 13.20(a) was
implemented with two D latches and a multiplexer.
Suppose that the DLs are replaced with single-edge
DFFs. Analyze the operation of this circuit. Is it still
a dual-edge DFF? (Hint: Think about glitches.)
16. Dual-edge TFF
Figure E13.16 shows a dual-edge DFF configured as
a TFF. Given the waveform for clk, draw the

--- Page 656 ---
waveform at the output (q). Comment on the
usefulness of this circuit.
17. DL with reset, clear, and preset
FIGURE E13.16
Figure E13.17 shows the same positive-level DL seen
in Figure 13.8(b).
a. Make the modifications needed to
introduce a reset port (active low, as
depicted in the symbolon the right of Figure
E13.17). Recall that in our context reset is
asynchronous, while clear is synchronous.
b. Suppose that instead of a reset port we
want a flip-flop clear port (active low).
Make the modifications needed to introduce
it.
c. Finally, make the modifications assuming
that the desired port is a preset port (output
forced to ‘1’ asynchronously, again active
low).
18. DFF with clear
FIGURE E13.17

--- Page 657 ---
Figure E13.18 shows a DFF implemented using the
master-slave approach in which the DL of Figure
13.8(b) is employed in each stage.
a. Is this a positive- or negative-edge DFF?
b. Given the waveforms for clk and d
depicted in the figure, draw the waveform
for q (assume that the initial state of q is ‘0’
and that the propagation delays are
negligible).
c. Make the modifications needed to include
in this circuit a flip-flop clear input (recall
again that in our context reset is
asynchronous, while clear is synchronous, so
the flip-flop should only be cleared at the
proper clock edge).
19. DFF with enable #1
FIGURE E13.18
A classical way of introducing an enable port into a
DFF was shown in Figure 13.22(b), which was
repeated in Figure E13.19 below.
a. Given the waveforms for clk, d, and ena,
draw the waveform for q (assume that its
initial state is ‘0’ and that the propagation
delays are negligible).
b. Inspect the result and verify whether this
enable arrangement is truly synchronous

--- Page 658 ---
(that is, whether it becomes effective only at
the rising edge of the clock).
20. DFF with enable #2
FIGURE E13.19
Another alternative to introduce an enable port is
depicted in Figure E13.20, which shows an AND
gate processing clk and ena, with the purpose of
preventing clk from reaching the DFF when ena =
‘0’. This option, however, interferes with the clock,
which is generally not recommended. It also exhibits
another important difference (defect) with respect to
the option depicted in Figure 13.22(b).
a. Given the waveforms for clk, ena, and d,
draw the waveform for q (notice that these
waveforms are the same as those in the
previous exercise). To ease your task, draw
first the waveform for clk*. Assume that the
initial state of q is ‘0’ and that the
propagation delays are negligible.
b. Inspect the result (q) and compare it with
that obtained in the previous exercise. Is
there any difference? Why?

--- Page 659 ---
FIGURE E13.20
13.12 Exercises with SPICE
See Chapter 25, Section 25.15.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 660 ---
14
Sequential Circuits
Chapter Contents
14.1 Shift Registers
14.2 Synchronous Counters
14.3 Asynchronous Counters
14.4 Signal Generators
14.5 Frequency Dividers
14.6 PLL and Prescalers
14.7 Pseudo-Random Sequence Generators
14.8 Scramblers and Descramblers
14.9 Exercises
14.10 Exercises with VHDL
14.11 Exercises with SPICE
Objective:
Sequential circuits are studied in Chapters 13 to 15. In Chapter 13, the
fundamental building blocks (latches and flip-flops) were introduced and
discussed at length. We turn now to the study of circuits that employ such
building blocks. The discussion starts with shift registers, followed by the
most fundamental type of sequential circuit, counters, and then several shift-
register and/or counter-based circuits, namely signal generators, frequency

--- Page 661 ---
dividers, prescalers, PLLs, pseudo-random sequence genera-tors, and data
scramblers. This type of design will be further illustrated using VHDL in
Chapter 22.
14.1 Shift Registers
Shift registers (SRs) are very simple circuits used for storing
and manipulating data. As illustrated in Figure 14.1, they
consist of one or more strings of serially connected D-type
flip-flops (DFFs). In Figure 14.1(a), a four-stage single-bit
SR is shown, while in Figure 14.1(b) a four-stage N-bit SR is
depicted.
FIGURE 14.1  (a) Single-bit and (b) multibit shift registers.
The operation of an SR is very simple: Each time a positive
(or negative, depending on the DFF) clock transition occurs,
the data vector advances one position. Hence in the case of
Figure 14.1 (four stages), each input bit (d) reaches the
output (q) after four positive clock edges have occurred.
Four applications of SRs are illustrated in Figure 14.2. In
Figure 14.2(a), the SR operates as a serial-in parallel-out
(SIPO) memory. In Figure 14.2(b), an SR with a
programmable initial state is presented (load = ‘1’ causes x =

--- Page 662 ---
x0x1x2x3 to be loaded into the flip-flops at the next positive
edge of clk, while load = ‘0’ causes the circuit to operate as a
regular SR). This circuit also operates as a parallel-in serial-
out (PISO) memory. In Figure 14.2(c), a circular SR is
depicted. Note that rst is connected to rst of all DFFs except
for the last, which has rst connected to its preset (pre) input.
Therefore, the rotating sequence is fixed and composed of
three ‘0’s and one ‘1’. Finally, in Figure 14.2(d), a
programmable-block SR, known as tapped delay line, is
shown. It consists of several SR blocks with sizes that are
powers of 2 interconnected by means of multiplexers
(Section 11.6). By setting the selection bits, sel(2:0),
properly, a delay varying from 0 to 7 clock periods can be
obtained (see the accompanying truth table).

--- Page 663 ---
FIGURE 14.2  Applications of SRs: (a) Serial-in parallel-
out (SIPO) memory; (b) SR with load capability or parallel-in
serial-out (PISO) memory; (c) Circular SR with a fixed rotating
sequence (“0001”); (d) Tapped delay line.
14.2 Synchronous Counters
Counters are at the heart of many (or most) sequential
systems, so a good understanding of their physical structures
is indispensable. To achieve that purpose, an extensive
analysis of internal details is presented in this chapter, along
with numerous design considerations. The design of counters

--- Page 664 ---
will be further illus-trated in Chapter 15 employing the
finite-state-machine concept. Practical designs using VHDL
will also be shown in Chapter 22.
Counters can be divided into synchronous and asynchronous.
In the former, the clock signal is connected to the clock input
of all flip-flops, whereas in the latter the output of one flip-
flop serves as clock to the next.
They can also be divided into full-scale and partial-scale
counters. The former is modulo-2N because it has 2N states
(where N is the number of flip-flops, hence the number of
bits), thus spanning the complete N-dimensional binary
space. The latter is modulo-M, where M < 2N, thus spanning
only part (M states) of the corresponding binary space. For
example, a 4-bit counter counting from 0 to 15 is a full-scale
(modulo-16) circuit, while a BCD (binary-coded decimal)
counter (4-bits, counting from 0 to 9) is a partial-scale
(modulo-10) counter. Synchronous modulo-2N and modulo-
M counters are studied in this section, while their
asynchronous counterparts are seen in the next. The
following six cases will be described here:
Case 1: TFF-based synchronous modulo-2N
counters
Case 2: DFF-based synchronous modulo-2N
counters
Case 3: TFF-based synchronous modulo-M
counters
Case 4: DFF-based synchronous modulo-M
counters
Case 5: Counters with nonzero initial state
Case 6: Large synchronous counters

--- Page 665 ---
Case 1 TFF-based synchronous modulo-2N
counters
A synchronous counter has the clock signal applied
directly to the clock input of all flip-flops. Two classical
circuits of this type are shown in Figure 14.3. All flip-
flops are TFFs (Section 13.10) with a toggle-enable port
(t). Therefore, their internal structure is that depicted in
Figure 13.24(b) or similar. The t input of each stage is
controlled by the outputs of all preceding stages, that is,
tk = qk−1 … q1q0, with q0 representing the counter’s
LSB (least significant bit). If four stages are employed,
then the output is q3q2q1q0 = {“0000” → “0001” →
“0010” → “0011” → … → “1111” → “0000” → …},
which constitutes a binary 0-to-15 (modulo-16) counter.


--- Page 666 ---
FIGURE 14.3  Synchronous modulo-2N counters
with (a) parallel enable and (b) serial enable. All flip-flops
are positive-edge TFFs, where t is a toggle-enable port
(Figure 13.24(b)). A partial timing diagram is shown in (c).
The counter of Figure 14.3(a) has the toggle-enable
signals (t) computed locally at each stage, so it is often
referred to as synchronous counter with parallel enable.
The counter of Figure 14.3(b), on the other hand, has
the toggle-enable signals computed serially, thus known
as synchronous counter with serial enable. The former
is faster, but the modularity of the latter (one TFF plus
one AND gate per cell) results in less silicon space and
generally also less power consumption.
A partial timing diagram is shown in Figure 14.3(c). It
depicts the behavior of the first three stages in Figure
14.3(a), which produce the vector q2q1q0, thus counting
from 0 (“000”) to 7 (“111”). Looking at the waveforms
for q2, q1, and q0 (in that order), we observe the
following sequence: “000” → “001” → “010” → “011”
… etc. In the first stage of Figure 14.3(a), t0 is
permanently at ‘1’, so the first TFF toggles every time a
positive clock transition occurs (highlighted by arrows
in the clock waveform of Figure 14.3(c)), producing q0
delayed by one TFF-delay with respect to the clock. In
the second stage, t1 = q0, causing it to toggle once every
two positive clock transitions, producing q1 also one
TFF-delay behind clk. In the third stage, t2 = q0 · q1, so
it toggles once every four positive clock edges. Note
that even though t2 takes one AND-delay plus one TFF-
delay to settle, q2 is only one TFF-delay behind clk.
Finally, in the fourth stage, t2 = q0 · q1 · q2, so it toggles
once every eight positive clock edges. Even though t3

--- Page 667 ---
takes one AND-delay plus one TFF-delay to settle,
again q3 is just one TFF-delay behind clk.
Note in the description above that the delay needed to
produce the toggle-enable signals (tk, k = 2, 3, …) is
larger than that to produce the flip-flop outputs (qk, k=
1, 2, …), so the former is the determining factor to the
counter’s maximum speed. Moreover, even though the
parallel-enable approach of Figure 14.3(a) is slightly
faster than the serial-enable circuit of Figure 14.3(b),
recall that a gate’s delay grows with its fan-in (number
of inputs), so the advantage of the former over the latter
is limited to blocks of four or so bits, after which their
speeds become comparable (but recall that the latter
occupies less space and consumes less power).
To understand why a TFF-based counter (Figure 14.3)
needs an AND gate connected to each t input with this
gate receiving all preceding flip-flop outputs, let us
examine Figure 14.4, where the first column contains
the desired output values (a binary counter). Inspecting
that column, we verify that each output (q0, q1, …)
must change its value if and only if all preceding
outputs are high. Therefore, because we must produce t
= ‘1’ for the TFF to toggle, ANDing the outputs of all
preceding stages is the proper solution. This was
highlighted with rectangles in the q2 column (see that q2
changes only when q1 and q0 are both ‘1’), but it can be
verified also in the other columns. In the particular case
of q0, because we want it to change at every clock edge
(of the proper polarity), t0 must be permanently ‘1’. The
resulting toggle-enable signals are depicted in the third
column of Figure 14.4.

--- Page 668 ---
FIGURE 14.4  Generation of toggle-enable signals.
Case 2 DFF-based synchronous modulo-2N
counters
Figure 14.5 shows the implementation of synchronous
modulo-2N counters using DFFs instead of TFFs. The
circuit in Figure 14.5(a) is equivalent to that in Figure
14.3(a), which operates with a parallel enable, while
that in Figure 14.5(b) is similar to that in Figure
14.3(b), operating with a serial enable. In either case,
instead of generating toggle-enable inputs, the circuit
must generate data (d0, d1, …) inputs (notice, however,
that the portions within dark boxes resemble TFFs (see
Figure 13.24)).

--- Page 669 ---
FIGURE 14.5  Synchronous modulo-2N counters
implemented using regular DFFs instead of TFFs: (a) With
parallel enable; (b) With serial enable (the portions within
dark boxes implement TFFs); (c) Generation of the DFF
inputs (d0, d1, …).
To understand the equation for d, let us examine the
table in Figure 14.5(c), which shows the counter’s
outputs for the first three stages. The first column
presents the desired output values. Recall that, because
the flip-flops are D type, the output simply copies the
input at the respective clock transition; therefore, the
values that must be provided for d are simply the
system’s next state. In other words, when the output (…
q2q1 q0) is m (where m is a decimal value in the range
0≤m≤2N−1), the next state (…d2d1d0) must be m+1
(except when m=2N−1, because then the next state must

--- Page 670 ---
be zero). This can be observed in the rightmost column
of Figure 14.5(c). To attain these values for d, the table
shows that d must change to ‘1’ whenever its present
value is ‘0’ and all preceding bits are ‘1’s, and it also
shows that d must remain in ‘1’ while the preceding bits
are not all ‘1’s. For example, for d2 this can be
translated as d2=q′2·(q1·q0)+q2·(q1·q0)′, which is the
same as d2=q2⊕ (q1·q0). This is precisely what the
circuits of Figures 14.5(a) and (b) do.
Another DFF-based synchronous full-scale counter is
illustrated in Figure 14.6. Although this kind of
implementation is not common, the exam of its
architecture is a good exercise. An adder (Sections 12.2
and 12.3) or an incrementer (Section 12.6) is employed
along with regular DFFs. If an adder is used, then the
DFF outputs (q0, q1, …) are connected to one of its
inputs, while 1 (=“0 …001”) is applied to the other
input, with the sum fed back to the flip-flops, causing
the circuit to increment its output by one unit every
time a positive clock edge occurs. A similar reasoning
holds for the case when an incrementer is used.
FIGURE 14.6  Another synchronous modulo-2N
counter, which employs an adder/incrementer and DFFs.
Case 3 TFF-based synchronous modulo-M
counters

--- Page 671 ---
All counters described above are full-scale counters
because they span the whole binary space (2N states,
where N is the number of flip-flops, hence the number
of bits). For a modulo-M counter (where M < 2N), some
type of comparator must be included in the system,
such that upon reaching the desired final value the
system can return to and continue from its initial state.
To construct such a circuit, one might be tempted to use
a system like that in Figure 14.7 with a full-scale
counter feeding one input of the comparator and a
reference value (for reset) feeding the other. In this
case, the comparator would be able to generate a reset
signal whenever the reference value is reached.
FIGURE 14.7  Incorrect modulo-M counter
implementation.
There are, however, two major flaws in this approach.
When the counter’s output changes from one state to
another, it might very briefly go through several states
before settling into its definite state. This is particularly
noticeable when the MSB changes because then all bits
change (for example, “0111”→“1000”). Consequently,
it is possible that one of these temporary states
coincides with the refer-ence value, which would
inappropriately reset the counter (recall that reset is an
asynchronous input). The other problem is that upon
reaching the reference value the counter is immediately

--- Page 672 ---
reset, implying that the reference value would have to
be “final value + 1,” in which state the counter would
remain for a very brief moment, thus causing a glitch at
the output. For these reasons, a different approach is
needed, which consists of manipulating the main input
(that is, t when using TFFs or d when using DFFs)
without ever touching the reset input. This approach is
summarized below.
To construct a modulo-M synchronous counter with
TFFs, any of the circuits shown in Figure 14.3 can be
used but with some kind of toggling-control mechanism
added to it. Let us start by considering the most
common case, in which the TFFs are plain TFFs, as in
Figure 13.24(b). And suppose, for example, that our
circuit must be a 0-to-9 counter. Then the situation is
the following:
 Desired final value: q3q2q1q0 = “1001” (=9)
 Natural next value: q3q2q1q0 = “1010”
(=10; this is where the counter would go)
 Desired next (initial) value:
q3q2q1q0=“0000” (=0; this is where the
counter must go)
In this list, we observe the following:
 For q3: It is high in the final value and
would continue high in the next state.
Because we want it to be ‘0’, this flip-flop
must be forced to toggle (t3=‘1’) when the
final value is reached (that is, when
q3=q0=‘1’; note that the ‘0’s need no
monitoring because there is no prior state in

--- Page 673 ---
which q3=q0=‘1’ occurs in a sequential binary
counter—this, however, would not be the case
in a counter with Gray outputs, for example).
 For q2: The value in the next state coincides
with the desired initial value so nothing needs
to be done.
 For q1: It is ‘0’ in the final value and would
change to ‘1’ in the next state. Because we
want it to be ‘0’, this flip-flop must be
prevented from toggling (t1=‘0’) when
q3=q0=‘1’ occurs.
 For q0: The value in the next state coincides
with the desired initial value, so nothing
needs to be done.
The construction of this toggling-control mechanism is
illustrated in the example below. However, it is
important to observe that this procedure, though very
simple and practical, does not guarantee that the
Boolean expressions are irreducible (though they are
irreducible in the light of the information that is
available at this point). The reason is very simple:
When the counter is a partial-scale one (like the 0-to-9
counter above), the method does not take advantage of
the states that no longer occur (from 10 to 15), which
might lead to smaller expressions (this will be
demonstrated in Chapter 15, Example 15.4, using a
finite state machine).
EXAMPLE 14.1 SYNCHRONOUS 0-
TO-9 COUNTER WITH REGULAR
TFFS

--- Page 674 ---
Design a synchronous 0-to-9 counter using regular TFFs.
SOLUTION
In this case, the situation is precisely that described
above, that is:
Desired final value: q3q2q1q0=“1001” (=9)
Natural next value: q3q2q1q0=“1010” (=10)
Desired next value: q3q2q1q0=“0000” (=0)
Therefore, q3 must be forced to toggle (thus t3=‘1’)
while q1 must be forced not to toggle (hence t1=‘0’)
when q3=q0=‘1’ occurs. In Boolean terms, tnew=told
when condition=FALSE or tnew= ‘0’ or ‘1’ (depending
on the case) when condition = TRUE, where
condition=q3·q0. The following expressions then result
for t3 and t1, with t3old and t1old taken from the
original modulo-2N circuit (Figure 14.8(a)):
t3new = t3old · condition + ‘1’ · condition =
t3old + condition (simplified using the
absorption theorem)
Hence t3new = t3old + q3 · q0 = q2 · q1 · q0 +
q3 · q0
t1new = t1old · condition + ‘0’ · condition =
t1old · condition′
Hence t1new = t1old · (q3 q0)′ = q0 · (q3 · q0)′
= q3′ · q0.

--- Page 675 ---
FIGURE 14.8 Synchronous 0-to-9 counter
using regular TFFs (Example 14.1): (a)
Original modulo-2N counter (N = 4); (b)
Modifications needed to force t1 = ‘0’ and t3
= ‘1’ when q3q2q1q0 = “1001” (=9); (c)
Final circuit.
The other two flip-flops (q2 and q0) need no
modifications. The complete circuit is shown in Figure
14.8. In (a), the original (unchanged) modulo-2N circuit,
borrowed from figure 14.3(a), is presented, where the
TFF is any of those in figure 13.24(b) or equivalent. In
(b), the modifications needed to cause t1=‘0’ and t3=‘1’
(expressions above) when q3q2q1q0=“1001” (=9) are
depicted. The final circuit, with these modifications
included, is shown (c).
EXAMPLE 14.2 SYNCHRONOUS 0-
TO-9 COUNTER USING TFFS WITH
CLEAR
a. Design a synchronous 0-to-9 counter using
TFFs with a flip-flop clear port (Figure
13.24(c)).

--- Page 676 ---
b. Discuss the advantages of this approach
over that in Example 14.1.
SOLUTION
Part (a):
The general situation here is the same as in Example
14.1, that is:
Desired final value: q3 q2 q1 q0=“1001” (=9)
Natural next value: q3 q2 q1 q0 =“1010” (=10)
Desired next (initial) value: q3q2q1q0=“0000”
(=0)
Because clear is a synchronous input, all that is needed
is a gate that produces clear=‘0’ when the desired final
value is reached (that is, when q3=q0=‘1’). This is
illustrated in Figure 14.9(a). Because two of the flip-
flops (q0 and q2) need no modifications, the dashed lines
connecting their clr inputs to the NAND gate are
optional. Notice also that only q0 and q3 need to be
connected to the NAND gate because in a sequential
binary counter no other state previous to 9 (=“1001”)
presents the same pattern of ‘1’s.

--- Page 677 ---
FIGURE 14.9 (a) Synchronous 0-to-9
counter using TFFs with clear (Example
14.2); (b) Programmable version (0-to-y
counter), where y3y2y1y0 is the minterm
corresponding to the desired final value (for
example, if y = 9 = “1001”, then y3y2y1y0 =
q3q2q1q0).
Part (b):
The advantage of this architecture is its versatility. The
same circuit can be used for any value of M. This is
illustrated in Figure 14.9(b), which shows a 0-to-y
counter, where y = y3y2y1y0 is the minterm
corresponding to the desired final value (for example,
y3y2y1y0=q3q2′q1′q0 when the final value is
y=“1001”=9).
Case 4 DFF-based synchronous modulo-M
counters
To construct a modulo-M synchronous counter with
DFFs instead of TFFs, any of the circuits of Figure 14.5
can be used but with some kind of d-control mechanism

--- Page 678 ---
added to it. Let us assume the most general case in
which the DFFs are just plain D-type flip-flops with no
special clear or enable ports. And, as an example, let us
consider again the 0-to-9 counter discussed above. The
situation is then the following:
Desired final value: q3q2q1q0 = “1001” (=9)
Natural next value: q3q2q1q0= “1010” (=10;
this is where the counter would go)
Desired next (initial) value: q3q2q1q0= “0000”
(= 0; this is where the counter must go)
In this list, we observe the following:
For q3: Its next value is ‘1’, but ‘0’ is wanted,
so its input must be forced to be d3=‘0’ when
the final value is reached (that is, when q3 =
q0 = ‘1’; note that again the ‘0’s need no
monitoring because there is no prior state in
which q3 = q0 = ‘1’ occurs).
For q2: Its next value is ‘0’, which coincides
with the desired value, so nothing needs to be
done.
For q1: Its next value is ‘1’, but ‘0’ is wanted.
Thus its input must be forced to be d1 = ‘0’
when q3 = q0 = ‘1’ occurs.
For q0: Its next value is ‘0’, which coincides
with the desired value, so nothing needs to be
done.
The construction of this input-control mechanism is
illustrated in the example below. However, similarly to
the previous case, it is important to observe that this

--- Page 679 ---
procedure, though very simple and practical, does not
lead necessarily to irreducible Boolean expressions.
This is because it does not take advantage of the of the
states that cannot occur (from 10 to 15), which could
lead to smaller expressions (this will be demonstrated in
Chapter 15, Example 15.4, using the finite-state-
machine approach).
EXAMPLE 14.3 SYNCHRONOUS 0-
TO-9 COUNTER WITH REGULAR
DFFS
Design a synchronous 0-to-9 counter using regular
DFFs.
SOLUTION
From the description above we know that d3 = d1 = ‘0’
must be produced when q3 = q0 = ‘1’. In Boolean terms,
dnew = dold when condition = FALSE or dnew = ‘0’
when condition = TRUE, where condition = q3 · q0. The
following expressions then result for d3 and d1, with the
values of d3old and d1old picked from the original
modulo-2N circuit (Figure 14.10(a)):
d3new = d3old · condition′ + ‘0’ · condition =
d3old · condition′
Hence d3new = d3old · (q3 · q0)′ = [q3 ⊕  (q2 ·
q1 · q0)] (q3 · q0)′ = q3 · q0′ + q3′ · q2 · q1 · q0
d1new = d1old · condition + ‘0’ · condition =
d1old · condition′
Hence d1new = d1old · (q3 · q0)′ = (q1 ⊕  q0) ·
(q3 · q0)′ = q1 · q0′ + q3′ · q1′ · q0

--- Page 680 ---
FIGURE 14.10 Synchronous 0-to-9
counter using regular DFFs (Example 14.3):
(a) Original modulo-2N counter (N = 4); (b)
Modifications needed to force d1 = ‘0’ and
d3 = ‘0’ when q3q2q1q0 = “1001” (= 9); (c)
Final circuit.
The complete circuit, with these modifications included,
is presented in Figure 14.10(c).
EXAMPLE 14.4 SYNCHRONOUS 0-
TO-9 COUNTER USING DFFS WITH
CLEAR
a. Design a synchronous 0-to-9 counter using
DFFs with a synchronous flip-flop clear port
(Figure 13.22(c)).
b. Discuss the advantages of this approach
over that in Example 14.3.
SOLUTION

--- Page 681 ---
Part (a):
Figure 14.11(a) shows the same modulo-24 (0-to-15)
counter of Figure 14.5(a) in which the DFFs do not
exhibit a flip-flop clear input. We know that for this
circuit to count only up to 9, some kind of zeroing
mechanism must be included. To do so, in Figure
14.11(b) an AND gate was introduced between the XOR
output and the DFF input, which allows the DFFs to be
synchronously cleared when the other input to the AND
gate is clear = ‘0’. From the previous example we know
that for the counter to count from 0 to 9, d1 = ‘0’ and d3
= ‘0’ must be produced when q3 = q0 = ‘1’. This,
however, does not mean that d0 and d2 cannot be zeroed
as well. Consequently, the general architecture of Figure
14.11(b) results, which is a programmable 0-to-y
counter, where y3 y2 y10 is again the minterm
corresponding to the desired final value, y. Because in
the present example it must count from 0 to 9, y3y2y1y0
= q3q2′q1′q0 should be employed because y = 9 =
“1001”.


--- Page 682 ---
FIGURE 14.11  (a) Synchronous 0-to-15
(modulo-2N) counter using regular DFFs; (b)
Programmable version (0-to-y counter),
where y3y2y1y0 is the minterm
corresponding to the desired final value (for
example, y3y2y1y0=q3q2q1q0 when
y=9=“1001”).
Part (b):
The advantage of this architecture is its versatility. Like
that in Example 14.2, by simply changing the
connections to y3y2y1y0 any 4-bit 0-to-y counter can be
obtained.
Case 5 Counters with nonzero initial state
In the discussions above, all modulo-M counters were
from 0 to M –1. We will consider now the case when
the initial state (m) is not zero, that is, the circuit counts
from m to M+m−1 (m>0). Though the general design
procedure is still the same as above, the following two
situations must be considered:
a. The number of flip-flops used in the
implementation is minimal.
b. The number of flip-flops is not minimal
(for example, it could be the same number as
if it were a 0-to-m + M − 1 counter).
Suppose, for example, that we need to design a 3-to-9
counter. This circuit has only M = 7 states, so ⌈ log2M⌉  =
3 flip-flops suffice. However, we can also implement it
as if it were a 0-to-9 counter, in which case ⌈ log2(m +
M) ⌉  = 4 flip-flops are needed. The advantage of (a) is
that it requires less flip-flops, but it also requires

--- Page 683 ---
additional combinational logic to convert the counter’s
output (3 bits) into the actual circuit output (4 bits),
which also causes additional time delay. In summary, in
high-performance designs, particularly when there is an
abundance of flip-flops (like in FPGAs, Chapter 18),
saving flip-flops is not necessarily a good idea. Both
situations are depicted in the examples that follow.
EXAMPLE 14.5 SYNCHRONOUS 3-
TO-9 COUNTER WITH FOUR DFFS
Design a synchronous 3-to-9 counter using four regular
DFFs.
SOLUTION
The situation is now the following:
Desired final value: q3 q2 q1 q0 = “1001” (=
9)
Natural next value: q3 q2 q1 q0= “1010” (=
10; this is where the counter would go)
Desired next value: q3 q2 q1 q0= “0011” (= 3;
this is where the counter must go)
In this list, we observe the following:
For q3: Its next value is ‘1’, but ‘0’ is wanted.
Thus its input must be forced to be d3 = ‘0’
when q3 = q0 = ‘1’.
For q2: Its next value is ‘0’, which coincides
with the desired value, so nothing needs to be
done.
For q1: Its next value is ‘1’, which coincides
with the desired value, so nothing needs to be
done.
For q0: Its next value is ‘0’, but ‘1’ is wanted.
Thus its input must be forced to be d0 = ‘1’
when q3 = q0 = ‘1’.

--- Page 684 ---
From the description above we know that d3 = ‘0’ and
d0 = ‘1’ must be produced when q3 = q0 = ‘1’. In
Boolean terms, d3new = d3old when condition = FALSE
or d3new = ‘0’ when condition = TRUE, where
condition = q3·q0; likewise, d0new = d0old when
condition = FALSE or d0new = ‘1’ when condition =
TRUE. The following expressions then result for d3 and
d0, with the values of d3old and d0old picked from the
original modulo-2N circuit (Figure 14.12(a)):
d3new = d3old · condition + ‘0’ · condition =
d3old · condition
Hence d3new = d3old · (q3 q0) = [q3 ⊕  (q2 ·
q1 · q0)] · (q3 · q0)′ = q3 · q0′ + q3′ q2 · q1 · q0
d0new = d0old · condition + ‘1’ · condition
Hence d0new =d0old · (q3 q0)′ +q3 · q0 =q0′ ·
(q3 · q0)′ +q3 q0 =q0+q3 (simplified using the
absorption theorem)
FIGURE 14.12 Synchronous 3-to-9
counter using four regular DFFs (Example
14.5): (a) Original modulo-2N counter (N =
4); (b) Final circuit, with modifications
introduced in d0 and d3 (gray areas).
The complete circuit, with these modifications included,
is presented in Figure 14.12(b).

--- Page 685 ---
EXAMPLE 14.6 SYNCHRONOUS 3-
TO-9 COUNTER WITH THREE DFFS
Design a synchronous 3-to-9 counter using the minimum
number of DFFs (that is, three).
SOLUTION
We need to design a 3-bit counter with M = 7 states then
convert its 3-bit output to the desired 4-bit output. A
regular 0-to-6 counter was chosen, thus resulting:
Desired final value: q2q1q0 = “110” (= 6)
Natural next value: q2q1q0= “111” (= 7; this is
where the counter would go)
Desired initial value: q2q1q0= “000” (= 0; this
is where the counter must go)
In this list, we observe the following:
For q2: Its next value is ‘1’, but ‘0’ is wanted.
Thus its input must be forced to be d2 = ‘0’
when the final value is reached (that is, when
q2 = q1 = ‘1’).
For q1: Same as above, so d1= ‘0’ is needed
when q2 = q1 = ‘1’.
For q0: Same as above, so d0= ‘0’ is needed
when q2 = q1 = ‘1’.
In summary, d2 = d1 = d0= ‘0’ must be produced when
q2q1q0=“110”. In Boolean terms, dnew = dold when
condition = FALSE or dnew = ‘0’ when condition =
TRUE, where condition = q2·q1. The following
expressions then result for d2, d1, and d0, with the
values of d2old, d1old, and d0old picked from the
original modulo-2N circuit (Figure 14.13(a)):
d2new = d2old · condition′ + ‘0’ · condition′ =
d2old · condition′

--- Page 686 ---
Hence d2new = d2old · (q2 q1) = [q2 ⊕  (q1 ·
q0)] · (q2 · q1)′ = q2 · q1′ + q2′ · q1 · q0
d1new = d1old · condition′ + ‘0’ condition =
d1old · condition′
Hence d1new = d1old · (q2 · q1)′ = (q1 ⊕  q0) ·
(q2 · q1)′ = q1′ · q0 + q2′ · q1 · q0′
d0new = d0old · condition′ + ‘0’ · condition =
d0old · condition′
Hence d0new = d0old · (q2 · q1)′ = q0′ · (q2 ·
q1)′ = q2 · q0′ + q1′ · q0


--- Page 687 ---
FIGURE 14.13 Synchronous 3-to-9
counter using the minimum number of DFFs
(Example 14.6): (a) Original modulo-2N
counter (N=3); (b) Modifications needed to
turn it into a 0-to-6 counter; (c) Counter with
modifications included (0-to-6 counter); (d)
Truth table and Karnaugh maps to convert
the 3-bit counter output into the desired 4-bit
output; (e) Conversion circuit.
This design is illustrated in Figure 14.13. In (a), the
original modulo-8 counter is depicted (extracted from
Figure 14.5). In (b), the modifications (equations above)
needed for it to count from 0 to 6 are shown. In (c), the
resulting counter circuit is presented. In (d), the truth
table and corresponding Karnaugh maps for the
conversion of the three counter outputs (q0, q1, q2) into
the desired four outputs (x0, x1, x2, x3) are shown, from
which we obtain:
The resulting circuit presented in (e). This is a good
example where the minimization of the number of flip-
flops is not advantageous because to save one DFF
substantial additional logic was needed, which also
causes the counter to be slower and possibly to also
consume more power.
Case 6 Large synchronous counters

--- Page 688 ---
The two main ways of constructing a large synchronous
counter are the following:
 With a serial enable structure: In this case,
either the circuit of Figure 14.3(b) or that of
Figure 14.5(b) can be used depending on
whether TFFs or DFFs are going to be
employed, respectively. Both of these
structures utilize a standard cell that is not
affected by the counter’s size.
 With a mixed parallel enable plus serial
enable structure: In this case, several blocks
are associated in series, each containing a
counter with parallel enable (typically with
four or so stages) like that in Figure 14.3(a) or
14.5(a), with such blocks interconnected
using a serial enable. This approach,
illustrated in Figure 14.14, is slightly faster
than that in (a), but the circuit consumes a
little more silicon space. Note that an
additional wire is needed for interstage
transmission of the serial enable signal (TIN –
TOUT). Recall also that the gate delay grows
with the fan-in, and note that the fan-in of the
last gate in Figure 14.14(a) is already 5.

--- Page 689 ---
FIGURE 14.14  Construction of large synchronous
counters using a serial-enable association of parallel-enable
blocks.
14.3 Asynchronous Counters
Asynchronous counters require less hardware space (and
generally also less power) than their synchro-nous
counterparts. However, due to their serial clock structure,
they are also slower. The following cases will be described:
Case 1: Asynchronous modulo-2N counters
Case 2: Asynchronous modulo-M counters
Case 1 Asynchronous modulo-2N counters
Figure 14.15 shows classical asynchronous full-scale
counter implementations. In Figure 14.15(a), all flip-
flops are TFFs, with no toggle-enable input (t). The
actual clock signal is applied only to the first flip-flop
and the output of each stage serves as input (clock) to
the next stage. This circuit (as well as all the others in

--- Page 690 ---
Figure 14.15) is a downward counter because it
produces q3q2q1q0={“1111” → “1110” → “1101” → …
→ “0000” → “1111” → …}, where q0 is again the
LSB. This sequence can be observed in the partial
timing diagram shown in Figure 14.15(d). Notice that
q0 is one TFF-delay behind clk, q1 is two TFF-delays
behind clk, and so on. In Figure 14.15(b), the most
common choice for the TFF’s internal structure is
depicted (DFF-based), which corresponds to that seen
in Figure 13.24(a). Finally, in Figure 14.15(c), the same
type of counter is shown but now with a counter-enable
input (ena), which is connected to the t (toggle-enable)
input of each TFF. When ena = ‘1’, the counter operates
as usual, but it stops counting and remains in the same
state when ena = ‘0’. These TFFs can be implemented
with any of the structures seen in Figure 13.24(b).

--- Page 691 ---
FIGURE 14.15  Asynchronous modulo-2N
downward counters: (a) Using TFFs without toggle-enable
input; (b) Showing the most common choice for the TFF’s
internal structure (DFF-based); (c) Same counter, now with
a global counter-enable (ena) input; (d) Partial timing
diagram.
As mentioned above, the counters of Figure 14.15 count
downward. To have them count upward, a few
alternatives are depicted in Figure 14.16, with TFFs
employed in the first two diagrams and DFFs in the last
two. In Figure 14.16(a), q′ is used instead of q to feed
the clock to the next stage. In Figure 14.16(b), negative-
edge TFFs are utilized. Equivalent circuits are shown in

--- Page 692 ---
Figures 14.16(c) and (d), but with DFFs instead of TFFs
(notice that the portions within dark boxes implement
TFFs).
FIGURE 14.16  Asynchronous modulo-2N upward
counters constructed with (a) and (b) TFFs or (c) and (d)
DFFs.
Case 2 Asynchronous modulo-M counters
The simplest way of causing an asynchronous counter
(Figure 14.16) to return to zero is by resetting all flip-
flops when output = M occurs (where M is the number
of states). This is the approach depicted earlier in Figure
14.7, which, as described in Case 3 of Section 14.2, is
not adequate for synchronous circuits because it
exhibits two major flaws.

--- Page 693 ---
What might make it acceptable here is that one of the
flaws does not occur in asynchronous counters due to
the clearly determined temporal relationship among the
output signals, which was already illus-trated in the
timing diagram of Figure 14.15(d), showing that q1 can
only change after q0, q2 after q1, q3 after q2, and so on.
Therefore, there is no risk of accidentally resetting the
flip-flops during state transitions. Then all that needs to
be done is to monitor the bits that must be ‘1’ when the
counter reaches the state immediately after the desired
final state (output = M). For example, if it is a 0-to 5
counter, then q2 and q1 must be monitored (with an
AND gate), because q2q1q0= “110” (=6) is the next
natural state.
Note, however, that one problem still remains with this
simplistic approach because the system will necessarily
enter the (undesired) output = M state, where it remains
for a very brief moment, thus causing a glitch at the
output before being reset to zero. In many applications,
this kind of glitch is not a problem, but if it is not
acceptable in a particular application, then one of the
reset mechanisms described for the synchronous
counters should be considered (at the expense of more
hardware). Recall that such a glitch does not occur
when it is a full-scale counter.
EXAMPLE 14.7 ASYNCHRONOUS 0-
TO-5 COUNTER
Design an asynchronous 0-to-5 counter and draw its
timing diagram. Assume that the propagation delays in
the flip-flops are tpCQ = 2 ns (from clk to q—see Figure

--- Page 694 ---
13.12) and tpRQ = 1 ns (from rst to q), and that in any
other gate it is tp = 1 ns.
SOLUTION
The circuit of Figure 14.16(b) was used with TFFs
equipped with a reset input. The resulting circuit is
depicted in Figure 14.17. An AND gate monitors q1 and
q2, producing rst = ‘1’ when q2q1q0 = “110” (= 6) is
reached, causing the counter to return to zero. The
corresponding timing diagram is included in Figure
14.17. As can be observed, this approach, though simple,
does exhibit a brief glitch when the output value is 6 (the
glitch occurs in q1). The time delays are depicted in the
inset, where the vertical lines are 1 ns apart (it takes 4 ns
for the glitch to occur and it lasts 2 ns).
FIGURE 14.17 Asynchronous 0-to-5
counter of Example 14.7.
14.4 Signal Generators

--- Page 695 ---
This section describes the generation of irregular square
waves, which constitutes a typical application for counters.
By definition, a signal generator is a circuit that takes the
clock as its main input and from it produces a predefined
glitch-free signal at the output.
The design technique described here is a simplified
procedure. In Chapter 15, a formal design technique, based
on finite state machines, will be studied, and in Chapter 23
such a technique will be combined with VHDL to allow the
construction of more complex signals. As will be shown, the
main drawback of a simplified procedure is that it is more
difficult to minimize the number of flip-flops. The overhead
in this design, however, is just one flip-flop, and the counter
employed in the implementation is a regular binary counter
(Sections 14.2 and 14.3).
An example of a signal generator is depicted in Figure 14.18.
The only input is clk, from which the signal called q must be
derived. Because q must stay low during three clock periods
and high during five periods (so T = 8T0), an eight-state
counter is needed. This means that there exists a circuit,
which employs only three flip-flops (because 23= 8), whose
MSB corresponds to the desired waveform. The problem is
that such a counter is not a regular (sequential) binary
counter because then the outputs would look like those in
Figure 14.3(c), where q2 is not equal to the desired signal, q.
One of the simplest solutions to circumvent this problem is
to still employ a regular binary counter, but then add an extra
flip-flop to convert its output into the desired shape.


--- Page 696 ---
FIGURE 14.18  Signal generator example.
This design technique can be summarized as follows:
Suppose that q has two time windows (as in Figure 14.18),
and that x and y are the counter values corresponding to the
end of the first and second time windows, respectively (for
example, x = 2 and y = 7). Take a regular (sequential) binary
0-to-y counter, then add an extra flip-flop to store q, whose
input must be d = ‘1’ when counter = x, d = ‘0’ when counter
= y, or d = q otherwise. This can be easily accomplished with
OR + AND gates for x and with NAND + AND gates for y as
illustrated in Example 14.8 below. Moreover, if the signal
generator must produce a wave-form with more than two
time windows, the extension of this procedure is
straightforward, as shown in Example 14.9.
Still referring to Figure 14.18, note that the actual values
when the circuit turns q high or low are not important, as far
as they are separated by five clock periods and the total
number of clock cycles is eight. In other words, 1 and 6
would also do, as would 3 and 0, etc. Another option would
be to construct a 0-to-4 counter that counts alternately from
0 to 2 and then from 0 to 4, but this would save at most one
flip-flop while requiring extra logic to operate the counter,
being therefore generally not recommended.
Finally, observe that in Figure 14.18 all transitions of q are at
the same (rising) edge of the clock, so that the generator is
said to be a single-edge circuit. Only single-edge generators
will be studied in this chapter. For the design of complex,
dual-edge circuits, a formal design procedure, utilizing finite
state machines, will be seen in Chapter 15, which also allows
the minimization of the number of flip-flops.

--- Page 697 ---
EXAMPLE 14.8 TWO-WINDOW SIGNAL
GENERATOR
Figure 14.19(a) depicts a signal q to be generated from the
clock, which has two time windows, the first with q = ‘0’ and
duration 10T0, and the second with q = ‘1’ and duration 20T0,
where T0 is the clock period. Design a circuit capable of
producing this signal.
FIGURE 14.19 Two-window signal generator of
Example 14.8.
SOLUTION
A 0-to-29 counter can be employed here (because the system
needs 30 states), whose output values of interest are listed in
Figure 14.19(b), showing x = “01001” (=9) and y =“11101”
(=29). Because the counter is a regular binary counter, its
design was already covered in Sections 14.2 and 14.3 of this
chapter. When the counter is available, obtaining q is very
simple, as shown in Figure 14.19(c). As mentioned before, an
extra DFF is needed to store q plus two pairs of gates. The OR
+ AND pair is used to process x, causing d = ‘1’ when the
counter reaches x, while the NAND + AND pair processes y,
producing d = ‘0’ when y is reached; in all other counter states,
d = q (see the truth table in Figure 14.19(c)). For x, all bits must
be monitored, including the ‘0’s; because x = “01001”,

--- Page 698 ---
q4′q3′q2′q1′q0 is the minterm to be processed (there are cases
when not all bits need to be monitored, but then the whole truth
table must be examined to verify that possibility). For y, only
the ‘1’s are needed (because y is the counter’s last value, so no
prior value will exhibit the same pattern of ‘1’s); because y =
“11101”, then q4q3q2q0 must be monitored. Finally, notice that
in fact the gate processing y in Figure 14.19(c) is not needed
because this information is already available in the counter (not
shown).
Note: It will be shown in Chapter 15 (Example 15.6) that an
“irregular” counter (that is, one whose sequence of states is
neither sequential nor Gray or any other predefined encoding
style) suffices to solve this problem (in other words, the circuit
can be implemented without the extra DFF shown in Figure
14.19(c)). However, we are establishing here a systematic
solution for this kind of problem, so the extra flip-flop is indeed
necessary.
EXAMPLE 14.9 FOUR-WINDOW SIGNAL
GENERATOR
Figure 14.20(a) depicts a signal, q, to be generated from the
clock, which has four time windows, the first with q= ‘0’ and
duration 17T0, the second with q= ‘1’ and duration 8T0, the
third with q = ‘0’ and duration 7T0, and the last with q=‘1’ and
duration 28T0. Design a circuit capable of producing this
signal.

--- Page 699 ---
FIGURE 14.20 Four-window signal generator of
Example 14.9.
SOLUTION
A sequential 0-to-59 binary counter can be employed in this
case, whose main outputs are listed in Figure 14.20(b), showing
x1 = “010000” (=16), y1 = “011000” (=24), x2 = “011111” (=
31), and y2 = “111011” (= 59). The solution is similar to that in
the previous example, except for the fact that now two AND
gates are needed for x (one for x1 and the other for x2), which
guarantee d = ‘1’ when those values are reached by the counter,
and two NAND gates are needed for y (for y1 and y2), which
guarantee d = ‘0’ when the respective values occur in the
counter (see the circuit and truth table in Figure 14.20(c)).
Again, for all control values (x1, x2, y1, y2) all bits must be
monitored, including the ‘0’s, with the exception of y2, for
which only the ‘1’s are needed (recall that this information is
already available in the counter anyway, so this gate is actually
not needed). With respect to monitoring all bits in the other
three gates, there are cases when not all are needed, but then
the whole truth table would have to be examined to verify that
possibility.

--- Page 700 ---
14.5 Frequency Dividers
A clock (or frequency) divider is a particular type of two-
window signal generator, which takes the clock as input and
produces at the output a signal whose period (T) is a multiple
of the clock period (T0). Depending on the application, the
phase of the output signal might be required to be symmetric
(duty cycle = 50%). The design procedure described here is
again a simplified procedure, so the same observations made
in the previous section are valid here (like the need for an
extra flip-flop and the use of finite state machines to
minimize their number). However, contrary to Section 14.4,
dual-edge generators will be included in this section, where
the following five cases are described:
Case 1: Divide-by-2N
Case 2: Divide-by-M with asymmetric phase
Case 3: Divide-by-M with symmetric phase
Case 4: Circuits with multiple dividers
Case 5: High-speed frequency dividers (prescalers)
Case 1 Divide-by-2N
To divide the clock frequency by 2N (where N is a
positive integer), the simplest solution is to use a
regular (sequential) modulo-2N binary counter (Sections
14.2 and 14.3), whose MSB will automatically
resemble the desired waveform. In this case, the
number of flip-flops will be minimal, and the output
signal will exhibit symmetric phase (duty cycle = 50 %)
automatically (see Figures 14.3(c) and 14.15(d)).
Case 2 Divide-by-M with asymmetric phase

--- Page 701 ---
To divide the clock by M (where M is a nonpower-of-2
integer), any modulo-M counter can be employed,
which can be one of those seen in Sections 14.2 and
14.3 or any other, with the only restriction that it must
possess exactly M states. In most implementations an
output with asymmetric phase will result, as is the case
when the counter is a sequential counter.
This fact is illustrated in Figure 14.21. In Figure
14.21(a), a binary 0-to-4 counter is used to divide the
clock by 5, while in Figure 14.21(b) a binary 0-to-5
counter is employed to divide it by 6. Notice that the
MSB (q2) in both cases exhibits asymmetric phase.
This, however, is not a problem in many applications,
particularly when all circuits are activated at the same
clock edge (that is, all at the rising edge or all at the
falling edge).
FIGURE 14.21  Timing diagram for binary (a) 0-to-
4 (M = 5) and (b) 0-to-5 (M = 6) counters.
Case 3 Divide-by-M with symmetric phase
When phase symmetry is required, a more elaborate
solution is needed. We will consider the most general
case, in which M is odd (for M = even, see Exercise
14.39). One way of designing this circuit is based on

--- Page 702 ---
the timing diagram of Figure 14.22, where M = 9. Note
that the desired signal (q) has transitions at both clock
edges, so this is a dual-edge signal generator.
FIGURE 14.22  Timing diagram for a divide-by-9
with symmetric phase.
One way of obtaining q is by first generating the signal
called qa, which stays low during (M – 1)/2 clock cycles
and high during (M+ 1)/2 clock periods. A copy of this
signal, called qb, is then created, which is one-half of a
clock cycle behind qa. By ANDing these two signals,
the desired output (q=qa · qb) results. Note that if qa is
glitch-free, then q is automatically guaranteed to be
glitch-free because qa and qb cannot change at the same
time (they operate at different clock edges).
This design approach can then be summarized as
follows: Suppose that M is odd and that no dual-edge
DFFs are available. Take a regular (sequential) positive-
edge 0-to-(M – 1) counter (Sections 14.2 and 14.3) and
create a two-window signal (Section 14.4) that stays
low during (M – 1)/2 clock cycles and high during (M +
1)/2 cycles (qa in Figure 14.22). Make a copy of this
signal into another DFF, operating at the falling edge of
the clock (signal qb in Figure 14.22). Finally, AND
these two signals to produce the desired output (q = qa ·

--- Page 703 ---
qb). This design technique is illustrated in the example
below.
EXAMPLE 14.10 DIVIDE-BY-9 WITH
SYMMETRIC PHASE
Design a circuit that divides fclk by 9 and produces an
output with 50% duty cycle.
SOLUTION
The timing diagram for this circuit is that of Figure
14.22. Because M = 9, a regular (sequential) 0-to-8
counter can be employed, from which a signal that stays
low during four clock periods and high during five (qa)
can be easily obtained (as in Example 14.8). Such a
signal generator is shown within the dark box in Figure
14.23 with the OR + AND pair processing x (= 3 =
“0011” in this case, so q3′q2′q1q0 must be monitored)
and the NAND + AND pair processing y (= 8 = “1000”,
so q3q2′q1′q0′ must be monitored; recall, however, that
only the ‘1’s are needed in the counter’s last value, so
the NAND can be replaced with an inverter). This circuit
operates at the rising clock edge and produces qa. A
delayed (by one half of a clock period) copy of this
signal is produced by the second DFF, which operates at
the negative transition of the clock. By ANDing these
two signals, the desired waveform (q) results, which is
guaranteed to be glitch-free because qa and qb are
glitch-free (they come directly from flip-flops), and they
can never change at the same time (we will discuss
glitches in more detail in Chapter 15—see, for example,
Section 15.3).

--- Page 704 ---
FIGURE 14.23 Divide-by-9 circuit with
symmetric phase (0-to-8 counter not shown;
signal generator is within dark area).
Case 4 Circuits with multiple dividers
In certain applications a cascade of frequency dividers
are needed. This is the case, for example, when we need
to measure time. Suppose, for example, that we need to
construct a timer that displays seconds. If fclk= 1 Hz,
then a simple counter would do. This, of course, is
never the case, because fclk is invariably in the multi-
MHz or GHz range (for accuracy and practical
purposes). The classical approach in this case is to use
two (or more) counters with the first employed to
reduce the frequency down to 1 Hz and the other(s) to
provide the measurement of seconds. As will be shown
in the example below, what the first counter in fact
produces is a 1 Hz clock when it is asynchronous or a 1
Hz enable when it is synchronous.
EXAMPLE 14.11 TIMER
Present a diagram for a circular timer that counts
seconds from 00 to 59. Assume that the clock frequency
is fclk = F. The output should be displayed using two
SSDs (seven-segment displays—see Example 11.4).
SOLUTION

--- Page 705 ---
This is another application of frequency dividers
(counters), for which two solutions are presented, one
asynchronous and the other synchronous (mixed
solutions are also possible).
i. Asynchronous circuit: If the clock frequency
is not too high (so maximum performance is
not required), a completely asynchronous
circuit can be used, as depicted in Figure
14.24(a), where the output (MSB) of one stage
serves as clock to the next. The role of
counter1 is to reduce the frequency to 1 Hz,
while the other two counters comprise a BCD
(binary-coded decimal, Section 2.4) counter,
with counter2 running from 0 to 9 (hence
counting seconds) and counter3 from 0 to 5
(counting tens of seconds). The output of
counter2 has 4 bits, while that of counter3 has
3 bits. Both are converted to 7-bit signals by
the SSD drivers (BCD-to-SSD converters) to
feed the segments of the corresponding SSDs
(see Example 11.4).
ii. Synchronous circuit: This solution is
depicted in Figure 14.24(b). Because now all
counters are synchronous, the control is no
longer done over the clock; instead, each
counter must generate an enable signal to
control the next circuit. Counter1 must
produce ena1 = ‘1’ when its state is F – 1
(recall that it is a 0-to-F – 1 counter), thus
causing the next circuit (counter2) to be
enabled during one out of every F clock
periods. Likewise, counter2 must produce
ena2 = ‘1’ when its state is 9 (it is a 0-to-9
counter). These signals (ena1 and ena2) are
then ANDed to produce the actual enable for
counter3, causing it to be enabled during one
out of every 10F clock periods.

--- Page 706 ---
FIGURE 14.24 00-to-59-second timer: (a)
Asynchronous; (b) Synchronous.
Note that the timer above is a circular timer (when 59 is
reached it restarts automatically from zero). From a
practical point of view, additional features are generally
needed, like the inclusion of a stop/reset button, an
alarm when 59s (or another value) is reached,
programmability for the final value, etc. Although these
features are not always simple to add when designing
the circuit “by-hand,” it will be shown that with VHDL
it is straightforward (see Section 22.3).
Case 5 High-speed frequency dividers
(prescalers)
When very high speed is needed, special design
techniques must be employed, which are discussed
separately in the next section.
14.6 PLL and Prescalers

--- Page 707 ---
PLL (phase locked loop) circuits are employed for clock
multiplication and clock filtration, among other applications.
Even though it is not a completely digital circuit, its
increasing presence in high-performance digital systems
makes its inclusion in digital courses indispensable. For
instance, modern FPGAs (Section 18.4) are fabricated with
several PLLs.
14.6.1 Basic PLL
A basic PLL is depicted in Figure 14.25, which
generates a clock whose frequency (fout) is higher than
that of the input (reference) clock (fin). The circuit
operates as follows. The VCO (voltage-controlled
oscillator) is an oscillator whose frequency is controlled
by an external DC voltage. When operating alone, it
generates a clock whose frequency is near the desired
value, fout. This frequency is divided by M in the
prescaler, resulting floop = fout/M, which might be near
fin, but is neither precise nor stable. These two signals
(floop and fin) are compared by the PFD (phase-
frequency detector). If floop < fin, then the PFD
commands the charge pump to increase the voltage
applied to the VCO (this voltage is first filtered by a
low-pass loop filter to attain a stable operation), thus
causing fout to increase and, consequently, increasing
floop as well. On the other hand, if floop > fin, then the
opposite happens, that is, the PFD commands the
charge pump to reduce the voltage sent to the VCO,
hence reducing fout and, consequently, floop. In
summary, the process stabilizes when the output
frequency is “locked” at fout = Mfin. A PLL can be used
as a simple ×2 multiplier or with much larger

--- Page 708 ---
multiplication factors. For example, in Bluetooth radios,
fin = 1 MHz and fout= 2.4 GHz, so the multiplication
factor is M = 2400.
FIGURE 14.25  Basic PLL.
The internal construction of the PFD and charge pump
is shown in Figure 14.26(a). fin and floop are con-nected
to two positive-edge DFFs in the PFD. At the rising
edge of fin, up =‘1’ occurs. Likewise, at the rising edge
of floop, down = ‘1’ happens. After both signals (up,
down) are high, the AND gate produces a ‘1’ that resets
both flip-flops but only after a certain time delay, D.
This procedure is illustrated in Figure 14.26(b). Note
that initially floop < fin, so up = ‘1’ eventually occurs
earlier than down = ‘1’ (that is, up stays active longer
than down). The up and down signals control two
switches in the charge pump. When up = ‘1’ and down
= ‘0’ the upper current source charges the capacitor, C,
increasing the voltage sent to the VCO. On the other
hand, when up = ‘0’ and down = ‘1’, the lower current
source discharges the capacitor, hence decreasing the
control voltage. An additional RC branch is shown as
part of the low-pass loop filter.

--- Page 709 ---
FIGURE 14.26  (a) Internal PFD and charge pump
details; (b) Illustration of the frequency (and phase) locking
procedure (initially, floop < fin).
14.6.2 Prescaler
The ÷M block in Figure 14.25 normally operates at a
high frequency, hence requiring a special design
technique. Such a high-speed, specially designed
frequency divider is called prescaler. (Note: Other
definitions also exist, like the use of the words prescaler
and postscaler to designate dividers placed outside the
PLL circuit, that is, before and after it, respectively.)
Observe, however, that only the DFFs in the initial
stages of the prescaler must be specially designed
because when the frequency is reduced down to a few
hundred MHz, conventional flip-flops can be employed
in the remaining stages (which are normally
asynchronous).

--- Page 710 ---
DFFs were studied in Sections 13.4–13.9 Section 13.5
Section 13.6 Section 13.7 Section 13.8 Section 13.9. As
mentioned there, prescalers operating with input
frequencies in the 5 GHz range [Shu02, Ali05, Yu05]
have been successfully constructed using TSPC circuits
(Figures 13.17(a)–(c)) and state of the art CMOS
technology. For higher frequencies, SCL and ECL flip-
flops are still the natural choices, in which case the
transistors are fabricated using advanced techniques,
like those described in Sections 8.7 and 9.8 (GaAs,
SiGe, SOI, strained silicon, etc.). For example, pre-
scalers operating over 15 GHz have been obtained with
S-SCL (Figure 13.17(h)) [Ding05, Sanduleanu05], over
30 GHz with SCL (Figure 13.17(h)) [Kromer06,
Heydari06], and over 50 GHz with ECL flip-flops
(Figure 13.17(g)) [Griffith06, Wang06].
Besides the DFFs, another concern is with the inter-
DFF propagation delays, which are minimized by using
as few gates as possible. Moreover, whenever possible,
such gates are inserted into the flip-flops (that is, are
combined with the DFF’s circuit at the transistor level).
The inter-DFF connections are illustrated in Figure
14.27(a), which shows a divide-by-8 circuit with only
one gate, with fan-in = 1, in the feedback path, which is
as simple as it can get (the corresponding timing
diagram is shown in Figure 14.27(b), where, for
simplicity, the delays between the clock edges and the
transitions that they provoke were neglected). With a
slight modification, this circuit is turned into a divide-
by-7 (Figure 14.27(c)), where again only one gate is
observed in the feedback path (though now with fan-in
= 2). These two circuits are combined in Figure
14.27(d) to produce a programmable (through MC

--- Page 711 ---
(mode control)) divide-by-7/8 circuit (the widely used
notation 7/8 can be misleading; it means “7 or 8,” not
“7 over 8”). This last kind of circuit is referred to as
dual-modulus prescaler.
FIGURE 14.27  (a) M = 8 prescaler and (b) its
timing diagram; (c) M = 7 prescaler; (d) Dual-modulus
prescaler (M = 7 when MC = ‘1’, M = 8 when MC = ‘0’).
Note also that the number of states in this kind of
counter is much smaller than 2N (where N is the number
of flip-flops). Indeed, it is just 2N when M is even, or
2N – 1 when M is odd. Therefore, 
M/2
 flip-flops are
needed to implement a divide-by-M circuit. This can be
confirmed in the timing diagram of Figure 14.27(b),
relative to the circuit for M = 8 (Figure 14.27(a)), where
each signal starts repeating itself after eight clock
pulses. As can be also seen, all bits, not only the last,
are fclk/8, and all exhibit symmetric phase. However, for
M = odd, the phase is always asymmetric, with all bits
staying low during (M – 1)/2 clock cycles and high
during (M + 1)/2 clock periods (Exercise 14.48).

--- Page 712 ---
Because only the initial stages of the prescaler must
operate at very-high frequency, the overall circuit is
normally broken into two parts, one containing the high
speed section (always synchronous) and the other
containing the remaining stages (normally
asynchronous). This is depicted in Figure 14.28(a),
where the first block is a synchronous dual-modulus
divide-by-M1/(M1+ 1) counter and the second is an
asynchronous divide-by-M2 counter (where M2 is a
power of 2, so each stage is simply a divide-by-2, that
is, a DFF operating as a TFF). The resulting circuit is a
divide-by-M/(M + 1) prescaler, where M = M1M2.
FIGURE 14.28  (a) Typical approach to the
construction of dual-modulus prescalers (the circuit is
broken into two sections, the first synchronous, high speed,
the second asynchronous); (b) Divide-by-32/33 prescaler
(M = 32 if MC = ‘1’, M = 33 if MC = ‘0’).
A divide-by-32/33 prescaler, implemented using the
technique described above, is shown in Figure 14.28(b).
The first block was constructed in a way similar to that
in Figure 14.27, while the second is simply an
asynchronous 0-to-7 counter (see Figure 14.16(d)). In
this case, M1 = 4 and M2 = 8, so M = M1M2 = 32. The

--- Page 713 ---
circuit operates as follows. Suppose that MC= ‘0’; then
every time the second counter’s output is “000” it
produces X= ‘1’, which “inserts” the third DFF of the
first counter into the circuit, causing that circuit to
divide the clock by 5. During the other seven states of
the second counter (that is, “001”, “010”, …, “111”),
node X remains low, which “removes” the third DFF of
the first counter from the circuit (because then Y= ‘1’),
causing that circuit to divide the clock by 4. In
summary, the synchronous counter divides the clock by
5 once and by 4 seven times, resulting in a divide-by-33
operation. When MC = ‘1’ is employed, X stays
permanently low, in which case the synchronous circuit
always divides the clock by 4. Therefore, because the
second counter divides the resulting signal always by 8,
a divide-by-32 operation results.
14.6.3 Programmable PLL
In many applications, the PLL needs to generate a
programmable frequency instead of a fixed one.
This is the case, for example, in multichannel radio
systems for wireless data communication. The
separation between the channels (which is also the
separation between the programmable frequencies)
defines the PLL resolution. Suppose, for example,
that the output frequency is in the 2.4 GHz range
and that the channels must be 1 MHz apart. In this
case, the PLL resolution has to be 1 MHz. This
parameter defines the value of fin (because fout = M
· fin, where M is an integer, fin has to be either 1
MHz or an integer divisor of 1 MHz).

--- Page 714 ---
A programmable PLL is depicted in Figure 14.29,
which has two major differences compared to the
basic PLL of Figure 14.25. The first difference is
at the input. Because the frequency of the system
clock (fsys) is normally higher than that of the
needed reference (fin = 1 MHz in the present
example), an extra (low frequency) divider (R) is
necessary to produce fin. The second difference is
the presence of an additional counter (called
counter AB) after the prescaler. This counter
divides the frequency by B, producing a signal
(MC) that stays low during A cycles and high
during B – A cycles, where A and B are
programmable parameters (note that this is simply
a two-window signal generator, studied in Section
14.4). The waveform at the bottom of Figure 14.29
illustrates the type of signal expected at the output
of counter AB, and it indicates ranges of
programmability for its parameters (A, B). Because
the prescaler divides its input by M + 1 while MC
= ‘0’, and by M while M = ‘1’, the total division
ratio, MT = fout/floop, is now MT = A(M + 1) + (B –
A)(M) = B · M + A. Recall also that fin = fsys/R, and
when locked floop = fin. In summary:
fout = (B · M + A)fin = (B · M + A)(fsys/R)

--- Page 715 ---
FIGURE 14.29  Programmable PLL.
For example, with M = 32 (that is, a divide-by-
32/33 prescaler) and 7 bits for counter AB, with A
programmable from 0 to 31 and B programmable
from 72 to 80, the whole range 2.3 GHz < fout <
2.6 GHz can be covered in steps of 1 MHz
(assuming that fin = 1 MHz).
14.7 Pseudo-Random Sequence Generators
The generation of pseudo-random bit sequences is
particularly useful in communication and computing
systems. An example of application is in the construction of
data scramblers (the use of scramblers was seen in Chapter
6, with detailed circuits shown in the next section) for either
spectrum whitening or as part of an encryption system. In
this type of application, the sequence must be pseudo-
random, otherwise the original data would not be
recoverable.
Pseudo-random sequences are normally generated using a
circuit called linear-feedback shift register (LFSR). As
illustrated in Figure 14.30(a), it consists simply of a tapped
circular shift register with the taps feeding a modulo-2 adder
(XOR gate) whose output is fed back to the first flip-flop.

--- Page 716 ---
The shift register must start from a nonzero state so the
initialization can be done, for example, by presetting all flip-
flops to ‘1’ (note in Figure 14.30(a) that the reset signal is
connected to the preset input of all DFFs), in which case the
sequence produced by the circuit is that shown in Figure
14.30(b) (d = … 0001001101011110 …). Because the list in
Figure 14.30(b) contains all N-bit vectors (except for
“0000”), the circuit is said to be a maximal-length generator.
Figure 14.30 also shows, in (c), a simplified representation
for the circuit in (a); this type of representation was
introduced in Sections 4.11 and 4.13 and will again be
employed in the next section.
FIGURE 14.30  (a) Four-stage LFSR-based pseudo-
random sequence generator with polynomial 1 + x3 + x4; (b)
Corresponding truth table; (c) Simplified representation depicting
the flip-flops as simple blocks and the XOR gate as a modulo-2
adder.
Any pseudo-random sequence generator of this type is
identified by means of a characteristic polynomial. For the
case in Figure 14.30, the polynomial is 1 + x3 + x4 because
the taps are derived after the third and fourth registers.

--- Page 717 ---
Examples of other characteristic polynomials are given in
Figure 14.31.
FIGURE 14.31  Examples of characteristic polynomials for
LFSR-based pseudo-random sequence generators.
EXAMPLE 14.12 PSEUDO-RANDOM
SEQUENCE GENERATOR
Consider the 4-bit pseudo-random sequence generator of Figure
14.30. The data contained in the accompanying truth table was
obtained using “1111” as the LFSR’s initial state. Suppose that
now a different initial state (= “1000”) is chosen. Show that the
overall sequence produced by the circuit is still the same.
SOLUTION
Starting with “1000”, the new sequence is {8, 4, 2, 9, 12, 6, 11,
5, 10, 13, 14, 15, 7, 3, 1, 8, …}. Since the previous sequence
was {15, 7, 3, 1, 8, 4, 2, 9, 12, 6, 11, 5, 10, 13, 14, 15, …}, they
are indeed circularly equal.
14.8 Scramblers and Descramblers

--- Page 718 ---
As mentioned in Sections 6.1 and 6.9, scramblers are circuits
that pseudo-randomly change the values of some bits in a
data block or stream with the purpose of “whitening” its
spectrum (that is, spread it so that no strong spectral
component will exist, thus reducing electromagnetic
interference) or to introduce security (as part of an
encryption procedure). The pseudo-randomness is normally
accomplished using an LFSR circuit (described in the
previous section). In this case, a scrambler is just an LFSR
plus an additional modulo-2 adder (XOR gate), and it is
specified using the LFSR’s characteristic polynomial.
There are two types of LFSR-based scramblers, called
additive and multiplicative (recursive) scramblers. Both are
described below, along with their corresponding
descramblers.
14.8.1 Additive Scrambler-Descrambler
Additive scramblers are also called synchronous
(because they require the initial state of the scrambler
and descrambler to be the same) or nonrecursive
(because they do not have feedback loops). A circuit of
this type is shown in Figure 14.32(a), where a
simplified representation similar to that in Figure
14.30(c) was employed. Its characteristic polynomial
(which is the LFSR’s polynomial) is 1 + x9 + x11
because the taps are connected at the output of registers
9 and 11. This is the scrambler used in the 100Base-TX
inter-face described in Section 6.1, which repeats its
sequence after 2N – 1 = 2047 bits.

--- Page 719 ---
FIGURE 14.32  (a) Additive scrambler with
polynomial 1 + x9 + x11 used in the Ethernet 100Base-TX
interface and (b) corresponding descrambler.
Note that the LFSR is connected to the data stream by
means of just an additional modulo-2 adder (XOR
gate), where x(n) represents the data to be scrambled (at
time n), k(n) represents the “key” produced by the
LFSR, and c(n) represents the scrambled codeword.
The corresponding descrambler is shown in Figure
14.32(b), whose circuit is exactly the same as that of the
scrambler.
Physically speaking, the circuit of Figure 14.32(a)
simply causes the value of a bit in the main data stream
(x) to be flipped when the LFSR produces a ‘1’.
Therefore, if the circuit of Figure 14.32(b) is
synchronized with that of Figure 14.32(a), it will cause
the same bits to flip again, hence returning them to their
original values.
Formally, the recovery of x(n) can be shown as follows.
At time n, c(n) = x(n) ⊕  k(n). Because k(n) = k(n – 9) ⊕
k(n – 11), c(n) = x(n) ⊕  k(n – 9) ⊕  k(n – 11) results. At
the descrambler, y(n) = c(n) ⊕  k(n) is computed.

--- Page 720 ---
Assuming that the two circuits are synchronized, y(n) =
c(n) ⊕  k(n – 9) k(n – 11) results, hence y(n) = x(n) ⊕
k(n – 9) ⊕  k(n – 11) ⊕  k(n – 9) ⊕  k(n – 11) = x(n).
The disadvantage of this approach over that below is
that synchronism is required (that is, both ends must
start from the same initial state), which in practice is
achieved by sending a sequence of known symbols. For
example, in the Ethernet 100Base-TX interface
(introduced in Section 6.1), where this particular circuit
is employed, synchronism occurs after a sequence of
∼ 20 idle symbols are sent.
14.8.2 Multiplicative Scrambler-Descrambler
Multiplicative scramblers are also called asynchronous
(because they do not require LFSR synchronization) or
recursive (because they have a feedback loops). A
scrambler-descrambler pair of this type is shown in
Figure 14.33, again employing the LFSR with
characteristic polynomial 1 + x9 + x11.


--- Page 721 ---
FIGURE 14.33  (a) Multiplicative scrambler with
polynomial 1 + x9 + x11 and (b) corresponding
descrambler.
The proof that y(n) = x(n) is as follows. At time n, c(n)
= x(n) ⊕  k(n). Because k(n) = c(n – 9) ⊕  c(n – 11), c(n)
= x(n) ⊕  c(n – 9) ⊕  c(n – 11) results at the scrambler’s
output. At the descrambler, y(n) = c(n) ⊕  k(n) is
computed. Because k(n) = c(n – 9) ⊕  c(n – 11), y(n) =
c(n) ⊕  k(n – 9) ⊕  k(n – 11) results, hence y(n) = x(n) ⊕
c(n – 9) ⊕  c(n – 11) ⊕  c(n – 9) ⊕  c(n – 11) = x(n).
This pair is self-synchronizing, meaning that they do
not need to start from the same initial state. However,
this process (self-synchronization) might take up to N
bits (clock cycles), so the first N values of y(n) should
be discarded. The disadvantage of this approach is that
errors are multiplied by T + 1, where T is the number of
taps (T = 2 in Figure 14.33). Therefore, if one bit is
flipped by noise in the channel during transmission, 3
bits will be wrong after descrambling with the circuit of
Figure 14.33(b). It is important to mention also that
when the errors are less than N bits apart, less than T +
1 errors per incorrect bit might result because the
superposition of errors might cause some of the bits to
be (unintentionally) corrected.
EXAMPLE 14.13 MULTIPLICATIVE
SCRAMBLER-DESCRAMBLER
a. Sketch a circuit for a multiplicative
scrambler-descrambler pair with polynomial 1
+ x3 + x4.
b. With the scrambler starting from “0000” and
the descrambler from state “1111” (hence

--- Page 722 ---
different initial states), process the data stream
“101100010110” (starting from the left) and
check whether y = x occurs (recall that it might
take N clock cycles for the circuits to self-
synchronize).
c. Suppose now that an error occurs during
transmission in the sixth bit of the scrambled
code-word. Descramble it and show that now
T + 1 = 3 errors result.
SOLUTION
Part (a):
The multiplicative scrambler-descrambler pair with
polynomial 1 + x3 +x4 is shown in Figure 14.34(a).
FIGURE 14.34 Multiplicative scrambler-
descrambler pair with polynomial 1 + x3 +
x4 of Example 14.13; (b) The codeword c =
“101011100100” is produced by the
scrambler when the data sequence is x =
“101100010110”, with “0000” as the initial
state; (c) Descrambling with initial state
“1111” produces y = x after the first 4 bits;

--- Page 723 ---
(d) An error was introduced in the 6th bit of
the codeword, which became T + 1 = 3 errors
after descrambling (errors are indicated with
circles).
Part (b):
The scrambler operation is summarized in the table of
Figure 14.34(b), where the codeword c =
“101011100100” is produced when the data sequence is
x = “101100010110”, using “0000” as the initial state.
The descrambler operation, with initial state “1111”, is
summarized in the table of Figure 14.34(c), where y = x
occurs after the first N = 4 bits.
Part (c):
The descrambling in this case is depicted in Figure
14.34(d), again with “1111” as the initial state. An error
was introduced in the sixth bit of the received codeword,
which became T + 1 = 3 errors after descrambling (the
errors are indicated with circles).
14.9 Exercises
1. Circular shift register
Draw a diagram for a circular SR whose rotating
sequence is “00110” (see Figure 14.2(c)).
2. SR timing analysis
Suppose that the propagation delay from clk to q in
the DFFs employed to construct the SR of Figure
14.2(a) is tpCQ = 5 ns. Assuming that the circuit is
submitted to the signals depicted in Figure E14.2,
where the clock period is 30 ns, draw the resulting
output waveforms (adopt the sim-plified timing
diagram style of Figure 4.8(b)).
3. Event counter

--- Page 724 ---
FIGURE E14.2
Consider the waveform x depicted in Figure E14.3.
How can we design a circuit that counts all events
that occur on x (that is, rising plus falling edges)?
(Hint: Think about who could be the LSB).
4. Synchronous 0-to-31 counter with TFFs
a. Draw a circuit for a synchronous 0-to-31
counter with parallel enable using regular
TFFs.
b. Repeat the design above, this time with
serial enable.
5. Synchronous 0-to-31 counter with DFFs
a. Draw a circuit for a synchronous 0-to-31
counter with parallel enable using regular
DFFs.
b. Repeat the design above, this time with
serial enable.
6. Synchronous 0-to-255 counter with TFFs
FIGURE E14.3

--- Page 725 ---
Draw a circuit for a synchronous 0-to-255 counter
with serial enable using regular TFFs.
7. Synchronous 0-to-255 counter with DFFs
Draw a circuit for a synchronous 0-to-255 counter
with serial enable using regular DFFs.
8. Synchronous 0-to-4 counter with TFFs
a. Design a synchronous 0-to-4 binary
counter using regular TFFs (see Example
14.1).
b. Draw a timing diagram for your circuit
(consider that the propagation delays are
negligible).
9. Synchronous 0-to-4 counter with DFFs
a. Design a synchronous 0-to-4 binary
counter using regular DFFs (see Example
14.3).
b. Draw a timing diagram for your circuit
(consider that the propagation delays are
negligible).
10. Synchronous 0-to-4 counter using DFFs
with clear
a. Design a synchronous 0-to-4 binary
counter using DFFs with a flip-flop clear
port (see Example 14.4).
b. Draw a timing diagram for your circuit
(consider that the propagation delays are
negligible).
11. Synchronous 2-to-6 counter with DFFs
a. Design a synchronous 2-to-6 binary
counter using regular DFFs (see Example
14.5).

--- Page 726 ---
b. Draw a timing diagram for your circuit
(consider that the propagation delays are
negligible).
12. Synchronous 1-to-255 counter with DFFs
Design a synchronous 1-to-255 sequential counter
with serial enable using regular DFFs.
13. Synchronous 8-to-15 counter with four
DFFs
Design a synchronous 8-to-15 sequential counter
using four regular DFFs (see Example 14.5).
14. Synchronous 8-to-15 counter with three
DFFs
Repeat the design above using the minimum number
of DFFs (see Example 14.6).
15. Synchronous 20-to-25 counter with five
DFFs
a. Design a synchronous 20-to-25 counter
using five regular DFFs (see Example 14.5).
b. Draw a timing diagram for your circuit
(consider that the propagation delays are
negligible).
16. Synchronous 20-to-25 counter with three
DFFs
a. Design a synchronous 20-to-25 counter
using the minimum number of DFFs.
b. Is this circuit faster or slower than that in
the previous exercise?
c. How would you design it if it were a
2000-to-2005 counter?
17. Synchronous 0-to-1023 counter with serial
enable

--- Page 727 ---
Draw a circuit for a synchronous 0-to-1023 binary
counter with serial enable using regular DFFs.
18. Synchronous 0-to-1023 counter with parallel
enable
Repeat the exercise above, this time with parallel
enable. However, limit the number of DFFs per block
to four (so more than one block will be needed—see
Figure 14.14).
19. Synchronous counter with enable #1
Figure E14.19 shows the same synchronous counter
of Figure 14.3(a), whose timing diagram is in Figure
14.3(c). The only difference is that now the toggle-
enable port (t) of the first TFF has an enable (ena)
signal connected to it.
a. Is this little modification enough to
control the counter, causing it to behave as a
regular counter when ena = ‘1’ or remain
stopped when ena = ‘0’? If so, is this
simplification valid also for the cir-cuit in
Figure 14.14(a), that is, can we replace the
wire from TIN to t of all registers with just
one connection from TIN to t of the first
register? (Hint: Consider that ena = ‘0’
occurs while q0 = ‘1’.)
b. Suppose that two counters of this type
must be connected together to attain an 8-bit
synchro-nous counter. Sketch the circuit,
showing how your enable (ena) signal
would be connected to the counters in this
case.
20. Synchronous counter with enable #2

--- Page 728 ---
FIGURE E14.19
Consider the 0-to-9 counters designed with DFFs in
Examples 14.3 and 14.4. Make the modifications
needed to include in the circuits an “enable” port (the
counter should operate as usual when ena = ‘1’ or
remain in the same state if ena = ‘0’). This should be
done for the following two circuits:
a. Counter of Figure 14.11(b).
b. Counter of Figure 14.10(d).
21. Programmable 4-bit counter #1
Design a programmable 0-to-M counter, where 0 ≤ M
≤ 15. The value of M should be set by a
programmable 4-bit input, illustrated with “1100” (=
12) in Figure E14.21. The counter must be
synchronous and with serial enable.
22. Programmable 4-bit counter #2
FIGURE E14.21
Repeat the exercise above for a synchronous counter
with parallel enable.
23. Programmable 8-bit counter #1

--- Page 729 ---
Design a programmable 0-to-M counter, where
0≤M≤255. The value of M should be set by a pro-
grammable 8-bit input, similar to that in Figure
E14.21 (but with 8 bits, of course). The counter must
be synchronous and with serial enable.
24. Programmable 8-bit counter #2
Repeat the exercise above for a synchronous counter
with parallel enable. The circuit should be composed
of two 4-bit blocks (see Figure 14.14).
25. Asynchronous 0-to-63 counter with DFFs
Draw a circuit for an asynchronous 0-to-63
sequential counter (see Figure 14.16).
26. Asynchronous 63-to-0 counter with DFFs
Draw a circuit for an asynchronous downward 63-to-
0 sequential counter (see Figure 14.15).
27. Asynchronous 0-to-62 counter with DFFs
Design an asynchronous 0-to-62 sequential counter
(see Example 14.7).
28. Asynchronous 0-to-255 counter with DFFs
Design an asynchronous 0-to-255 sequential counter
(see Figure 14.16).
29. Asynchronous 0-to-254 counter with DFFs
Design an asynchronous 0-to-254 sequential counter
(see Example 14.7).
30. Synchronized counter outputs
Consider the diagram of Figure E14.30(a), which is
relative to a sequential binary counter that must
produce two outputs, x and y, with y always one unit
behind x (that is, x = y + 1). One (not good) solution
is depicted in Figure E14.30(b), which shows two
counters, the first reset to “00 … 01” and the second

--- Page 730 ---
to “00 … 00” upon initialization. This solution uses
too much (unnecessary) hardware. Devise a better
circuit that solves this problem.
31. Synchronized shift-register outputs
FIGURE E14.30
Consider again the diagram of Figure E14.30(a), but
suppose that now the output x comes from a circular
shift register, whose rotating sequence is initialized
with “1000”. Suppose also that the sequence y must
be delayed with respect to x by one clock period (so y
should be initialized with “0001”). A (bad) solution
analogous to that in Figure E14.30(b) could be
employed, requiring two circular SRs. As in the
exercise above, devise a better circuit that solves this
problem.
32. Two-window signal generator #1
In Figure 14.19 the counter was omitted. Choose a
counter and then redraw Figure 14.19 with it
included. Eliminate any unnecessary gate.
33. Two-window signal generator #2
Design a circuit whose input is a clock signal and
output is a signal similar to that of Figure 14.19(a),
with two time windows, the first with width 20T0 and
the second 10T0, where T0 is the clock period.

--- Page 731 ---
34. Programmable two-window signal
generator
In the signal generator of Example 14.8, the time
windows were 10T0 and 20T0. In the exercise above,
they were 20T0 and 10T0. Draw a circuit for a
programmable signal generator with an extra input,
called sel (select), such that when sel = ‘0’ the signal
generator of Example 14.8 results and when sel = ‘1’
that of Exercise 14.33 is implemented.
35. Four-window signal generator
Design a circuit whose input is a clock signal and
output is a signal similar to that of Figure 14.20(a),
with four time windows, with the following widths
(from left to right): 5T0, 10T0, 15T0, and 20T0.
36. PWM circuit
A digital PWM (pulse width modulator) takes a clock
waveform as input and delivers a pulse train with
variable (programmable) duty cycle at the output. In
the illustration of Figure E14.36 the duty cycle is 2/7
(or 28.6%) because the output stays high during two
out of every seven clock periods. Sketch a circuit for
this PWM (the inputs are clk and duty, while the
output is y; duty is a 3-bit signal that determines the
duty cycle—see table in Figure E14.36). (Suggestion:
Think of it as a two-window signal generator (as in
Example 14.8) with the value of y fixed but that of x
programmable.)
37. Divide-by-8 circuit

--- Page 732 ---
FIGURE E14.36
Design a circuit that divides the clock frequency (fclk)
by M= 8. Discuss the phase symmetry in this case.
38. Divide-by-5 with symmetric phase
a. Design a circuit that divides fclk by M = 5
and produces an output with 50% duty
cycle.
b. Can you suggest an approach different
from that in Section 14.5 (Example 14.10)?
39. Divide-by-14 with symmetric phase
Design a circuit that divides the clock frequency by
M = 14 and exhibits symmetric phase. Because M is
even here, which simplifications can be made with
respect to the approach described in Section 14.5
(Example 14.10)?
40. Two-digit BCD counter #1
Figure E14.40 contains a partial sketch for a 2-digit
BCD (binary-coded decimal, Section 2.4) coun-ter.
Each stage has a 4-bit output that produces a decimal
value between 0 and 9. Therefore, the circuit can
count from 00 to 99, as described in the
accompanying truth table.
a. Make a sketch for this circuit using
synchronous counters. What type of
interaction must exist between the two

--- Page 733 ---
counters? (Suggestion: See the timer in
Example 14.11, with counter1 removed.)
b. Add two SSDs (seven-segment displays)
to the circuit in order to numerically display
the result (see Example 11.4). Include blocks
for the BCD-to-SSD converters.
41. Two-digit BCD counter #2
FIGURE E14.40
Repeat the exercise above using asynchronous
counters.
42. 1 HZ signal
A partial sketch for a system that derives from the
clock, with frequency fclk = F, a 1 Hz waveform is
depicted in Figure E14.42 (divide-by-F frequency
divider). As can be observed, it is a 16-bit system that
is composed of four blocks, each containing a
synchronous 4-bit counter with parallel enable.
a. Study this problem and then make a
complete circuit sketch, given that fclk = 50
kHz. Add (or suppress) any units that you
find (un)necessary. Provide as many circuit
details as possible. Where does the output

--- Page 734 ---
signal come from? Will its phase be
automatically symmetric?
b. What is the highest fclk that this system
can accept while still producing a 1 Hz
output? Will the phase be automatically
symmetric in this case?
43. Timer #1
FIGURE E14.42
In Example 14.11 the construction of a circular 00-
to-59 seconds timer was discussed. Assuming that
fclk= 5 Hz, show a detailed circuit for each one of the
three counters. Consider that they are all synchronous
with serial enable.
44. Timer #2
Repeat the exercise above with asynchronous
counters.
45. Frequency meter #1
This exercise deals with the design of a frequency
meter. One alternative is depicted in Figure E14.45,
where x is the signal whose frequency we want to
measure, fx is the measurement, and clk is the system
clock (whose frequency is fclk =F). The circuit
contains two counters and a register. Counter1
creates, from clk, a signal called write that stays low

--- Page 735 ---
during 1 second (that is, during F clock periods), and
high during one clock period (T0—see the
accompanying timing diagram). While write = ‘0’,
counter2 counts the events occurring on x, which are
stored by the register when write changes from ‘0’ to
‘1’, at the same time that counter2 is reset. Note that
counter1 is a two-window signal generator (Section
14.4).
a. Is this approach adequate for the
measurement of low or high (or both)
frequencies?
b. What is the inactivity factor of this
approach (that is, the time fraction during
which the circuit does not measure x) as a
function of F?
c. Present a detailed diagram (with internal
block details) for this circuit.
46. Frequency meter #2
FIGURE E14.45
Another approach to the construction of frequency
meters is exactly the opposite of that described
above, that is, to count the number of clock cycles
that occur between two (positive) edges of x instead
of counting the number of events that occur on x

--- Page 736 ---
during two edges of a signal generated from the
clock.
a. Draw a block diagram for this circuit
(note that a divider is needed).
b. What are the advantages and
disadvantages of this approach compared to
the previous one? Is it adequate for low or
high (or both) frequencies? Does it require
more or less hardware than the other? What
is its inactivity factor?
c. Show a detailed diagram for each block
presented in part (a).
d. Consider that the clock frequency is
accurate enough such that the main error is
due to the par-tial clock period that goes
unaccounted for at the beginning and/or at
the end of each cycle of x. Prove that, if the
maximum frequency to be measured is fxmax
and the maximum error accepted in the
measurement is e, then the clock frequency
must obey fclk ≥ fxmax/e.
47. PLL operation
Describe the operation of a PLL (see Figure 14.25),
considering that initially floop > fin. Draw a timing
diagram analogous to that depicted in Figure
14.26(b) and show/explain how the system is eventu-
ally locked to the correct frequency.
48. Divide-by-7 prescaler
Draw the timing diagram for the prescaler of Figure
14.27(c). Confirm that it divides the clock fre-quency
by M = 7. During how many clock periods does the

--- Page 737 ---
output stay low and during how many does it stay
high?
49. Dual-modulus prescaler #1
Figure E14.49 shows a basic divide-by-M/(M + 1)
prescaler.
a. Determine the value of M for MC = ‘0’
and for MC = ‘1’.
b. Draw a timing diagram (similar to that in
Figure 14.27(b)) for MC = ‘0’.
c. Repeat part (b) for MC = ‘1’.
50. Dual-modulus prescaler #2
FIGURE E14.49
Figure E14.50 shows a basic divide-by-M/(M + 1)
prescaler.
a. Determine the value of M for MC = ‘0’
and for MC = ‘1’.
b. Draw a timing diagram (similar to that in
Figure 14.27(b)) for MC = ‘0’.
c. Repeat part (b) for MC = ‘1’.
51. Dual-modulus prescaler #3

--- Page 738 ---
FIGURE E14.50
Figure E14.51 shows a basic divide-by-M/(M + 1)
prescaler.
a. Determine the value of M for MC = ‘0’
and for MC = ‘1’.
b. Draw a timing diagram (similar to that in
Figure 14.27(b)) for MC = ‘0’.
c. Repeat part (b) for MC = ‘1’.
52. Fifth-order pseudo-random sequence
generator
a. Draw an LFSR-based pseudo-random
sequence generator defined by the
polynomial of degree N = 5 in Figure 14.31.
b. Starting with all flip-flops preset to ‘1’,
write a table with the contents of all flip-
flops until the sequence starts repeating
itself. Add an extra column to the table and
fill it with the decimal values corresponding
to the flip-flops’ contents. Check whether
this is a maximal-length generator.
c. If the initialization had been done
differently (for example, with q0q1q2q3q4 =
“10000”), would the overall sequence
produced by the circuit be any different?
53. Additive data scrambler

--- Page 739 ---
a. Make a sketch for an additive scrambler-
descrambler pair (similar to that in Figure
14.32) whose LFSR is that in Figure 14.30.
b. Suppose that the data sequence x =
“101010101010 …” is processed by this
scrambler. What is the resulting bit sequence
(c) at its output?
c. Pass this sequence (c) through the
corresponding descrambler and confirm that
x is recovered.
54. Multiplicative data scrambler
a. Make a sketch for an additive scrambler-
descrambler pair (similar to that in Figure
14.33) using an LFSR whose polynomial is
1 + x6 + x7.
b. Suppose that the data sequence x =
“101010101010 …” is processed by this
scrambler. What is the resulting bit sequence
(c) at its output?
c. Pass this sequence (c) through the
corresponding descrambler and confirm that
x is recovered.
FIGURE E14.51
14.10 Exercises with VHDL

--- Page 740 ---
See Chapter 22, Section 22.7.
14.11 Exercises with SPICE
See Chapter 25, Section 25.16.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 741 ---
15
Finite State Machines
Chapter Contents
15.1 Finite State Machine Model
15.2 Design of Finite State Machines
15.3 System Resolution and Glitches
15.4 Design of Large Finite State Machines
15.5 Design of Finite State Machines with
Complex Combinational Logic
15.6 Multi-Machine Designs
15.7 Generic Signal Generator Design
Technique
15.8 Design of Symmetric-Phase Frequency
Dividers
15.9 Finite State Machine Encoding Styles
15.10 Exercises
15.11 Exercises with VHDL
Objective:
This chapter concludes the study of sequential circuits (initiated in chapter
13). A formal design procedure, called finite state machine (FSM), is here
introduced and extensively used. The FSM approach is very helpful in the

--- Page 742 ---
design of sequential systems whose operation can be described by means of a
well-defined (and preferably not too long) list containing all possible system
states, along with the necessary conditions for the system to progress from
one state to another, and also the output values that the system must produce
in each state. This type of design will be further illustrated using VHDL in
chapter 23.
15.1 Finite State Machine Model
The specifications of a sequential system can be summarized
by means of a state transition diagram, like that depicted in
Figure 15.1. What it says is that the machine has four states,
called stateA, stateB, stateC, and stateD; it has one output,
called y, that must be ‘0’ when in stateA, stateB, or stateC, or
‘1’ when in stateD; and it has one input (besides clock, of
course, and possibly reset), called x, which controls the state
transitions (the machine should move from stateA to stateB
at the next clock edge if x = ‘1’ or stay in stateA otherwise;
similar transition information is provided also for the other
states).
FIGURE 15.1  Example of state transition diagram.

--- Page 743 ---
In terms of hardware, a simplified model for an FSM is that
shown in Figure 15.2(a). The lower section (sequential)
contains all the sequential logic (that is, all flip-flops), while
the upper section (combinational) contains only
combinational circuitry. Because all flip-flops are in the
lower section, only clock and reset are applied to it, as
shown in the figure. The data currently stored in the flip-
flops (called pr – state) represent the system’s present state,
while the data to be stored by them in a future clock
transition (called nx_state) represent the system’s next state.
The upper section is responsible for processing pr_state,
along with the circuit’s actual input, to produce nx_state as
well as the system’s actual output.
FIGURE 15.2  (a) Simplified FSM model (for the
hardware); (b) Mealy machine; (c) Moore machine.
To encode the states of an FSM, regular (sequential) binary
code (Section 2.1) is often used, with the encoding done in
the same order in which the states are enumerated
(declared). For example, if with VHDL the following data
type had been used in the example of Figure 15.1:

--- Page 744 ---
TYPE machine_state IS (stateA, stateB, stateC,
stateD)
then the following binary words would be assigned to the
states: stateA = “00”, stateB = “01”, stateC = “10”, and
stateD = “11”. Other encoding styles also exist and will be
described in Section 15.9. In the particular case of circuits
synthesized onto CPLD/FPGA chips (chapter 18), the one-
hot style is often used because flip-flops are abundant in
those devices.
One important aspect related to the FSM model is that, even
though any sequential circuit can in principle be modeled as
such, this is not always advantageous. A counter is a good
example because it can have a huge number of states,
making their enumeration impractical. As a simple rule of
thumb, the FSM approach is advisable in systems whose
tasks constitute a well-structured and preferably not too long
list such that all states can be easily enumerated and
specified.
Mealy versus Moore machines
A last comment about the FSM model regards its
division into two categories, called Mealy and
Moore machines. If the machine’s output depends
not only on the stored (present) state but also on
the current inputs, then it is a Mealy machine
(Figure 15.2(b)). Otherwise, if it depends only on
the stored state, it is a Moore machine (Figure
15.2(c)). A conventional counter is an example of
the latter because its next output depends only on
its current state (the circuit has no inputs—except
for clock, of course). Note, however, that the

--- Page 745 ---
former is more general, so most designs fall in that
category.
15.2 Design of Finite State Machines
A design technique for FSMs, which consists of five steps, is
described in this section. Several application examples
follow.
Step 1: Draw (or describe) the state transition
diagram (as in Figure 15.1).
Step 2: Based on the diagram above, write the
truth tables for nx_state and for the output. Then
rearrange the truth tables, replacing the states’
names with the corresponding binary values (recall
that the minimum number of bits—thus the
number of flip-flops—needed to implement an
FSM is log2n, rounded up, where n is the number
of states).
Step 3: Extract, from the rearranged truth tables,
the Boolean expressions for nx_state and for the
output. Make sure that the expressions (either in
SOP or POS form) are irreducible (Sections 5.3
and 5.4).
Step 4: Draw the corresponding circuit, placing all
flip-flops (D-type only) in the lower section and
the combinational logic for the expressions derived
above in the upper section (as in Figure 15.2).
Step 5 (optional): When the circuit is subject to
glitches at the output, but glitches are not
acceptable, add an extra DFF for each output bit
that must be freed from glitches. The extra DFF

--- Page 746 ---
can operate either at the rising or falling edge of
the clock. It must be observed that, due to the extra
flip-flop, the new output will then be either one
clock cycle or one-half of a clock cycle delayed
with respect to the original output depending on
whether a rising- or falling-edge DFF is employed,
respectively (assuming that the original machine
operates at the positive clock edge).
It is important to mention that in this design procedure only
D-type flip-flops are employed. If a TFF is needed, for
example, then the combinational logic (from the upper
section) that will be associated to the DFF will automatically
resemble a TFF (this fact will be illustrated in Example
15.3).
EXAMPLE 15.1 A BASIC FSM
The state transition diagram of an FSM is depicted in Figure
15.3. It contains three states (A, B, and C), one output (y), and
one input (x). When in state A, it must produce y = ‘0’ at the
output, proceeding to state B at the next positive clock
transition (assuming that is a positive-edge machine) if the
input is x = ‘0’ at that moment, or staying in state A otherwise.
When in B, again y = ‘0’ must be produced, proceeding to C
only if x = ‘1’ when the positive edge of clk occurs. Finally, if
in C, it must cause y = x′ and return to A at the next rising edge
of clk regardless of x. Design a circuit that implements this
FSM.

--- Page 747 ---
FIGURE 15.3 FSM of Example 15.1.
SOLUTION
The solution, using the formal FSM procedure, is presented
below.
Step 1: This step consists of constructing the state
transition diagram, which was already provided in
Figure 15.3.
Step 2: From the specifications contained in the state
transition diagram, the truth table for nx_state and y
can be obtained and is shown in Figure 15.4(a). This
truth table was then rearranged in Figure 15.4(b),
where all bits are shown explicitly. Because there are
three states, at least 2 bits (
 log23
  = 2 flip-flops) are
needed to represent them. Also, because nx_state is
always connected to the inputs of the flip-flops (all of
type D) and pr_state to their outputs, the pairs of bits
d1d0 and q1q0 were used to represent nx_state and
pr_state, respectively.
Step 3: We must derive, from the truth table, the
Boolean expressions for y and nx_state. Applying the
trio q1 q0x of Figure 15.4(b) into three Karnaugh
maps (Section 5.6), one for y, one for d1, and another
for d0 (Figure 15.4(c)), the following irreducible SOP
expressions (Section 5.3) result:

--- Page 748 ---
FIGURE 15.4 (a) and (b) Truth tables and
(c) Karnaugh maps for the FSM of Figure
15.3.
Step 4: Finally, we can draw the circuit
corresponding to the conclusions obtained above. The
result is shown in Figure 15.5(a), with the DFFs in
the lower part and the combinational logic
implementing the expressions just derived in the
upper part. To clarify the relationship with the
general FSM model of Figure 15.2 even further, the
circuit was slightly rearranged in Figure 15.5(b),
where all signals (x, y, pr_state, and nx_state) can be
more clearly observed.
Step 5: There is no specification concerning glitches.
Moreover, this system is not subject to glitches
anyway, and the output in state C must follow x (y =
x′), so Step 5 should not be employed.

--- Page 749 ---
FIGURE 15.5 (a) Circuit that implements the
FSM of Figure 15.3; (b) Rearranged version.
EXAMPLE 15.2 THE SMALLEST AND
SIMPLEST FSM
It is well known that a DFF is a two-state FSM. Verify this
observation using the FSM model.
SOLUTION
Step 1: The state transition diagram of such a
machine is shown in Figure 15.6. It contains only two
states, A and B, and the values that must be produced
at the output are y = ‘0’ when in state A, or y = ‘1’
when in state B. The transition from one state to the
other is controlled by x (so x is an input). Because x =
‘1’ causes y = ‘1’, and x = ‘0’ causes y = ‘0’ (at the
next rising edge of clk, assuming that it is a positive-
edge circuit), then y is simply a synchronous copy of
x (hence a DFF).
Step 2: From the diagram of Figure 15.6, the truth
tables of Figure 15.7(a) were extracted. Because there
are only two states, only one bit (one flip-flop) is
needed to represent them. Assuming that the states A
and B were declared in that order, the corresponding
encoding then is A = ‘0’, B = ‘1’, shown in the
rearranged truth tables of Figure 15.7(b).

--- Page 750 ---
Step 3: From the first truth table, we conclude that y
= pr_state, and in the second we verify that nx_state
= x.
Step 4: Finally, applying these pieces of information
into the general FSM model of Figure 15.2, results in
the circuit of Figure 15.7(c), which, as expected, is
simply a DFF. Step 5 is not needed because the
output already comes directly from a flip-flop.
FIGURE 15.6 The smallest and simplest FSM (a
DFF).
FIGURE 15.7 Implementation for the FSM of
Figure 15.6: (a) Original and (b) rearranged truth
tables; (c) Corresponding circuit, disposed
according to the general model of Figure 15.2.
EXAMPLE 15.3 COUNTER—A
CLASSICAL FSM
As mentioned in Section 14.2, counters are among the most
frequently used sequential circuits. For that reason, even
though their design was already studied in Sections 14.2 and
14.3, some of it is repeated here, now using the FSM approach.

--- Page 751 ---
One important aspect to be observed regards the flip-flop type.
Because the present design procedure employs only D-type
flip-flops (DFFs), and counters often need T-type flip-flops
(TFFs), it is then expected that the combinational logic
generated during the design (upper section), when combined
with the DFFs (lower section), will resemble TFFs. Design a
modulo-8 counter and analyze the resulting circuit to confirm
(or not) this fact.
SOLUTION
Step 1: The state transition diagram for a 0-to-7
counter is shown in Figure 15.8. Its states are named
zero, one, …, seven, each name corresponding to the
decimal value produced by the counter when in that
state. This is a Moore machine because there are no
control inputs (only clock and, possibly, reset).
Step 2: From the diagram of Figure 15.8, the truth
table for nx_state was obtained (Figure 15.9(a)),
which was then modified in Figure 15.9(b) to show
all bits explicitly.
Step 3: From the truth table, using Karnaugh maps,
the following irreducible SOP expressions are
obtained:
FIGURE 15.8  State transition diagram for
a full-scale 3-bit counter.

--- Page 752 ---
FIGURE 15.9 Truth table for the FSM of
Figure 15.8.
Step 4: Using the information above, the circuit of
Figure 15.10(a) was constructed. Again, only D-type
flip-flops were employed, all located in the lower
section, while the combinational logic for the
expressions derived in Step 3 was placed in the upper
section. Step 5 is not needed because the outputs
already come straight from flip-flops. Notice that the
circuit perfectly resembles the general model of
Figure 15.2.

--- Page 753 ---
FIGURE 15.10 Circuit that implements the FSM
of Figure 15.8: (a) Designed circuit; (b) and (c)
Rearranged versions for comparison with
synchronous counters seen in Section 14.2 (Figures
14.5(a) and 14.3(a), respectively).
To conclude, we want to compare this counter with those in
Section 14.2. Rearranging the circuit of Figure 15.10(a), that of
Figure 15.10(b) results. The portions inside dark boxes are
TFFs (see Figure 13.24(b)), so an equivalent representation is
shown in Figure 15.10(c). Comparing Figure 15.10(b) with
Figure 14.5(a), or Figure 15.10(c) with Figure 14.3(a), we
observe that, as expected, the circuits are alike.
EXAMPLE 15.4 SYNCHRONOUS 3-TO-9
COUNTER
This example deals with the design of a synchronous modulo-
M counter (where M < 2N) with a nonzero initial value. Apply
the formal FSM design procedure to design a synchronous 3-to-

--- Page 754 ---
9 counter. Afterward, compare the results (equations) with
those obtained in Example 14.5.
SOLUTION
Step 1: The state transition diagram is shown in
Figure 15.11. The states are called three, four, five,
…, nine. The values that must be produced at the
output in each state are shown between parentheses.
Step 2: From the state transition diagram, the truth
table for nx_state is obtained (included in Figure
15.11).
Step 3: From the truth table, the Karnaugh maps of
Figure 15.12 are obtained, from which the following
irreducible SOP expressions result for nx_state:
FIGURE 15.11  State transition diagram
for a synchronous 3-to-9 counter (Example
15.4) and corresponding truth table.

--- Page 755 ---
FIGURE 15.12 Karnaugh maps and
circuit that implements the FSM of Figure
15.11 (a synchronous 3-to-9 counter).
Step 4: The circuit implementing the expressions
above is depicted in Figure 15.12. Again, Step 5 is
not needed because the outputs come directly from
flip-flops. And, once again, the circuit resembles the
general FSM model of Figure 15.2.
Finally, we want to compare it to a similar counter designed in
Section 14.2 (Example 14.5, Figure 14.12). The equations
obtained in that example were the following:


--- Page 756 ---
Comparing these equations to those obtained using the FSM
approach, we observe that d1 and d0 are equal, but d3 and d2
are simpler in the latter. The reason is very simple: In the FSM
approach, we took advantage of the states that no longer occur
in the counter, that is, because it counts from 3 to 9 and
employs four flip-flops, there are nine nonoccurring states (0,
1, 2, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15), which were not taken into
consideration in the simplified design of Example 14.5.
Note: Indeed, a small part of the “don’t care” states was taken
advantage of in Example 14.5 when adopting the simplification
that “only the ‘1’s need to be monitored in the final value
because no other previous state exhibits the same pattern of
‘1’s “ (that is, monitoring only the ‘1’s leads potentially to
smaller expressions than monitoring the ‘1’s and the ‘0’s). To
confirm this fact, the reader in invited to write the values
obtained with the expressions of Example 14.5 in the Karnaugh
maps of Figure 15.12.
EXAMPLE 15.5 STRING DETECTOR
Design a circuit that takes as input a serial bit stream and
outputs a ‘1’ whenever the sequence “111” occurs. Overlaps
must also be considered, that is, if the input sequence is “…
0111110 … “, for example, then the output sequence should be
“… 0001110 … “. Analyze whether the proposed solution is
subject to glitches or not. (See also Exercises 15.5-15.7.)
SOLUTION
Step 1: The corresponding state transition diagram is
depicted in Figure 15.13. A top-level block diagram
is also shown, having x, clk, and rst as inputs and y as
output.
Step 2: From the state transition diagram, the truth
tables of Figure 15.14(a) are extracted, which were
modified in Figure 15.14(b) to show all bits

--- Page 757 ---
explicitly. Because the machine has four states, at
least two DFFs are needed, whose inputs are d0 and
d1 (nx_state) and outputs are q0 and q1 (pr_state).
Step 3: With the help of Karnaugh maps (Figure
15.14(c)), the following irreducible SOP expressions
for y and nx_state are obtained:
FIGURE 15.13 State transition diagram
for the FSM of Example 15.5.
FIGURE 15.14 (a) and (b) Truth tables
and (c) Karnaugh maps for the FSM of
Figure 15.13 (Example 15.5).


--- Page 758 ---
Step 4: The circuit for this FSM is shown in Figure
15.15(a). The flip-flops are located in the lower
(sequential) section, while the combinational logic
needed to implement the equations above is in the
upper (combinational) section.
Step 5: To illustrate the occurrence of glitches, a
timing diagram was drawn in Figure 15.15(b),
showing x = “00110111100” as the input sequence,
from which y = “0000000110” is expected (notice
that the values of x are updated in the falling edge of
the clock, while the FSM operates at the rising edge).
If we assume that the high-to-low transition of the
DFFs is slower than the low-to-high transition, then
both flip-flop outputs will be momentarily high at the
same time when the machine moves from state one to
state two, hence producing a brief spike (y = ‘1’) at
the output (see the timing diagram).
FIGURE 15.15 FSM of Example 15.5 (Figure
15.13): (a) Circuit; (b) Timing diagram.
In conclusion, this circuit’s output is subject to glitches. If they
are not acceptable, then Step 5 must be included. There is,
however, another solution for this particular example, which
consists of employing a Gray code to encode the states of the
FSM because then when the machine moves from one state to
another only one bit changes (except when it returns from state

--- Page 759 ---
two to state zero, but this is not a problem here). In other
words, by encoding the states as zero = “00”, one = “01”, two =
“11”, and three = “10”, glitches will be automatically prevented
(it is left to the reader to confirm this fact). This, however, is
normally feasible only for very small machines, as in the
present example; in general, Step 5 is required when glitches
must be prevented. (For more on this, see Exercises 15.5-15.7.)
EXAMPLE 15.6 A BASIC SIGNAL
GENERATOR
A signal generator is depicted in Figure 15.16, which must
derive, from clk, the signal y. As indicated in the figure, y must
stay low during three clock periods (3T0), and high during five
clock cycles (5T0). Design an FSM that implements this signal
generator. Recall that in any signal generator glitches are
definitely not acceptable.
FIGURE 15.16 Signal generator of Example
15.6.
SOLUTION
Step 1: The corresponding state transition diagram is
depicted in Figure 15.17. The FSM has eight states
(called zero, one, …, seven), and must produce y =
‘0’ in the first three states and y = ‘1’ in the other five
(notice that this approach would be inappropriate if
the number of clock periods were too large; FSMs
with a large number of states are treated in Section
15.4).
Step 2: From Figure 15.17, the truth table for y and
nx_state can be easily obtained and is presented in
Figure 15.18(a). The table was then rearranged with

--- Page 760 ---
all bits shown explicitly in Figure 15.18(b). Notice
that to encode eight states, three bits (so at least three
flip-flops) are required, with their outputs (q2q1q0)
representing the present state (pr_state) and their
inputs (d2d1d0) representing the next state (nx_state)
of the machine.
Step 3: From the truth table, with the help of
Karnaugh maps, the following irreducible SOP
expressions are obtained:
FIGURE 15.17 State transition diagram
for the signal generator of Figure 15.16
(Example 15.6).
FIGURE 15.18 Truth table for the FSM of
Figure 15.17.


--- Page 761 ---
Step 4: The circuit implementing the expressions
above can now be drawn and is shown in Figure
15.19(a). Again, the circuit directly resembles the
general FSM model of Figure 15.2.
Step 5: Logic gates with several inputs compute y,
which might all change at the same time. Such
changes, however, are never perfectly simultaneous.
Suppose, for example, that due to slightly different
internal propagation delays the outputs of the three
DFFs change in the following order: q0, then q1, then
q2. If so, when the system moves from state three to
state four, for example, it goes momentarily through
states two and zero, during which y = ‘0’ is produced
(see Figure 15.20). Because y was supposed to stay
high during that transition, such a ‘0’ constitutes a
glitch. Then Step 5 is needed to complete the design,
which adds the extra flip-flop seen in Figure
15.19(b).
FIGURE 15.19 (a) Solution of Example 15.6
using only steps 1–4; (b) Step 5 included to
eliminate glitches at the output.

--- Page 762 ---
FIGURE 15.20 Glitch formation when the
system of Figure 15.19(a) moves from state three to
state four (states two and zero occur during that
transition, causing a brief y = ‘0’ pulse).
15.3 System Resolution and Glitches
Resolution of sequential systems: Given a synchronous
system whose registers are all controlled by the same clock
signal, it is clear that its resolution can not be better than one
half of a clock period. This would be the case for units
operating at both clock edges. For units employing only
single-edge flip-flops (which is generally the case), all
operating at the same clock transition (that is, all operating at
the positive clock edge or all at the negative edge), the
resolution is worse, that is, it is one whole clock period,
meaning that any event lasting less than one clock cycle
might simply go unnoticed.
Resolution of combinational systems: Combinational logic
circuits, being unregistered (hence unclocked), are not
subject to the limitation described above. Their outputs are
allowed to change freely in response to changes at the inputs
with the resolution limited only by the circuit’s internal
propagation delays. However, if the system is mixed (that is,
with sequential and combinational circuits), then the
resolution is generally determined by the clocked units.
Glitches: Glitches are undesired spikes (either upward or
downward) that might corrupt a signal during state

--- Page 763 ---
transitions, causing it to be momentarily incorrect (as in
Examples 15.5 and 15.6).
Although simple, these concepts are very important. For
example, we know that one technique to remove glitches is
to add extra registers (Step 5 of the FSM design procedure).
However, if in the system specifications an output is
combinationally tied to an input, then that output should not
be stored for the obvious reason that a change at the input
lasting less than one (or one half of a) clock period might not
be perceived at the output. As an example, let us observe
Example 15.1 once again. Its resolution is one clock period
(because all flip-flops are single-edge registers). However, in
the specification of state C (Figure 15.3), it is said that while
in that state the output should be y = x′. Because there is no
constraint preventing x from lasting less than one clock
period, y should not be stored if maximum resolution is
desired. In other words, Step 5 should not be used. Glitches
do not happen in that particular example, but if they did, and
if glitches were unacceptable, then they would have to be
eliminated by redesigning the combinational (upper) section.
If still no solution could be found, only then Step 5 should be
considered (at the obvious cost of system resolution).
15.4 Design of Large Finite State Machines
In all designs illustrated so far, the number of states was
small, so the formal 5-step technique described earlier could
be easily employed, leading to a circuit similar to that
illustrated in Figure 15.21(a), with all flip-flops (D-type
only) located in the lower section and the combinational
logic in the upper section. There is, however, a practical
limitation regarding that approach because it requires that all
states be explicitly enumerated (declared); for example, if

--- Page 764 ---
the signal generated in Example 15.6 spanned 800 clock
cycles instead of 8, then a straight application of that design
technique would be completely impractical.
FIGURE 15.21  (a) Basic FSM model; (b) and (c) Model
for large FSMs (the counter is separated from the main machine).
The large number of states that might occur in a state
machine is normally due to a “built-in” counter. To solve it,
because we know how to design a counter of any type and
any size (chapter 14), we can separate the counter from the
main design. In other words, the problem can be split into
two parts, one related to the main FSM (for which the 5-step
formal FSM design technique is still employed) and the
other related to the counter, for which we can adopt a direct
design, as we did in Sections 14.2 and 14.3. This, of course,
might cause the Boolean expressions related to the counter to
be nonminimal, as already illustrated in Example 15.4, but
the results are still correct and the difference in terms of
hardware is very small. The overall architecture can then be
viewed as that in Figure 15.21(b), where the counter appears
as an inner FSM, while the main circuit occupies the outer
FSM. A more objective illustration appears in Figure
15.21(c), where the counter, in spite of being also an FSM,

--- Page 765 ---
has been completely separated from the main circuit, with its
output playing simply the role of an extra input to the main
machine (along with x and pr_state). The use of this design
technique is illustrated in the example below.
EXAMPLE 15.7 LARGE-WINDOW
SIGNAL GENERATOR
Redesign the signal generator of Example 15.6, but this time
with the time windows lasting 30 and 50 clock cycles instead of
3 and 5, as illustrated in Figure 15.22(a).
FIGURE 15.22 (a) Signal generator of Example
15.7 and (b) its state transition diagram.
SOLUTION
In this case, separating the counter from the main machine is
advisable, which allows the system to be modeled as in Figure
15.21(c), where the counter’s output acts as an input to the
main machine. The state transition diagram is then depicted in
Figure 15.22(b).
Counter design: A 0-to-79 counter is needed, which can be
designed following any one of the several techniques described
in Sections 14.2 and 14.3. A synchronous 4-bit counter, with
parallel enable and flip-flop clear input, was chosen (see
Example 14.2, Figure 14.9). Because a total of 7 bits are
needed here, two such counters were utilized. The complete
circuit is shown in Figure 15.23. Recall that clear, contrary to

--- Page 766 ---
reset, is a synchronous input. In this example, clear = ‘0’ will
occur when the counter reaches “1001111” (= 79), which forces
the circuit to return to zero at the next positive clock edge.
FIGURE 15.23 0-to-79 counter of Example 15.7
(two 4-bit synchronous counters were utilized to
construct a 7-bit circuit).
FSM design: We need to design now the main machine (Figure
15.22(b)). To ease the derivation of the Boolean functions
(without Karnaugh maps or other simplification techniques),
we will make a slight modification in the state transition
diagram shown in Figure 15.24(a) (compare it to Figure
15.22(b)). This will cause the expression for nx_state to be
nonminimal, but again the result is correct and only slightly
bigger (see comparison and comments at the end of Example
15.4).


--- Page 767 ---
FIGURE 15.24 (a) Simplified state transition
diagram for the FSM of Figure 15.22; (b)
Corresponding truth tables.
From the truth tables in Figure 15.24(b), the following
expressions are obtained:
 where m29 and m79 are the minterms
corresponding to the decimals 29 and 79, respectively, that is:
Note that, as indicated above, for m79 only the ‘1’s need to be
monitored because 79 is the counter’s largest value, so no other
prior value exhibits the same pattern of ‘1’s. This information,
nevertheless, is already available in the counter (see gate that
computes clear in Figure 15.23). It is also important to remark
that any two minterms with a separation of 50 would do, that is,
we could have used m25 with m75, m30 with m80, etc.
The circuit that computes the expressions above is shown in the
upper section of the FSM depicted in Figure 15.25, while the
DFF that produces q (pr_state) appears in the lower section. As
described in the model of Figure 15.21(c), the counter is
separated from the main machine, to which it serves simply as
an extra input. Though flip-flops might provide complemented
outputs, in Figure 15.25 only the regular outputs were shown to
simplify the drawing. Moreover, only NAND gates were used
(smaller transistor count—Section 4.3) in the upper section,
though other choices there also exist. Notice also that the fan-in
of the gate computing m29 is 8, which might be unacceptable
for certain types of implementations (recall that the delay
grows with the fan-in), so the reader is invited to reduce the
fan-in to 5 or less, and also explore other gates for the upper
section.

--- Page 768 ---
FIGURE 15.25 Final circuit for the FSM of
Example 15.7. The only external signals are clk (in)
and y (out).
15.5 Design of Finite State Machines with Complex
Combinational Logic
In Section 15.4 we described a technique that simplifies the
design of FSMs whose number of states (due to a built-in
counter) is too large. In this section we describe another
technique that is appropriate for cases when the
combinational section is too complex, that is, for machines
whose outputs are expressed by means of functions that
might change from one state to another.
This model is illustrated in Figure 15.26(a), where a three-
state FSM is exhibited, with y (the output) expressed by
means of different functions of x (the input) in each state,
that is, y = f1(x) in state A, y = f2(x) in state B, and y = f3(x) in
state C. This, of course, can be modeled exactly as before;
however, if the expressions for y are already available or are

--- Page 769 ---
simple to derive, then the model of Figure 15.26(b) can be
employed, which consists of a multiplexer (Section 11.6)
whose input-select port (sel) is controlled by an FSM. This
might substantially reduce the design effort because now
only a much simpler FSM needs to be designed (a counter).
This technique is illustrated in the example that follows.
FIGURE 15.26  Alternative design technique for FSMs
whose output expression varies from one state to another
(multiplexer controlled by FSM).
EXAMPLE 15.8 PWM
The circuit employed in this example was already seen in
chapter 14 (Exercise 14.36). A digital PWM (pulse width
modulator) is a circuit that takes a clock waveform as input and
delivers a pulse train with variable (programmable) duty cycle
at the output. In the illustration of Figure 15.27 the duty cycle
is 2/7 (or 28.6%) because the output stays high during two out
of every seven clock periods. The 3-bit signal called x
determines the duty cycle of y, according to the table shown on
the right of Figure 15.27. Design a circuit for this PWM.

--- Page 770 ---
FIGURE 15.27 PWM of Example 15.8
SOLUTION
This circuit can be understood as a two-window signal
generator (like that in Example 14.8), where the size of the first
time window is programmable (from 0 to 7 T0, with T0
representing the clock period), while the total size is fixed (= 7
T0). Due to the programmable input (x), y will inevitably be
expressed as a function of x. The first part of the solution is
depicted in Figure 15.28. The state transition diagram,
containing seven states (A, B, …, G), is shown in Figure
15.28(a). The value of y in each state can be determined with
the help of the table in Figure 15.28(b), where, for simplicity,
the bits of x were represented by a, b, and c; for example, if x =
“000”, then y = ‘0’ in all seven states; if x = “001”, then y = ‘0’
in all states but the last, and so on. From that table we obtain:


--- Page 771 ---
FIGURE 15.28 (a) State transition diagram for
the PWM of Figure 15.27; (b) Truth table
describing the system operation; (c) Truth table for
the FSM.
These are the expressions that are included in the state
transition diagram of Figure 15.28(a).
As can be seen, y is computed by a different function of x in
each state, so the mixed model (FSM + multiplexer) described
above can be helpful (though the general model seen earlier can
obviously still be used). The resulting circuit is presented in
Figure 15.29, which shows, on the left, the circuit needed to
compute the seven mux inputs, and, on the right, the overall
system. The FSM is now a trivial 0-to-6 counter, and the
multiplexer can be any of those studied in Section 11.6 or
equivalent (counter and multiplexer designs were studied in
Sections 14.2, 14.3, and 11.6, respectively).

--- Page 772 ---
FIGURE 15.29 Circuit of Example 15.8.
Note: The purpose of the solution presented above is to
illustrate the general idea of “nonstatic” outputs (that is, outputs
that might change in spite of the machine staying in the same
state). However, for the particular circuit above (PWM), a
much simpler solution can be devised because it is simply a
two-window signal generator (Section 14.4) whose
intermediate value is variable (depends on x), while the total
length is fixed (= 7). Therefore, if the FSM approach is not
employed, the circuit can be designed as in Section 14.4; or, if
it is employed, then it can be modeled exactly as in Figure
15.24.
15.6 Multi-Machine Designs
In some designs more than one FSM might be needed. Two
fundamental aspects related to such designs are described in
this section: synchronism and reduction to quasi-single
machines.
Synchronism
When using more than one machine to implement
a circuit, it is necessary to determine whether the

--- Page 773 ---
signals that they produce must be synchronized
with respect to each other. As an example, suppose
that a certain design contains two FSMs, which
produce the signals y1 and y2 depicted in Figure
15.30(a) that ANDed give rise to the desired signal
(y = y1 · y2) shown in the last plot of the figure. If
y1 and y2 are not synchronized properly, a
completely different waveform can result for y,
like that in Figure 15.30(b), in spite of the shapes
of y1 and y2 remaining exactly the same.
FIGURE 15.30  Different shapes can result
for y = y1 · y2 when y1 and y2 are not synchronized
properly.
Several situations must indeed be considered. In
Figure 15.31(a), y1 and y2 exhibit different
frequencies (because T1 = 4T0 and T2 = 5T0, where
T0 is the clock frequency), so synchronism might
not be important (observe, however, that only
when the least common multiple of T1 and T2 is
equal to T1 · T2 is synchronism completely out of
question). The second situation, depicted in Figure
15.31(b), shows y1 and y2 with the same frequency
and operating at the same clock edge (positive, in
this example); this means that it is indeed just one
machine, which produces both outputs, so sync is
not an issue. Finally, Figure 15.31(c) shows the
two machines operating with the same frequency

--- Page 774 ---
but at different clock transitions (positive edge for
y1, negative edge for y2); in this type of situation,
sync is normally indispensable.
FIGURE 15.31  Designs employing two
FSMs operating (a) with different frequencies (sync
might not be important); (b) with the same frequency
and at the same clock edge (therefore a single
machine, so sync is not an issue); and (c) with the
same frequency but at different clock transitions
(sync normally required).
Note in Figure 15.31(c) that the ith state of y2
(i=A, B, C, D) comes right after the ith state of y1
(that is, one-half of a clock cycle later). This
implies that pr_state2 is simply a copy of
pr_state1, but delayed by one-half of a clock
period. Consequently, the machines can be
synchronized using the method shown in Figure
15.32; in (a), the general situation in which the
machines work independently (no sync) is
depicted, while (b) shows them synchronized by
the interconnection nx_state2 = pr_state1. This
synchronization procedure is illustrated in the
example below.

--- Page 775 ---
FIGURE 15.32  (a) Two FSMs operating
independently (no sync); (b) Machines synchronized
by the interconnection nx_state2 = pr_state1; (c)
Reduction to a quasi-single machine due to the
interconnection pr_state2 = pr_state1.
EXAMPLE 15.9 CIRCUIT WITH
SYNCHRONIZED MACHINES
Using the FSM approach, design a circuit that is
capable of generating the signals depicted in
Figure 15.31(c).
SOLUTION
The state transition diagrams of both machines are
shown in Figure 15.33(a). Applying the 5-step
design procedure of Section 15.2, the circuit of
Figure 15.33(b) results (it is left to the reader to
verify that). Observe the interconnection
nx_state2 = pr_state1, which is responsible for the
synchronism. Note also that in this case both
outputs (y1 and y2) are subject to glitches, so Step
5 of the design procedure must be included if
glitch-free signals are required.

--- Page 776 ---
FIGURE 15.33 Two synchronized
FSMs (see nx_state2 = pr_state1
interconnection in (b)) that implement
the waveforms of Figure 15.31(c).
Both outputs (y1, y2) are subject to
glitches, so Step 5 of the design
procedure is necessary if glitch-free
signals are required (see also
Excercise 15.21).
From multi-machines to quasi-single machine
When the machines have the same number of
states, they can be reduced to a quasi-single
machine, as shown in Figure 15.32(c). This is
achieved by including Step 5 of the disign
procedure (Section 15.2) in the second FSM (see
register at its output) and then making the
connection pr_state2 = pr_state1, which
eliminates the sequential section of the second
FSM. Observe, however, that this technique is not
always advantageous (see Exercise 15.20; see also
Exercises 15.15, 15.16, and 15.21).
15.7 Generic Signal Generator Design Technique

--- Page 777 ---
As seen in previous examples, the study of signal generators
offers an invaluable opportunity for mastering not only FSM
design techniques, but digital logic concepts in general. In
this section, another interesting design technique is
presented, which can be applied to the construction of any
binary waveform.
Such a technique is derived from the observation that any
binary waveform can be constructed with the proper
combination of the signals ‘0’, ‘1’, clk, and clk′, placed side
by side. Two examples are depicted in Figure 15.34. The
waveform in Figure 15.34(a) has period T = 2T0 and can be
constructed with the sequence {clk → ‘1’} in each period of
y. The example in Figure 15.34(b) is more complex; its
period is T = 7T0 and it can be constructed with the sequence
{clk → ‘0’ → clk → ‘1’ → clk → clk′ → clk}.
FIGURE 15.34  (a) and (b) Waveforms constructed by
combining the signals ‘0’, ‘1’, clk, and clk side by side; (c)
Corresponding generic circuit; (d) Equivalent circuit implemented
with a quasi-single machine.
The generic circuit (capable of implementing any binary
waveform) introduced here is depicted in Figure 15.34(c). It
consists of two multiplexers, controlled by two FSMs that

--- Page 778 ---
operate at different clock edges. The pair FSM1-MUX1 is
responsible for generating the desired waveform, while the
pair FSM2-MUX2 is responsible for removing any glitches
(recall that glitches are never allowed in signal generators).
The operation of MUX2 is as follows. During the time
intervals in which the output of MUX1 (called x) exhibits no
glitch, MUX2 must select x. On the other hand, if a glitch
occurs when x is supposed to stay high, then ‘1’ must be
selected to eliminate it; similarly, if a glitch occurs when x is
supposed to stay low, then ‘0’ must be selected to suppress it.
The use of this technique is illustrated in the example that
follows.
Finally, note that the FSMs of Figure 15.34(c) can be
reduced to a quasi-single machine using the technique
described in Section 15.6. The resulting circuit is shown in
Figure 15.34(d) (see Exercises 15.15 and 15.16).
EXAMPLE 15.10 GENERIC SIGNAL
GENERATOR DESIGN TECHNIQUE
Design the signal generator of Figure 15.35, which must derive,
from clk, the signal y. Note that in this case the output has
transitions at both clock edges, so the circuit’s resolution must
be maximum (that is, one-half of a clock period), in which case
the use of two FSMs might be helpful.
FIGURE 15.35 Signal generator of Example
15.10.
SOLUTION

--- Page 779 ---
As shown in Figure 15.35, each period of y can be constructed
with the sequence {‘1’ → clk → ‘1’}. A tentative solution, with
only one FSM-MUX pair, is shown in Figure 15.36(a). The
multiplexer’s only inputs are clk and ‘1’, because these are the
signals needed to construct y. To generate the sequence above,
the FSM must produce sel = ‘1’ (to select the ‘1’ input),
followed by sel = ‘0’ (to select clk), and finally sel = ‘1’ (to
select ‘1’ again).
FIGURE 15.36 (a) FSM-MUX-based solution
(not OK) for the signal generator of Figure 15.35;
(b) Glitch formation during the cl/c-to-T state
transition.
There is a major problem, though, with this circuit. Observe in
Figure 15.36(b) that when the multiplexer completes the
transition from its upper input (clk) to its lower input (‘1’), clk
is already low (some propagation delay in the mux is
inevitable), thus causing a glitch at the output. Consequently,
for this approach to be viable, some kind of glitch removal
technique must be included.
The problem can be solved with the addition of another FSM-
MUX pair, as previously shown in Figure 15.34(c). Since the
glitch in x occurs when x is high, ‘1’ must be selected during
that time interval, with x chosen at all other times.
The generic circuit of Figure 15.34(c), adapted to the present
example, is shown in Figure 15.37(a) (note that not all input
signals are needed). A corresponding timing diagram is shown

--- Page 780 ---
in Figure 15.37(b). MUX1 must generate x, which requires the
sequence {‘1’ → clk → ‘1’}, so sel1 = {‘1’ → ‘0’ → ‘1’} must
be produced by FSM1. The selection performed by MUX2
depends on the glitch locations; in this example, there is only
one glitch, which occurs while x = ‘1’, so MUX2 must select its
lower input (‘1’) during that time slot (so sel2 = ‘1’), and
should select x (so sel2 = ‘1’) during the other two time slots
that comprise each period of y. In summary, MUX2 must
generate the sequence {x → ‘1’ → x}, so sel2 = {‘0’ → ‘1’ →
‘0’} must be produced by FSM2.
FIGURE 15.37 Example using the generic 2-
FSM-MUX approach for the design of signal
generators: (a) Diagram for generating the signal of
Figure 15.35; (b) Corresponding timing diagram
showing a glitch in x; (c) Values of sel1 and sel2
with respective FSM state names; (d) State
transition diagrams of FSM1 and FSM2; (e) Final
circuit (multiplexers not shown). (See also Exercise
15.21.)

--- Page 781 ---
The timing diagram is repeated in Figure 15.37(c), showing the
names for the states (A, B, C) to be used in the FSMs. From this
diagram, the state transition diagrams of both FSMs can be
obtained and are displayed in Figure 15.37(d). Applying the 5-
step design procedure of Section 15.2 to these two diagrams,
the expressions below result.
With these expressions, the final circuit can be drawn (shown
in Figure 15.37(e)). Notice the use of the synchronization
method described in Section 15.6. The multiplexers to which
sel1 and sel2 will be connected can be constructed using any of
the techniques described in Section 11.6.
Note: For a continuation of this generic design technique for
signal generators see Exercises 15.15 and 15.16 and also
Section 23.2.
15.8 Design of Symmetric-Phase Frequency
Dividers
A signal generator is a circuit that takes the clock as the main
input and from it produces a predefined glitch-free signal at
the output (Section 14.4). As seen in Section 14.5, a
frequency divider is a particular case of signal generator in
which the output is simply a two-window signal with the
windows sometimes required to exhibit equal length (50%
duty cycle). If the clock frequency must be divided by M,
with M even, then the circuit needs to operate only at one of
the clock edges (resolution = one clock cycle, Section 15.3);
on the other hand, if M is odd, the circuit must operate at
both clock transitions (resolution = one-half clock cycle),
thus requiring a slightly more complex solution.

--- Page 782 ---
The design of this type of circuit using the FSM approach is
very simple. The problem is illustrated in Figure 15.38 for M
= 5. In Figure 15.38(a), the waveforms are shown. Because
M = 5, five states (A, B, …) are required. The circuit must
produce the waveform x1, which is ‘0’ during (M – 1)/2
clock periods and ‘1’ during (M + 1)/2 clock cycles. A copy
of x1 (called x2), delayed by one-half clock period, must also
be produced such that ANDing these two signals results in
the desired waveform (y = x1 · x2). Note that y has symmetric
phase, and its frequency is fclk/M.
FIGURE 15.38  Divide-by-5 circuit with symmetric phase:
(a) Waveforms; (b) General circuit diagram.
The circuit is depicted in Figure 15.38(b). It contains a
positive-edge FSM, which produces x1, followed by an
output stage that stores x1 at the negative transition of the
clock to produce x2. An additional (optional) flip-flop was
also included, which is needed only when x1 is subject to
glitches. The example below illustrates the use of this design
technique.
EXAMPLE 15.11 DIVIDE-BY-5 WITH
SYMMETRIC PHASE

--- Page 783 ---
Using the FSM approach, design a circuit that divides fclk by 5
and produces an output with 50% duty cycle.
SOLUTION
Our circuit must produce the waveforms depicted in Figure
15.38(a). The FSM is a 5-state machine, whose output (x1)
must be low during (M – 1)/2 = 2 clock periods and high during
(M + 1)/2 = 3 clock cycles. Hence the corresponding truth table
for x1 and nx_state is that depicted in Figure 15.39 (with
sequential binary encoding for the states), from which, with the
help of Karnaugh maps, the following equations result:
FIGURE 15.39 Symmetric-phase divide-by-5
circuit of Example 15.11.


--- Page 784 ---
Therefore, the corresponding circuit for this FSM is that within
the dark boxes in Figure 15.39. We must now make a decision
regarding whether its output (x1) is subject to glitches or not.
Looking at its expression (x1 = q2 + q1), we verify, for
example, that when the system moves from state D (q2q1q0 =
“011“) to state E (q2q1q0 = “100“), all bits change; therefore, if
q1 goes to ‘0’ before q2 has had time to grow to ‘1’, x1 = ‘0’
will occur, which constitutes a glitch because x1 was supposed
to stay high during that transition (see Figure 15.38(a)).
Consequently, the extra DFF shown at the output of the FSM is
needed. The other DFF shown in Figure 15.39, which operates
at the negative clock transition, stores x1 to produces x2, hence
resulting in y = x1 · x2 at the output.
Note: The counter above has only five states (so it requires 3
flip-flops) and is designed such that the output stays low during
(M –1)/2 clock periods and high during (M + 1)/2 periods.
Recall the approach used to design prescalers in Section 14.6,
which requires 
M/2
 flip-flops to implement a divide-by-M
circuit. Because M is 5 in the exercise above, 3 DFFs are
needed to implement the corresponding prescaler, which is the
same number of DFFs needed above (but prescalers are faster).
Moreover, they produce an output low during (M – 1)/2 clock
periods and high during (M + 1)/2 periods automatically. In
summary, when designing small symmetric-phase frequency
dividers, the prescaler approach (for the counter only, of
course) should be considered.
15.9 Finite State Machine Encoding Styles
As seen in the examples above, to design an FSM we need
first to identify and list all its states. This “enumeration”
process causes the data type used to represent the states to be
called an enumerated type. To encode it, several schemes are

--- Page 785 ---
available, which are described next. The enumerated type
color shown below (using VHDL syntax), which contains
four states, will be used as an example.
TYPE color IS (red, green, blue, white)
Sequential binary encoding: In this case, the minimum
number of bits is employed, and the states are encoded
sequentially in the same order in which they are listed. For
the type color above, two bits are needed, resulting in red =
“00” (= 0), green = “01” (= 1), blue = “10” (= 2), and white
= “11” (= 3). Its advantage is that it requires the least number
of flip-flops; with N flip-flops (N bits), up to 2N states can be
encoded. The disadvantage is that it requires more
combinational logic and so might be slower than the others.
This is the encoding style employed in all examples above,
except for Example 15.4, in which four DFFs were
employed instead of three (that system has only seven
states).
One-hot encoding: At the other extreme is the one-hot
encoding style, which uses one flip-flop per state (so with N
flip-flops only N states can be encoded). It demands the
largest number of flip-flops but the least amount of
combinational logic, being therefore the fastest. The total
amount of hardware, however, is normally larger (or even
much larger, if the number of states to be encoded is large)
than that in the previous option. For the type color above the
encoding would be red = “0001”, green = “0010”, blue =
“0100”, and white = “1000”.
Two-hot encoding: This style is in between the two styles
above. It presents 2 bits active per state. Then with N flip-
flops (N bits), up to N(N – 1)/2 states can be encoded. For
the type color above the encoding would be red = “0011”,
green = “0101”, blue = “1001”, and white = “0110”.

--- Page 786 ---
Gray encoding: Values are encoded sequentially using Gray
code (Section 2.3). For the type color above the encoding
would be red = “00”, green = “01”, blue = “11”, and white =
” ‘10”. The amount of hardware and the speed are
comparable to the sequential binary option.
User-defined encoding: This includes any other encoding
scheme chosen by the designer (as in Example 15.4).
The one-hot style might be used in applications where flip-
flops are abundant, like in FPGAs (field programmable gate
arrays, chapter 18), while in compact ASIC (application-
specific integrated circuit) implementations the sequential
binary style is often chosen. As an example, suppose that our
FSM has eight states. Then the encoding for three of the
options listed above would be that shown in Figure 15.40.
The number of flip-flops required in each case is three for
sequential binary, five for two-hot, and eight for one-hot. In
VHDL, there is a special attribute that allows the user to
choose any encoding style—it is called enum_encoding and
will be seen in Section 19.16.
FIGURE 15.40  Some encoding options for an eight-state
FSM.
EXAMPLE 15.12 ONE-HOT-ENCODED
COUNTER

--- Page 787 ---
A one-hot counter is expected to be simply a circular shift
register (Section 14.1) with only one bit high. Design a five-
state counter using one-hot encoding to verify that fact.
SOLUTION
The state transition diagram is depicted in Figure 15.41(a), and
the corresponding truth table, utilizing one-hot encoding, is
shown in Figure 15.41(b). From the truth table we obtain d4 =
q3, d3 = q2, d2 = q1, d1 = q0, and d0 = q4, which are the
equations for a circular shift register (Figure 15.41(c)).
However, no initialization scheme is provided in this design (as
is the case for any shift register), which then needs to be
provided separately. This was done in Figure 15.41(c) by
connecting the reset input to the preset port of the first flip-flop
and to the reset port of all the others, thus causing the system to
start from state A (that is, q4q3q2q1q0 = “00001“).
FIGURE 15.41 Five-state counter using one-hot
encoding (a circular shift register).
EXAMPLE 15.13 GRAY-ENCODED
COUNTER

--- Page 788 ---
This example further illustrates the use of encoding styles for
FSMs other than sequential binary. Design the five-state
counter seen in the previous example, this time encoding its
states using Gray code instead of one-hot code.
SOLUTION
The corresponding state transition diagram is shown in Figure
15.42(a) with the Gray values included. Recall, however, from
Section 2.3, that Gray codes are MSB reflected (the codewords
are reflected with respect to the central words and differ only in
the MSB position—see example in Figure 2.3), so when the
number of states is odd the resulting code is not completely
Gray, because the first and the last codewords differ in two
positions instead of one. On the other hand, when the number
of states is even, a completely Gray code results if the
codewords are picked from the codeword list starting at the
center and moving symmetrically in both directions (try this in
Figure 2.3).


--- Page 789 ---
FIGURE 15.42 Gray-encoded counter of
Example 15.13.
The truth table for the FSM of Figure 15.42(a) is presented in
Figure 15.42(b), from which, with the help of Karnaugh maps,
the following equations are obtained for nx_state:
A circuit that implements these equations is shown in Figure
15.42(c).
15.10 Exercises
1. 0-to-9 counter
a. Using the FSM approach, design a 0-to-9
counter. Prove that its equations are:
b. Compare the resulting circuit (equations)
with that designed in Example 14.3 (Figure
14.10). Which one has simpler equations?
Why?
2. Modulo-7 counter
Example 15.3 shows the design of a synchronous
modulo-23 counter. Redesign it, assuming that it must
now be a modulo-7 counter with the following
specification:
a. Counting from 0 to 6
b. Counting from 1 to 7
3. 3-to-9 counter with three flip-flops

--- Page 790 ---
a. Using the FSM approach, design a 3-to-9
counter with the minimum number of flip-
flops (that is, 3, because this machine has 7
states). Remember, however, that the actual
output (y) must be 4 bits wide to represent
all decimal numbers from 3 to 9. To reduce
the amount of combinational logic in the
conversion from 3 to 4 bits, try to find a
suitable (3-bit) representation for the FSM
states.
b. Compare the resulting circuit with that
designed in Example 14.6 (Figure 14.13).
Note, however, that sequential 0-to-6
encoding was employed there, while a
different encoding is likely to be chosen
here.
4. Counter with gray output
Redesign the counter of Example 15.3, but instead of
producing sequential binary code its output should be
Gray-encoded (see Example 15.13).
5. String comparator #1
Design an FSM that has two bit-serial inputs, a and
b, and a bit-serial output, y, whose function is to
compare a with b, producing y = ‘1’ whenever three
consecutive bits of a and b are equal (from right to
left), as depicted in the following example: a = “…
00110100”, b = “…01110110”, y = “…00110000”.
6. String comparator #2
In Example 15.5 a very simple string detector was
designed, which detects the sequence “111”.
a. Can you find a simpler (trivial) solution
for that problem? (Suggestion: Think of shift

--- Page 791 ---
registersand logic gates.) Draw the circuit
corresponding to your solution then discuss
its advantagesand disadvantages (if any)
compared to the FSM-based solution seen in
Example 15.5.
b. Suppose that now a string with 64 ones
must be detected instead of 3 ones. Is your
solution stilladvantageous? Explain.
c. Suppose that instead of only ones, the
detection involved also zeros (with an
arbitrary composition). Does this fact affect
the approach used in your solution? Explain.
7. String comparator #3
Apply the same discussion of Exercise 15.6 to the
design of Exercise 15.5. Can you find a simpler (non-
FSM-based) solution for that problem? In which
respect is your solution advantageous?
8. Circular register
Figure E15.8 shows the diagram of an FSM
controlling four switches. The machine must close
one switch at a time, in sequence (that is, A, then B,
then C, then D, then A, …), keeping it closed for n
clock periods.
a. Design an FSM that solves this exercise
for n = 1.
b. Can this exercise be solved with a circular
shift register (see Figure 14.2(c) and
Example 15.12)?
c. Repeat the exercise above for n = 1 in A, n
= 2 in B, n = 3 in C, and n = 4 in D.
d. How would your solution be if n were
much larger (for example, n = 100)?

--- Page 792 ---
9. Extension of Example 15.6
FIGURE E15.8
The FSM depicted in Figure E15.9 is somewhat
similar to that in Example 15.6 but with an input
variable (x) added to it (it is now a Mealy machine).
For the circuit to move from state A to state B, not
only a certain amount of time (time_up) must pass,
but x = ‘1’ must also occur. The time counting should
only start after x = ‘1’ is received, resetting it if x =
‘0’ happens before time_up has been completed. A
similar condition is defined for the circuit to return
from B to A. Design the corresponding circuit,
considering that time_up and time_down are three
and five clock periods, respectively, as in Example
15.6.
10. Frequency divider with symmetric phase
FIGURE E15.9

--- Page 793 ---
Using the FSM approach, design a circuit that divides
the clock frequency by M and produces an output
with 50% duty cycle (see Section 15.8). Design two
circuits, as indicated below, then compare the results.
a. For M = 6
b. For M = 7
How would your solution be if M were large, for
example 60 or 61 instead of 6 or 7?
11. Signal generator #1
Design an FSM capable of deriving, from clk, the
waveforms x and y shown in the center of Figure
E15.11-12. Was Step 5 of the design procedure
necessary in your solution?
12. Signal generator #2
FIGURE E15.11–12
Design an FSM capable of deriving, from clk, the
waveforms x and y shown on the right hand side of
Figure E15.11-12. Was Step 5 of the design
procedure necessary in your solution?
13. Signal generator #3
Design an FSM capable of deriving, from clk, the
waveform shown on the left of Figure E15.13-14,
where T0 is the clock period.
14. Signal generator #4
a. Using the approach described in Section
15.4 (see Example 15.7), design an FSM

--- Page 794 ---
capable ofderiving, from clk, the waveform
shown on the right of Figure E15.13-14.
b. Can you suggest another approach to
solve this exercise?
15. Generic signal generator design #1
FIGURE E15.13–14
This exercise concerns the generic design technique
for arbitrary binary waveform generators described in
Section 15.7.
a. Show that a glitch can only occur in x
during the following mux transitions: (i)
from clk to ‘1’, (ii)from clk to clk′, (iii) from
clk′ to ‘0’, and (iv) from clk′ to clk.
b. Employing the approach of Section 15.7,
design a circuit that produces the waveform
of Figure 15.34(b).
c. Applying the technique for reduction to a
quasi-single machine described in Section
15.6, redraw the circuit obtained above.
d. Can you suggest another “universal”
approach for the design of signal generators
(with maxi-mum resolution)?
16. Generic signal generator design #2
a. Using the technique described in Section
15.7, design a circuit capable of producing
the waveform shown in Figure E15.16.
Notice that the sequence that comprises this
signal is {clk → ‘1’ →clk → clk → ‘0’}.

--- Page 795 ---
b. Applying the technique for reduction to a
quasi-single machine described in Section
15.6, redraw the circuit obtained above.
17. Car alarm
FIGURE E15.16
Utilizing the FSM approach, design a circuit for a car
alarm. As indicated in Figure E15.17(a), it should
have four inputs, called clk, rst, sensors, and remote,
and one output, called siren. For the FSM, there
should be at least three states, called disarmed,
armed, and intrusion, as illustrated in Figure
E15.17(b). If remote = ‘1’ occurs, the system must
change from disarmed to armed or vice versa
depending on its current state. If armed, it must
change to intrusion when sensors = ‘1’ happens, thus
activating the siren (siren = ‘1’). To disarm it, another
remote = ‘1’ command is needed.
FIGURE E15.17
Note: Observe that this machine, as depicted in
Figure E15.17(b), exhibits a major flaw because it

--- Page 796 ---
does not require remote to go to ‘0’ before being
valid again. For example, when the system changes
from disarmed to armed, it starts flipping back and
forth between these two states if the command
remote = ‘1’ lasts several clock cycles.
Suggestion: The machine of Figure E15.17(b) can be
fixed by introducing intermediate (temporary) states
in which the system waits until remote = ‘0’ occurs.
Another solution is to use some kind of flag that
monitors the signal remote to make sure that only
after it goes through zero a new state transition is
allowed to occur.
Hint: After solving this exercise, see Section 23.3.
18. Garage door controller
Design a controller for an electric garage door,
which, as indicated in Figure E15.18, should have,
besides clock and reset, four other inputs: remote (=
‘1’ when the remote control is activated), open (= ‘1’
when the door is completely open, provided by a
sensor), closed (= ‘1’ when the door is completely
closed, also provided by a sensor), and timer (= ‘1’
30 s after open = ‘1’ occurs). At the output, the
following signals must be produced: power (when ‘1’
turns the electric motor on) and direction (when ‘0’
the motor rotates in the direction to open the door,
when ‘1’ in the direction to close it).


--- Page 797 ---
FIGURE E15.18
The system should present the following features:
i. If the remote is pressed while the door is
closed, immediately turn the motor on to
open it.
ii. If the remote is pressed while the door is
open, immediately turn the motor on to close
it.
iii. If the remote is pressed while the door is
opening or closing, immediately stop it. If
pressedagain, the remote should cause the
door to go in the opposite direction.
iv. The door should not remain open for
more than a certain amount of time (for
example, 30 s);this information is provided
by an external timer.
a. Given the specifications above, would any
glitches (during state transitions) be a
problem forthis system?
b. Estimate the number of flip-flops
necessary to implement this circuit. Does the
clock frequencyaffect this number? Why?
c. Design this circuit using the formal FSM
design technique described in Section 15.2
(assume areasonable frequency for clk).
Note: See the observation in Exercise 15.17 about
how to avoid the effect of long remote = ‘1’
commands.
19. Switch debouncer
When we press or change the position of a
mechanical switch, bounces are expected to occur
before the switch finally settles in the desired

--- Page 798 ---
position. For that reason, any mechanical switch must
be debounced in an actual design. This can be done
by simply counting a minimum number of clock
cycles to guarantee that the switch has been in the
same state for at least a certain amount of time (for
example, 5 milliseconds). In this exercise, the
following debouncing criteria should be adopted:
Switch closed (y = ‘0’): x must stay low
for at least 5 ms without interruption.
Switch open (y = ‘1’): x must stay high
for at least 5 ms without interruption.
a. Assuming that a clock with frequency 1
kHz is available, design an FSM capable of
debouncing theswitch of Figure E15.19.
However, before starting, estimate the
number of DFFs that will be needed.
b. How many DFFs would be needed if the
clock frequency were 1 MHz?
FIGURE E15.19
Note: In chapter 23 (Exercise 23.3) you will be asked
to solve this problem using VHDL. Check then if
your predictions for the number of flip-flops made
here were correct.
20. Quasi-single FSM #1

--- Page 799 ---
Compare the two architectures for multi-machine
designs described in Section 15.6 (Figures 15.32(b)
and (c)). Is the reduction to a quasi-single machine
always advantageous? (Hint: Think of an FSM with
few states but a large number of output bits).
21. Quasi-single FSM #2
a. Employing the quasi-single-machine
reduction procedure described in Section
15.6, redraw thecircuit of Example 15.9
(Figure 15.33)
b. Was it advantageous in this case?
c. Would it be advantageous in the case of
Example 15.10?
15.11 Exercises with VHDL
See chapter 23, Section 23.5.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 800 ---
16
Volatile Memories
Chapter Contents
16.1 Memory Types
16.2 Static Random Access Memory
(SRAM)
16.3 Dual and Quad Data Rate (DDR, QDR)
SRAMs
16.4 Dynamic Random Access Memory
(DRAM)
16.5 Synchronous DRAM (SDRAM)
16.6 Dual Data Rate (DDR, DDR2, DDR3)
SDRAMs
16.7 Content-Addressable Memory (CAM)
for Cache Memories
16.8 Exercises
Objective:
Virtually any digital system requires some kind of memory, so understanding
how memories are built, their main features, and how they work is
indispensable. Volatile memories are described in this chapter, while
nonvolatile ones are described in the next. The following volatile types are

--- Page 801 ---
included below: SRAM (regular, DDR, and QDR), DRAM, SDRAM (regular,
DDR, DDR2, and DDR3), and CAM.
16.1 Memory Types
The enormous need in modern applications for large and
efficient solid-state memory has driven MOS technology to
new standards, so a discussion on MOS technology would
not be complete without the inclusion of memories.
Memories are normally classified according to their data-
retention capability as volatile and nonvolatile. Volatile
memory is also called RAM (random access memory), while
nonvolatile is also (for historic reasons) called ROM (read
only memory). Within each of these two groups, further
classification exists, as shown in the lists below. Some
promising next-generation memories are also included in this
list and will be seen in Chapter 17.
Volatile memories (Chapter 16):
 SRAM (static RAM)
 DDR and QDR (dual and quad data rate) SRAM
 DRAM (dynamic RAM)
 SDRAM (synchronous DRAM)
 DDR/DDR2/DDR3 SDRAM (dual data rate
SDRAM)
 CAM (content-addressable memory) for cache
memories
Nonvolatile memories (Chapter 17):
 MP-ROM (mask-programmed ROM)

--- Page 802 ---
 OTP-ROM (one-time-programmable ROM, also
called PROM)
 EPROM (electrically programmable ROM)
 EEPROM (electrically erasable programmable
ROM)
 Flash (also called flash EEPROM)
Next generation memories (Chapter 17):
 FRAM (ferroelectric RAM)
 MRAM (magnetoresistive RAM)
 PRAM (phase-change RAM)
16.2 Static Random Access Memory (SRAM)
SRAM is one of the most traditional memory types. Its cells
are fast, simple to fabricate, and retain data without the need
for refresh as long as the power is not turned off. A popular
SRAM application is in the construction of computer cache
memory (shown in Section 16.7).
SRAM circuit
A common SRAM cell implementation is the so-
called 6T (six transistor) cell depicted in Figure
16.1(a). It consists of two cross-coupled CMOS
inverters plus two access nMOS transistors
responsible for connecting the inverters to the
input/output bit lines (BLs) when the
corresponding word line (WL) is asserted. A 3 × 3
(3 words of 3 bits each) SRAM array is illustrated
in Figure 16.1(b).

--- Page 803 ---
FIGURE 16.1  (a) Traditional 6T SRAM cell;
(b) 3 × 3 SRAM array.
Memory-read
One of the methods for reading the SRAM cell of
Figure 16.1(a) consists of first precharging both
BLs to VDD, which are then left floating. Next, WL
is asserted, causing one of the BLs to be pulled
down. This procedure is illustrated in Figure 16.2,
which shows q=‘0’ and q′=‘1’ as the current
contents of the SRAM cell. The latter causes M1 to
be ON and M2 to be OFF, while the former causes
M3 to be OFF and M4 to be ON. After bit and bit′
have been both precharged to ‘1’ and left floating,
the access transistors, M5 and M6, are turned ON
by the respective WL. Because M3 is OFF, the BL
corresponding to bit′ will remain high, while the
other will be pulled down (because M1 is ON),
hence resulting in bit=‘0’ and bit′=‘1’ at the output.
FIGURE 16.2  One option for reading the 6T
SRAM cell.

--- Page 804 ---
A major concern in the memory-read procedure
described above is the large parasitic capacitance
of the (long) bit lines. When M5 is turned ON
(recall that M1 is already ON), the high voltage of
the bit line causes the voltage on the intermediate
node q (=0 V) to be pulled up momentarily. The
value of this ΔV depends on the relative values of
the channel resistances of M1 and M5. Even
though the voltage on node q will return to zero
eventually, it should be prevented from going
above the threshold voltage of M3 ( ∼ 0.5 V), or, at
least, it should stay well below the transition
voltage (VTR, Equation 9.7) of the M3–M4
inverter, otherwise M3 might be turned ON, thus
reverting (corrupting) the stored bits.
This protection, called read stability, is achieved
with M1 stronger (that is, with a larger channel
width-to-length ratio) than M5. A minimum-size
transistor can then be used for M5 (and M6), while
a wider channel (typically around twice the width
of M5) is employed for M1 (and M3).
Another concern in this memory-read procedure
regards the time needed for M1–M5 to pull the
respective BL down, which, due to the large
parasitic capacitance, tends to be high. To speed
this process up, a sense amplifier (described later)
is usually employed at each bit line.
Another memory-read alternative is to precharge
the BLs to VDD/2 instead of VDD, which prevents
data corruption even if the transistors are not sized
properly, and it has the additional advantage of
causing a smaller swing to the BL voltages, thus

--- Page 805 ---
reducing the power consumption and improving
speed (at the expense of noise margin).
Memory-write
The memory-write procedure is illustrated in
Figure 16.3(a). Suppose that the SRAM cell
contains q=‘0’, which we want to overwrite with a
‘1’. First, bit=‘1’ and bit′=‘0’ are applied to the
corresponding BLs, then WL is pulsed high. Due
to the read stability constraint, M5 might not be
able to turn the voltage on node q high enough to
reverse the stored bits, so this must be
accomplished by M6. This signifies that M6, in
spite of M4 being ON, should be able to lower the
voltage of q′ sufficiently to turn M1 OFF (that is,
below M1’s threshold voltage, ∼ 0.5 V), or, at
least, well below the transition voltage (VTR) of the
M1–M2 inverter. For this to happen, the channel
resistance of M6 must be smaller than that of M4
(that is, M6 should be stronger than M4). Because
M6 is nMOS and M4 is pMOS (which by itself
guarantees a factor of about 2.5 to 3 due to the
higher charge mobility of nMOS transistors—
Sections 9.1 and 9.2), same-size transistors suffice
to attain the proper protection. In summary, M2,
M4, M5, and M6 can all be minimumsize
transistors, while M1 and M3 must be larger.

--- Page 806 ---
FIGURE 16.3  (a) SRAM memory-write
procedure; (b) SRAM memory-write circuitry.
Finally, note that there are several ways of
applying the ‘0’ and ‘1’ voltages to the BLs in
Figure 16.3(a), with one alternative depicted in
Figure 16.3(b). Both BLs are precharged to VDD,
then left floating; next, a write-enable (WE) pulse
is applied to the upper pair of nMOS transistors,
causing one of the BLs to be lowered to ‘0’ while
the other remains at ‘1’.
SRAM chip architecture
A typical architecture for an SRAM chip is
depicted in Figure 16.4. In this example, the size
of the array is 16 × 8 × 4, meaning that it contains
16 rows and 8 columns of 4-bit words (see the
diagram on the right-hand side of Figure 16.4).
Two address decoders (Section 11.5) are needed to
select the proper row and the proper column.
Because there are 16 rows and 8 columns, 4 (A0–
A3) plus 3 (A4–A6) address bits are required,
respectively. As can be seen in the figure, the four
data I/O pins (D0–D3) are bidirectional and are
connected to input and output tri-state buffers,
which are controlled by the signals 
  (chip

--- Page 807 ---
enable), 
  (write enable), and 
  (output
enable).
FIGURE 16.4  Typical SRAM chip
architecture. In this example, the array size is 16
rows by 8 columns of 4-bit words (see the diagram
on the right). Two address decoders, 7 address bits,
and 4 I/O lines are needed. Memory-write occurs
when 
 =
 =‘0’, while memory-read happens
when 
 =
 =‘0’ and 
 =‘1’. 
 =‘1’ causes the
chip to be powered down.
To write data into the memory, in=‘1’ must be
produced, which occurs when 
  and 
  are both
low. To read data, out=‘1’ is required, which
happens when 
  and 
  are low and 
  is high.
When 
  is high, the chip is powered down (this
saves energy by lowering the internal supply
voltage and by disabling the decoders and sense
amplifiers). Data, of course, remains intact while
in the standby (power down) mode.
Sense amplifier

--- Page 808 ---
To speed up SRAM memory accesses, a sense
amplifier is used at each bit line. An example is
depicted in Figure 16.5, which contains two
sections, that is, an equalizer and the sense
amplifier proper.
FIGURE 16.5  Differential sense amplifier
(plus equalizer) for SRAM memories.
As described earlier, the memory-read procedure
starts with a precharge phase in which both BLs
are precharged to VDD. That is the purpose of the
equalizer shown in the upper part of Figure 16.5.
When equalize′=‘0’, all three pMOS transistors are
turned ON, raising and equalizing the voltages on
all BLs. To increase speed, it is not necessary to
wait for the BLs to be completely precharged;
however, it is indispensable that they be
precharged to exactly the same voltage, which is

--- Page 809 ---
achieved by the horizontal pMOS transistor. When
the BLs have been precharged and equalized, they
are allowed to float (equalize′=‘1’). Next, one of
the WLs is selected, so each SRAM cell in that
row will pull one of the BLs down. After the
voltage difference between bit and bit′ has reached
a certain value (for example, 0.5 V), sense is
asserted, powering the cross-coupled inverters that
constitute the sense amplifier. The side with the
higher voltage will turn the nMOS transistor of the
opposite inverter ON, which will then help pull its
BL down and will also turn the opposite pMOS
transistor ON, hence establishing a positive-
feedback loop that causes one of the BL voltages
to rapidly decrease toward ‘0’ while the other
remains at ‘1’. Also, as mentioned earlier (in the
description of the memory-read procedure), the
BLs can be precharged to VDD/2 instead of VDD,
which has the additional benefits already described
(at the expense of noise margin).
16.3 Dual and Quad Data Rate (DDR, QDR)
SRAMs
As seen above, conventional SRAM chips (Figure 16.4) are
asynchronous. To improve and optimize operation, modern
SRAM architectures are synchronous, so all inputs and
outputs are registered and all operations are controlled
directly by the system clock or by a clock derived from it
(hence synchronized to it). Moreover, they allow DDR (dual
data rate) operation, which consists of processing data (that
is, reading or writing) at both clock transitions, hence
doubling the throughput.

--- Page 810 ---
An extension of DDR is QDR (quad data rate), which is
achieved with the use of two independent data buses, one for
data in (memory-write) and the other for data out (memory-
read), both operating in DDR mode.
Dual-bus operation is based on dual-port cells, which are
derived directly from the 6T SRAM cell seen in Figure
16.1(a), with two options depicted in Figure 16.6. In Figure
16.6(a), the “write” part of the cell is shown, which utilizes
the left bit line to enter the bit value to be written into the
cell. In Figure 16.6(b), the “read” part is shown, with the
read bit output through the right bit line (bit*). In Figure
16.6(c), these two parts are put together to produce the
complete dual-port cell. Another alternative is shown in
Figure 16.6(d), which is simpler but requires more word and
bit lines and also exhibits a poor isolation between the
bita/bita′ and bitb/bitb′ bit lines.
FIGURE 16.6  Dual-port SRAM cell. In (a) and (b), the
“write” and “read” parts of the 6T cell are shown, respectively,
which are put together in (c) to produce the complete dual-port
cell. A simpler dual-port cell is depicted in (d), but it requires
more word and bit lines, and the bit lines are poorly isolated.
A simplified diagram for a QDR SRAM chip is shown in
Figure 16.7, which shows two data buses (data_in and

--- Page 811 ---
data_out) plus an address bus, all of which are registered.
Two clocks are shown, called K and C; the former is for
writing, while the second is for reading. 
 and 
  are read
and write control signals, respectively. In this example, the
memory size is 72 Mbits, distributed in 2M rows, each with
a single 36-bit word. As in the SDRAMs described ahead,
the operation of QDR SRAMs is based on synchronous
pipelined bursts.
FIGURE 16.7  Simplified QDR SRAM chip diagram.
To conclude the study of SRAMs, a summary of typical
specifications for large, modern, single-die, standalone QDR
SRAM chips is presented below.
 Density: 72 Mbits
 Bit organization: rows and columns
 Maximum operating frequency: 400 MHz
 Maximum data rate: 800 Mbps in + 800 Mbps
out per line
 Burst length: 1, 2, 4, or 8
 Supply voltage: 1.8 V
 I/O type: HSTL-18 (Section 10.9)

--- Page 812 ---
16.4 Dynamic Random Access Memory (DRAM)
Like SRAMs, DRAMs are also volatile. However, contrary
to SRAMs, they must be refreshed periodically (every few
milliseconds) because information is stored onto very small
capacitors. They are also slower than SRAMs. On the other
hand, DRAM cells are very small and inexpensive, hence
allowing the construction of very dense low-cost memory
arrays. A very popular application of DRAMs is as main
(bulk) computer memory.
DRAM circuit
The most popular DRAM cell is the 1T-1C (one
transistor plus one capacitor) cell, depicted in the 3
× 3 array of Figure 16.8(a). The construction of the
capacitor is a very specialized task; examples are
trench capacitor (constructed vertically) and
stacked capacitor (multilayer). A simplified
diagram illustrating the construction of the 1T-1C
cell using a trench capacitor is presented in Figure
16.8(b).


--- Page 813 ---
FIGURE 16.8  (a) 3 × 3 DRAM array
employing 1T-1C cells; (b) Simplified cell view with
trench capacitor.
Memory-read
To read data from this memory, first the BL is
precharged to VDD/2 then is left floating. Next, the
proper WL is asserted, causing the voltage of BL
to be raised (if a ‘1’ is stored) or lowered (when
the cell contains a ‘0’).
As with the SRAM cell, a major concern in this
procedure is the large parasitic capacitance of the
(long) bit line, CBL (illustrated at the bottom-left
corner of Figure 16.8(a)). Because a single
transistor must pull BL down or up and its source
is not connected to ground, but rather to the cell
capacitor, Ccell, the voltage variation ΔV that it will
cause on BL depends on the relative values of
these two capacitors, that is ΔV=
(Ccell/(CBL+Ccell))VDD/2. Because Ccell
 CBL (for
compactness), ΔV can be very small, hence
reducing the noise margin and making the use of
sense amplifiers indispensable. Note that the
reading procedure alters the charge stored in the
DRAM cells, so the sense amplifiers’ outputs must
be rewritten into the memory array.
Memory-write
To write data into the DRAM cell of Figure
16.8(a) the bit values must be applied to the bit
lines, then the proper word line is pulsed high,
causing the capacitors to be charged (if bit=‘1’) or

--- Page 814 ---
discharged (if bit=‘0’). Note that, due to the
threshold voltage (VT) of the nMOS transistor,
Ccell is charged to VDD–VT instead of VDD.
DRAM chip architecture
An example of DRAM chip architecture is
depicted in Figure 16.9. In this case, the array size
is 256 rows by 256 columns of 4-bit words. All
inputs are registered, while the outputs are not. The
row and column addresses (a total of 16 bits) are
multiplexed. The memory array is controlled by
the signals (1)–(6) generated by the timing and
control unit after processing 
 (output enable),
 (write enable), 
  (row address strobe), and
 (column address strobe). As can be seen, (1)–
(3) serve to store the row address, the column
address, and the input data, respectively, while (4)
and (5) control the input and output tri-state
buffers. (6) is used to power the chip down
(standby mode) to save energy (this is normally
achieved by lowering the internal supply voltage
and by disabling the decoders and sense
amplifiers). As in the SRAM chip, data are
obviously maintained while in standby mode.

--- Page 815 ---
FIGURE 16.9  Simplified view of a
conventional DRAM chip. In this example, the array
size is 256 rows by 256 columns of 4-bit words. All
inputs are registered, while the outputs are not. The
row and column addresses (total of 16 bits) are
multiplexed. The memory array is controlled by the
signals (1)–(6) generated by the timing and control
unit after processing 
 (output enable), 
  (write
enable), 
  (row address strobe), and 
  (column
address strobe).
The write/read sequences for the device of Figure
16.9 can be summarized as follows. To write data,
the row address is presented, then 
  is lowered
to store that address. Next, the column address is
presented, and 
  is lowered to store it. Finaly,
 is lowered to latch the input data and store it
into the memory. To read data, the same address
storage sequence is needed, followed by 
 =‘0’,
which activates the output buffers.
DRAM refresh

--- Page 816 ---
One important difference between DRAMs and
SRAMs is the need for refresh in the former,
which makes them more complex to operate. To
refresh the memory, several schemes are normally
available, among which is the CAS-before-RAS
procedure, which consists of lowering 
  before
 is lowered. With 
  low, every time 
  is
pulsed low one row is refreshed. In this case, the
external addresses are ignored and the row
addresses (needed for refresh) are generated
internally by a counter in the timing and control
unit. This sequence of pulses must obey the
maximum delay allowed between refreshes. For
example, if the maximum delay is 16 ms, then the
minimum frequency for the 
  pulses in the
example of Figure 16.9 is 256 / 16 ms=16 kHz.
Sense amplifier
As with SRAMs, many sense amplifiers have been
developed for DRAM memories. An example
(called open bit-line architecture) is shown in
Figure 16.10, which is an extension of that used in
Figure 16.5. Because DRAMs are single-ended,
while SRAMs exhibit differential outputs, to
employ the differential circuit described previously
each bit line is broken into two halves, as indicated
in Figure 16.10(a), where for simplicity only one
column is displayed. This column was redrawn
horizon-tally in Figure 16.10(b), with the sense
amplifier inserted in the center, plus two dummy
DRAM cells, one on each side of the amplifier. A
memory-read process starts with equalize=‘1’,
which precharges and equalizes the voltages of

--- Page 817 ---
BL1 and BL2 to VDD/2. During this time, dummy1
and dummy2 are also asserted, charging their
respective capacitors also to VDD/2. Next, the BLs
and the dummies are left floating, and the proper
WL is asserted. When a WL on the left is selected,
dummy2 is asserted as well, maintaining BL2 at
VDD/2, which acts as a reference voltage for the
differential sense amplifier. The voltage of BL1
will necessarily grow or decrease, depending on
whether the selected cell contains a ‘1’ or a ‘0’,
respectively. After the differential voltage between
BL1 and BL2 reaches a certain value (for example,
0.2 V), sense is asserted, activating the sense
amplifier, and dummy2 is unasserted. The
amplifier causes BL1 to rapidly move toward ‘1’
or ‘0’, while BL2 moves in the opposite direction,
thus producing bit=BL1 and bit′=BL2 at the
output. Note that when a WL on the right of the
sense amplifier is selected, dummy1 is used to
produce the reference voltage, in which case
bit=BL2 and bit′=BL1.

--- Page 818 ---
FIGURE 16.10  Differential sense amplifier
(called open bit-line architecture) for DRAM arrays.
16.5 Synchronous DRAM (SDRAM)
Next we describe several improvements that have been
incorporated onto traditional DRAM chips. These
improvements, however, affect only their operation because
the storage cell still is the 1T-1C cell seen in Figure 16.8.
The following architectures are covered below: SDRAM,
DDR SDRAM, DDR2 SDRAM, and DDR3 SDRAM.
Instead of conventional DRAMs, modern main computer
memories are constructed with synchronous DRAMs
(SDRAMs). While the former requires a separate controller,
the whole system is built in the same chip in the latter. By
eliminating the need for communication between separate
chips, a speed closer to that of the CPU is achieved.
A simplified diagram for an SDRAM chip is depicted in
Figure 16.11. As can be seen, the inputs and outputs are all
registered, and the overall operation is controlled by an
external clock derived from (hence synchronized to) the

--- Page 819 ---
system clock. The main inputs are address and data, while
the only output is data (bidirectional). There are also clock
(CLK) and clock enable (CKE) inputs, plus five control
inputs, that is, 
  (chip select), 
  (write enable), 
  (row
address strobe), 
  (column address strobe), and DQM
(data mask). As before, 
  and 
  store row and column
addresses, respectively, at the positive clock edge; 
enables the memory-write operation; and 
  enables or
disables the device (when high, it masks all inputs except
CLK, CKE, and DQM). The purpose of CKE, when low, is to
freeze the clock, to power down the chip (standby mode),
and also to activate the self-refresh mode (described below).
Finally, DQM serves to mask the input and output data when
active (the inputs are masked and the output buffers are put
in high-impedance mode).
FIGURE 16.11  Simplified SDRAM chip diagram.
Comparing the diagram of Figure 16.11 to that of a
traditional DRAM (Figure 16.9), several differences are
observed. First, to cope with the large memory size, a three-
dimensional addressing scheme is employed, that is, besides

--- Page 820 ---
row and column addresses, a block address is also included.
In this example, the total memory size is 1 Gbits, divided
into 4 blocks, each with 8192 rows by 8192 columns of 4-bit
words. Another difference is the presence of CLK and CKE,
which are needed because this DRAM is synchronous. As
mentioned above, when CKE=‘1’ the memory operates as
usual, while CKE=‘0’ freezes the clock, powers the chip
down (standby mode), and also activates the self-refresh
scheme.
Self-refresh is another important feature of SDRAMs, which
present two refresh schemes, called auto-refresh and self-
refresh. The former is similar to the CAS-before-RAS mode
described for regular DRAMs, while the latter is even
simpler because no external clocking is needed. When CKE
is lowered, the timing and control unit generates not only the
addresses, but also the clock signal (with the appropriate
minimum refresh period) needed to refresh all SDRAM
locations. The minimum refresh period is typically in the 10
ms–100 ms range. Suppose that for the SDRAM of Figure
16.11 it is 64 ms. Then, taking into account that all blocks
and columns are refreshed simultaneously (one row at a
time, of course), only row addresses need to be generated.
Because there are 8192 rows, the minimum frequency for the
internal refresh clock is 8192/64 ms=128 kHz.
Another important feature of SDRAMs is that they are burst
oriented, that is, a memory-read command causes several
sequential (or interleaved) data words to be read with the
burst length pro-grammable between 1 and 8. There is,
however, a clock latency (CL) penalty associated with every
memory-read command (due to pipelined operation). When
such a command is given, the controller must wait CL clock
cycles (CL is measured in clock cycles, and it ranges
typically between 2 and 5) before the first data-out word is

--- Page 821 ---
valid. However, the succeeding words are retrieved at full
clock speed.
The SDRAM architecture described above served as the
basis for the creation of the so-called dual data rate (DDR)
versions of SDRAM, which allow faster memory access and
lower power consumption. Therefore, even though SDRAM
chips, as originally conceived, are now of little interest, the
versions derived from it are used as bulk (main) memory in
basically any computer (desktop or laptop) as well as in
basically any other computing device. Such SDRAM
derivations are described below.
16.6 Dual Data Rate (DDR, DDR2, DDR3)
SDRAMs
As mentioned above, dual data rate (DDR) is a variation of
the SDRAM architecture described in the previous section.
DDR, DDR2, and DDR3 memories transfer data at both
clock transitions (positive and negative clock edges), thus
achieving twice the throughput for the same clock frequency.
They are used as main memory in personal computers,
where they operate over a 64-bit data bus. Due to their
compactness, low cost, and relatively high performance, they
are used as main memory in all sorts of electronic gadgets.
DDR is a perfected SRAM memory, operating with a power
supply of 2.5 V, against 3.3 V of regular SDRAM. The
specified minimum and maximum clock frequencies are 100
MHz and 200 MHz. A 2-bit prefetch is employed so data can
be transferred at both edges, achieving 200 to 400 MTps
(Tps=transfers per second). Because each transfer contains
64 bits (8 bytes), the total data rate is 1.6 to 3.2 GBps. The

--- Page 822 ---
type of I/O used to access this memory is SSTL_2 (studied
in Section 10.9—see Figures 10.29 and 10.32).
All SDRAM memories for computer applications are
available in the form of modules. A module is a small printed
circuit board on which several SDRAM chips are installed,
creating a larger memory array, which can be plugged
directly into receptacles available on the motherboard. Such
modules are known by the acronym DIMM (dual inline
memory module). For DDRs intended for desktop PCs, the
DIMM contains 184 pins, like that shown in Figure 16.12.
The capacity of such modules normally fall in the 256 MB–2
GB range.
FIGURE 16.12  DIMM (dual inline memory module) with
DDR SDRAM chips for desktop computers.
DDR2 differs from DDR in its internal construction,
allowing twice the throughput. It is operated with two
clocks, one for the memory, another for the I/O bus. The
memory clock still ranges from 100 to 200 MHz, as in DDR,
but now the prefetch depth is 4 bits instead of 2. The I/O
clock operates at twice the speed, so because data is
transferred at both of its edges, 400 to 800 MTps occur.
Because each transfer again contains 64 bits (8 bytes), the
total data rate is 3.2 to 6.4 GBps.
A comparison between DDR, DDR2, and DDR3 is shown in
Figure 16.13. A major improvement in DDR2 with respect to

--- Page 823 ---
DDR is ODT (on-die termination), which consists of
bringing the termination resistors used for impedance
matching (to avoid reflected signals in the PCB traces, which
are treated as transmission lines) from the PCB into the die.
Such resistors, of values 50 Ω, 75Ω, and 150Ω, are
selectively connected between the data pins and VDD or
GND to optimize high-frequency I/O operation. Another
important difference is the lower power consumption of
DDR2 (the power supply was reduced from 2.5 V to 1.8 V).
The I/O standard used in DDR2 is SSTL_18 (Section 10.9—
see Figures 10.29 and 10.33).
FIGURE 16.13  Main features of DDR, DDR2, and DDR3
SDRAM memories.
Typical DDR2 chip densities are in the 256 Mb–2 Gb range.
The corresponding DIMM, for the case of desktop PCs,
contains 240 pins, with a total memory generally in the 512

--- Page 824 ---
MB–4 GB range. Denser DIMMs for other applications also
exist.
The most recent addition to the SDRAM family is DDR3. As
shown in Figure 16.13, it too operates with two clocks, one
for the memory, the other for the I/O bus. The memory clock
still ranges from 100 to 200 MHz, as in DDR and DDR2, but
now the prefetch depth is 8 bits, and the I/O clock frequency
is four times that of the memory clock. Because data are
transferred at both I/O clock edges, 800 to 1600 MTps can
occur. Because each transfer again contains 64 bits (8 bytes),
the total data rate is 6.4 to 12.8 GBps. Note in Figure 16.13
that DDR3 employs a power supply of 1.5 V, which causes a
power consumption about 30% lower than DDR2. The I/O
standard used in DDR3 is SSTL_15 (Section 10.9).
DDR3 chip densities are expected to range typically from
512 Mb to 4 Gb. The corresponding DIMM, for the case of
desktop PCs, contains again 240 pins, with the total memory
expected to be typically in the 512 MB–8 GB range.
16.7 Content-Addressable Memory (CAM) for
Cache Memories
The last volatile memory to be described is CAM (content-
addressable memory). To read a traditional memory, an
address is presented, to which the memory responds with the
contents stored in that address. The opposite occurs in a
CAM: instead of an address, a content is presented, to which
the memory responds with a hit if such a content is stored in
the memory, or with a miss if it is not. This type of memory,
also called associative memory, is used in applications where
performing a “match” operation is necessary.

--- Page 825 ---
A simplified view of a CAM application is shown in Figure
16.14. It consists of a regular computer memory structure,
where the CPU operates with a cache memory, followed by
the main memory, and finally a hard disk. The cache is
constructed in the same chip as the CPU, so they can
communicate at full clock speed. The main memory, which
is of DRAM type, is constructed in separate chips, so it
communicates with the CPU at a much lower speed than the
cache. The hard disk is even slower, so it is the most
undesirable data location for high-speed programs.
FIGURE 16.14  Simplified view of a CAM application, as
part of a fully associative cache memory in a regular computer
memory structure.
As can be seen, the cache memory consists of two main
blocks (besides cache control), that is, CAM and SRAM.
The former stores tags, while the latter stores data. The tags
are (part of) the addresses of the main memory whose
contents are available also in the cache (SRAM). In other
words, the CAM stores addresses while the SRAM stores the
corresponding data.
In this example we assume that the cache is fully associative.
In simplified terms, its operation is as follows. To retrieve
data from the memory system, the CPU sends an address out
through the address bus. The CAM compares the received
address against all addresses (tags) stored in it (in a single

--- Page 826 ---
iteration), responding with hit=‘1’ when a match is found or
with hit=‘0’ (a miss) otherwise. When a hit occurs, the match
line of the matched tag asserts the corresponding word line
(WL) in the SRAM, causing its content to be placed on the
data bus (hit=‘1’ is necessary to inform that is a valid data
word). When a miss occurs, the CPU retrieves the data from
the main memory, in which case the data are copied also into
the cache for future use.
Figures 16.15(a) and (b) show two CAM cell
implementations, called 9T (nine-transistor) CAM and 10T
CAM, respectively. The upper part of either cell is a
conventional 6T SRAM (Figure 16.1(a)), while the other
transistors constitute the match circuitry. If the input bit does
not coincide with that stored in the SRAM, the match line
(ML) is pulled down. Therefore, for a ML to remain high, all
incoming bits must match all bits stored in the CAM cells
that belong to the same row. This computation is illustrated
in Figure 16.15(c), where pseudo-nMOS logic (Section 10.7)
was employed. If all MLs are pulled down, then hit=‘0’ (a
miss) is produced by the final OR gate, while hit=‘1’ occurs
when a match is found. Notice that the CAM match lines
(MLs) are word lines (WLs) for the SRAM array.

--- Page 827 ---
FIGURE 16.15  (a) 9T CAM cell; (b) 10T CAM cell; (c)
Generation of “hit” with pseudo-nMOS logic.
16.8 Exercises
1. SRAM array
Consider the SRAM architecture depicted in Figure
16.4.
a. How many transistors are needed to
construct its 16 × 8 × 4 SRAM core?
b. Explain how the address decoders work
(see Section 11.5). How many output bits
does each decoder have? How many bits are
active at a time?
2. SSR/QDR SRAM array
a. If, instead of SRAM cells, DDR SRAM
cells were employed in the 16 × 8 × 4 core
of Figure 16.4, how many transistors would
be needed?
b. And if QDR SRAM cells were used
instead?

--- Page 828 ---
3. QDR SRAM chip
In Figure 16.7 a simplified diagram for a QDR
SRAM chip was presented. Additionally, typical
parameters for this kind of chip were included at the
end of Section 16.3.
a. Check memory data sheets for the largest
chips of this type that you can find. What is
its bit capacity?
b. Make a simplified diagram for it (as in
Figure 16.7).
c. Check its speed, supply voltage, and type
of I/O.
4. SRAM versus DRAM
a. Briefly describe the main conceptual
differences between SRAM and DRAM.
b. Physically speaking, how is a bit stored in
an SRAM cell, and how is it stored in a
DRAM cell?
c. If the 16 × 8 × 4 core of Figure 16.4 were
constructed with DRAM cells, how many
transistors (and capacitors) would be
needed?
d. Which is used as main computer memory
and which is used as cache memory? Why?
5. DRAM versus SDRAM
a. Briefly describe the main conceptual
differences between DRAM and SDRAM.
b. Are they conceptually intended for the
same applications?
6. DDR SDRAM versus regular SDRAM
a. Briefly describe the technical evolutions
that occurred in the transition from regular

--- Page 829 ---
SDRAM to DDR SDRAM.
b. Check in data sheets the main parameters
for DDR SDRAM chips and compare them
against those listed in the DDR column of
Figure 16.13.
7. DDR SDRAM modules
As explained in Section 16.6, DDRs are normally
assembled in DIMMs.
a. Check in data sheets for the number of
pins and general appearance of DIMMs
intended for desktop computers.
b. Look for the largest (in bytes) DIMM that
you can find for the application above.
c. Repeat parts (a) and (b) for DIMMs
intended for laptop computers.
8. DDR2 versus DDR SDRAM
a. Briefly describe the technical evolutions
that occurred in the transition from DDR
SDRAM to DDR2 SDRAM.
b. Check in data sheets the main parameters
for DDR2 SDRAM chips and compare them
against those listed in the DDR2 column of
Figure 16.13.
9. DDR2 SDRAM modules
As explained in Section 16.6, DDR2 memories are
normally assembled in DIMMs.
a. Check in data sheets (or JEDEC
standards) for the number of pins and
general appearance of DDR2 DIMMs
intended for desktop computers.
b. Look for the largest (in bytes) DDR2
DIMM that you can find for the application

--- Page 830 ---
above.
c. Repeat parts (a) and (b) for DDR2
DIMMs intended for laptop computers.
10. DDR3 versus DDR2 SDRAM
a. Briefly describe the technical evolutions
that occurred in the transition from DDR2
SDRAM to DDR3 SDRAM.
b. Check in data sheets the main parameters
for DDR3 SDRAM chips and compare them
against those listed in the DDR3 column of
Figure 16.13.
11. DDR3 SDRAM modules
As explained in Section 16.6, DDR3 memories are
normally assembled in DIMMs.
a. Check in data sheets (or JEDEC
standards) for the number of pins and
general appearance of DDR3 DIMMs
intended for desktop computers.
b. Look for the largest (in bytes) DDR3
DIMM already available for the application
above.
c. Repeat parts (a) and (b) for DDR3
DIMMs intended for laptop computers.
12. CAM array
a. Check the operation of both CAM cells
shown in Figure 16.15.
b. How many transistors are needed to
construct a CAM array similar to that in
Figure 16.15(c) with 256 32-bit rows using
the CAM cell of Figure 16.15(a)?
13. CACHE memory

--- Page 831 ---
Briefly explain the operation of the cache memory
shown in Figure 16.14. Why is CAM (Figure 16.15)
needed to construct it?
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 832 ---
17
Nonvolatile Memories
Chapter Contents
17.1 Memory Types
17.2 Mask-Programmed Read Only Memory
(MP-ROM)
17.3 One-Time-Programmable ROM (OTP-
ROM)
17.4 Electrically Programmable ROM
(EPROM)
17.5 Electrically Erasable Programmable
ROM (EEPROM)
17.6 Flash Memory
17.7 Next-Generation Nonvolatile Memories
17.8 Exercises
Objective:
The study of memories was initiated in Chapter 16, where volatile types were
described, and it concludes in this chapter, where nonvolatile memories are
presented. The following nonvolatile types are included below: MP-ROM,
OTP-ROM, EPROM, EEPROM, and flash memory. A special section on

--- Page 833 ---
promising next-generation nonvolatile memories is also included, where
FRAM, MRAM, and PRAM memories are described.
17.1 Memory Types
As mentioned in Section 16.1, nearly all modern digital
designs require memory, which can be divided into volatile
and nonvolatile. The former type was seen in Chapter 16,
while the latter is studied here. The complete list is shown
below, where some promising next-generation technologies
are also included.
Volatile memories (Chapter 16):
 SRAM (static RAM)
 DDR and QDR (dual and quad data rate) SRAM
 DRAM (dynamic RAM)
 SDRAM (synchronous DRAM)
 DDR/DDR2/DDR3 SDRAM (dual data rate
SDRAM)
 CAM (content-addressable memory) for cache
memories
Nonvolatile memories (Chapter 17):
 MP-ROM (mask-programmed ROM)
 OTP-ROM (one-time-programmable ROM, also
called PROM)
 EPROM (electrically programmable ROM)
 EEPROM (electrically erasable programmable
ROM)
 Flash (also called flash EEPROM)

--- Page 834 ---
Next generation memories (Chapter 17):
 FRAM (ferroelectric RAM)
 MRAM (magnetoresistive RAM)
 PRAM (phase-change RAM)
17.2 Mask-Programmed ROM (MP-ROM)
The first type of nonvolatile memory to be described is MP-
ROM (mask-programmed read only memory), which is
programmed during fabrication. A 4 × 3 (4 words of 3 bits
each) ROM of this type is depicted in Figure 17.1(a). This is
a NOR-type ROM because each column is a NOR gate (a
pseudo-nMOS architecture was employed in this example—
see Figure 10.12(b)). Considering the outputs after the
inverters, the presence of a transistor corresponds to a ‘1’,
while its absence represents a ‘0’. A common construction
approach for this type of ROM is to have a transistor
fabricated at every node, then have the final interconnect
mask select which ones should effectively participate in the
circuit.
FIGURE 17.1  (a) 4 × 3 NOR-type pseudo-nMOS MP-
ROM array; (b) Equivalent NAND-type pseudo-nMOS MP-ROM

--- Page 835 ---
array; (c) Memory contents; (d) Implementation using
conventional gates.
To select a word in Figure 17.1(a), a ‘1’ (VDD), is applied to
the corresponding word line (WL) with all the other WLs at
0 V. Suppose that WL0 has been selected; then the voltages
of bit lines BL2 and BL1 are lowered by the nMOS
transistors, while that of BL0 remains high due to the pull-up
pMOS transistor. Therefore, after inverters, the output is
“110”. The four words stored in this NOR-type MP-ROM
are listed in Figure 17.1(c). Note that to convert the N
address bits into 2N word lines an address decoder (Section
11.5) is needed, which is not included in Figure 17.1(a).
A logically equivalent ROM implementation is shown in
Figure 17.1(b). This is a NAND-type MP-ROM because
each column is a NAND gate (see Figure 10.12(a)). Word
selection is done with a ‘0’, while keeping all the other WLs
at ‘1’. If we again consider the outputs after the inverters,
now the presence of a transistor is a ‘0’, while its absence is
a ‘1’. The advantage of this approach is that the nMOS
transistors are directly connected to each other, with no
ground or any other contact in between, thus saving silicon
space. On the other hand, the large time constant associated
with the long stack of transistors causes the NAND memory
to be slower to access than its NOR counterpart.
When using CPLDs (Chapter 18), ROMs are often
implemented with traditional gates. An example is shown in
Figure 17.1(d), which produces the same output words as the
ROMs of Figures 17.1(a) and (b), listed in Figure 17.1(c).
17.3 One-Time-Programmable ROM (OTP-ROM)

--- Page 836 ---
Old construction techniques for OTP-ROMs are based on
fuses or antifuses, which either open or create contacts when
traversed by a relatively large electric current, hence
allowing transistors/gates to be removed or inserted into the
circuit. However, due to its lower power consumption and
mature technology, EPROM cells (described below) are
currently preferred. In this case, the EPROM array is
conditioned in a package that does not contain the
transparent window (for erasure) of regular EPROMs. OTP-
ROMs are compact and present low cost, at the expense of
versatility, because they cannot be reprogrammed.
17.4 Electrically Programmable ROM (EPROM)
Nearly all commercial reprogrammable ROMs are based on
floating-gate transistors. The first electrically programmable
ROM (EPROM) employed the FAMOS (floating-gate
avalanche-injection MOS) transistor, depicted in Figure
17.2(a). Compared to a conventional MOSFET (Figure 9.2),
it presents an additional gate surrounded by insulating
material (SiO2) and with no connections to the external
circuit. For that reason, this gate is called floating gate, while
the regular gate is referred to as control gate.


--- Page 837 ---
FIGURE 17.2  (a) Cross section of a FAMOS transistor (for
EPROM cells), which is programmed by avalanche injection and
erased by UV light; (b) NOR-type pseudo-nMOS-based EPROM
array.
If a large positive voltage is applied to the control gate (12
V) and also to the drain (6 V), with the source grounded,
high-energy electrons start flowing between the source and
drain terminals. Some of these electrons might acquire
enough kinetic energy such that, after scattering in the
crystal lattice and being accelerated by the transversal
electric field (due to the gate voltage), they are able to
traverse the thin (< 100 nm) oxide layer that separates the
transistor channel from the floating gate. Once they reach the
floating gate, they are trapped and remain there indefinitely
(if no strong opposing electric field is applied, of course).
Such electrons are referred to as “hot” electrons, and this
phenomenon is called channel hot-electron injection (CHEI).
The presence of electrons in the floating gate raises the
threshold voltage (VT) from around 1 V (with no charge) to
over 6 V. Therefore, given that all logic voltages are ≤5 V,
such a transistor can never be turned ON. A transistor
without charge stored in the floating gate is said to be erased
(this is considered a ‘1’), while a transistor with electrons
accumulated in the floating gate is said to be programmed
(considered to be a ‘0’).
The floating-gate transistor, with the additional gate included
in its symbol, is used to implement an EPROM array in
Figure 17.2(b). Like the circuit in Figure 17.1(a), this too is
nonvolatile, asynchronous, NOR-type, and employs pseudo-
nMOS logic (Section 10.7). Note that in the EPROM cells a
single transistor is used for storage and for word selection.
To program the EPROM cells, the whole array must first be
erased, which is done with an EPROM programmer, where

--- Page 838 ---
the memory is exposed to UV radiation through a transparent
window existent in its package during several minutes (the
time depends on light intensity, distance, etc.). Next, each
row (word) can be individually programmable. To do so,
first the values to be stored are applied to the bit lines (BLs),
then the corresponding word line (WL) is pulsed high.
Recall that a programmed transistor represents a ‘0’, while
an erased transistor is a ‘1’. For example, to write “0 1 1” to
the first row of Figure 17.2(b), the following voltages are
needed: BL2 = 6 V, BL1 = BL0 = 0 V, WL0=WL1=WL2 = 0
V; after applying these voltages, WL0 must be pulsed high
(12 V) during a few microseconds, causing the leftmost
transistor to be programmed (‘0’), while the other two
remain erased (‘1’).
Most EPROMs are fully static and asynchronous (as in the
example in Figure 17.2(b)), so to read its contents only
addresses and the proper chip-enable signals are needed.
After the address is processed by the address decoder, one of
the WLs is selected (WL=‘1’), while all the others remain
low. If a transistor in the selected row is programmed (that
is, has charge in its floating gate, so VT is high), it will
remain OFF, thus not affecting the corresponding BL (stays
high). On the other hand, if it is erased (without charge, so
VT is low), it will be turned ON, hence lowering the
corresponding BL voltage. Therefore, after inverters, the
outputs will be ‘0’ for the FAMOS cells that are programmed
and ‘1’ for those that are erased.
The main limitation of EPROMs is the erasure procedure. As
mentioned above, to remove charge from the floating gates
the memory array must be exposed to UV light (erasure
occurs because the UV radiation generates electron-hole
pairs in the insulator, causing it to become slightly
conductive) for several minutes, a process that is time

--- Page 839 ---
consuming and cumbersome (off system). Another important
limitation is their endurance, normally limited to about 100
erasure cycles. These limitations, however, do not apply
when the EPROM is intended for OTP (one-time-
programmable) applications (Section 17.3), which is
basically the only case where the EPROM cell is still
popular.
A summary of typical features of standalone EPROM chips
is presented below.
 Density: 128 Mb
 Architecture: Normally fully-static
asynchronous, but synchronous is also available.
 Erase time: Several minutes (whole array)
 Program (write) time: 5 μs/word
 Access (read) time: 45 ns
 Supply voltages: 5 V down to 2.7 V
 Programming voltages: 12 V/6 V
 Endurance (erase-program cycles): 100
 Current main application: OTP-ROMs
17.5 Electrically Erasable Programmable ROM
(EEPROM)
EEPROM solves the erasure problem of EPROM with a
slight modification in the floating-gate transistor. The new
device, called FLOTOX (floating-gate tunneling-oxide)
transistor, is depicted in Figure 17.3(a). Comparing it to a
traditional floating-gate transistor (Figure 17.2(a)), we
observe that the floating gate now has a section running over
and very near ( ∼ 10 nm) the drain. With such a thin oxide,

--- Page 840 ---
and under the proper electric field, electrons can traverse the
oxide, thus moving from the drain to the floating gate and
vice versa by a mechanism called Fowler-Nordheim
tunneling. Therefore, to program the device, a high voltage
(12 V) must be applied to the control gate with the drain
grounded, which causes electrons to tunnel from the drain to
the floating gate, where they remain indefinitely if no other
strong electric field is ever applied. The tunneling effect is
bidirectional, so if the voltages above are reversed the
electrons will tunnel back to the drain, hence erasing the
transistor.
FIGURE 17.3  Cross section of a FLOTOX transistor (for
EEPROM cells), which is programmed and erased by means of
tunneling between drain and floating gate; (b) NOR-type pseudo-
nMOS-based EEPROM array.
The ideal goal with the FLOTOX transistor was the
construction of memory arrays with single-transistor cells
that could be individually erased and programmed (thus
avoiding the lengthy and nonversatile erasure procedure of
EPROMs). Such a construction, however, is not possible due
to two major limitations of the FLOTOX cell, the first

--- Page 841 ---
related to the program-erase procedure and the second
concerning the difficult control over the threshold voltage.
The problem with the program-erase procedure is that in
EEPROMs it is completely symmetric, that is, the same
process (tunneling) and the same cell section (floating-
gate/drain overlap) are used for programming and for
erasing. Therefore, it is difficult to write a bit into a cell
without disturbing neighboring cells.
The second problem mentioned above concerns the difficult
control over the FLOTOX transistor’s threshold voltage,
which is determined by the amount of charge accumulated in
the floating gate. This occurs because tunneling is not a self-
limiting process (contrary to tunneling, avalanche injection,
which happens in the FAMOS transistor of EPROMs, is self-
limiting, due to the growing opposing electric field caused
by the accumulated charge). As a result, the gate might even
become positively charged (over-erased), in which case the
device can never be turned OFF (because VT is then
negative, like in a depletion MOSFET). Therefore,
individual transistor control is desirable to guarantee the
proper value of VT.
Both problems described above are solved by an extra (cell-
select) transistor included in the EEPROM cell, shown in the
array of Figure 17.3(b) (VPP is a programming voltage). The
extra transistor allows each cell to be individually accessed
and controlled, thus rendering a completely versatile circuit.
Moreover, erasure is now much faster (a few milliseconds
per word or page) than for EPROMs (several minutes). The
obvious drawback is the much larger size of the EEPROM
cell compared to EPROM.
A final remark concerns the memory-write procedure. Like
EPROM, the programming procedure starts with a cell-erase
cycle, followed by a cell-program cycle. Again, an erased

--- Page 842 ---
transistor (without charge in the floating gate, hence a low
VT) represents a ‘1’, whereas a programmed transistor (with
electrons trapped in the floating gate, hence a high VT) is
considered a ‘0’. Therefore, the cell must be programmed
only when a ‘0’ needs to be stored in it. In practice, this
procedure (erase-program) is conducted using a train of
pulses, with the proper values and applied to the proper
terminals, during which the cells are carefully monitored
until the desired value of VT results.
To conclude, a summary of typical features of standalone
EEPROM chips is presented below.
 Architecture: Parallel (older) and serial (newer)
 Density: 1 Mb parallel, 256 Mb serial
 Write (erase plus program) time: 10 ms/page
parallel, 1.5 ms/word serial
 Access (read) time: 70 ns to 200 ns parallel, 1 μs
serial
 Supply voltages: 1.8 V to 5 V
 Endurance (erase-program cycles): 105 to 106
 Data retention: >10 years
Note: EEPROM has been almost entirely replaced with
Flash EEPROM (described next).
17.6 Flash Memory
Flash memory (also called Flash EEPROM) is a combination
of EPROM with EEPROM. It requires only one transistor
per cell (like EPROM), which is electrically erasable and
electrically programmable (like EEPROM). Its high density

--- Page 843 ---
and low cost has made it the preferred choice when
reprogrammable nonvolatile storage is needed.
ETOX cell
The original transistor for flash memories is the
ETOX (EPROM tunnel oxide) transistor,
introduced by Intel in 1984 and with many
generations developed since then. Two ETOX
versions (for 180 nm and 130 nm technologies) are
depicted in Figure 17.4. Both operate with
avalanche (hot-electron) injection for
programming (as in EPROM) and tunneling for
erasure (as in EEPROM). To avoid the extra (cell-
access) transistor of EEPROM, in-bulk erasure is
performed, which consists of erasing the whole
chip or, more commonly, a whole block or sector
at once (thus the name flash). Moreover, contrary
to EEPROM, a nonsymmetric procedure is used
for programming-erasing, which eases the control
over the device in its several operating modes
(erase, program, and read).

--- Page 844 ---
FIGURE 17.4  (a) and (b) Simplified cross
sections of two ETOX transistors, for 180 nm and
130 nm technologies, respectively, both erased by
tunneling and programmed by hot-electron injection;
(c) NOR-type flash array; (d) Situation during
erasure (with ETOX of (a)); (e) Situation during
programming.
The main difference between the ETOX transistors
of Figures 17.4(a) and (b) resides in their tunneling
(erasure) mechanism. While in Figure 17.4(a)
tunneling occurs only through the overlap between
the floating gate and the source diffusion, in Figure
17.4(b) it occurs over the whole channel, resulting
in a faster cell-erase operation. The graded source
doping shown in Figure 17.4(a) is to prevent band-
to-band tunneling. In Figure 17.4(b), additional
details regarding the wells were included.
ETOX programming
To program a flash array, it must first be erased.
The overall process is illustrated in Figures

--- Page 845 ---
17.4(c)–(e), where the ETOX transistor of Figure
17.4(a) was employed to construct a NOR-type
array (only a 2 × 2 section is shown). Erasure is
depicted in Figure 17.4(d). It can be accomplished
either with negative pulses (− 12 V) applied to all
gates (WLs) with the sources (SL) grounded, or
with positive pulses applied to the sources (SL)
with the gates (WLs) grounded, always with the
drains (BLs) open, hence forcing electrons to
tunnel out of the floating gate into the source
(indicated by “tunnel-out” in the figure). At the
conclusion of erasure, all flash cells contain a ‘1’.
Programming is illustrated in Figure 17.4(e),
where the bits ‘0’ and ‘1’ are written into the first
array row. To the first BL a positive voltage (6 V)
is applied (to write a ‘0’), while the second BL
receives 0 V (to keep the cell erased). The selected
WL is then pulsed high (12 V), with the other WLs
at 0 V. These pulses cause channel hot electrons
(avalanche) injection onto the floating gate of the
first transistor of the first row (indicated by
“CHEI” in the figure). Note that the second cell of
the first row, which we want to keep erased, is
only subject to an (very weak) inward tunneling,
which only causes a negligible variation of that
transistor’s VT. Observe also that the cells in the
unselected rows are not affected by the operations
in the selected row.
Note: As depicted in the descriptions of all
floating-gate devices, to erase and program them a
rather complex sequence of voltages and pulses is
needed, which depends on particular construction

--- Page 846 ---
details, varying with device generation and
sometimes also from one manufacturer to another.
For these reasons, the voltage values and
sequences described in this chapter, though closely
related to actual setups, are just illustrative.
Split-gate cell
The flash cells of Figure 17.4 are very compact,
but are also very complex to operate, particularly
with respect to attaining the correct values for VT.
Consequently, standalone flash-memory chips
often have a built-in microprocessor just to control
their erase-program procedures. Even though this
is fine in standalone memory chips, which are very
large, it is not adequate for (much smaller)
embedded applications.
A popular alternative for embedded flash is the
split-gate cell shown in Figure 17.5(a). As can be
seen, the floating gate only covers part of the
channel, while the control channel covers the
complete channel. This is equivalent to having two
transistors in series to control the gate, one with a
floating gate, the other just a regular MOS
transistor. The disadvantage of this cell is its size,
which is bigger than ETOX, being therefore not
appropriate for large (standalone) memories. On
the other hand, it avoids the over-erasure problem,
simplifying the erase-program procedure and
therefore eliminating the need for a built-in
controller (so the cell oversize is justifiable in
embedded applications).

--- Page 847 ---
FIGURE 17.5  (a) Split-gate cell for
embedded flash memories; (b) SONOS cell.
As seen earlier, over-erasure can occur because
tunneling is not a self-limiting process, so the gate
can become positively charged (VT < 0 V), in
which case the device can never be turned OFF.
Because the cell of Figure 17.5(a) contains two
transistors, when a ‘0’ is applied to the control gate
it automatically closes the channel, so the cell is
turned OFF even if its floating-gate part has been
over-erased. In other words, over-erasure is no
longer a concern, so the memory-write process is
faster and simpler.
SONOS cell
Another modern flash cell, used in standalone
flash memories and in some embedded
applications, is shown in Figure 7.5(b). This cell,
called SONOS (silicon-oxide-nitride-oxide-
silicon), has no floating gate, which simplifies the
fabrication process (single poly).
Instead of a floating gate, it contains a nitride
(Si3N4) layer. An important characteristic of nitride
is its richness of defects that act as charge traps;
therefore, once the electrons reach that layer, they
are trapped and remain there indefinitely (as in a

--- Page 848 ---
floating gate). Another advantage of this cell is that
it can be programmed with less power (because it
can operate using only tunneling, which uses
smaller currents) and also smaller voltages. This
technology has been applied also to the split-gate
architecture described above for embedded
applications.
NOR flash versus NAND flash
Contrary to the previous nonvolatile memory
architectures, which are generally NOR-type, flash
memories are popular in both NOR and NAND
configurations. Both architectures are depicted in
Figure 17.6, with a NOR (transistors in parallel)
flash shown in Figure 17.6(a) and a NAND
(transistors in series) flash in Figure 17.6(b). In the
latter, each stack of transistors is called a NAND
module.
FIGURE 17.6  NOR-type flash (transistors in
parallel); (b) NAND-type flash (transistors in series).
Both arrays present the traditional word lines
(WLs), bit lines (BLs), and source line (SL), to

--- Page 849 ---
which the proper voltages are applied during the
erase, program, and read operations. In the NAND
flash, however, two additional selection lines can
be observed, called selD (select drain) and selS
(select source), needed because the BLs are shared
by many NAND modules. Such modules are
normally constructed with 16 transistors each, so
the transistor per bit relationships are 1T/1bit for
NOR and 18T/16bits for NAND.
To construct a NOR flash, any of the cells seen
above can be employed, where a combination of
CHEI and tunneling is normally employed. On the
other hand, for NAND flash, only tunneling is
generally used, which lowers the power
consumption and allows larger memory blocks to
be processed at a time. In these cells, the erasing
procedure (intentionally) continues until the cells
become over-erased (that is, until excessive
electrons are removed from the floating gates,
which then become positively charged), hence
turning the threshold voltage negative (as in a
depletion MOSFET), with a final value of VT
around − 2.5 V. Programming consists of replacing
charge until VT becomes again positive at around
0.7 V. As a result, transistors with VT=− 2.5 V will
never be turned OFF, while those with VT = 0.7 V
will be turned ON when a ‘1’ is applied to their
gates.
To read the NAND flash of Figure 17.6(b), WL =
‘1’ must be supplied to all rows except for the
selected one, to which WL = ‘0’ is applied. WL =
‘1’ causes all transistors in the unselected rows to
be short-circuited, hence leaving to the selected-

--- Page 850 ---
row transistor the decision on whether to lower the
BL voltage or not. If the transistor is programmed
(VT ∼  0.7 V), it will remain OFF (recall that WL =
0 V), thus not affecting the corresponding BL. On
the other hand, if the transistor is erased (VT = –
2.5 V), it will be ON anyway, regardless of WL,
thus lowering the corresponding BL voltage
unconditionally. After output inverters, the logic
levels become ‘0’ or ‘1’, respectively (thus again a
programmed transistor represents a ‘0’, while an
erased one—over-erased indeed—represents a
‘1’). This procedure is performed with selD and
selS asserted.
One advantage of NAND flash over NOR flash is
its lower cost due to the fact that the transistors in
the NAND modules are directly connected to each
other, without any contact in between, which
reduces the silicon area substantially ( ∼  40%).
Another advantage is its faster memory-write time
(because erasure in NAND flash is faster). On the
other hand, reading is slower because of the
elevated time constant associated with the long
stack of transistors. These features make NOR and
NAND flashes more like complementary
technologies than competing technologies because
they aim at distinct applications. For example,
program code in computer applications might not
change much, but fast read is crucial, so NOR
flash is appropriate. On the other hand, in video
and audio applications, which normally require
large blocks of data to be stored and frequently
renewed, NAND flash is a more suitable candidate
(the interest in NAND flash has grown immensely

--- Page 851 ---
recently). Another fast-growing application for
NAND flash is as a substitute for hard disks.
One last comment, which refers to flash as well as
to EEPROM cells, regards their endurance and
data retention capabilities. The endurance,
measured in erase-program cycles, is in the 105 –
106 range. Though not all causes that contribute to
limit the number of cycles are fully understood, the
main contributors seem to be defects in the thin
oxide and at the Si-SiO2 interface, which behave
as electron traps, as well as defects in the interpoly
(between gates) oxide, which behave as hole traps.
The trapped particles reduce the floating gate’s
capacity to collect electrons, thus limiting the
changes of VT. Data retention, measured in years
(typically > 10 years), is limited mainly by defects
in the thin oxide, which cause charge leakage.
Multibit flash
To increase data density, 2-bit flash cells are also
available. Two approaches have been used, one
called multilevel cell (MLC, Figure 17.7(a)) and
the other called multibit cell (MBC, Figure
17.7(b)). The MLC cell is essentially the same
ETOX cell seen in Figure 17.4(a), just with the
capacity of handling distinct amounts of charge
(detected by more elaborate sense amplifiers),
hence providing more than two voltage levels. As
indicated in the figure, there are three levels of
programming (“00”, “01”, “10”), and one level of
erasure (“11”). This is only possible because of
advances in fabrication processes, which allow
finer control over the amounts of charge injected

--- Page 852 ---
onto or removed from the floating gate. The ONO
(oxide-nitride-oxide) layer shown in Figure 17.7(a)
refers to an intermediate layer of Si3N4, which has
a high dielectric constant (7.8) to prevent electrons
from the floating gate from reaching the control
gate.
FIGURE 17.7  Two-bit flash cells: (a)
Multilevel cell (MLC); (b) Multibit cell (MBC).
The second cell (MBC) is similar to the SONOS
cell seen in Figure 17.5(b), where instead of a
regular (conductive) floating gate a trap-based
floating gate (nitride) is used. In this case, the
electrons remain in the region of the floating gate
where they were captured. Therefore, even though
the cell is perfectly symmetric, the left and right
sides can behave differently. Note that the source
and drain terminals are interchanged during
operation. Both cells of Figure 17.7 operate with
tunneling for erasure and generally with CHEI for
programming.
Typical flash specifications
To conclude, a summary of typical features of
standalone flash-memory chips is presented below.

--- Page 853 ---
 Cell architectures: 1bit/cell and
2bits/cell
 Array architectures: NOR, NAND,
serial
 Endurance (erase-program cycles): 105
to 106
 Data retention: >10 years
 Technology: 130 nm, 90 nm, 65 nm,
45 nm
 Supply voltages: 5 V down to 1.8 V
NOR flash:
 Density: 512 Mb
 Die efficiency (cell size): 7 Mb/mm2
 Erase method and final VT: Tunneling,
∼ 1 V
 Program method and final VT: CHEI,
∼ 6 V
 Erase time: 200 ms/block (512 B)
 Program time: 2 μs/word
 Synchronous read access time: 70 ns
initial access, 6 ns sequential/burst (133
MHz)
 Asynchronous read access time: 70 ns
random
NAND flash:
 Density: 4 Gbits single-die, 32 Gbits
stacked-die

--- Page 854 ---
 Die efficiency (cell size): 11 Mb/mm2
 Erase method and final VT: Tunneling,
∼  – 2.5 V
 Program method and final VT:
Tunneling, ∼  0.7 V
 Erase time: 1.5 ms/block (16 KBytes)
 Program time: 200 μs/page (512 Bytes)
 Read access time: 15 μs random, 15 ns
serial
17.7 Next-Generation Nonvolatile Memories
The need for large nonvolatile storage media (e.g., for
portable audio/video applications), with fast read and write
cycles, with low power consumption and also low cost, has
spun an intense search for new memory materials, preferably
compatible with traditional CMOS processes. Ideally, such
next-generation memories should exhibit at least the
following features:
 Very high density (terabits/in2)
 Nonvolatility (>20 years data retention)
 Fast read and fast write cycles (few ns for both,
comparable to current 6T SRAM)
 Large endurance ( ∼ infinite read-write cycles)
 Low power consumption (less than any current
memory)
 Low cost (comparable to current DRAM)
Though still far from ideal, three promising approaches
(among several others) are briefly described in this section.

--- Page 855 ---
They are:
 FRAM
 MRAM
 PRAM
17.7.1 Ferroelectric RAM (FRAM)
FRAM memory was introduced by Ramtron in the
1990s, with substantial progress made since then. An
FRAM cell is depicted in Figure 17.8. It is similar to a
DRAM cell (Figure 16.8) except for the fact that the
capacitor’s content is now nonvolatile. Such a capacitor
is constructed with a ferroelectric crystal as its
dielectric.
FIGURE 17.8  FRAM cell.
Contrary to what the name might suggest, a
ferroelectric crystal (usually lead-zirconate-titanate,
PZT) does not contain iron nor is it affected by
magnetic fields. The ferroelectric capacitor operation is
based on the facts that the central atom in the crystal’s
face-centered cubic structure is mobile, has two stable
positions, and can be moved from one stable position to
the other (in less than 1 ns) by an external electric field.
That is, when a voltage is applied to the capacitor in

--- Page 856 ---
one direction, it causes the central atom to move in the
direction of the applied field until it reaches the other
stable position (still inside the cube, of course), where it
remains indefinitely after the field is removed. If the
direction of the field is reversed, then the atom returns
to the previous stable position.
To read an FRAM cell, the proper word line is selected,
turning ON the nMOS transistor, hence applying the bit
line voltage to the capacitor. This voltage creates an
electric field through the crystal, which dislocates the
mobile atom to the other stable position or not,
depending on its current position. If it is dislocated, it
passes through a central high-energy position where a
charge spike occurs in the corresponding bit line, which
is detected by the sense amplifier. Therefore, because it
is possible to detect in which of the two stable positions
the atom initially was, the cell can store ‘0’ and ‘1’
values. One inconvenience of this process is that it is
destructive because the memory-read operation causes
all atoms to move to the same side of the crystal.
Consequently, after reading the cell, a memory-write
operation must follow to restore the atom to its original
position.
FRAM memories are currently offered with serial and
parallel architectures. The former is offered in densities
varying from 4 kb to 512 kb, operating with bus speeds
up to 20 MHz. The density of the latter is currently in
the 64 kb to 4 Mb range with 55 ns access time. Power
supply options for both are from 5 V down to 2.7 V. The
endurance (number of read-write cycles) is virtually
unlimited (>1010), and the power consumption is
smaller than that of EEPROM or flash. On the other
hand, the cells are still much larger than DRAM cells,

--- Page 857 ---
so high density is not possible yet, and the cost per bit is
also higher than DRAM.
17.7.2 Magnetoresistive RAM (MRAM)
Figure 17.9(a) shows an MRAM cell. Compared to a
DRAM cell (Figure 16.8), a variable resistor connected
to the drain of an nMOS transistor is observed instead
of a capacitor connected to its source terminal. It also
shows the existence of an extra global line, called digit
line, needed to program the MRAM cell.
FIGURE 17.9  (a) MRAM cell; (b) MTJ device.
The variable resistor of Figure 17.9(a) represents an
MTJ (magnetic tunnel junction) device (Figure
17.9(b)), which constitutes the core of the MRAM cell.
The MJT is formed by two ferromagnetic layers
separated by a very thin ( ∼  2 nm) tunneling barrier
layer. The latter is constructed with Al2O3 or, more
recently, with MgO. The ferromagnetic layers are
programmed by electric currents flowing through the bit
and digit lines, which are physically very close to the
ferromagnetic layers, such that the magnetic fields
created by the currents can spin-polarize each one of
these layers. One of the ferromagnetic layers (bottom
plate) is “fixed” (that is, it is magnetized by a current

--- Page 858 ---
flowing always in the same direction through the digit
line and is pinned by the underlying antiferromagnetic
layer), while the other (top plate) is “free” (that is, can
be polarized in either one of the two possible current
directions through the bit line). If the free layer is
polarized in the same direction as the fixed layer (that
is, if their spins are parallel), then electrons can
“tunnel” through the barrier layer (small resistivity),
while spins in opposite directions (antiparallel) cause
the barrier to present a large resistivity. A small R is
considered to be a ‘0’, while a large R is a ‘1’.
To read the MRAM cell, the proper word line is
selected and a voltage is applied to the bit line. By
comparing the current through the bit line against a
reference value, the corresponding current-sense
amplifier can determine whether a ‘0’ (low R, so high I)
or a ‘1’ (high R, so low I) is stored in the cell. Note that,
contrary to FRAM, memory-read in MRAM is not
destructive.
The overall features of MRAMs are similar to those
described for FRAMs but with higher read-write speeds
(comparable to SRAM), lower power consumption
(mainly because memory-read is not destructive), and
virtually unlimited endurance. One of the first
commercial MRAM chips was delivered by Freescale
in 2006, which consisted of a 4 Mb chip with a 35 ns
access time. A 16 Mb MRAM chip was announced by
Toshiba in 2007.
17.7.3 Phase-Change RAM (PRAM)
PRAM, also called OUM (ovonic unified memory), is a
technology licensed by Ovonyx, under development by

--- Page 859 ---
Intel, Samsung, and other companies, again intended as
a future replacement for traditional flash memory.
PRAM is essentially the same technology employed in
R/W CDs and DVDs. It consists of a material (a
chalcogenide, normally GexSbyTez) whose phase can be
changed very easily from crystalline to amorphous and
vice versa by the application of heat. In CDs and DVDs
the heat is applied by a laser beam, while in an
electronic memory it is caused by an electric current.
When in the crystalline state, the material presents high
reflectivity (for the optical CD and DVD) and low
resistivity (for our present context), while in the
amorphous state its reflectivity is low and its resistivity
is high. Consequently, a PRAM cell can be modeled in
the same way as the MRAM cell of Figure 17.9(a),
where a variable resistor represents the memory
element.
Figure 17.10(a) depicts a phase-change element. It
contains two electrodes, which are separated by the
chalcogenide and silicon oxide layers. At each bit
position (crossing of horizontal and vertical memory
select lines) the SiO2 layer has a circular opening filled
with a resistive electrode. When voltage pulses are
applied to the electrodes, current flows from one
electrode to the other through the chalcogenide and
resistive electrode. The latter is heated, causing the
former to change its phase in the region adjacent to the
resistive element, as indicated in the figure (the phase
of the overall material is crystalline). If the phase
changes from crystalline to amorphous, then the electric
resistance between the electrodes becomes very high,
while a change to crystalline causes it to be reduced.

--- Page 860 ---
FIGURE 17.10  (a) Simple phase-change element
used in PRAMs; (b) Improved construction to reduce the
melting volume (lower power consumption).
The melting temperature of GexSbyTez is between
600°C and 700°C (it depends on x, y, z). If melted, it
becomes amorphous, while when kept in the 300°C to
600°C range it rapidly crystallinizes (takes only a few
ns). Therefore, to store a ‘1’, a high current must be
applied, such that the material melts, while a ‘0’ is
stored by a crystalline phase. To avoid crystallinization
while cooling (after a ‘1’ has been stored), annealing
(that is, rapid cooling) is necessary, which is achieved
with the proper choice of materials for the electrodes
and adjacent components.
Another important aspect to be taken care of regards the
intensity of the pulses needed to write to this memory,
which should be high only when the cell is in the
amorphous state.
A final concern regards the power consumption. The
first PRAM cells employed a phase-change element
similar to that in Figure 17.10(a), which required
relatively high currents ( ∼  1 mA) for programming. A
more elaborate construction is depicted in Figure
17.10(b), in which melting occurs only inside the
ringlike opening in the bottom electrode. This reduction
of chalcogenide volume to be heated led to much

--- Page 861 ---
smaller programming currents ( ∼  0.1 mA at 1.5 V
supply).
The main features projected for this technology are
more or less similar to those projected for MRAM, but
very likely with smaller cell sizes (already at ∼  0.05
/um2/bit). Note that here too the memory-read operation
is not destructive. Prototype chips employing this
technology (with 512 Mb) were demonstrated in 2006
and are already commercially available.
17.8 Exercises
1. NAND-type MP-ROM
Using pseudo-nMOS logic, draw a NOR-type MP-
ROM whose contents are those in the LUT (lookup
table) of Figure E17.1.
2. NOR-type MP-ROM
FIGURE E17.1
Using pseudo-nMOS logic, draw a NAND-type MP-
ROM whose contents are those in the LUT of Figure
E17.1.
3. ROM with conventional gates
Using conventional gates, design a ROM whose
contents are those in the LUT of Figure E17.1.

--- Page 862 ---
4. OTP-ROM
a. Briefly describe what an OTP-ROM is
and when it is employed.
b. Instead of fuses or antifuses, what is the
other construction technology (now
common) for this type of device?
5. EPROM
a. Briefly describe what an EPROM is and
when it is employed.
b. What are its basic differences with respect
to OTP-ROM and MP-ROM?
6. EEPROM
a. Briefly describe what an EEPROM is and
when it is employed.
b. What are its basic differences with respect
to EPROM?
7. Flash memory
a. Briefly describe what flash memory is and
when it is employed.
b. What are its basic differences with respect
to EEPROM?
c. Why is EEPROM being replaced with
flash?
8. Flash arrays
a. Draw a 3 × 4 NOR-type flash array.
b. Draw a 3 × 4 NAND-type flash array.
9. Flash cells
a. Briefly compare the four flash cells shown
in Figures 17.4(a) and (b) and 17.5(a) and
(b).
b. Why is the split-gate cell popular for
embedded applications?

--- Page 863 ---
10. Multibit flash cells
Briefly explain how 2-bit flash cells are constructed
and work. Examine manufacturers’ data sheets for
additional details of each approach.
11. FRAM
a. Briefly describe what FRAM memory is
and when it is employed.
b. Check in manufacturers’ data sheets for
the current state of this technology. What are
the densest and fastest chips?
12. MRAM
a. Briefly describe what MRAM memory is
and when it is employed.
b. Check in manufacturers’ data sheets for
the current state of this technology. What are
the densest and fastest chips?
13. PRAM
a. Briefly describe what PRAM memory is
and when it is employed.
b. Check in manufacturers’ data sheets for
the current state of this technology. What are
the densest and fastest chips?
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 864 ---
18
Programmable Logic Devices
Chapter Contents
18.1 The Concept of Programmable Logic
Devices
18.2 SPLDs
18.3 CPLDs
18.4 FPGAs
18.5 Exercises
Objective:
This chapter describes CPLD and FPGA devices. Owing to their high
gate/flip-flop density, wide range of I/O standards, large number of I/O pins,
easy ISP (in-system programming), high speed, and decreasing cost, their
presence in modern digital systems has grown substantially. Additionally, the
ample diffusion of VHDL and Verilog, plus the high quality of current
synthesis and simulation tools, also contributed to the wide adoption of such
technology. CPLD/FPGA devices allow the development of new products
with a very short time to market, as well as easy update or modification of
existing circuits.
18.1 The Concept of Programmable Logic Devices

--- Page 865 ---
Programmable logic devices (PLDs) were introduced in the
mid 1970s. The idea was to construct combinational logic
circuits that were programmable. However, contrary to
microprocessors, which can run a program but possess a
fixed hardware, the programmability of PLDs was intended
at the hardware level. In other words, a PLD is a general
purpose chip whose hardware can be configured to meet
particular specifications.
The first PLDs were called PAL (programmable array logic)
or PLA (programmable logic array), depending on the
programming scheme (described later). They employed only
conventional logic gates (no flip-flops), therefore targeting
only the implementation of combinational circuits. To extend
their coverage, registered PLDs were launched soon after,
which included one flip-flop at each circuit output. With
them, simple sequential functions could then be
implemented as well.
In the beginning of the 1980s, additional logic circuitry was
added to each PLD output. The new out-put cell, normally
referred to as macrocell, contained, besides the flip-flop,
logic gates and multiplexers. The cell was also
programmable, allowing several modes of operation.
Additionally, it provided a return (feedback) signal from the
circuit output back to the programmable array, which gave
the PLD greater flexibility. This new PLD structure was
called generic PAL (GAL). A similar architecture was known
as PALCE (PAL CMOS electrically erasable/programmable
device). All these chips (PAL, PLA, registered PLD, and
GAL/PALCE) are now collectively referred to as SPLDs
(simple PLDs). Of these, GAL is the only one still
manufactured.

--- Page 866 ---
In the mid 1980s, several GAL devices were fabricated on
the same chip using a sophisticated routing scheme, more
advanced silicon technology, and several additional features,
like JTAG support (port for circuit access/test defined by the
Joint Test Action Group and specified in the IEEE 1149.1
standard) and interface to several logic standards. Such an
approach became known as CPLD (complex PLD). CPLDs
are currently very popular due to their relatively high
density, high performance, and low cost (some cost nearly as
low as $1), making them a popular choice in many
applications, including consumer electronics, computers,
automotive, etc.
Finally, also in the mid 1980s, FPGAs (field programmable
gate arrays) were introduced. FPGAs differ from CPLDs in
architecture, technology, built-in features, and cost. They
target mainly complex, large-size, top-performance designs,
like gigabit transceivers, high-complexity switching, HDTV,
wireless, and other telecommunication applications.
A final remark is that CPLDs are essentially nonvolatile,
while FPGAs are volatile. CPLDs normally employ
EEPROM (Section 17.5) or flash memory (Section 17.6) to
store the interconnects, while FPGAs employ SRAM
(Section 16.2). Consequently, the latter needs a configuration
nonvolatile memory from which the program is loaded at
power up. A table illustrating the evolution of PLDs is
presented in Figure 18.1.
FIGURE 18.1  Summary of PLD evolution.

--- Page 867 ---
18.2 SPLDs
As mentioned above, PAL, PLA, and GAL devices are
collectively called SPLDs, which stands for simple PLDs. A
description of each one of these architectures follows.
18.2.1 PAL Devices
PAL (programmable array logic) chips were introduced
by Monolithic Memories in the mid 1970s. Its basic
architecture is illustrated in Figure 18.2, where the little
ovals represent programmable connections. As can be
seen, the circuit is composed of a programmable array
of AND gates followed by a fixed array of OR gates.
This implementation is based on the fact that any
combinational function can be represented by a sum-of-
products (SOP), as seen in Section 5.3. The products are
computed by the AND gates, while the sum is
computed by the OR gate that follows.

--- Page 868 ---
FIGURE 18.2  Basic PAL architecture.
A PAL-based example is depicted in Figure 18.3, which
computes the combinational functions f1 = a · b + a′ · b′
· c′ · d′ + b · d and f2 = a · b · c + d. The dark ovals
indicate a connection. The outputs of non-programmed
AND gates are set to zero.

--- Page 869 ---
FIGURE 18.3  PAL-based example where two
combinational functions (f1, f2) of four variables (a, b, c, d)
are implemented. Dark ovals indicate a connection. The
output of a nonprogrammed AND gate is set to zero.
As mentioned earlier, the main limitation of this
approach is that it is appropriate only for the
implementation of combinational functions. To
circumvent this problem, registered PALs were
launched toward the end of the 1970s. These included a
flip-flop at each output (after each OR gate in Figure
18.2), thus allowing the construction of sequential
circuits as well (though only very simple ones).
An example of a then popular PAL chip is the PAL16L8
device, which contained 16 inputs and eight outputs
(though only 18 I/O pins were available because it was
a 20-pin DIP package with two pins destined to the
power supply, plus 10 IN pins, two OUT pins, and six
IN/OUT pins). Its registered counterpart was the 16R8
device.

--- Page 870 ---
The early technology employed in the fabrication of
PALs was bipolar (Chapter 8) with fuses or antifuses
normally employed to establish the (nonvolatile) array
connections. They operated with a 5 V supply voltage
and exhibited a large power consumption for such small
devices (around 200 mA with open outputs) with a
maximum frequency around 100 MHz.
18.2.2 PLA Devices
PLA (programmable logic array) chips were introduced
in the mid 1970s by Signetics. The basic architecture of
a PLA is illustrated in Figure 18.4. Comparing it to that
in Figure 18.2, we observe that the only fundamental
difference between them is that while a PAL has
programmable AND connections and fixed OR
connections, both are programmable in a PLA. The
obvious advantage is greater flexibility because more
combinational functions (more product terms) can be
implemented with the same amount of hardware. On the
other hand, the extra propagation delay introduced by
the additional programmable interconnections lowered
their speed.

--- Page 871 ---
FIGURE 18.4  Basic PLA architecture.
An example of a then popular PLA chip is the Signetics
PLS161 device. It contained 12 inputs and eight
outputs, with a total of 48 12-input AND gates,
followed by a total of eight 48-input OR gates. At the
outputs, additional programmable XOR gates were also
available.
The technology then employed in the fabrication of
PLAs was the same as that of PALs. Though PLAs are
also obsolete now, they reappeared a few years ago as a
building block in the first family of low power CPLDs,
the CoolRunner family from Xilinx.
18.2.3 GAL Devices
The GAL (generic PAL) architecture was introduced by
Lattice in the beginning of the 1980s. It contains several
important improvements over the first PALs. First, a
more sophisticated output cell (called OLMC—output

--- Page 872 ---
logic macrocell, or simply macrocell) was constructed,
which included a flip-flop, an XOR gate, and five
multiplexers, with internal programmability that
allowed several modes of operation. Second, a return
(feedback) signal from the macrocell back to the
programmable array was also included, conferring to
the circuit more versatility. Third, EEPROM was
employed instead of fuses/antifuses or PROM/EPROM
to store the interconnects. Finally, an electronic
signature for identification and protection was also
made available.
This type of device is illustrated in Figure 18.5, which
shows the GAL16V8 chip. The largest part of the
diagram comprises the programmable AND array,
where the little circles represent programmable
interconnections. As can be seen, the circuit is
composed of eight sections, each with eight AND gates.
The eight AND outputs in each section are connected to
a fixed OR gate located inside the macrocell (shown
later), which completes the general PAL architecture of
Figure 18.2. The circuit has 16 inputs and eight outputs,
hence the name 16V8. However, because its package
has only 20 pins, the actual configuration is eight IN
pins (pins 2–9) and eight IN/OUT pins (pins 12–19),
plus CLK (pin 1), /OE (output enable, pin 11), GND
(pin 10), and VDD (pin 20). Observe that at each output
there is a macrocell.

--- Page 873 ---
FIGURE 18.5  GAL 16V8 chip.
The macrocell’s internal diagram is shown in Figure
18.6. As mentioned above, it contains the fixed eight-
input OR gate to which the programmable ANDs are

--- Page 874 ---
connected. It contains also a programmable XOR gate
followed by a DFF. A multiplexer allows the output
signal to be chosen between that coming directly from
the OR/XOR gate (for combinational functions) and
that coming from the DFF (for sequential functions),
while another multiplexer allows the return (feedback)
signal to be picked from the DFF, from an adjacent
macrocell, or from its IN/OUT pin. Notice the presence
of three more multiplexers, one for selecting whether
the output of the top AND gate should or should not be
connected to the OR gate, another for choosing which
signal should control the output tri-state buffer, and
finally another to choose whether a zero or the
macrocell’s output should be sent to the other adjacent
macrocell.
FIGURE 18.6  Macrocell diagram.
As mentioned earlier, GAL devices are still
manufactured (by Lattice, Atmel, etc.). CMOS

--- Page 875 ---
technology is now employed, which includes EEPROM
or flash memory for interconnect storage, 3.3 V supply
voltage, and a maximum frequency around 250 MHz.
18.3 CPLDs
As mentioned before, SPLDs (simple PLDs) were replaced
with CPLDs (complex PLDs), originally obtained by
constructing and associating several SPLDs on the same
chip.
18.3.1 Architecture
The basic approach to the construction of a CPLD is
illustrated in Figure 18.7. It consists of several PLDs
(GALs, in general) fabricated on the same chip, which
communicate through a complex and programmable
interconnecting array. I/O drivers and a clock/control
unit are also needed. Several additional features are
inherent to modern CPLDs, notably JTAG support, a
variety of I/O standards (LVTTL, LVCMOS, etc.), a
large number of user I/O pins, and low-power
operation.

--- Page 876 ---
FIGURE 18.7  Basic CPLD architecture, which
consists of n PLDs (GALs, in general) interconnected
through a programmable switch array, plus I/O bank and
clock/control unit.
The Xilinx XC9500 CPLD series is an example of a
CPLD constructed according to the general architecture
depicted in Figure 18.7 (and the same is true for the
CoolRunner family, though this employs PLAs instead
of GALs). It contains n PLDs, each resembling a V18
GAL (therefore similar to the 16V8 architecture of
Figure 18.5, but with 18 programmable AND arrays
instead of eight, hence with 18 macrocells each), where
n = 2, 4, 6, 8, 12, or 16. With these values of n, CPLDs
with 18n = 36 up to 288 macrocells are obtained. This
fact can be verified in the XC9500 data sheets available
at www.xilinx.com.
The Altera MAX3000 CPLD series is another example
of a CPLD constructed according to the general
architecture depicted in Figure 18.7 (and the same is

--- Page 877 ---
true for the MAX7000 series). A MAX3000 CPLD
contains n PLDs, each resembling a V16 GAL
(therefore similar to the 16V8 architecture of Figure
18.5 but with 16 programmable AND arrays instead of
eight, hence with 16 macrocells each), where n = 2, 4,
8, 16, or 32. Altera calls these individual PLDs by the
name LAB (logic array block), and the interconnect
array by PIA (programmable interconnect array). With
the values of n listed above, CPLDs with 16n = 32 up to
512 macrocells are obtained. This architecture can be
verified in the MAX3000A data sheets available at
www.altera.com.
Besides lower power consumption, recent CPLDs
exhibit higher versatility and more features than the
traditional GAL-based architecture described above. As
an example, Figure 18.8 depicts the overall approach
used in the Altera MAXII CPLD series. As shown in
Figure 18.8(a), a LAB (logic array block) is no longer a
GAL, but a collection of LEs (logic elements) to which
a vaster interconnecting array is made available.
Additionally, Figure 18.8(b) shows that each LAB is
composed of ten LEs with local as well as global (row
plus column) interconnects. Consequently, this type of
CPLD is more like a “simplified” FPGA than a
traditional CPLD.

--- Page 878 ---
FIGURE 18.8  Basic architecture of the Altera
MAXII CPLDs. (a) A LAB (logic array block) is no longer
a GAL, but a collection of LEs (logic elements), with finer
interconnecting buses; (b) Each LAB is composed of ten
LEs with local as well as global interconnections (this is a
“simplifi ed” FPGA).
A simplified diagram for the LE mentioned above is
presented in Figure 18.9. This circuit differs
substantially from the traditional PLD-based approach
(which employs a PAL array plus a macrocell)

--- Page 879 ---
described earlier. First, instead of a PAL array, it
employs a lookup table (LUT) to implement
combinational logic. Because it is a four-input LUT, it
can implement any combinational function of four
variables, therefore spanning a wider binary space. For
the case when more than four variables are needed (or
for table sharing), a LUT chain output is provided.
Likewise, a register chain output is provided for large
sequential functions. Carry chain is also available, thus
optimizing addition/subtraction (observe the XOR gate
on the left and check the circuits in Figure 12.13(a)).
FIGURE 18.9  Simplified diagram of the LE
employed in the Altera MAXII CPLDs.
To conclude this section, we present two tables that
summarize the main features of current CPLDs. The
first (Figure 18.10) presents the CPLDs offered by
Xilinx, while the second (Figure 18.11) shows those
from Altera. It is important to mention, however, that
other companies, like Atmel and Lattice, also offer this
kind of device.

--- Page 880 ---
FIGURE 18.10  Summary of current Xilinx CPLDs
(overall performance and other features grow from left to
right).

--- Page 881 ---
FIGURE 18.11  Summary of current Altera CPLDs
(overall performance and other features grow from left to
right).
18.3.2 Xilinx CPLDs
Looking at Figure 18.10, we observe three CPLD series
(XC9500, CoolRunner XPLA3, and CoolRunner II)
whose overall performance and other features grow
from left to right. The first table line shows the power
supply options, which go from 5 V down to 1.8 V
(lower power consumption), while the second line
shows the building blocks described earlier, that is,
GAL for XC9500 and PLA for CoolRunner.

--- Page 882 ---
The number of macrocells (number of GAL or PLA
sections) appears in the third line, that is, 36–288 for
XC9500 (compare these numbers to those calculated
earlier) and 32–512 for CoolRunner. In the next line,
the number of flip-flops is shown, which is one per
macrocell (in the CoolRunner II they are dual-edge flip-
flops).
The number of I/O pins appears next and can be
relatively large. The types of I/O standards supported
by CPLDs is another important parameter because in
modern/complex designs communication with
specialized units (memories, other ICs, specific buses,
etc.) is often required (see I/O standards in Section
10.9).
The following line regards the use of Schmitt triggers
(Section 11.13) in the input pads (to increase noise
immunity), which is a common feature in modern
devices. As can be seen, they are available in the
XC9500 and CoolRunner II series (with a much higher
hysteresis in the latter). Another important parameter is
the maximum system frequency, which can be higher
than 300 MHz. Observe that the larger the CPLD, the
lower the maximum frequency.
The next line shows the power consumption, a crucial
parameter in portable products (digital cameras, MP3
players, etc.). The values shown are for the smallest
CPLD in each series, which is operating with nearly all
cells in reduced-power (so lower speed) mode, and for
the largest CPLD, which is operating with all cells in
normal power (so regular speed) mode, with each pair
of values given for the device in standby mode (0 Hz)
and operating at 100 MHz. As can be seen, the
CoolRunner devices present very low (near zero) power

--- Page 883 ---
consumption in standby, and also a relatively low
consumption in high frequency (CoolRunner II only).
Indeed, CoolRunner was the first low-power CPLD.
The reduced power in standby is due to the sense
amplifiers used in the SOPs, replaced with fully digital
gates that drain no static current (Xilinx calls this
approach “RealDigital”). Besides the avoidance of
sense amplifiers and the use of a low supply voltage
(1.8 V), the lower power consumption of CoolRunner II
at high frequency is due also to a reduced global clock
frequency, obtained with a global clock divider, with
the clock frequency reestablished locally (at the
macrocells) by a clock doubler.
The table of Figure 18.10 also shows the technology
used to fabricate these devices, which is 0.35 μm or
0.18 μm CMOS (Chapters 9–10), with either EEPROM
(Section 17.5) or flash (Section 17.6) nonvolatile
memory employed to store the interconnects.
18.3.3 Altera CPLDs
A similar set of features can be observed in the table of
Figure 18.11, which shows the three CPLD series
(MAX7000, MAX3000, and MAXII) currently offered
by Altera (again, the overall performance and other
features grow from left to right).
The first line shows the power supply options, which
again go from 5V down to 1.8V (lower power
consumption). The second line shows the building
blocks described earlier, that is, GAL for MAX7000
and MAX3000, and LAB (logic array block) composed
of LEs (logic elements) for MAXII.

--- Page 884 ---
The next two lines show the number of macrocells
(number of GAL sections) or of LEs, followed by the
respective number of flip-flops. As can be seen, these
numbers are also comparable to those for the Xilinx
CPLDs, except for the number of flip-flops in the
MAXII devices, which can be substantially larger.
Information regarding I/O follows, showing the number
of pins, the types of I/O standards, and the use (or not)
of Schmitt triggers. Next, the maximum system
frequencies are listed, which can again be as high as
∼ 300 MHz.
The power consumption is shown next, using the same
methodology adopted in Figure 18.10. Like
CoolRunner, MAXII is a low-power CPLD. Even
though the latter has a higher power consumption in
standby, in regular operation they are comparable.
The technologies used to fabricate these devices are
listed in the following line, with again either EEPROM
(Section 17.5) or flash (Section 17.6) nonvolatile
memory employed to store the interconnects. Finally, a
feature that is proper of FPGAs (user memory) is shown
for the MAXII series (recall that MAXII is indeed a
simplified FPGA).
18.4 FPGAs
Field programmable gate array (FPGA) devices were
introduced by Xilinx in the mid 1980s. As mentioned earlier,
they differ from CPLDs in terms of architecture, technology,
built-in features, size, performance, and cost. To describe the
construction and main features of FPGAs, two top-
performance devices (Virtex 5 from Xilinx and Stratix III
from Altera) will be used as examples.

--- Page 885 ---
18.4.1 FPGA Technology
The technology employed in the fabrication of the two
devices mentioned above is 65 nm CMOS (Chapters 9–
10), with all-copper metal layers. A low-K dielectric is
used between the copper layers to reduce
interconnection capacitances. The maximum internal
clock frequency achieved in these two devices is 550
MHz for Virtex 5 and 600 MHz for Stratix III.
The typical supply voltage for 65 nm technology is VDD
= 1 V, which reduces the dynamic power consumption
(Pdyn = CVDD2f) in approximately 30% with respect to
the previous technology node, 90 nm, for which the
power supply was 1.2 V. Note, however, that for the
same number of gates and equivalent routing the
equivalent capacitance (C) is lower, reducing the
dynamic power consumption even further. Architectural
improvements were also introduced in these two
devices, like lower interconnect capacitances and the
use of low-power transistors in the noncritical sections,
allowing a combined relative (that is, for the same
number of gates and same frequency) dynamic power
reduction of over 40%. Recall, however, that the new
devices are denser and faster, hence off-setting such
savings.
Regarding the static power consumption, however, even
though it normally decreases with the supply voltage,
that is not exactly so with such small transistors (65 nm
gate length) because current leakage is no longer
negligible (due mainly to subthreshold leakage between
drain and source and to gate oxide tunneling). One of
the improvements developed to cope with this problem
is the triple-oxide process. Previous (90 nm) FPGAs

--- Page 886 ---
used two oxide thicknesses, that is, one very thin
(thinox), employed basically in all core transistors, and
the other thick (thickox), employed in the higher
voltage tolerant transistors of the I/O blocks. In the
FPGAs mentioned above, a medium thickness oxide
(midox) was included. This transistor has a higher
threshold voltage and lower speed than thinox
transistors, but it also has a much lower leakage and is
employed in the millions of configuration memory
cells, which are not critical, as well as in other FPGA
sections where top performance is not required. As a
rough preliminary estimate for the total power budget
of high performance FPGAs, ∼ 1 W can be considered
for small devices, ∼ 5 W for medium devices, and ∼ 10
W for large ones.
Another improvement, which was adopted in the Stratix
III FPGA, consists of using strained silicon (described
in Section 9.8) to increase the transistors’ speed. All
Stratix III transistors are strained, allowing many of
them to be constructed with midox instead of thinox,
thus preventing leakage without compromising speed.
18.4.2 FPGA Architecture
The overall architecture of FPGAs is depicted in Figure
18.12, which presents a simplified view of the Virtex 5
and Stratix III FPGAs. The former is illustrated in
Figure 18.12(a), where the programmable logic blocks
are called CLB (configurable logic block), with each
CLB composed of two Slices (one of type L, the other
of type L or M). Stratix III is depicted in Figure
18.12(b), where the programmable logic blocks are
called LAB (logic array block), with each LAB

--- Page 887 ---
composed of 10 ALMs (adaptive logic modules).
Because the programmable logic blocks are relatively
complex, this type of architecture is considered to be
medium grained (fine-grained structures have been
considered, but a move in the opposite direction proved
to be more efficient; indeed, every new FPGA
generation has seen programmable logic blocks with
increased size and complexity).


--- Page 888 ---
FIGURE 18.12  Simplified FPGA architectures: (a)
Xilinx Virtex 5; (b) Altera Stratix III. Additional blocks
(SRAM, DSP, etc.) and additional routing not shown.
18.4.3 Virtex CLB and Slice
As shown in Figure 18.12(a), the basic building block
in the Xilinx Virtex 5 FPGA is the CLB, which is
composed of two Slices, called Slice L or Slice M. The
difference between them is that the LUT (lookup table)
in the latter, when not employed to implement a
function, can be used as a 64-bit distributed SRAM,
which is made available to the user as general purpose
memory, or it can be used as a general purpose 32-bit
shift register. Approximately one-fourth of the total
number of Slices in the Virtex 5 FPGA are of type M.
A simplified view of a Slice (type L) is presented in
Figure 18.13. It is composed of four similar sections
(logic cells), containing a total of four six-input LUTs,
four DFFs, and a fast carry chain. The total number of
CLBs, Slices, and registers in the Virtex 5 FPGA can be
seen in Figure 18.18. The maximum internal clock
frequency is 550 MHz.

--- Page 889 ---
FIGURE 18.13  Simplified diagram of the Slice L
unit employed in the Virtex 5 FPGA, which contains four
six-input LUTs, four DFFs, and a fast carry chain.

--- Page 890 ---
FIGURE 18.18  Summary of Virtex 5 and Stratix III
features.
18.4.4 Stratix LAB and ALM
As shown in Figure 18.12(b), the basic building block
in the Altera Stratix III FPGA is called LAB, which is
composed of 10 ALMs. A simplified ALM diagram is
presented in Figure 18.14. Notice that this circuit is not

--- Page 891 ---
much different from that seen in Figure 18.9. It contains
two six-input LUTs, two adders for fast arithmetic/carry
chains, plus two DFFs and register chain for the
implementation of large sequential functions. Even
though the ALM can operate with two six-input LUTs,
note that it has only eight inputs, so four of them are
common to both tables (see detail on the left of Figure
18.14). Still, having eight inputs confers great
flexibility to the LUTs, which can then be configured in
several ways, including two completely independent 4-
LUTs (four-input LUTs), or a 3-LUT plus a 5-LUT, also
independent, etc. Similarly to Virtex 5, Stratix III can
also have the unused ALMs converted into user
(distributed) SRAM. ALMs that allow such usage are
called MLAB ALMs, each providing 640 bits of user
RAM; 5% of the total number of ALMs are of this type,
thus resulting in a total of approximately 32 bits/ALM
of extra user memory. The MLAB ALMs allow also the
construction of shift registers, FIFO memory, or filter
delay lines. The total number of LABs, ALMs, and
registers in the Stratix III FPGA can be seen in Figure
18.18. The maxi-mum internal clock frequency is 600
MHz.

--- Page 892 ---
FIGURE 18.14  Simplified diagram of the ALM unit
employed in the Stratix III FPGA, which contains two six-
input LUTs (though inputs are not completely independent),
two DFFs, two adders, plus carry and register chains.
18.4.5 RAM Blocks
Besides the indispensable programmable logic blocks,
modern FPGAs also include other blocks, which are
helpful in the development of large and/or complex
designs. These blocks normally are the following:
SRAM blocks, DSP blocks, and PLL blocks.
Because most designs require memory, the inclusion of
user SRAM is one of the most common and helpful
features. Both FPGAs mentioned above contain user
SRAM blocks. To illustrate this point, Figure 18.15
shows the floor plan of a Stratix III FPGA (the smallest
device in the E series), where, besides the ALMs and
I/Os (which are indispensable), RAM, DSP, PLL, and
DLL blocks can also be observed.

--- Page 893 ---
FIGURE 18.15  Stratix III floor plan (smallest
device in the E series).
The SRAM blocks in this FPGA are divided into three
categories, called M9 k (9216 bits), M144 k (147,456
bits), and MLAB (640 bits). The first two types of
blocks can be observed in the diagram of Figure 18.15;
they operate as simple dual-port memory at up to 600
MHz. The third type (MLAB) can also operate at 600
MHz but is obtained from ALMs of type MLAB, as
explained earlier ( ∼ 32bits/ALM result when the total
number of ALMs is considered). As mentioned above,
the MLAB ALMs can also operate as shift registers,
FIFO, or filter delay lines. The total number of user
SRAM bits can be seen in the summary of Figure 18.18
and goes from 2.4 Mb (smallest device in the L series)
to 20.4 Mb (largest device in the L series).
The Virtex 5 FPGA also contains user SRAM blocks,
each of size 36 kbits, and configurable in several ways
(36 k × 1, 16 k × 2, 8 k × 4, etc.), totaling 1.15 Mb in
the smallest device and 10.4 Mb in the largest one.

--- Page 894 ---
Moreover, recall that the memory used to construct the
LUTs in the M-type Slices can be employed as
distributed user SRAM when the LUTs are not needed.
This memory can also be configured as single-, dual-,
or quad-port SRAM or as a shift register. Like Stratix
III, the distributed RAM adds roughly 30% more bits to
the existing user RAM blocks. The resulting total
number of bits can be seen in the summary of Figure
18.18 and goes from 1.47 Mb to 13.8 Mb. All SRAM
cells can operate at up to 550 MHz.
18.4.6 DSP Blocks
DSP (digital signal processing) is often required in
applications involving audio or video, among others.
Such processing (FIR/IIR filtering, FFT, DCT, etc.) is
accomplished by three basic elements: multipliers,
accumulators (adders), and registers. To make this type
of application simpler to implement (route) and also
faster (less routing delays), special DSP blocks are
included in modern FPGAs (see Figures 18.15 and
18.18), normally containing large parallel multipliers,
MAC (multiply-and-accumulate) circuits, and shift
registers.
Each DSP block available in the Stratix III FPGA
contains eight 18 × 18 multipliers (which can also be
configured as 9 × 9, 12 × 12, or 36 × 36 multipliers),
plus associated MAC circuits and shift registers. The
total number of DSP blocks varies from 27 (in the
smallest L-series device) to 96 (largest L-series device)
and is capable of operating at up to 550 MHz.
The Virtex 5 FPGA also contains DSP blocks (called
DSP48E Slices). Each block includes a 25 × 18

--- Page 895 ---
multiplier, plus MACs, registers, and several operating
modes. The total number of such blocks varies from 32
(in the smallest device) to 192 (in the largest device),
with a maximum frequency of 550 MHz. Information
regarding the DSP blocks can also be seen in the
summary of Figure 18.18.
18.4.7 Clock Management
Clock management is one of the most crucial aspects in
high performance devices. It includes two main parts:
clock distribution and clock manipulation.
An adequate clock distribution network is necessary to
minimize clock skew (that is, to avoid the clock
reaching one section of the chip much later than it
reaches others), which can be disastrous in synchronous
systems operating within tight time windows. This type
of network is constructed with minimum parasitic
resistances and capacitances, and its layout tries to
balance the distances between the diverse regions of the
chip as best as possible. For example, the Stratix III
FPGA exhibits three kinds of clock distribution
networks, called GCLK (global clock), RCLK (regional
clock), and PCLK (peripheral clock). The first two can
be observed in Figure 18.16. The clock signals feeding
these networks can come only from external sources
(through dedicated clock input pins) or from PLLs (up
to 12, located near the input clock pins, at the top,
bottom, left, and right of the chip frame). Stratix III has
up to 16 GCLKs, 88 RCLKs, and 116 PCLKs (total of
220) clock networks.

--- Page 896 ---
FIGURE 18.16  (a) Global and (b) regional clock
distribution networks of Stratix III.
Clock manipulation is the other fundamental part of
clock management. To do so, PLLs (Section 14.6) are
normally employed, which serve the following four
main purposes: clock multiplication, clock division,
phase shift, and jitter filtration.
The Stratix III devices can have up to 12 PLLs
(distributed in the positions already indicated in Figure
18.16), whose simplified diagram is shown in Figure
18.17. Comparing it to that in Figure 14.25, we observe
that the PLLs proper are similar (note that the ÷ M
prescaler in the latter is represented by ÷ m in the
former). However, the PLL of Figure 18.17 exhibits
additional features, like the programmable PLL seen in
Figure 14.29. The Stratix III PLL includes eight shifted
versions of the generated signal, an optional ÷ 2 block
within the PLL loop, a pre-PLL divider (÷ n, similar to
the ÷ R of Figure 14.29), plus several post-PLL dividers
(represented by ÷ c0, ÷ c1,…, ÷ cx, where x can be 6 or
9). These features allow a wide range of frequency

--- Page 897 ---
division and multiplication factors as well as a wide
selection of clock phases.
FIGURE 18.17  Simplified diagram of the Stratix III
PLLs.
Another interesting feature of this PLL is that it allows
the generation of clocks with nonsymmetric duty
cycles, though only when the post-PLL dividers are
employed. For example, if c0 = 10, then the duty cycle
of the corresponding output can be 10–90% (that is, one
high, 9 low), 20–80% (2 high, 8 low),…, 90–10% (9
high, one low). It also allows a 50–50% duty cycle
when the divisor is odd, which consists of switching the
signal from low to high at the rising edge of the VCO
clock and from high to low at the falling edge.
The Stratix III PLLs also allow six modes of operation,
depending on where the feedback clock comes from
(these modes are defined by the multiplexer installed in
the feedback loop—see inputs marked with (1) and (2)
in Figure 18.17). If input (1) is employed, then the no-
compensation mode results, while for the other five
modes input (2) is employed. All six modes are
described below.

--- Page 898 ---
No-compensation mode: In this case, input
(1) is used, so the generated clock is locally
phase aligned with the PLL reference clock
(from a clock input pin). Due to less
circuitry, this is the option with less jitter.
Normal mode: In this case, the generated
clock, taken from an internal point at flip-
flop clock inputs, is phase aligned with the
PLL reference clock.
Zero-delay buffer mode: The generated
clock, taken from a clock output pin, is
phase aligned with the PLL reference clock
(which enters the device), hence resulting
zero delay through the device (the delay is
exactly one clock period).
External feedback mode: A clock leaving
the device is aligned with the reference
clock, like above, but taken from a point
after going through external circuitry (that
is, after traveling through the PCB).
Source-synchronous mode: The generated
clock, taken from a point feeding I/O
enable registers, is phase aligned with the
PLL reference clock.
Source-synchronous for LVDS
compensation mode: In this case, the clock
input to SERDES (serializer/deserializer)
registers is phase aligned with the PLL
reference clock.
Stratix III also contains four DLL (delay locked loop)
units, located one in each corner of the device (Figure
18.15). Though DLLs can also be used for clock

--- Page 899 ---
manipulation, they are used only for phase shifting
when interfacing with external memory. More
specifically, they are used for phase shifting the DQS
(data strobe) signals for memory read and write
operations. Each DLL has two outputs, allowing eight
phase-shift settings. The combined options include the
following shifts: 0°, 22.5°, 30°, 36°, 45°, 60°, 67.5°,
72°, 90°, 108°, 120°, 135°, 144°, or 180°. These,
however, depend on the chosen DLL frequency mode,
for which there are five options. For example, for 100
MHz–167 MHz, the resolution is 22.5°, while for 400
MHz it is 45°.
Virtex 5 also contains a powerful clock management
system. It is composed of up to six CMTs (clock
management tiles), each constructed with two DCM
(digital clock management) units and one PLL. Besides
extensive clock control circuitry, the DCM also
contains one DLL, employed for local clock deskew
(phase shifting). Like Stratix III, the PLLs are used for
clock multiplication, division, jitter filtration, and
network clock deskew. Each device contains 20
dedicated clock pins, which are connected to 32 global
clock networks (GCLKs). There are also four regional
clock networks (RCLKs) in each one of the device’s 8
to 24 regions, thus totaling 32 to 96 RCLKs. A third
type of clock network also exists, which feeds the I/O
SERDES circuits.
18.4.8 I/O Standards
As mentioned earlier, FPGAs support a wide selection
of I/O standards, most of which are described in Section
10.9.

--- Page 900 ---
18.4.9 Additional Features
The Virtex 5 FPGA is offered in two main versions,
called LX and LXT. What distinguishes these two series
is the set of additional features aimed at particular types
of designs. The LXT series contains a PCI Express
interface, Ethernet blocks (four), and high-speed serial
transceivers (8–16). Likewise, the Stratix III FPGA is
offered in three main versions, called L, E, and GX.
Compared to the L series, the E series has additional
RAM and DSP blocks, while the GX series includes
additional RAM blocks and high-speed serial
transceivers.
18.4.10 Summary and Comparison
The table in Figure 18.18 summarizes the main features
of the two FPGAs described above. To ease the
analysis, related topics are grouped together and are
presented in the same order as the descriptions above. It
is important to mention, however, that other companies
also offer FPGAs, like Atmel, Lattice, and QuickLogic.
The price ranges for CPLDs and FPGAs, very roughly
speaking, are the following:
 CPLDs: $1 to $100
 Basic FPGAs (for example, Spartan 3,
Cyclone II): $10 to $1000
 Top FPGAs (for example, Virtex 5, Stratix
III): $100 to $10,000
18.5 Exercises

--- Page 901 ---
1. PAL versus PLA
a. Briefly explain the main differences
between PAL and PLA.
b. Why can a PLA implement more logical
functions than a PAL with the same number
of AND-OR gates?
c. Why is a PLA slower than a PAL with the
same number of AND-OR gates (of similar
technology)?
2. GAL versus PAL
Briefly explain the improvements introduced by
GAL over the existing PAL and PLA devices. Why is
GAL fine for implementing sequential circuits while
the other two are not?
3. CPLD versus GAL #1
Check the data sheets for the Xilinx XC9500 CPLD
series and confirm that such CPLDs are constructed
with n V18-type GALs, where n = 2, 4, 6, 8, 12, 16.
4. CPLD versus GAL #2
Check the data sheets for the Altera MAX3000
CPLD series and confirm that such CPLDs are
constructed with n V16-type GALs, where n = 2, 4,
8, 16, 32.
5. Low-power CPLDs #1
Check the data sheets of the Xilinx CoolRunner II
CPLD and confirm that its static (standby) power
consumption is much smaller than that of any other
Xilinx CPLD (see Figure 18.10).
6. Low-power CPLDs #2
Check the data sheets of the Altera MAX II CPLD
and confirm that its static (standby) power

--- Page 902 ---
consumption is much smaller than that of any other
Altera CPLD (Figure 18.11).
7. CPLD technology #1
Check the data sheets for the three Xilinx CPLD
families (Figure 18.10) and write down the
following:
a. The CMOS technology employed in their
fabrication.
b. The type of memory (EEPROM, flash,
etc.) used to store the interconnects. Is it
nonvolatile?
c. The power supply voltage options.
d. The total number of flip-flops.
8. CPLD technology #2
Check the data sheets for the three Altera CPLD
families (Figure 18.11) and write down the
following:
a. The CMOS technology employed in their
fabrication.
b. The type of memory (EEPROM, flash,
etc.) used to store the interconnects. Is it
nonvolatile?
c. The power supply voltage options.
d. The total number of flip-flops.
9. CPLD I/Os #1
Check the data sheets for the three Xilinx CPLD
families (Figure 18.10) and write down the
following:
a. The I/O standards supported by each
family. Which of them are in Section 10.9?
b. The number of user I/O pins.
c. The types of packages (see Figure 1.10).

--- Page 903 ---
10. CPLD I/Os #2
Check the data sheets for the three Altera CPLD
families (Figure 18.11) and write down the
following:
a. The I/O standards supported by each
family. Which of them are in Section 10.9?
b. The number of user I/O pins.
c. The types of packages (see Figure 1.10).
11. FPGA versus CPLD
Briefly explain the main differences between
FPGAs and CPLDs.
12. FPGA technology #1
Check the data sheets for the Xilinx Virtex 5
family of FPGAs (Figure 18.18) and write
down the following:
a. The CMOS technology employed in
their fabrication.
b. The type of memory (EEPROM, flash,
SRAM, DRAM, etc.) used to store the
interconnects. Is it volatile or nonvolatile?
c. The power supply voltage.
d. The total number of flip-flops.
e. The number of PLLs.
f. The amount of user RAM.
13. FPGA technology #2
Check the data sheets for the Altera Stratix
III family of FPGAs (Figure 18.18) and
write down the following:
a. The CMOS technology employed in
their fabrication.
b. The type of memory (EEPROM, flash,
SRAM, DRAM, etc.) used to store the
interconnects. Is it volatile or nonvolatile?

--- Page 904 ---
c. The power supply voltage.
d. The total number of flip-flops.
e. The number of PLLs.
f. The amount of user RAM.
14. FPGA I/Os #1
Check the data sheets for the Xilinx Virtex 5
family of FPGAs (Figure 18.18) and write
down the following:
a. The I/O standards supported by each
family.
b. The number of user I/O pins.
c. The types of packages (see Figure
1.10).
15. FPGA I/Os #2
Check the data sheets for the Altera Stratix
III family of FPGAs (Figure 18.18) and
write down the following:
a. The I/O standards supported by each
family.
b. The number of user I/O pins.
c. The types of packages (see Figure
1.10).
16. Other CPLD manufacturers
As mentioned earlier, there are several other
CPLD manufacturers besides those used as
examples in this chapter. Look for such
manufacturers and briefly compare their
devices against those in Figures 18.10 and
18.11.
17. Other FPGA manufacturers
As mentioned earlier, there are several other
FPGA manufacturers besides those used as
examples in this chapter. Look for such

--- Page 905 ---
manufacturers and briefly compare their
devices against those in Figure 18.18.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 906 ---
19
VHDL Summary
Chapter Contents
19.1 About VHDL
19.2 Code Structure
19.3 Fundamental VHDL Packages
19.4 Predefined Data Types
19.5 User Defined Data Types
19.6 Operators
19.7 Attributes
19.8 Concurrent versus Sequential Code
19.9 Concurrent Code (WHEN, GENERATE)
19.10 Sequential Code (IF, CASE, LOOP,
WAIT)
19.11 Objects (CONSTANT, SIGNAL,
VARIABLE)
19.12 Packages
19.13 Components
19.14 Functions
19.15 Procedures
19.16 VHDL Template for FSMs

--- Page 907 ---
19.17 Exercises
Objective:
This chapter concisely describes the VHDL language and presents some
introductory circuit synthesis examples. Its purpose is to lay the fundamentals
for the many designs that follow in Chapters 20 and 21, for combinational
circuits, and in Chapters 22 and 23, for sequential circuits. The use of VHDL
is concluded in Chapter 24, which introduces simulation techniques with
VHDL testbenches. The descriptions below are very brief; for additional
details, books written specifically for VHDL ([Pedroni 2004a] and [Ashenden
2002], for example) should be consulted.
The summary presented in this chapter can be divided into two
parts [Pedroni 2004a]. The first part, which encompasses Sections
19.1 to 19.11, plus Section 19.16, describes the VHDL statements
and constructs that are intended for the main code, hence referred
to as circuit-level design. The second part, covered by Sections
19.12 to 19.15, presents the VHDL units that are intended mainly
for libraries and code partitioning, so it is referred to as system-
level design.
19.1 About VHDL
VHDL is a technology and vendor independent hardware
description language. The code describes the behavior or
structure of an electronic circuit from which a compliant
physical circuit can be inferred by a compiler. Its main
applications include synthesis of digital circuits onto
CPLD/FPGA chips and layout/mask generation for ASIC
(application-specific integrated circuit) fabrication.

--- Page 908 ---
VHDL stands for VHSIC hardware description language and
resulted from an initiative funded by the U.S. Department of
Defense in the 1980s. It was the first hardware description
language standardized by the IEEE, through the 1076 and
1164 standards.
VHDL allows circuit synthesis as well as circuit simulation.
The former is the translation of a source code into a
hardware structure that implements the specified
functionalities; the latter is a testing procedure to ensure that
such functionalities are achieved by the synthesized circuit.
In the descriptions that follow, the synthesizable constructs
are emphasized, but an introduction to circuit simulation
with VHDL is also included (Chapter 24).
The following are examples of EDA (electronic design
automation) tools for VHDL synthesis and simulation:
Quartus II from Altera, ISE from Xilinx, FPGA Advantage,
Leonardo Spectrum (synthesis), and ModelSim (simulation)
from Mentor Graphics, Design Compiler RTL Synthesis
from Synopsys, Synplify Pro from Synplicity, and Encounter
RTL from Cadence.
All design examples presented in this book were synthesized
and simulated using Quartus II Web Edition, version 6.1 or
higher, available free of charge at www.altera.com. The
designs simulated using testbenches (Chapter 24) were
processed with ModelSim-Altera Web Edition 6.1g, also
available free of charge at the same site.
19.2 Code Structure
This section describes the basic structure of VHDL code,
which consists of three parts: library declarations, entity, and
architecture.

--- Page 909 ---
Library declarations
Library declarations is a list of all libraries and
corresponding packages that the compiler will
need to process the design. Two of them (std and
work) are made visible by default. The std library
contains definitions for the standard data types
(BIT, BOOLEAN, INTEGER, BIT, BIT_VECTOR,
etc.), plus information for text and file handling,
while the work library is simply the location where
the design files are saved.
A package that often needs to be included in this
list is std_logic_1164, from the ieee library, which
defines a nine-value logic type called STD_ULOGIC
and its resolved subtype, STD_LOGIC (the latter is
the industry standard). The main advantage of
STD_LOGIC over BIT is that it allows high-
impedance (‘Z’) and “don’t care” (‘–’)
specifications.
To declare the package above (or any other) two
lines of code are needed, one to declare the library
and the other a use clause pointing to the specific
package within it, as illustrated below.
Entity
Entity is a list with specifications of all I/O ports
of the circuit under design. It also allows generic
parameters to be declared, as well as several other

--- Page 910 ---
declarations, subprogram bodies, and concurrent
statements. Its syntax is shown below.
 GENERIC: Allows the declaration of
generic constants, which can then be
used anywhere in the code, including in
PORT. Example: GENERIC
(number_of_bits: INTEGER := 16).
 PORT, signal mode: IN, OUT, INOUT,
BUFFER. The first two are truly
unidirectional, the third is bidirectional,
and the fourth is needed when an output
signal must be read internally.
 PORT, signal type: BIT, BIT_VECTOR,
INTEGER, STD_LOGIC,
STD_LOGIC_VECTOR, BOOLEAN, etc.
 Declarative part: Can contain TYPE,
SUBTYPE, CONSTANT, SIGNAL, FILE,
ALIAS, USE, and ATTRIBUTE
declarations, plus FUNCTION and

--- Page 911 ---
PROCEDURE bodies. Rarely used in this
way.
 Statement part: Can contain concurrent
statements (rarely used).
Architecture
This part contains the code proper (the intended
circuit’s structural or behavioral description). It
can be concurrent or sequential. The former is
adequate for the design of combinational circuits,
while the latter can be used for sequential as well
as combinational circuits. Its syntax is shown
below.
 Declarative part: Can contain the same
items as the entity’s declarative part, plus
COMPONENT and CONFIGURATION
declarations.
 Code: Can be concurrent, sequential,
or mixed. To be sequential, the
statements must be placed inside a
PROCESS. However, as a whole, VHDL
code is always concurrent, meaning that
all of its parts are treated in “parallel”
with no precedence. Consequently, any
process is compiled concurrently with
any other statements located outside it.

--- Page 912 ---
The only other option to construct
sequential VHDL code is by means of
subprograms (FUNCTION and PROCEDURE),
described in Sections 19.14 and 19.15.
To write purely concurrent code, operators
(Section 9.6) can be used as well as the WHEN and
GENERATE statements. To write sequential code
(inside a PROCESS, FUNCTION, or PROCEDURE), the
allowed statements are IF, CASE, LOOP, and
WAIT (plus operators).
The code structure described above is illustrated in
the example that follows.
EXAMPLE 19.1 BUFFERED MULTIPLEXER
This introductory example shows the design of a 4
× 8 multiplexer (Section 11.6) whose output
passes through a tri-state buffer (Section 4.8)
controlled by an output-enable (ena) signal. The
circuit is depicted in Figure 19.1(a), and the
desired functionality is expressed in the truth table
of Figure 19.1(b).
FIGURE 19.1  Buffered multiplexer
of Example 19.1.
SOLUTION

--- Page 913 ---
A VHDL code for this example is presented in
Figure 19.2. Note that it contains all three code
sections described above. The additional package
is precisely std_logic_1164 (lines 2 and 3), which
is needed because the high-impedance state (‘Z’)
is employed in this design.
FIGURE 19.2 VHDL code for the
circuit of Figure 19.1 (Example 19.1).
The entity is in lines 5–10, under the name
buffered_mux (any name can be chosen) and
contains six input signals and one output signal
(note the modes IN and OUT). Signals a to d are 8-
bits wide and of type STD_LOGIC_VECTOR, and so
is y (otherwise none of the inputs a–d could be
passed to it); in a to d and y the indexing is from 7

--- Page 914 ---
down to 0 (in VHDL, the leftmost bit is the
MSB). The type of sel was declared as INTEGER,
though it could also be STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(1
DOWNTO 0), among other options. Finally, ena
was declared as STD_LOGIC (single bit), but
BIT would also do.
The architecture is in lines 12–21, with the name
myarch (can be basically any name, including the
same name as the entity’s). In its declarative part
(between the words ARCHITECTURE and
BEGIN) an internal signal (x) was declared,
which plays the role of multiplexer output. The
WHEN statement (described later) was employed in
lines 15–18 to implement the multiplexer and in
lines 19 and 20 to implement the tri-state buffer.
Because all eight wires that feed y must go to a
high-impedance state WHEN ena = ‘0’, the keyword
OTHERS was employed to avoid repeating ‘Z’
eight times (that is, y >= “ZZZZZZZZ”).
Note that single quotes are used for single-bit
values, while double quotes are used for multibit
values. Observe also that lines 1, 4, 11, and 22
were included only to improve code organization
and readability (“–” is used for comments).
Finally, VHDL is not case sensitive, but to ease
visualization capital letters were employed for
reserved VHDL words.
Simulation results obtained with the code above
are shown in Figure 19.3. Note that the input
signals are preceded by an arrow with an “I”
(Input) marked inside, while the arrow for the
output signal has an “O” (Output) marked inside.

--- Page 915 ---
The inputs can be chosen feely, while the output is
calculated and plotted by the simulator. As can be
seen, the circuit does behave as expected.
FIGURE 19.3 Simulation results
from the circuit (buffered mux)
inferred with the code of Figure 19.2.
19.3 Fundamental VHDL Packages
The list below shows the main VHDL packages along with
their libraries of origin. These packages can be found in the
libraries that accompany your synthesis/simulation software.
Library std
 Package standard: Defines the basic
VHDL types (BOOLEAN, BIT,
BIT_VECTOR, INTEGER, NATURAL,
POSITIVE, REAL, TIME,
DELAY_LENGTH, etc.) and related logical,
arithmetic, comparison, and shift
operators.
Library ieee

--- Page 916 ---
 Package std_logic_1164: Defines the
nine-valued type STD_ULOGIC and its
resolved subtype STD_LOGIC (industry
standard). Only logical operators are
included, along with some type-
conversion functions.
 Package numeric_std: Defines the
numeric types SIGNED and UNSIGNED,
having STD_LOGIC as the base type.
Includes also logical, arithmetic,
comparison, and shift operators, plus
some type-conversion functions.
Nonstandard packages
Both libraries above (std, ieee) are standardized by
the IEEE. The next packages are common
sharewares provided by EDA vendors.
 Package std_logic_arith: Defines the
numeric types SIGNED and UNSIGNED,
having STD_LOGIC as the base type.
Includes some arithmetic, comparison,
and shift operators, plus some type-
conversion functions. This package is
only partially equivalent to numeric_std.
 Package std_logic_signed: Defines
arithmetic, comparison, and some shift
operators for the STD_LOGIC_VECTOR type
as if it were SIGNED.
 Package std_logic_unsigned: Defines
arithmetic, comparison, and some shift

--- Page 917 ---
operators for the STD_LOGIC_VECTOR type
as if it were UNSIGNED.
19.4 Predefined Data Types
The predefined data types are from the libraries/packages
listed above. Those that are synthesizable are listed in Figure
19.4, which shows their names, library/package of origin,
and synthesizable values.
FIGURE 19.4  Predefined synthesizable data types with
respective library/package of origin and synthesizable values.
EXAMPLE 19.2 DATA-TYPE USAGE
Consider the following signal definitions:

--- Page 918 ---
a. How many bits will the compiler assign to each of
these signals?
b. Explain why the assignments below are legal.
c. Explain why the assignments below are illegal.
SOLUTION
Part (a):

--- Page 919 ---
1 bit for a and d, 7 bits for g, 8 bits for b, e, h, and i, and 16 bits
for c and f.
Part (b):
All data types and ranges match.
Part (c):
There are type and range mismatches.
19.5 User Defined Data Types
Data types can be created using the keyword TYPE. Such
declarations can be done in the declarative part of ENTITY,
ARCHITECTURE, FUNCTION, PROCEDURE, or PACKAGE.
Roughly speaking, they can be divided into the three
categories below.
Integer-based data types Subsets of INTEGER, declared using
the syntax below.
Syntax: TYPE type_name IS RANGE
type_range;
Examples:
TYPE bus_size IS RANGE 8 TO 64;
TYPE temperature IS RANGE −5 TO 120;
Enumerated data types Employed in the design of finite
state machines.
Syntax: TYPE type_name IS (state_names);
Examples:

--- Page 920 ---
TYPE machine_state IS (idle, forward,
backward);
TYPE counter IS (zero, one, two, three);
Array-based data types The keywords TYPE and ARRAY
are now needed, as shown in the syntax below. They allow
the creation of multi-dimensional data sets (1D, 1D × 1D,
2D, and generally also 3D are synthesizable without
restrictions).
Syntax: TYPE type_name IS ARRAY
(array_range) OF data_type;
Examples of 1D arrays (single row):
Examples of 1D × 1D arrays (4 rows with 8
elements each):
Example of 2D array (8 × 16 matrix):
19.6 Operators
VHDL provides a series of operators that are divided into the
six categories below. The last four are summarized in Figure
19.5, along with the allowed data types.

--- Page 921 ---
FIGURE 19.5  Predefined synthesizable operators and
allowed predefined data types.
Assignment operators “<=”, “:=”, “=>”
“<=” Used to assign values to signals.
“:=” Used to assign values to variables, constants,
or initial values.
“=>” Used with the keyword OTHERS to assign
values to arrays.
Examples:
Concatenation operators “&” and “,”
These operators are employed to group values.
Example: The assignments to x, y, and z below
are equivalent.

--- Page 922 ---
Logical operators NOT, AND, NAND, OR, NOR, XOR,
XNOR
The only logical operator with precedence over the others is
NOT.
Examples:
Arithmetic operators +, −, *, /, **, ABS, REM, MOD
These are the classical operators: addition, subtraction,
multiplication, division, exponentiation, absolute-value,
remainder, and modulo. They are also summarized in Figure
19.5 along with the allowed data types.
Examples:
Shift operators SLL, SRL, SLA, SRA, ROL, ROR
Shift operators are shown in Figure 19.5 along with the
allowed data types. Their meanings are described below.
SLL (shift left logical): Data are shifted to the
left with ‘0’s in the empty positions.
SRL (shift right logical): Data are shifted to the
right with ‘0’s in the empty positions.
SLA (shift left arithmetic): Data are shifted to
the left with the rightmost bit in the empty

--- Page 923 ---
positions.
SRA (shift right arithmetic): Data are shifted to
the right with the leftmost bit in the empty
positions.
ROL (rotate left): Circular shift to the left.
ROR (rotate right): Circular shift to the right.
Examples:
Comparison operators =, /=, >, <, >=, <=
Comparison operators are also shown in Figure 19.5 along
with the allowed data types.
Example:
19.7 Attributes
The main purposes of VHDL attributes are to allow the
construction of generic (flexible) codes as well as event-
driven codes. They also serve for communicating with the
synthesis tool to modify synthesis directives.
The predefined VHDL attributes can be divided into the
following three categories: (i) range related, (ii) position
related, and (iii) event related. All three are summarized in
Figure 19.6, which also lists the allowed data types.

--- Page 924 ---
FIGURE 19.6  Predefined synthesizable attributes and
allowed predefined data types.
Range-related attributes Return parameters regarding the
range of a data array.
Example:
For the signal x specified below, the range-
related attributes return the values listed
subsequently (note that m > n).
Position-related attributes Return positional information
regarding enumerated data types. For example, x′
POS(value) returns the position of the specified value, while
x′ VAL(position) returns the value in the specified position.
These attributes are also included in Figure 19.6.
Event-related attributes Employed for monitoring signal
changes (like clock transitions). The most common of these
is x′ EVENT, which returns TRUE when an event (positive or
negative edge) occurs in x. The main (synthesizable)
attributes in this category are also included in Figure 19.6.
Other attributes

--- Page 925 ---
GENERIC: This attribute was described in Section
19.2. It allows the specification of arbitrary
constants in the code’s entity.
ENUM_ENCODING: This is a very important
attribute for state-encoding in finite-state-
machine-based designs. Its description will be
seen in Section 19.16.
19.8 Concurrent versus Sequential Code
Contrary to computer programs, which are sequential
(serial), VHDL code is inherently concurrent (parallel).
Therefore, all statements have the same precedence.
Though this is fine for the design of combinational circuits,
it is not for sequential ones. To circumvent this limitation,
PROCESS, FUNCTION, or PROCEDURE can be used, which
are the only pieces of VHDL code that are interpreted
sequentially.
In the IEEE 1076 standard, FUNCTION and PROCEDURE
are collectively called subprograms. To ease any reference to
sequential code, we will use the word subprogram in a wider
sense, including PROCESS in it as well.
Regarding sequential code, it is important to remember,
however, that each subprogram, as a whole, is still
interpreted concurrently to any other statements or
subprograms that the code might contain.
The VHDL statements intended for concurrent code
(therefore located outside subprograms) are WHEN and
GENERATE (plus a less common statement called BLOCK),
while those for sequential code (thus allowed only inside
subprograms) are IF, CASE, LOOP, and WAIT. Operators
(seen in Section 19.6) are allowed anywhere.

--- Page 926 ---
19.9 Concurrent Code (WHEN, GENERATE)
As mentioned above, concurrent code can be constructed
with the statements WHEN and GENERATE, plus operators.
The WHEN statement This statement is available in two
forms as shown in the syntaxes below. Two equivalent
examples (a multiplexer) are also depicted. The keyword
OTHERS is useful to specify all remaining input values, while
the keyword UNAFFECTED (not employed in the examples
below) can be used WHEN no action is to take place. (You can
now go back and inspect Example 19.1.)
The GENERATE statement This statement is equivalent to
the LOOP statement. However, the latter is for sequential
code, while the former is for concurrent code.

--- Page 927 ---
EXAMPLE 19.3 PARITY DETECTOR
Parity detectors were studied in Section 11.7 (see Figure
11.20). Design a circuit of this type with a generic number of
inputs.
SOLUTION
A VHDL code for this problem is presented below. Note that
this code has only two sections because additional
libraries/packages are not needed (the data types employed in
the design are all from the package standard, which is made
visible by default).
The entity, called parity_detector, is in lines 2–6. As requested,
N is entered using the GENERIC attribute (line 3), so this code
can implement any size parity detector (the only change needed
is in the value of N in line 3). The input is called x (mode IN,
type BIT_VECTOR), while the output is called y (mode OUT,
type BIT). The architecture is in lines 8–16. Note that
GENERATE was employed (lines 12–14) along with the logical
operator XOR (line 13). An internal signal, called internal, was
created in line 9 to hold the value of the XOR operations (line
13). Observe that this signal has multiple bits because multiple
assignments to the same bit are not allowed (if it were a single-
bit signal, then N assignments to it would occur, that is, one in

--- Page 928 ---
line 11 and N – 1 in line 13). Simulation results are depicted in
Figure 19.7.
FIGURE 19.7 Simulation results from the code
(parity detector) of Example 19.3.
19.10 Sequential Code (IF, CASE, LOOP, WAIT)
As mentioned in Section 19.8, VHDL code is inherently
concurrent. To make it sequential, it has to be written inside
a subprogram (that is, PROCESS, FUNCTION, or PROCEDURE,
in our broader definition). The first is intended for use in the
main code (so it will be seen in this section), while the other
two are intended mainly for libraries (code-sharing and
reusability) and will be seen in Sections 19.14 and 19.15.

--- Page 929 ---
PROCESS
Allows the construction of sequential code in the main
code (recall that sequential code can implement
sequential and combinational circuits). Because its code
is sequential, only IF, CASE, LOOP, and WAIT are
allowed (plus operators, of course). As shown in the
syntax below, a process is always accompanied by a
sensitivity list (except WHEN WAIT is employed); the
process runs every time a signal included in the
sensitivity list changes (or the condition related to WAIT
is fulfilled). In the declarative part (between the words
PROCESS and BEGIN), variables can be specified. The
label is optional.
The IF statement This is the most commonly used of
all VHDL statements. Its syntax is shown below.


--- Page 930 ---
The WAIT statement This statement is somewhat
similar to IF, with more than one form available.
Contrary to WHEN IF, CASE, or LOOP are used, the
process cannot have a sensitivity list WHEN WAIT is
employed. The WAIT UNTIL statement accepts only one
signal, while WAIT ON accepts several. WAIT FOR is for
simulations only. All three syntaxes are shown below.
The CASE statement Even though CASE can only be used
in sequential code, its fundamental role is to allow the
easy creation of combinational circuits (more
specifically, of truth tables), so it is the sequential
counterpart of the concurrent statement WHEN. WHEN
CASE is employed, all input values must be tested, so the
keyword OTHERS can be helpful, as shown in the
example below (multiplexer).


--- Page 931 ---
The LOOP statement Allows the creation of multiple
instances of the same assignments. It is the sequential
counterpart of the concurrent statement GENERATE.
However, as shown below, there are four options
involving LOOP.
Note in the example with EXIT above that the code
counts the number of leading zeros in an N-bit vector
(starting with the MSB), while in the example with
NEXT it counts the total number of zeros in the vector.

--- Page 932 ---
EXAMPLE 19.4 LEADING ZEROS
As mentioned above, the code presented in the example
with EXIT counts the total number of leading zeros in an
N-bit vector, starting from the left (MSB). Write the
complete code for that problem.
SOLUTION
The corresponding code is shown below. Again
additional library/package declarations are not needed.
The entity is in lines 2–6, and the name chosen for it is
leading_zeros. Note that the number of bits was again
declared using the GENERIC statement (line 3), thus
causing this solution to be fine for any vector size. The
architecture is in lines 8–20 under the name behavioral.
Note that a process was needed to use a variable (temp),
which, contrary to a signal, does accept multiple
assignments (lines 13 and 16). The EXIT statement (line
15) was employed to quit the loop WHEN a ‘1’ is found.
The value of temp (a variable) is eventually passed to y
(a signal) at the end of the process (line 18). Simulation
results are depicted in Figure 19.8.
FIGURE 19.8 Simulation results from the
code (leading zeros) of Example 19.4.

--- Page 933 ---
19.11 Objects (CONSTANT, SIGNAL,
VARIABLE)
There are three kinds of objects in VHDL: CONSTANT,
SIGNAL, and VARIABLE.
CONSTANT A constant can be declared and used basically
anywhere (entity, architecture, package, component, block,
configuration, and subprograms). Its syntax is shown below.
(Constants can also be declared using the GENERIC statement
seen in Section 19.2.2.)
Syntax: CONSTANT constant_name:
constant_type := constant_value;
Examples;

--- Page 934 ---
SIGNAL Signals define circuit I/Os and internal wires. They
can be declared in the same places as constants, with the
exception of subprograms (though they can be used there).
WHEN used in a subprogram, its value is only updated at the
conclusion of the subprogram run. Moreover, it does not
accept multiple assignments. Its syntax is shown below. The
initial value is ignored during synthesis.
Syntax: SIGNAL signal_name: signal_type
[range] [:= initial_value];
Examples:
VARIABLE Variables can only be declared and used in
subprograms (PROCESS, FUNCTION, or PROCEDURE in our
broader definition), so it represents only local information
(except in the case of shared variables). On the other hand,
its update is immediate, and multiple assignments are
allowed. Its syntax is shown below. The initial value is again
only for simulations.
Syntax: VARIABLE variable_name:
variable_type [range] [:=
initial_value];
Examples;


--- Page 935 ---
SIGNAL versus VARIABLE The distinction between signals and
variables and their correct usage are fundamental to the
writing of efficient (and correct) VHDL code. Their
differences are summarized in Figure 19.9 by means of six
fundamental rules [Pedroni 2004a] and are illustrated in the
example that follows.
FIGURE 19.9  Comparison between SIGNAL and
VARIABLE.
EXAMPLE 19.5 COUNTER (FLIP-FLOP
INFERENCE)
This example illustrates the use of the rules presented in Figure
19.9, particularly rule 6, which deals with the inference of flip-
flops. Design a 0-to-9 counter, then simulate it and also check
the number of flip-flops inferred by the compiler. Recall from
Section 14.2 that four DFFs are expected in this case.
SOLUTION
The corresponding VHDL code is shown below. Note the use
of rule 6 in lines 12, 13, and 18. Because a value is assigned to
a variable (temp, lines 13) at the transition of another signal

--- Page 936 ---
(clk, line 12) and that variable’s value is eventually passed to a
signal (count, line 18), flip-flops are expected to be inferred.
Looking at the compilation reports one will find that four
registers were inferred. Note also the use of other rules from
Figure 19.9, like rule 3; the test in line 14 is fine only because
the update of a variable is immediate, so the value assigned in
line 13 is ready for testing in the next line of code. Simulation
results are displayed in Figure 19.10.
FIGURE 19.10 Simulation results from the code
(0-to-9 counter) of Example 19.5.


--- Page 937 ---
19.12 Packages
We have concluded the description of the VHDL units that
are intended for the main code, and we turn now to those that
are intended mainly for libraries (system-level design); these
are PACKAGE, COMPONENT, FUNCTION, and PROCEDURE. The
relationship between them and the main code is illustrated in
Figure 19.11 [Pedroni 2004a].
FIGURE 19.11  Relationship between the main code and
the units intended mainly for system-level design (located in
libraries).
A package can be used for two purposes: (i) to make
declarations and (ii) to describe global functions and
procedures. To construct it, two sections of code might be
needed, called PACKAGE and PACKAGE BODY (see syntax
below). The former contains only declarations, while the
latter is needed WHEN a function or procedure is declared in
the former, in which case it must contain the full description
(body) of the declared subprogram(s). The two parts must
have the same name.

--- Page 938 ---
EXAMPLE 19.6 PACKAGE WITH A
FUNCTION
The PACKAGE below (called my_package) contains three
declarations (one constant, one type, and one function).
Because a function declaration is present, a PACKAGE BODY is
needed, in which the whole function is described (details on
how to write functions will be seen in Section 19.14).
19.13 Components
COMPONENT is simply a piece of conventional code (that is,
library declarations, entity, and architecture). However, the

--- Page 939 ---
declaration of a code as a component allows reusability and
also the construction of hierarchical designs. Commonly
used digital subsystems (adders, multipliers, multiplexers,
etc.) are often compiled using this technique.
A component can be instantiated in an ARCHITECTURE,
PACKAGE, GENERATE, or BLOCK. Its syntax contains two
parts, one for the declaration and another for the
instantiation, as shown below.
As can be seen above, a COMPONENT declaration is similar to
an ENTITY declaration. The second part (component
instantiation) requires a label, followed by the (optional)
word COMPONENT, then the component’s name, and finally a
PORT MAP declaration, which is simply a list relating the
ports of the actual circuit to the ports of the predesigned
component that is being instantiated. This mapping can be
positional or nominal, as illustrated below.


--- Page 940 ---
The two traditional ways of using a component (which, as
seen above, is a conventional piece of VHDL code that has
been compiled into a certain library) are:
i. With the component declared in a package (also
located in a library) and instantiated in the
maincode;
ii. With the component declared and instantiated in
the main code.
An example using method (ii) is shown below.
EXAMPLE 19.7 CARRY-RIPPLE ADDER
WITH COMPONENT
Adders were studied in Sections 12.2–12.4. The carry-ripple
adder of Figure 12.3(b) was repeated in Figure 19.12 with a
generic number of stages (N). Design this adder using
COMPONENT to instantiate the N full-adder units.
FIGURE 19.12 Carry-ripple adder of Example
19.7.
SOLUTION
A VHDL code for this problem is shown below. Note that the
full-adder unit, which will be instantiated using the keyword
COMPONENT in the main code, was designed separately (it is a
conventional piece of VHDL code). In this example, the

--- Page 941 ---
component was declared in the main code (in the architecture’s
declarative part, lines 13–15; note that it is simply a copy of the
component’s entity). The instantiation occurs in line 20.
Because N is generic, the GENERATE statement was employed to
create multiple instances of the component. The label chosen
for the component is FA, and the mapping is positional.
Simulation results are shown in Figure 19.13.
FIGURE 19.13 Simulation results from the code
(carry-ripple adder) of Example 19.7.


--- Page 942 ---
GENERIC MAP Completely generic code (for libraries) can be
attained using the GENERIC attribute (Section 19.2). WHEN a
component containing such an attribute is instantiated, the
value originally given to the generic parameter can be
overwritten by including a GENERIC MAP declaration in the
component instantiation. The new syntax for the component
instantiation is shown below.


--- Page 943 ---
19.4 Functions
PROCESS, FUNCTION, and PROCEDURE are the three types of
VHDL subprograms (in our broader definition). The first is
intended mainly for the main code, while the other two are
generally located in packages/libraries (for reusability and
code sharing).
The code inside a function is sequential, so only the
sequential VHDL statements (IF, CASE, LOOP, and WAIT)
can be used. However, WAIT is generally not supported in
functions. Other prohibitions are signal declarations and
component instantiations. The syntax of FUNCTION is shown
below.
Zero or more parameters can be passed to a function.
However, it must always return a single value. The
parameters, WHEN passed, can be only CONSTANT (default) or
SIGNAL (VARIABLE is not allowed), declared in the
followinge way:
A function can be called basically anywhere (in
combinational as well as sequential code, inside
subprograms, etc.). Its construction (using the syntax above),
on the other hand, can be done in the following places: (i) in

--- Page 944 ---
a package, (ii) in the declarative part of an entity, (iii) in the
declarative part of an architecture, (iv) in the declarative part
of a subprogram. Because of reusability and code sharing,
option (i) is by far the most popular (illustrated in the
example below).
EXAMPLE 19.8 FUNCTION
SHIFT_INTEGER
Write a function capable of logically shifting an INTEGER to the
left or to the right. Two signals should be passed to the
function, called input and shift, where the former is the signal
to be shifted, while the latter is the desired amount of shift. If
shift > 0, then the vector should be shifted shift positions to the
left; otherwise, if shift < 0, then the vector should be shifted 
shift
 positions to the right. Test your function with it located in
a PACKAGE (plus PACKAGE BODY, of course).
SOLUTION
A VHDL code for this problem is shown below. The function
(called shift_integer) is declared in line 3 of a PACKAGE (called
my_package) and constructed in lines 7–10 of the respective
PACKAGE BODY. The inputs to the function are signals a and b,
both of type INTEGER, which also returns an INTEGER. Note that
only one line of actual code (line 9) is needed to create the
desired shifts.
The main code is also shown below. Note that the package
described above must be included in the library declarations
portion of the main code (see line 2). As can be seen in the
entity, 6-bit signals were employed to illustrate the function
operation. A call is made in line 12 with input and shift passed

--- Page 945 ---
to the function, which returns a value for output (observe the
operation of this code in Figure 19.14).
FIGURE 19.14 Simulation results from the code
(function shift_integer) of Example 19.8.
19.15 Procedures

--- Page 946 ---
The purpose, construction, and usage of PROCEDURE are
similar to those of FUNCTION. Its syntax is shown below.
The parameters in the syntax above can contain CONSTANT,
SIGNAL, or VARIABLE, accompanied by their respective mode,
which can be only IN, OUT, or INOUT. Their full
specification is as follows.
The fundamental differences between FUNCTION and
PROCEDURE are the following: (i) a procedure can return more
than one value, whereas a function must return exactly one;
(ii) variables can be passed to procedures, which are
forbidden for functions; and (iii) while a function is called as
part of an expression, a procedure call is a statement on its
own.
EXAMPLE 19.9 PROCEDURE
SORT_DATA
Write a procedure (called sort_data) that sorts two signed
decimal values. Test it with the procedure located in a PACKAGE.
SOLUTION

--- Page 947 ---
A VHDL code for this problem is shown below. As requested,
the procedure (sort_data) is located in a package (called
my_package). This procedure (which returns two values) is
declared in lines 3–4 of a PACKAGE and is constructed in lines 8–
18 of the corresponding PACKAGE BODY. In the main code, note
the inclusion of my_package in line 2. Observe also in line 11
that the procedure call is a statement on its own. Simulation
results are depicted in Figure 19.15.
FIGURE 19.15 Simulation results from the code
(procedure sort_data) of Example 19.9.


--- Page 948 ---
19.16 VHDL Template for FSMs
As seen in Chapter 15, there are two fundamental aspects
that characterize an FSM, one related to its specifications
and the other related to its physical structure. The
specifications are normally translated by means of a state
transition diagram, like that in Figure 19.16(a), which says
that the machine has three states (A, B, and C), one output
(y), and one input (x). Regarding the hardware, it can be
modeled as in Figure 19.16(b), which shows the system split
into two sections, one sequential (contains the flip-flops) and
one combinational (contains the combinational circuits). The
signal presently stored in the DFFs is called pr_state, while
that to be stored at the next (positive) clock transition is
called nx_state.

--- Page 949 ---
FIGURE 19.16  (a) Example of state transition diagram;
(b) Simplified FSM model (for the hardware).
A VHDL template, resembling the diagram of Figure
19.16(b), is shown below [Pedroni 2004a]. First, observe the
block formed by lines 12–15. An enumerated data type is
created in line 12, which contains all machine states; next,
the (optional) ENUM_ENCODING attribute is declared in lines
13–14, which allows the user to choose the encoding scheme
for the machine states (explained shortly); finally, a signal
whose type is that defined in line 12 is declared in line 15.
Observe now that the code proper has three parts. The first
part (lines 18–25) creates the lower section of the FSM,
which contains the flip-flops, so the clock is connected to it
and a process is needed. The second part (lines 27–44)
creates the upper section of the FSM; because it is
combinational, the clock is not employed and the code can
be concurrent or sequential (because sequential code allows
the construction of both types of circuits); the latter was
employed in the template, and CASE was used. Finally, the
third part (lines 46–51) is optional; it can be used to store
(“clean”) the output WHEN it is subject to glitches but glitches
are not acceptable in the design (like in signal generators).

--- Page 951 ---
ENUM_ENCODING This attribute allows the user to choose the
encoding scheme for any enumerated data type. Its set of
options includes the following (see Section 15.9e):
 Sequential binary encoding (regular binary code,
Section 2.1)
 Gray encoding (see Section 2.3)
 One-hot encoding (codewords with only one ‘1’)
 Default encoding (defined by the compiler,
generally sequential binary or one-hot or a
combination of these)
 User-defined encoding (any other encoding)
Example:


--- Page 952 ---
The following encoding results in this example:
A = ‘11’, B = “00”, C = ‘10’.
Example:
The following encoding results in this case: red
= ‘000’, green = ‘001’, blue = ‘010’, white =
‘011’, black = ‘100’.
Note: WHEN using Quartus II, the ENUM_ENCODING
attribute causes the State Machine Viewer to be turned off.
To keep it on and still choose the encoding style, instead of
employing the attribute above, set up the compiler using
Assignments > Settings > Analysis & Synthesis Settings >
More Settings and choose “minimal bits” to have an
encoding similar to “sequential” or “one-hot” for one-hot
encoding (the latter is Quartus II default). This solution,
however, is not portable and does not allow encodings like
“gray,” for example.
EXAMPLE 19.10 BASIC STATE
MACHINE
The code below implements the FSM of Figure 19.16(a). As
can be seen, it is a straightforward application of the VHDL
template described above. Note that the enumerated data type is
called state (line 8) and that the optional attribute
ENUM_ENCODING was employed (lines 9–10) to guarantee
that the states are represented using sequential (regular) binary
code.

--- Page 954 ---
19.17 Exercises
1. VHDL packages
Examine in the libraries that accompany your
synthesis software the packages listed in Section
19.3. Write down at least the following:
a. Data types and operators defined in the
package standard.
b. Data types and operators (if any) defined
in the package std_logic_1164.
c. Data types and operators (if any) defined
in the package numeric_std.
d. Data types and operators defined in the
package std_logic_arith.
2. Buffered multiplexer
Redo the design in Example 19.1, but for a generic
number of bits for a, b, c, d, and y (enter N using the
GENERIC statement).
3. Data-type usage
Consider the following VHDL objects:
a. Why are the statements below legal?

--- Page 955 ---
b. And why are these illegal?
4. Logical operators
Suppose that a = “11110001”, b = “11000000”, and c
= “00000011”. Determine the values of x, y, and z.
a. x > = NOT (a XOR b)
b. y > = a XNOR b
c. z > = (a AND NOT b) OR (NOT a AND
c)
5. Shift operators
Determine the result of each shift operation below.
a. “11110001” SLL 3
b. “11110001” SLA 2
c. “10001000” SRA 2
d. “11100000” ROR 4
6. Parity detector
Redo the design of Example 19.3, but use sequential
instead of concurrent code (that is, a PROCESS with

--- Page 956 ---
LOOP).
7. Hamming weight (HW)
The HW of a vector is the number of ‘1’s in it.
Design a circuit that computes the HW of a generic-
length vector (use GENERIC to enter the number of
bits, N).
8. Flip-flop inference
a. Briefly describe the main differences
between SIGNAL and VARIABLE. When are
flip-flops inferred?
b. Write a code from which flip-flops are
guaranteed to be inferred, then check the
results in the compilation report.
c. If the counter of Example 19.5 were a 0-
to-999 counter, how many flip-flops would
be required?
d. Modify the code of Example 19.5 for it to
be a 0-to-999 counter, then compile and
simulate it, finally checking whether the
actual number of registers matches your
prediction.
9. Shift register
As seen in Section 14.1, a shift register (SR) is
simply a string of serially connected flip-flops
commanded by a common clock signal and,
optionally, also by a reset signal. Design the SR of
Figure 14.2(a) using the COMPONENT construct to
instantiate N = 4 DFFs. Can you make your code
generic (arbitrary N)?
10. Function add_bitvector

--- Page 957 ---
Arithmetic operators, as defined in the original
packages, do not support the type BIT_VECTOR (see
Figure 19.5). Write a function (called add_bitvector)
capable of adding two BIT_VECTOR signals and
returning a signal of the same type. Develop two
solutions:
a. With the function located in a package.
b. With the function located in the main
code.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 958 ---
20
VHDL Design of Combinational Logic
Circuits
Chapter Contents
20.1 Generic Address Decoder
20.2 BCD-to-SSD Conversion Function
20.3 Generic Multiplexer
20.4 Generic Priority Encoder
20.5 Design of ROM Memory
20.6 Design of Synchronous RAM
Memories
20.7 Exercises
Objective:
Combinational circuits were studied in Chapters 11 and 12, with logic circuits
in the former and arithmetic circuits in the latter. The same division is made
in the VHDL examples, with combinational logic designs presented in this
chapter and combinational arithmetic designs illustrated in the next.
20.1 Generic Address Decoder

--- Page 959 ---
Address decoders were studied in Section 11.5. We illustrate
now the design of the address decoder of Figure 20.1
(borrowed from Figure 11.7) in the following two situations:
 With N = 3 using the WHEN statement (for N = 3,
the truth table is shown in Figure 20.1).
 Still using WHEN, but for arbitrary size (generic
N).
FIGURE 20.1  Address decoder. The truth table is for the
case of N = 3.
Code for N = 3 using the WHEN statement
A VHDL code for this problem is shown below. As
mentioned in Section 19.2, three sections of code
are necessary. However, the first (library
declarations) was omitted because only the
standard libraries are employed in this example,
and these are made visible automatically.
The second section of code (ENTITY) is
responsible for defining the circuit’s I/O ports
(pins) and appears in lines 2–5 under the name
address_decoder; it declares x as a 3-bit input and
y as an 8-bit output, both of type BIT_VECTOR.
The third section of code (ARCHITECTURE) is
responsible for the code proper (circuit structure or

--- Page 960 ---
behavior) and appears in lines 7–17 with the same
name as the entity’s (it can be basically any name).
The concurrent statement WHEN, seen in Section
19.9, was employed to implement the circuit (lines
9–16). Note that this solution is awkward because
the code grows with N.
The dashed lines (lines 1, 6, and 18) were
employed only to improve code organization and
readability. Note also that x and y could have been
declared as INTEGER instead of BIT_VECTOR.
Simulation results from the code above are
presented in Figure 20.2. The upper graph shows
only the grouped values of x and y, while the
second graph shows also the individual bits of x
and y. In all other simulations that follow, only the
former type of presentation will be exhibited (more
compact). As can be observed, the circuit does
operate as expected (x ranges from 0 to 7, while y

--- Page 961 ---
has only one bit high—note that the values of y are
all powers of 2).
FIGURE 20.2  Simulation results from the
address decoder of Figure 20.1, with N = 3. The
upper graph shows only the grouped values of x and
y, while the second graph shows also the individual
bits of x and y (only the former type of presentation
will be exhibited in future examples).
Code for arbitrary N, still with the WHEN
statement
The corresponding VHDL code is presented below
where x is now declared as INTEGER (line 4). Note
that the size of the code is now fixed, regardless of
N, whose value is entered using the GENERIC
statement (line 3). Therefore, by just changing the

--- Page 962 ---
value of N in that line, any address decoder can be
obtained. The GENERATE statement (lines 10–12)
was employed to create 2N instances of y (that is,
from y(0) to y(2N – 1)), whose indexes were copied
from x with the x′RANGE attribute (line 10). The
label (mandatory) chosen for this GENERATE was
gen. For N = 3, the simulation results are
obviously the same as those seen in Figure 20.2.
20.2 BCD-to-SSD Conversion Function
A circuit that converts 4-bit BCD (binary-coded decimal)
vectors into 7-bit SSD (seven-segment display) vectors was
described and designed in Example 11.4, with part of it
repeated in Figure 20.3 below. The truth table assumes that
they are common-cathode SSDs (see Figure 11.13).

--- Page 963 ---
FIGURE 20.3  BCD-to-SSD converter.
We show now the same design but using VHDL. However,
the purpose of this exercise is to illustrate the construction of
functions, so a function will first be designed and then called
in the main code.
As seen in Section 19.14, VHDL functions can be located in
several places, like the main code itself (in the declarative
part of the architecture, for example) or a separate package.
Because the latter is more commonly used (for code sharing
and reusability), that is the option chosen in this example.
A PACKAGE (lines 2–4), called my_functions, was created to
install the FUNCTION named bcd_to_ssd (line 3). Because a
PACKAGE containing a FUNCTION (or PROCEDURE) declaration
must be accompanied by a PACKAGE BODY, in which the
function body is located, such as was done in lines 6–26.
Moreover, because FUNCTION is a subprogram (therefore
sequential), only sequential VHDL statements (IF, CASE,
LOOP, WAIT) can be used in it, with CASE chosen in this
example (as seen in Section 19.10, the main purpose of
CASE is the creation of combinational circuits; more
specifically, of LUTs). To simplify the analysis of the
simulation results, the decimal values corresponding to each
SSD digit were also included in lines 11–21. Note that the

--- Page 964 ---
case in line 21 (which displays the letter ″E″) is for error
detection.
In this example, the main code contains only one line of
code proper (line 11) in which a call to the bcd_to_ssd
function is made. Note that a USE clause was included in line
2 to make the PACKAGE containing the function visible to the
design. Corresponding simulation results are displayed in
Figure 20.4 where the decimal values listed in the code for
the function can be observed.
FIGURE 20.4  Simulation results from the bcd_to_ssd
converter of Figure 20.3.


--- Page 965 ---
20.3 Generic Multiplexer
Multiplexers were studied in Section 11.6. A top-level
diagram for that type of circuit is shown in Figure 20.5(a)
with an arbitrary number of inputs (M) as well as an arbitrary
number of bits per input (N). Log2M (assuming that M is a
power of 2) bits are needed in the input-select (sel) port.
FIGURE 20.5  Arbitrary size multiplexer.

--- Page 966 ---
The purpose of this example is to show how multi-
dimensional data arrays can be created and manipulated with
VHDL.
The main input (x) can be specified in several ways, with
one option depicted in Figure 20.5(b). Because this is a 2D
array, not available in the predefined VHDL data types, it
must be created. Such can be done in the main code itself or
in a separate PACKAGE. However, in this particular example,
the new type will be needed right in the beginning of the
code (that is, in the ENTITY, to specify the x input), so the
latter alternative must be adopted. Such a PACKAGE, called
my_data_types, is shown in the code below, containing the
new data type (called matrix, line 3).
In the main code, the new data type is employed in the
ENTITY to specify x (line 7). The circuit is constructed using
the GENERATE statement to instantiate N assignments from x
to y (lines 14–16). Note that a USE clause was necessary (line
2) to make the PACKAGE visible to the main code. Note also
that this code is completely generic, that is, by simply
changing the values of M and N in lines 5–6 any multiplexer
can be obtained.

--- Page 967 ---
Corresponding simulation results can be observed in Figure
20.6, where small values were employed for M (=4) and N
(=3) to simplify the visualization of the simulation results.
FIGURE 20.6  Simulation results from the generic
multiplexer of Figure 20.5.

--- Page 968 ---
20.4 Generic Priority Encoder
Priority encoders are combinational circuits, which were
studied in Section 11.8. The option shown in Figure 11.21(b)
will be designed now using VHDL and for an arbitrary
value for N.
A code for this problem is shown below. Even though the
circuit is combinational, a sequential code was again
employed (recall that concurrent code is only recommended
for combinational circuits, while sequential code can
implement both types of circuits, that is, sequential and
combinational).
To construct sequential code, a PROCESS was needed (lines
10–22) in which the LOOP statement was used (lines 13–20),
combined with the IF statement, to detect a ‘1’ in the input
vector. Note that as soon as a ‘1’ is found, the EXIT statement
(line 16) causes LOOP to end. A VARIABLE (called temp, line
11) was employed instead of using y directly (y is a SIGNAL)
because a VARIABLE accepts multiple assignments and its
value is updated immediately; only in line 21 is its value
passed to y.

--- Page 969 ---
Simulation results are depicted in Figure 20.7 for N = 7 (see
Figure 11.21(b)). Note, however, that the code is generic
(that is, the only change needed for any other priority-
encoder size is in line 3).
FIGURE 20.7  Simulation results from the priority encoder
of Figure 11.21(b) with N = 7.
20.5 Design of ROM Memory

--- Page 970 ---
The construction of memories from a technology standpoint
was discussed at length in Chapters 16 and 17. In this and in
the next section we are interested in analyzing how VHDL
can be used to implement ROM and RAM circuits using
regular logic (not for instantiation of prefabricated memory
blocks). The following fours cases will be examined:
 ROM memory (Section 20.5)
 Synchronous RAM with separate data I/O buses
(Section 20.6)
 Synchronous RAM with single data I/O bus
(Section 20.6)
 Synchronous RAM with separate R/W address
buses and separate data I/O buses (Section 20.6)
ROM memory
A ROM memory is normally implemented using
regular logic cells in CPLDs (an exception is the
MAX II CPLD series—Section 18.3), or lookup
tables (LUTs) in FPGAs (and in some CPLDs, like
MAXII). In both cases, the LUT model can be
employed, as in Figure 20.8(a), with address as the
only input and data (that is, the contents stored in
the addressed location) as the only output.


--- Page 971 ---
FIGURE 20.8  (a) ROM architecture; (b)
Lookup table for BCD-to-SSD conversion.
The use of this type of circuit is exemplified in
Figure 20.8(b), which shows a conversion table
from BCD (binary-coded decimal) to SSD (seven-
segment display), which was seen in Example 11.4
and also in Section 20.2. The former is entered
through the address bus, causing the latter to be
retrieved through the data bus. This type of
conversion is needed, for example, when the
output of a decade counter must be displayed by
SSDs (as in Example 11.4).
VHDL code
A VHDL code for this ROM is shown below. In
line 8 a new data type (called memory) was
specified, which allows the creation of a 1D × 1D
array with a total of 10 × 7 bits. Next, a CONSTANT
(called rom) was declared in line 9 as conforming
with the new data type for which ten 7-bit values
were specified in lines 10–19. Finally, in the code
proper (line 21), a memory-read operation occurs.


--- Page 972 ---
Solution with FUNCTION
A different approach is presented next. This time
the BCD-to-SSD conversion table (ROM) was
created using a FUNCTION (Section 19.14). The
function (called bcd_to_ssd) was constructed in a
PACKAGE (as in Section 20.2), so it can be reused
and shared by other designs. In the main code, just
a function call (line 11) is needed to produce the
desired circuit.

--- Page 973 ---
20.6 Design of Synchronous RAM Memories
As mentioned in Section 20.5, we are interested in
describing how VHDL can be used to implement ROM and
RAM circuits using regular logic (not for instantiation of

--- Page 974 ---
prefabricated memory blocks), with the following four cases
included:
 ROM memory (Section 20.5)
 Synchronous RAM with separate data I/O buses
(Section 20.6)
 Synchronous RAM with single data I/O bus
(Section 20.6)
 Synchronous RAM with separate R/W address
buses and separate data I/O buses (Section 20.6)
Synchronous RAM with separate data I/O
buses
Figure 20.9 depicts a synchronous RAM memory
with separate data I/O buses (data_in and
data_out). For all memories, it is assumed that the
number of bits in the address and data buses are M
and N, respectively, so the memory contains 2M N-
bit words. Observe that, contrary to the ROM seen
above, the circuit in Figure 20.9 is synchronous
(clocked, implemented with flip-flops).
FIGURE 20.9  RAM memory with separate
data I/O buses.

--- Page 975 ---
A VHDL code for this RAM is presented below.
Note that none of the ports (lines 8–11) is
bidirectional. As before, a new data type (called
memory, line 15) was defined to allow the creation
of a 1D × 1D array with a total of 2M · N bits. In
line 16, a signal called ram was declared as
belonging to that data type. In the code proper
(ARCHITECTURE), a PROCESS (lines 18–25) was used
to create the sequential part of the circuit, that is,
the flip-flops that store data_in when a positive
clock edge occurs while the input called write
(write-enable) is asserted. Finally, in line 26, the
output data bus was created.


--- Page 976 ---
Synchronous RAM with single data I/O bus
A synchronous RAM with single data I/O bus is
depicted in Figure 20.10. Its fundamental
difference from the previous RAM is that now the
data bus is bidirectional, so a tri-state buffer is
needed to turn the output off when data must be
written into the RAM.
FIGURE 20.10  Synchronous RAM with a
single (bidirectional) data I/O bus.

--- Page 977 ---
A VHDL code for this circuit is presented below.
As before, two GENERIC parameters (N and M,
lines 6–7) were employed to specify the widths of
the data and address buses. Note also that now one
of the ports is bidirectional (data, line 10). To
construct the sequential part of the circuit (that is,
the flip-flop bank) a PROCESS was again employed
(lines 18–25), while the combinational part (tri-
state buffer) was constructed with the concurrent
statement WHEN (line 26).


--- Page 978 ---
Synchronous RAM with separate R/W address
buses andseparate data I/O buses
The last memory to be discussed in this section is
depicted in Figure 20.11. It is a RAM with
separate buses for data I/O, as well as separate
read/write address buses, so read and write
operations can be performed independently and are
controlled by two separate clocks (clk1 for writing,
clk2 for reading). The total number of flip-flops is
now (2M + 1)N instead of 2M · N because the word
selected by rd_address is stored at the data_out
output.
FIGURE 20.11  Synchronous RAM with
separate R/W address and data I/O buses.
A VHDL code for this RAM is presented next. Its
overall structure is similar to that for the circuit of
Figure 20.9, with the differences that now there are
two address buses, two clocks, and an additional
set of flip-flops. Because this circuit has only
sequential parts, two processes were employed,
one for the overall register bank (lines 20–27) and
the other for the output register (lines 28–33).

--- Page 979 ---
20.7 Exercises
In all exercises below, the VHDL code must be written,
compiled, debugged, and then carefully simulated.
1. Address decoder #1

--- Page 980 ---
This exercise regards the address decoder designed in
Section 20.1, for N = 3. In it, the “simple” WHEN
statement was employed (that is, WHEN/ELSE).
Rewrite that code employing the “selected” WHEN
(that is, WITH/SELECT/WHEN).
2. Address decoder #2
This exercise again regards the address decoder
designed in Section 20.1. Part (b) is GENERIC, that is,
allows any value of N (where N is the number of bits
in the address bus). Suppose that, instead of N, the
number of bit lines (that is, the size of the memory
pile, M = 2N) is wanted as the arbitrary parameter.
Modify the code with M in place of N in line 3.
3. Address decoder #3
The address decoder designs of Section 20.1
employed concurrent VHDL code (which is
recommended only for combinational circuits—and
address decoders are combinational). However,
sequential VHDL code allows the construction of
sequential as well as combinational circuits. Rewrite
the code for part (b) using only sequential VHDL
statements (IF, CASE, LOOP, and WAIT, which must
be located inside a PROCESS).
4. BCD-to-SSD function
Repeat the BCD-to-SSD converter design of Section
20.2, this time with the FUNCTION (Section 19.14)
located in the main code instead of in a PACKAGE.
More specifically, locate in the declarative part of the
ARCHITECTURE.
5. Multiplexer #1

--- Page 981 ---
This question refers to the multiplexer designed in
Section 20.3. Rewrite the code, making as many
simplifications as possible, for the particular case of
N = 1 (but with M still GENERIC). In this case, is it
necessary to create a special data type?
6. Multiplexer #2
Can you write a VHDL code for the multiplexer of
Section 20.3, with both N and M still GENERIC, using
only pre-defined data types? (In other words, without
using the type called matrix in that code or any other
user-defined data type.)
7. Parity generator
Parity detectors were studied in Section 11.7. In
continuation to that, Figure E20.7 shows the diagram
of a parity generator. The circuit has a 7-bit input, a,
and an 8-bit output, b. It has also a singlebit parity-
selection input, called parity. The circuit must detect
the parity of a, then add an extra bit to it (on its left)
to produce b, whose parity (number of ‘1’s) must be
odd if parity = ‘0’ or even if parity = ‘1’. Design this
circuit using VHDL.
8. Priority encoder
FIGURE E20.7
Write a VHDL code to implement the priority
encoder of Figure 11.21(a) (see equations in Section
11.8). The number inputs (N) should be a generic
parameter.

--- Page 982 ---
9. Binary sorter #1
Write a VHDL code to implement the binary sorter of
Figure 11.23, for N = 5.
a. Do it using concurrent code.
b. Repeat it with sequential code.
10. Binary sorter #2
Repeat the VHDL design for the binary sorter of
Figure 11.23, this time with N (number of inputs)
entered as a generic parameter.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 983 ---
21
VHDL Design of Combinational Arithmetic
Circuits
Chapter Contents
21.1 Carry-Ripple Adder
21.2 Carry-Lookahead Adder
21.3 Signed and Unsigned
Adders/Subtracters
21.4 Signed and Unsigned
Multipliers/Dividers
21.5 ALU
21.6 Exercises
Objective:
Chapter 20 showed VHDL designs for combinational logic circuits. The second
and final part of combinational circuits is presented in this chapter, which
exhibits VHDL designs for combinational arithmetic circuits (studied in
Chapter 12).
21.1 Carry-Ripple Adder

--- Page 984 ---
In this section and in the next, the physical structures of
adders/subtracters are explored, while in Section 21.3 the
types of addition/subtraction (that is, unsigned or signed) are
considered.
Adders are combinational arithmetic circuits, studied in
Sections 12.2 and 12.3. Of all multibit adders, the carry-
ripple adder (seen in Figure 12.3, partially repeated in
Figure 21.1 below) is the simplest one (it has the least
amount of hardware). Even though we have already
illustrated this type of design in Example 19.7, it is included
here for completeness and also to show its design without
using the COMPONENT construct (showing such construct was
the purpose of Example 19.7).
FIGURE 21.1  Carry-ripple adder architecture.
To implement this structural design, it is important to recall
this adder’s equations, given in Section 12.2, that is:
A corresponding VHDL code is shown below, with the
expressions above appearing in lines 20–22. Note that N is a
generic parameter (line 6). To create N instances of the
assignments, the LOOP statement was used in lines 19–23. If

--- Page 985 ---
the data types BIT and BIT_VECTOR were employed instead of
STD_LOGIC and STD_LOGIC_VECTOR, then the first section of
the code (library declarations, lines 2 and 3) could be
suppressed.
Simulation results are displayed in Figure 21.2. As expected,
because a, b, and s are all 8-bit vectors, whenever a + b >
255 occurs, the carry-out bit is asserted and 256 is subtracted
from s. The glitch observed at the output is absolutely
normal because in the real world the sum bits cannot all
change exactly at the same time.

--- Page 986 ---
FIGURE 21.2  Simulation results from the VHDL code for
the carry-ripple adder of Figure 21.1.
21.2 Carry-Lookahead Adder
Similar to Section 21.1, this section also deals with an
adder’s physical structure. However, a higher performance
circuit will now be designed (at the expense of silicon and
power).
Carry-lookahead adders were studied in Section 12.3 (see
Figures 12.9 and 12.10), with Equations 12.10 and 12.11
employed to compute the G (generate) and P (propagate)
signals and Equations 12.17–12.20 Equation 12.18 Equation
12.19 Equation 12.20 used for computing the carry bits. To
make the design even more realistic, we assume that a large
adder is needed (32 bits). Therefore, as explained in Section
12.3, the design must be broken into several blocks because
the usefulness of the carry-lookahead approach is normally
limited to about four or so bits. Consequently, the adder will
be broken into eight blocks of 4 bits each, with each block
operating as a true carry-lookahead adder, and with the
interblock connections performed in a carry-ripple fashion
(as in Section 21.1).
A corresponding VHDL code is shown below. The 4-bit carry-
lookahead adder was constructed to be instantiated later in
the main code as a COMPONENT. Recall that a COMPONENT is

--- Page 987 ---
just a conventional piece of VHDL code (that is, library
declarations + ENTITY + ARCHITECTURE), which can be seen
in the first part (37 lines) of the code below, where the carry-
lookahead equations mentioned above were employed. The
data types STD_LOGIC and STD_LOGIC_VECTOR were chosen,
but BIT and BIT_VECTOR would also do. The name chosen for
this part of the design (determined by the ENTITY’s name) is
carry_lookahead_adder.
In the main code, the 4-bit carry-lookahead adder is
instantiated using the COMPONENT statement. Recall, however,
that a component must always be declared before it is
instantiated. This can be done in several places, including the
architecture’s declarative part, which was the chosen option
in this example (lines 15–20 of the main code). An internal
signal, called carry, was defined in line 13 to deal with the
carry-out signal from each 4-bit block. The global port cin
(carry-in) was assigned to the carry-in input of the first block
(line 23), while the carry-out bit from the last block was
assigned to the global port cout (line 32). The 4-bit adder is
instantiated in lines 25–30 (under the label adder). Note that,
to avoid writing the whole component eight times, the
GENERATE statement (labeled gen_adder) was employed
(lines 24–31). Note also that positional mapping was
employed in the PORT MAPsection of the component
instantiation. Finally, simulation results are depicted in
Figure 21.3.

--- Page 988 ---
FIGURE 21.3  Simulation results from the 32-bit adder
designed in Section 21.2.

--- Page 990 ---
21.3 Signed and Unsigned Adders/Subtracters
As seen in Sections 3.2 and 12.5, the construction of an
adder is not affected by the fact that the system is signed or
unsigned because in both systems the adder treats the
numbers exactly in the same way. The only difference is the

--- Page 991 ---
existence of additional two’s complement circuitry and the
way the results are interpreted, which leads to distinct
overflow-check criteria.
As a conclusion, when using VHDL to design an
adder/subtracter, the only aspect to worry about regards the
data types because for some predefined types the addition
(+) and subtraction (−) operators are also predefined in the
standard libraries, while for others they are not (so data
conversion functions are needed). This is precisely what the
designs in this section illustrate.
Adder/subtracter with INTEGER inputs/outputs
The type INTEGER is defined in the package
standard of the library std (see Section 19.3). This
package also includes the ‘+’ and ‘–’ operators
(among others), so the code is straightforward, as
shown below. Note that all signals are specified as
INTEGER (lines 4 and 5), so the sum and subtraction
(lines 10 and 11) can be computed directly. As in
the other examples, N (number of bits in each
signal) is specified using the GENERIC statement
(line 3). Observe also that the number of bits at the
output is the same as at the input (which is the
usual form in computer-based systems), so
overflow can occur.

--- Page 992 ---
Simulation results are depicted in Figure 21.4. As
mentioned above, these are not affected by the fact
that the system is signed or unsigned, only the
interpretation of the results is. For example,
suppose that the system is unsigned, so 125 (=
“0111 1101“) and 150 (= “10010110”) are both
positive values, producing 125 + 150 = 275; due to
overflow, this number is represented as (275–256)
= 19 (an incorrect result). On the other hand, if the
system is signed, then 125 (= “0111 1101”) is still
positive, while 150 (= “10010110”) is now
negative (it is the two’s complement representation
of 150–256 = –106); therefore, 125 + (−106) = 19
(a correct result). In summary, the result is the
same (=19) in both cases, but it is incorrect in the
former and correct in the latter.


--- Page 993 ---
FIGURE 21.4  Simulation results from the
adder/subtracter designed in Section 21.3.
Adder/subtracter with STD_LOGIC_VECTOR
inputs/outputs
The code below implements the same
adder/subtracter but now with all I/O signals
specified as STD_ LOGIC_VECTOR (lines 9 and 10).
The std_logic_1164 package (lines 2 and 3) is now
needed because it is in that package that the type
STD_LOGIC_VECTOR is defined. Observe also the
inclusion of the std_logic_signed package in line 4
because it contains the functions ‘+’ and ‘–’ for
STD_LOGIC_VECTOR. Finally, observe that line 4 can
be replaced with line 5 with no effect on the
implemented circuit. The simulation results of
Figure 21.4 obviously also apply to this
adder/subtracter.

--- Page 994 ---
21.4 Signed and Unsigned Multipliers/Dividers
Multipliers and dividers are also combinational arithmetic
circuits, so their theory was seen in Chapter 3 (Sections 3.4–
3.7 Section 3.5 Section 3.6 Section 3.7), and their respective
circuits were seen in Chapter 12 (Sections 12.9 and 12.10).
Such circuits are represented symbolically in Figure 21.5,
where a, b, and div (= a/b) are N-bit signals, while prod (=
a*b) is 2N bits wide.
FIGURE 21.5  Multiplier and divider representations,
where a, b, and div are N-bit signals, while prod is 2N bits wide.

--- Page 995 ---
Similar to the previous section, we want to illustrate the
design of these arithmetic circuits for different choices of
input-output data types. However, as seen in Chapter 3,
multipliers/dividers are designed differently when the system
is signed versus when it is unsigned, so the following three
cases will be examined:
 Unsigned multiplier/divider with I/O signals
specified as INTEGER
 Signed multiplier/divider with I/O signals
specified as INTEGER
 Signed multiplier/divider with I/O signals
specified as STD_LOGIC_VECTOR
Unsigned multiplier/divider with INTEGER
inputs/outputs
The corresponding VHDL code is shown below.
Because the system is unsigned and the inputs and
outputs are of type INTEGER, prod and div can be
computed directly. Simulation results are depicted
in Figure 21.6.
FIGURE 21.6  Simulation results from the
unsigned multiplier/divider of Section 21.4.

--- Page 996 ---
Signed multiplier/divider with INTEGER
inputs/outputs
The code is shown below. The inputs are first
converted from INTEGER to SIGNED (lines 15 and
16) by a function called TO_SIGNED available in the
numeric_std package (lines 2 and 3). The results
are then converted back to INTEGER in lines 17 and
18 by a function called TO_INTEGER available in
the same package. Simulation results are displayed
in Figure 21.7 (for N = 8, thus with a, b, and div
ranging from –128 to 127 and prod from –32,768
to 32,767) with the results exhibited in two
different ways.

--- Page 997 ---
FIGURE 21.7  Simulation results from the
signed multiplier/divider of Section 12.4. In the
upper graph, the results are displayed in unsigned
form, thus requiring the user to “interpret” them. In
the second graph, signed representation was chosen,
so the actual results can be viewed directly.


--- Page 998 ---
Signed multiplier/divider with
STD_LOGIC_VECTOR inputs/outputs
This solution is similar to that above. The inputs
are first converted from STD_LOGIC_VECTOR to
SIGNED (lines 16 and 17) by a function called
TO_SIGNEDavailable in the numeric_std package
(line 4). The results are then converted to
STD_LOGIC_VECTOR in lines 18 and 19. The
simulation results shown in Figure 21.7 are
obviously valid for this code also.
21.5 ALU
The ALU (arithmetic-logic unit) was studied in Section 12.8.
Its symbol is shown on the left of Figure 21.8, while the

--- Page 999 ---
specifications for the present example are shown on the right
(borrowed from Figure 12.17). The design of this ALU, using
VHDL, is presented below.
FIGURE 21.8  ALU symbol and specifications.
Recall that ALUs are combinational circuits, so concurrent
or sequential code can be used. The former was chosen in
this example (see the WHEN statement in the code below,
where the WITH-SELECT-WHEN version was adopted). If the
latter were chosen, then CASE would be the most appropriate
statement, and a PROCESS would then be needed, because
sequential statements can only be written inside PROCESS,
FUNCTION, or PROCEDURE.
Note also in the code below that STD_LOGIC_VECTOR was
specified as the main signals’ type (lines 7 and 10).
However, the original package for this data type,
std_logic_1164 (lines 2 and 3), does not define arithmetic
operations. For that reason, the package std_logic_unsigned
was added to the code (line 4), which, as mentioned in
Section 19.3, contains arithmetic operations for

--- Page 1000 ---
STD_LOGIC_VECTOR. One might consider the use of INTEGER
instead because it supports arithmetic operations, but then
the problem would be with the logical operations, which are
not defined in the original package (standard) for INTEGER.


--- Page 1001 ---
Simulation results are shown in Figure 21.9. The values a =
“00010001” (= 17) and b = “01010001” (= 81) were adopted
for the inputs, and seven opcodes were tested for which the
results below are expected. Note in Figure 21.9 that the
correct results occur.
FIGURE 21.9  Simulation results from the ALU designed in
Section 21.5.

--- Page 1003 ---
21.6 Exercises
In all exercises below, the VHDL code must be written,
compiled, debugged, and then carefully simulated.
1. Incrementer
a. Write a VHDL code for the circuit of Figure
12.14(b), then simulate it to verify whether it
is an incrementer.
b. Rewrite the code, this time for a generic
value of N (GENERATE or LOOP can be
used).
2. Decrementer
a. Write a VHDL code for the circuit of Figure
12.14(c), then simulate it to verify whether it
is a decrementer.
b. Rewrite the code, this time for a generic
value of N (GENERATE or LOOP can be
used).
3. Two’s complementer
a. Write a VHDL code for the circuit of Figure
12.14(d), then simulate it to verify whether it
is a two’s complementer.
b. Rewrite the code, this time for a generic
value of N (GENERATE or LOOP can be
used).
4. Unsigned comparator
Comparators are combinational arithmetic circuits,
also studied in Chapter 12 (Section 12.7). A diagram
for that type of circuit is depicted in Figure E21.4,

--- Page 1004 ---
which contains two inputs (a, b) and three outputs
(x1, x2, x3). It must produce x1 = ‘1’ when a = b, x2 =
‘1’ when a ≥ b, and x3 = ‘1’ when a ≤ b. Write a VHDL
code from which this circuit can be inferred,
assuming that the system is unsigned.
5. Signed comparator
FIGURE E21.4
Repeat the exercise above, now assuming that the
inputs are signed.
6. Magnitude comparator
Using VHDL, design a magnitude comparator that
contains two N-bit inputs (a, b) and a single-bit
output (x). Assume that the system is signed, so x =
‘1’ must occur when a = b or a = –b. Enter N using
the GENERIC statement.
7. Signed and unsigned adders/subtracters #1
In the adder/subtracter design of Section 21.3, two
solutions were presented, one for INTEGERI/Os and
the other for STD_LOGIC_VECTOR I/Os. Present
another solution, this time with STD_LOGIC_VECTOR
inputs and INTEGER outputs.
8. Signed and unsigned adders/subtracters #2
Reciprocally to the exercise above, present another
solution for the adder/subtracter using INTEGER inputs
and STD_LOGIC_VECTOR outputs.

--- Page 1005 ---
9. Signed and unsigned multipliers/dividers #1
In the multiplier/divider design of Section 21.4, three
solutions were presented, one unsigned with INTEGER
I/Os, another SIGNED for INTEGER I/Os, and finally
another signed for STD_LOGIC_VECTOR I/Os. Present a
new solution, this time for a signed system with
STD_LOGIC_VECTOR inputs and INTEGER outputs.
10. Signed and unsigned multipliers/dividers #2
Reciprocally to the exercise above, present another
solution for the signed multiplier/divider using
INTEGER inputs and STD_LOGIC_VECTOR outputs.
11. ALU
The questions below regard the ALU designed in
Section 21.5.
a. What should be changed in the VHDL code
if the opcode (line 9) were specified as
INTEGER?
b. What happens to that solution if the
std_logic_unsigned package (line 4) is not
included?
c. Find another package that could be
employed in place of std_logic_unsigned
without affecting the synthesized circuit.
(Suggestion: see examples in Section 21.3.)
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 1006 ---
22
VHDL Design of Sequential Circuits
Chapter Contents
22.1 Shift Register with Load
22.2 Switch Debouncer
22.3 Timer
22.4 Fibonacci Series Generator
22.5 Frequency Meters
22.6 Neural Networks
22.7 Exercises
Objective:
Sequential circuits were studied in Chapters 13 to 15, with regular circuits in
Chapters 13 and 14 and finite state machine (FSM)-based circuits in Chapter
15. The same division is made in the VHDL examples, with regular sequential
designs presented in this chapter and FSM-based designs shown in the next.
This chapter closes with a larger example in which the design of neural
networks is illustrated.
22.1 Shift Register with Load

--- Page 1007 ---
Figure 22.1 shows an M-stage N-bit shift register (SR) with
load capability (this circuit was studied in Section 14.1).
When load = ‘1’, vector x must be loaded into the SR at the
next rising clock edge, while for load = ‘0’ the circuit must
operate as a regular SR. We illustrate in this section the
design of such SR under the following two premises: (i) M
and N generic and (ii) employing a structural design
approach (with COMPONENT used to instantiate the
multiplexers and flip-flop banks).
FIGURE 22.1  M-stage N-bit shift register with load
capability.
A VHDL code for this circuit is shown below. Because M
and N must be arbitrary values, a user-defined data type is
needed for x because none of the predefined types (Figure
19.4) satisfy the present need. Because such a type is needed
at the beginning of the main code (in the ENTITY—see line 8
of the main code), it was specified in a PACKAGE (called
my_package), which is made visible to the design by means
of line 2 of the main code.
The multiplexer and flip-flop bank were designed separately
because they are intended to be called using the COMPONENT
construct in the main code (as seen in Section 19.13, a
COMPONENT is simply a predesigned piece of regular VHDL
code). Note that these two codes (multiplexer and ff_bank)
are also generic, so their generic parameters must be

--- Page 1008 ---
overwritten by the main code (see GENERIC MAP in lines 34
and 36 of the main code). The GENERATE statement was
employed to create M instances of these units (lines 33–38).
Note that the assignments adopted in GENERIC MAP and PORT
MAP are all positional (Section 19.13). Corresponding
simulation results are depicted in Figure 22.2.
FIGURE 22.2  Simulation results from the VHDL code for
the shift register of Figure 22.1.

--- Page 1010 ---
22.2 Switch Debouncer

--- Page 1011 ---
A switch debouncer was described in Exercise 15.19, which
is related to the diagram repeated in Figure 22.3(a). When
we press or change the position of a mechanical switch,
bounces are expected to occur before the switch finally
settles in the desired position, so in actual designs this type
of switch must be debounced. This can be done analogically
(for example, with RC circuits and, optionally, Schmitt
triggers) or digitally. In the latter case, a minimum number
of clock cycles are counted to guarantee that the switch has
been in the same position for at least a certain amount of
time (for example, 10 milliseconds).
FIGURE 22.3  Switch debouncer: (a) Top-level diagram;
(b) A possible solution.
In this design the following debouncing criteria are adopted:
 Switch closed (y = ‘0’): x must stay low for at
least 10 ms without interruption.
 Switch open (y = ‘1’): x must stay high for at
least 10 ms without interruption.
To make the design generic, the time window (twindow = 10
ms) and the clock frequency (fclk) are entered using the
GENERIC statement. With these two parameters, the CONSTANT
max = twindow * fclk is defined (in the declarative part of
the ARCHITECTURE), which can be used as a reference to reset

--- Page 1012 ---
the counter. In the simulations, a low frequency (fclk = 1
kHz) will be used to ease the visualization of the results.
This example will be divided into three parts:
 A preliminary circuit to implement this function
will be sketched without VHDL.
 Then the number of flip-flops needed to
construct it will be estimated.
 Finally, a generic design, using VHDL, will be
presented.
Preliminary circuit sketch
A possible solution is depicted in Figure 22.3(b). It
contains a counter, which is allowed to count when
x ≠ y and is cleared when x = y occurs. If the count
reaches the specified maximum (max), it causes
the output DFF to toggle, hence storing x.
Subsequently, the counter is cleared because x = y
then results, after which the counter is ready to
start a new debouncing cycle.
Estimate for the number of flip-flops
The estimated number of DFFs is one to store y
plus n for the counter, where n = [log2max]. For
example, if fclk = 25 MHz and twindow = 10 ms,
then the counter must count up to max = 250 k, so
18 flip-flops are needed (for the counter), hence
totaling 19 DFFs.
VHDL code
A VHDL code for the debouncer is presented
below, with fclk and twindow entered as generic

--- Page 1013 ---
parameters (lines 6 and 7). The code proper
(ARCHITECTURE) contains a counter (variable
count) plus an assignment from x to y (line 24).
Recall from rule 6 of Figure 19.9 that when a value
is assigned to a signal (or variable) at the transition
of another signal, registers are inferred. In our
case, the registers for the counter are inferred in
line 21 because values are assigned to count at the
transition of clk (line 19). Likewise, the output
DFF is inferred in line 24 because a value is
assigned to y at the transition of another signal
(again clk).

--- Page 1014 ---
Simulation results are depicted in Figure 22.4.
Because fclk = 1 kHz and twindow = 10 ms were
employed (so max = 10), the switch must stay in
the same position for at least 10 positive clock
edges for it to be considered valid.

--- Page 1015 ---
FIGURE 22.4  Simulation results from the
VHDL code for the debouncer of Figure 22.3.
The reader is invited to compile this code and
check whether the actual number of flip-flops
inferred by the compiler matches the prediction
made above.
22.3 Timer
A two-digit timer is depicted in Figure 22.5 (a similar circuit
was studied in Example 14.11). The system is composed of
three sections: counter, display drivers, and the display
proper (with two SSDs—seven-segment displays—detailed
in Example 11.4).
FIGURE 22.5  Two-digit timer.
The counter is the sequential part of the system. It must
count seconds from 00 to 60, starting whenever the enable
(ena) input is asserted, and stopping whenever 60 is reached
or the enable switch is turned OFF. It must also have an
asynchronous reset switch that zeros the system. If 60 is

--- Page 1016 ---
reached, besides stopping, the full_count output must be
asserted.
The SSD driver (BCD-to-SSD converter) is the
combinational part of the system (seen in Section 20.2). It
must convert the 4-bit outputs from the counters (count1,
count2) into 7-bit signals (dig1, dig2) to feed the two-digit
display (assume that these are common-cathode SSDs—see
Figure 11.13).
This example will be divided into two parts:
 The number of flip-flops needed to implement
the timer will be estimated.
 Then a generic design, using VHDL, will be
developed.
Estimate for the number of flip-flops
The number of flip-flops is [log2fclk] + 4 + 3 (the
first term is to reduce the frequency to 1 Hz, the
second is for the 0-to-9 counter of dig1, and the
third for the 0-to-6 counter of dig2). For example,
for fclk = 10 Hz, 1 kHz, or 1 MHz, the expected
number of DFFs is 11, 17, or 27, respectively.
VHDL code
A VHDL code for this problem is shown below,
where fclk was entered using the GENERIC
statement (line 6), with a small default value used
to ease the visualization of the simulation results.
The sequential part (counters) is in lines 19–39 and
was designed using IF, while the combinational
part (SSD driver) is in lines 41–63 and was
designed with CASE. As can be seen in lines 15–17,

--- Page 1017 ---
three variables were employed to implement the
counters; the first normalizes the frequency to 1
Hz, the second feeds dig1, and the third feeds dig2.


--- Page 1018 ---
Simulation results (just a small fraction) are
depicted in Figure 22.6. The reader is invited to
compile this code and check whether the actual
number of flip-flops inferred by the compiler
matches the prediction made above.

--- Page 1019 ---
FIGURE 22.6  Simulation results from the
VHDL code for the timer of Figure 22.5.
22.4 Fibonacci Series Generator
In the 12th century, Leonardo Fibonacci discovered a
numeric series with interesting mathematical properties, like
the quick convergence of the ratio of any two consecutive
elements to phi 
 , a number that
became known as the golden ratio or the divine proportion
(allegedly used, for example, in da Vinci’s Mona Lisa and in
the dimensions of Egyptian pyramids).
The Fibonacci series, F(n), starts with F(0)=0 and F(1) = 1,
with each new value obtained by summing the two preceding
elements, thus resulting in F(n) = {0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21,
34, 55, 89, 144, 233, …} (in closed form,
). We want to design a circuit that
generates this series with a new value displayed at every
positive clock transition. Though this could be done with a
simple memory (lookup table), which would store the series,
to reduce the amount of hardware an actual generator will be
implemented.
The design will be divided into three parts:
 A preliminary circuit to implement this function
will be sketched without VHDL.

--- Page 1020 ---
 Then the number of flip-flops needed to
construct it, assuming that N = 16 bits are used to
represent the series, will be estimated.
 And finally, a generic design, using VHDL, will
be developed.
Preliminary circuit sketch
A possible solution for this problem is presented in
Figure 22.7. The circuit contains two N-bit
registers (A, B) plus an N-bit adder. Note that the
reset signal is connected to rst of register B (so its
initial state is c = “00 … 000” = decimal 0), but is
connected to rst/pre of register A (it must be
connected to the preset input of only the LSB flip-
flop, such that its initial state then is b = “000 …
001” = decimal 1). Therefore, after initialization,
the situation is c = 0, b = 1, and a = b + c = 1. At
the next (positive) clock edge, c = 1, b = 1, and a =
2 result. Next, c = 1, b = 2, and c = 3, and so on.
FIGURE 22.7  Fibonacci series generator.
Estimate for the number of flip-flops
The number of flip-flops is simply 2N. Note that
with N = 16, the largest Fibonacci element is

--- Page 1021 ---
46,368, which occurs for n = 24.
VHDL code
A VHDL code based on the circuit of Figure 22.7
is shown below. Because STD_LOGIC was not
employed, extra library declarations are not
needed. N was entered using GENERIC (line 3).
Reset is asynchronous and causes b = 1 and c = 0
(lines 13–15). Because values are assigned to
signals (b and c, lines 17 and 18) at the transition
of another signal (clk, line 16), flip-flops are
expected to be inferred (rule 6 of Figure 19.9).


--- Page 1022 ---
Simulation results are depicted in Figure 22.8. The
reader is invited to compile this code and check
whether the actual number of flip-flops inferred by
the compiler matches the prediction made above.
FIGURE 22.8  Simulation results from the
VHDL code for the Fibonacci generator of Figure
22.7.
22.5 Frequency Meters
The design of frequency meters was introduced in Exercises
14.45 and 14.46, where two approaches were described. We
want to proceed, now using VHDL. In what follows, clk is
the system clock, x is the signal whose frequency we want to
measure, and fclk and fx are their respective frequencies.
Two measurement approaches are considered (note that one
is the reciprocal of the other):
i. From the clock, a time window is created (with
the duration of 1 s, for example), and the number
of pulses in x within it is counted.
ii. The period of x (or several periods) is used as
the time window, and the number of clock pulses
within it is counted.
This exercise will be divided into two parts:

--- Page 1023 ---
 A preliminary circuit for each approach will be
sketched without VHDL, and related comments
will be presented.
 Then a VHDL code for approach (i) will be
developed.
(For the circuit of approach (ii), see Exercise 22.4.)
Preliminary circuit sketch
A general architecture for approach (i) is shown in
Figure 22.9(a). counter1 divides the clock
frequency by n + 1, creating a waveform that stays
low during nT0 seconds and high during T0
seconds. Choosing n = fclk, a 1 s time window
(twindow) is obtained. This waveform causes the
output of counter 2 to be stored in the register at its
rising edge, and it also resets counter 2, which is
released to start counting again after one clock
period. The inactivity factor is therefore 1/(fclk +
1) ≈ 0. This approach is accurate for large fx.


--- Page 1024 ---
FIGURE 22.9  General frequency-meter
architectures. In (a), pulses of x within a clock-based
time window are counted, while in (b), clock pulses
within one period of x are counted.
A general architecture for approach (ii) is shown in
Figure 22.9(b). The circuit operates in the opposite
way relative to that above, that is, it counts clock
pulses instead of pulses in x, with the latter playing
the role of time window and used also for resetting
the counter. Note that the frequency of x is divided
by 2, giving rise to y; this operation prevents
incorrect measurements when the duty cycle of x is
not 50%. The inactivity factor of this circuit is
poor (0.5); one way of increasing it is with the use
of two counters (more hardware), one active while
y = ‘0’, the other when y = ‘1’. Contrary to Figure
22.9(a), in Figure 22.9(b) fx is not obtained
directly; a divider is needed, which computes fx =
fclk/m. This approach is therefore accurate for low
frequencies. As pointed out in Exercise 14.46, fx
should be limited to fx ≤ e.fclk, where e is the
maximum error acceptable in the measurement
(for example, if fclk = 25 MHz and e ≤ 0.1%, then
fx must be limited to 25 kHz). Because of the
divider, the hardware in this approach is more
complex than that in approach (i). However, if the
measurement of Tx were wanted instead of fx, then
the result would be available directly.
Finally, to obtain an approach that is fine for high
and for low frequencies, programmability must be
incorporated into the system. For example, if
approach (i) is chosen and fx is small, then the time
window should be widened, with the widening

--- Page 1025 ---
factor obviously taken into consideration to always
display a normalized value. Moreover, the refresh
rate of the display must also be considered; for
high frequencies, the time window can be
shortened so the display can be refreshed more
frequently (for example, every few milliseconds);
however, for very low frequencies (sub-Hz), the
refresh rate has to be either low (every few
seconds) or based on averaged (accumulated)
measurements.
VHDL code
A VHDL code for the circuit of Figure 22.9(a) is
presented below. Note the presence of two generic
parameters in lines 3 (fclk = clock frequency) and
4 (fxmax = maximum frequency to be measured).
An additional signal (test, line 6) was included in
the ENTITY to visualize the signal twindow.
Because all three blocks of Figure 22.9(a) contain
flip-flops, and in all three a different signal is
connected to the clock input, three separate
processes were employed. The first process (lines
15–27) generates the time window; the second
(lines 29–38) counts the pulses of x; and the third
(lines 40–45) infers the output register. Simulation
results are depicted in Figure 22.10.

--- Page 1026 ---
FIGURE 22.10  Simulation results from the
VHDL code for the frequency meter of Figure
22.9(a).


--- Page 1027 ---
22.6 Neural Networks
We conclude this chapter by presenting a much larger VHDL
design, which consists of a neural network. To save

--- Page 1028 ---
hardware, only integers (instead of floating-point numbers)
are employed.
Neural networks (NNs) [Haykin 1994] are highly parallel,
highly interconnected systems. Such characteristics make
their implementation very challenging, and also very costly,
due to the large amount of hardware required.
A feedforward NN is depicted in Figure 22.11. In this case,
the circuit has two layers, each with three neurons, and each
neuron with three synaptic weights. Only the parameters
relative to the first layer are explicitly marked in the figure,
where xi and yi are the inputs and outputs, respectively, Wij
denotes the weights, and ti the threshold levels.
FIGURE 22.11  (a) Two-layer feedforward neural network;
(b) Sigmoid computed by neurons.
The function computed by a neuron is given by:
where f() is a nonlinear monotonically increasing function,
preferably of sigmoidal type, that is:

--- Page 1029 ---
where σj = Σixiwij−tj. This function is plotted in Figure
22.11(b).
NN implementation
Due to the huge amount of hardware needed to
construct an NN, several aspects must be
considered. In the discussion that follows we
assume that N bits are employed to represent the
inputs (x), the weights (w), and the outputs (y). The
first consideration regards the number of inputs. To
save pins, one might opt for using only one input
(that is, N pins) through which all inputs are
entered serially (one at a time) in accordance with
the clock. Likewise, one might opt for only one
multiplier per neuron instead of M (where M is the
number of weights per neuron). Another important
consideration regards the storage of the weights; if
they do not need to undergo in-system changes,
then they can be stored on-chip by a ROM-like
structure (created using CONSTANT). Otherwise, if
the weights require in-system programmability, a
more flexible solution (with external control) must
be implemented, like the use of a shift register to
enter and store the weights or the construction of
an on-chip RAM-like memory.
Two (among several other) alternatives are
illustrated in Figure 22.12. In (a), the weights are
entered through a shift register that is controlled by
a multiplexer. While load_w = ‘ 1’, the weights are

--- Page 1030 ---
entered and stored, after which load_w = ‘0’
causes the shift register to operate in a circular
fashion. In (b), the weights are stored in a ROM-
like memory, so they can only be changed by
recompiling the code. In this circuit all nodes are
explicitly named, and its operation is as follows.
Initially, the register that stores the accumulated
value (acc2) is reset. Next, the first input value is
presented and gets multiplied by the first weight,
producing prod = x · w. Note that because x and w
are N bits wide, the size of prod must be 2N bits
(the same occurs with acc1 and acc2).
FIGURE 22.12  Two options for a neuron
implementation: (a) With the inputs (x) entered one
at a time and the weights entered serially and stored
by a shift register; (b) Again with the inputs entered
one at a time but with the weights stored in a ROM-
like memory.

--- Page 1031 ---
The next circuit section in both cases of Figure
22.12 is an accumulator, which computes acc1 =
prod + acc2, stored at the next positive clock edge
and thus replacing the previously accumulated
value. The next section is where the sigmoidal
function is computed; it takes acc2 (2N bits) as
input and produces sig (with N bits) at the output.
The latter is stored when rst= ‘1’ occurs, producing
a clean and stable value for y. Notice that this
circuit requires that after each series of input (x)
values is concluded a reset pulse be applied.
Besides the challenges already mentioned, another
major challenge to implement an NN is with
regard to the hardware needed to compute the
sigmoid. To simplify the design, this function is
sometimes replaced with a simpler function, like a
threshold function or a linear function with
saturation. These, however, are computationally
inferior (from a learning perspective) to the
sigmoid, so the latter is included in the present
example.
In this design, N = 6 was adopted, signifying that
x, w, and y can range from −32 to 31, thus
resulting in 2N = 12 bits for the internal signals
(prod, accl, acc2), that is, a range between −2048
and 2047. For the sigmoid, eight points per
quadrant were adopted (that is, eight points for
positive values of σ plus 8 for negative values),
plus zero, hence totaling 17 points. For simplicity,
t = 0 was used, so σ = Σ(x · w). For σ = 0, the
corresponding output is y = 0, while for the other
values of σ the output was quantized using eight
equal intervals per quadrant. Dividing the

--- Page 1032 ---
maximum value of y (= 1) by 8, the following
eight sectors result: 0 < y < 0.125, 0.125 ≤ y <
0.25,…, 0.875 ≤ y < 1. For σ, the maximum value
was taken when y = 0.99 occurs, that is, σ = 5.293.
Applying this value in the expression of the
sigmoid results in σ = 0.251 for y = 0.125, σ =
0.511 for y = 0.250, etc., which are listed in the
table on the left of Figure 22.13, with y taken in
the center of the corresponding quantization
interval. The normalization was done as follows.
For the input, because it contains 12 bits, the
maximum value of σ (=5.293) was encoded as
2047, while for the output, having 6 bits, the
maximum value of y (= 1) was encoded as 31.
After rounding, the table shown on the right of
Figure 22.13 resulted.
FIGURE 22.13  Sigmoidal function
implementation with signed 12-bit input and signed
6-bit output, for eight points per quadrant plus zero,
using only integers.
VHDL code
A complete VHDL code is shown below, which
implements a one-layer NN with the general

--- Page 1033 ---
architecture of Figure 22.12(b). The code can be
easily adapted to any number of neurons, with any
number of synapses, and any number of bits to
represent them. For simulation purposes, N = 6
bits, 3 neurons, and 5 synaptic weights per neuron
were employed.
As can be seen, the code is divided into three parts.
The first part is a PACKAGE where circuit
parameters, data types, and the list of weights are
specified. The second part is another PACKAGE that
computes the sigmoid (these two packages can
obviously be put together but were written
separately to make the overall code simpler to
understand). Finally, in the third part, the main
code is constructed.
In the first PACKAGE, circuit parameters are
specified (lines 7–9), then three special data types
are defined (lines 11–14), whose purpose is to
allow the specification of the internal signals for
an array of neurons and also for the weights. Note
that the type defined in lines 13 and 14 allows the
weights to be entered as simple signed integers,
which is as simple as it can get. This occurs in
lines 17–19 with one set of weights (that is, for one
neuron) in each line.
The second package contains a FUNCTION (Section
19.14) that converts a 12-bit signal into a 6-bit
signal using a sigmoidal conversion, constructed
according to the approach described earlier. Note
that the values used in the comparators are those
listed in Figure 22.13, and that the returned value
has the same sign as the input value.

--- Page 1034 ---
Finally, in the third part, the main code is
presented, which is a straight implementation for
the circuit shown in Figure 22.12(b) (it is an array
of circuits). To make the code simpler to
understand, a separate process was employed for
each circuit section. The first process (lines 20–29)
implements a counter, which is needed to control
the inputs and to act as a pointer to the stored
weights. The second process (lines 31–45)
implements the registers for the signals acc1 →
acc2 and sigmoid → y. The last process (lines 47–
59) constructs the combinational units of the
circuit. Note that overflow check has been
included in lines 52–56, which causes the
accumulated value to assume the largest possible
value if overflow occurs (observe the indexing
employed in lines 52–55 and the importance of
understanding how to deal with data types of
dimensions 1D, 1D × 1D, and 2D [Pedroni
2004a]).
Simulation results are displayed in Figure 22.14.
Note that after five values of x are presented (each
neuron has five synapses, so five inputs) a reset
pulse must occur. Examine the accumulated (acc2)
and output (y) values obtained in the simulation
and compare them against the expected values (for
the weights, use the values entered in lines 17–19
of the first package) and verify that they coincide.

--- Page 1035 ---
FIGURE 22.14  Simulation results from the
VHDL code for the neural network shown above
(one layer, three neurons, five synapses per neuron,
signed 6-bit representation, single multiplexed input,
multiple outputs (for cascading)).
After studying this design carefully, other
architectures can be implemented, including the
addition of more layers.


--- Page 1039 ---
22.7 Exercises
In all exercises below, the VHDL code must be written,
compiled, debugged, and then carefully simulated.
1. Tapped delay line
Using VHDL, design the tapped delay line of Figure
14.2(d).
2. Shift register with load
Present two “downgraded” solutions for the SR
designed in Section 22.1 with the following

--- Page 1040 ---
simplifications:
a. Still with an arbitrary number of stages
(M) but only 1 bit per stage (N = 1).
b. Still with an arbitrary number of bits (N)
but a fixed number of stages (M = 4).
Try to develop solutions with and without
COMPONENT.
3. Pseudo-random sequence generator
Using VHDL, design the pseudo-random sequence
generator of Figure 14.30.
4. Frequency meter
Using VHDL, design the frequency meter illustrated
in Figure 22.9(b).
5. Digital PWM
Using VHDL, design the digital PWM circuit of
Exercise 14.36.
6. Divide-by-5 with symmetric phase
Using VHDL, design the divide-by-5 circuit with
symmetric phase of Exercise 14.38.
7. Timer #1
Consider the timer that was designed in Section 22.3,
shown in Figure E22.7 with additional features.
Present an improved solution, replacing the enable
(ena) and reset (rst) ON-OFF switches with just one
push button, such that every time the button is
pressed (and released) the timer switches its state,
that is, it stops if it is running, or it resumes running
when stopped. If the switch is pressed for a time
longer than two seconds, then the timer should be
reset. When the timer reaches 60, it must stop,
returning to zero only after a reset occurs. Note in

--- Page 1041 ---
Figure E22.7 that the normal state of the ena input is
‘1’ (the push button produces a ‘0’ when pressed).
The clock frequency (fclk) should be entered using
the GENERIC statement.
8. Timer #2
FIGURE E22.7
Add, to the solution developed for Exercise 22.7
above, a debouncing circuit for the push button.
9. Timer #3
In continuation of the exercise above, modify the
full_count output, such that instead of simply going
to ‘1’ when full count (that is, 60 seconds) is reached
it starts blinking, remaining so until the push button
is pressed (for more than 2 s) to reset the timer.
Adopt 2 Hz for the blinking frequency.
10. Neural network
a. Compile the code in Section 22.6 and
perform different simulations to get
acquainted with its structure.
b. Change the values of the weights, then
calculate the new values that should be
produced in the simulations, and finally
compile and simulate the code to verify the
actual results.

--- Page 1042 ---
c. Make the neuron bigger (note that the
constants in lines 7–9 of the initial package
are very helpful for that), then again compile
and simulate the code to compare the actual
results against yourpredictions.
d. Add more neurons to the structure, again
fully simulating the design to understand its
details.
e. Finally, add other layers to it.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 1043 ---
23
VHDL Design of State Machines
Chapter Contents
23.1 String Detector
23.2 “Universal” Signal Generator
23.3 Car Alarm
23.4 LCD Driver
23.5 Exercises
Objective:
In this chapter we conclude our series of design examples using VHDL. This
chapter finalizes the study of sequential circuits, which was initiated in the
previous chapter. However, while the former showed regular sequential
designs, this chapter presents state-machine-based designs. Like the previous
chapter, this too is closed with a larger example in which an LCD driver is
designed. In the next chapter, the use of VHDL for simulation instead of
synthesis will be presented.
23.1 String Detector
We want to design a circuit that takes a serial stream of
ASCII characters (Figure 2.12) as input and out-puts a ‘1’
whenever the sequence “mp3” occurs. As seen in Chapter

--- Page 1044 ---
15, this is a typical case in which the FSM approach is
helpful.
First, the state transition diagram must be drawn, which is
shown in Figure 23.1 (this problem is similar to that
designed in Example 15.5). There are four states, called
waiting, first_char (to which the FSM should move when
“m” is detected), second_char (after “m” and “p” have been
detected), and finally third_char (after “m,” “p,” and “3”
have been detected). A top-level diagram for the circuit is
also included in Figure 23.1.
FIGURE 23.1  String detector (“mp3”).
A VHDL code for this circuit is shown below, which is a
direct application of the template seen in Section 19.16. The
decimal values corresponding to the ASCII characters that
must be detected are (Figure 2.12) “m” = 109, “p” = 112,
and “3” = 51. However, ASCII characters are synthesizable,
so instead of declaring the inputs as integers we can employ
CHARACTER directly (line 7). Note that in VHDL, characters
are represented with 8 bits.
The code contains a user-defined enumerated data type
(detector_state, lines 12 and 13) to encode the states,

--- Page 1045 ---
followed by a declaration of signals (pr_state and nx_state,
line 14) that conform to that data type. The lower
(sequential) section of the FSM is implemented by the
process in lines 17–24. Note that a value is assigned to a
signal (pr_state, line 22) at the transitions of another signal
(clk, line 21), so registers are inferred. The upper
(combinational) section is implemented using the CASE
statement in the process of lines 26–62. Simulation results
are depicted in Figure 23.2.
FIGURE 23.2  Simulation results from the VHDL code for
the “mp3” string detector of Figure 23.1.

--- Page 1047 ---
23.2 “Universal” Signal Generator
A generic approach for the construction of any binary
waveform was introduced in Section 15.7. As shown in
Figure 23.3(a) (copied from Figure 15.34(c)), it consists of
two multiplexers, controlled by two FSMs that operate at
different clock edges, where the first FSM-MUX pair
generates the desired waveform and the second FSM-MUX
pair eliminates any glitches. We want to design the signal
generator of Example 15.10 using the same technique, but
now with VHDL. The signal to be produced (y) is shown in
Figure 23.3(b). Note that the system resolution must be
maximum (that is, one-half of a clock cycle — Section 15.3),
or, in other words, the circuit must operate at both clock
edges.

--- Page 1048 ---
FIGURE 23.3  Signal generator.
Recall from Example 15.10 that MUX1 must select the
sequence {‘1’ → clk → ‘1’}, while MUX2 must choose {x
→ ‘1’ → x}. Recall also that the machines must be
synchronized, which, as explained in Section 15.6, can be
achieved with the interconnection nx_state2 = pr_state1
when using two machines, or pr_state2 = pr_state1 when
using a quasi-single machine. The former option is adopted
here, while the latter is treated in Exercise 23.11 (though the
latter solution might save some flip-flops sometimes, it lacks
the elegance of the former).
A VHDL code for this problem is shown below. It contains
two FSMs, each designed according to the template in
Section 19.16. The lower (sequential) section of FSM1 is in
lines 14–19, while its upper (combinational) section, which
implements the multiplexer, is in lines 21–34. For FSM2, the
lower section is in lines 36–41, while the upper section is in
lines 43–54. The first machine operates at the negative clock
edge, whereas the second operates at the positive clock
transition. Synchronism between FSM1 and FSM2 is
established in line 45. Note in line 4 that the signal x was
brought outside, so the occurrence of glitches can be
checked in the simulations.

--- Page 1050 ---
Simulation results are displayed in Figure 23.4. As expected,
a glitch does occur in x when MUX1 commutes from clk to
‘1’. This glitch is suppressed by the second FSM-MUX pair,
resulting in a clean signal for y.
FIGURE 23.4  Simulation results from the signal generator
of Figure 23.3, showing glitches in the intermediate signal (x)
during state transitions from clk to ‘1’, but a clean signal at the
output (y).
To conclude, the reader is invited to compile this code and
check if the number of DFFs inferred by the compiler
matches that in our previous solution of Figure 15.37(e) (do

--- Page 1051 ---
not forget to set the encoding style to minimal bits or binary
sequential).
23.3 Car Alarm
A car alarm was described in Exercise 15.17, and its top-
level diagram is repeated in Figure 23.5(a). As indicated, it
contains four inputs (remote, sensors, rst, clk) and one output
(siren). The corresponding FSM should have at least three
states, called disarmed, armed, and intrusion, as illustrated
in Figure 23.5(b). If remote =‘1’ occurs, the system must
change from disarmed to armed or vice versa depending on
its current state. If armed, it must change to intrusion when
sensors = ‘1’ happens, thus activating the siren (siren= ‘1’).
When in intrusion, it can only be deactivated (returning to
disarmed) by another remote = ‘1’ command.
FIGURE 23.5  Car alarm.
The design of this car alarm will be shown in three
progressive levels.
 Case 1: Basic alarm
 Case 2: Alarm with debounced inputs
 Case 3: Alarm with debounced inputs and
ON/OFF chirps

--- Page 1052 ---
Case 1 Basic alarm
The machine of Figure 23.5(b) will be designed in this
case. Note, however, that it must be improved to fix a
major flaw because it does not require remote to go to
‘0’ before being valid again. Consequently, when the
system changes from disarmed to armed, it starts
flipping back and forth between these two states if a
long remote = ‘1’ command is given (one that lasts
several clock cycles). This is also a problem when
turning the alarm off.
The machine of Figure 23.5(b) can be fixed by
introducing intermediate (temporary) states in which
the system waits until remote = ‘0’ occurs. This
alternative is depicted in Figure 23.6(a), with the
waiting states (wait1 and wait2) represented with a
lighter color.
FIGURE 23.6  Two alternatives to fix the machine of
Figure 23.5(b): (a) With the introduction of intermediate
states (lighter color) where the system waits until remote =
‘0’ occurs; (b) With the use of a flag whose value changes
when remote = ‘0’ happens.

--- Page 1053 ---
Another solution is to use some kind of flag that
monitors the signal remote to make sure that only after
it returns to zero a new state transition is allowed to
occur. Such an alternative is depicted in Figure 23.6(b).
In this case, the flag can be constructed using a toggle
flip-flop (TFF), which changes its output value every
time remote goes to zero.
A VHDL code for the option shown in Figure 23.6(b) is
shown below. It contains two processes that implement
the two classical FSM sections in lines 27–34 (lower
section) and 36–63 (upper section). A third process
(lines 18–25) is employed to create the flag. The latter
is simply a TFF, which causes the flag’s value to flip
when the remote control button is released (that is,
when remote returns to zero). Simulation results from
the circuit inferred from this code are shown in Figure
23.7.
FIGURE 23.7  Simulation results from the VHDL
code for the FSM of Figure 23.6(b).

--- Page 1055 ---
Case 2 Alarm with debounced inputs
To protect the system against noise, for any input signal
transition to be considered as valid the signal must
remain in the new value for at least a certain amount of
time (for example, 5 ms). In other words, the signals
remote and sensors must be “debounced.”
This type of procedure (debouncing) was already seen
in Section 22.2, so the construction of the new code is
straightforward. It is shown below, where two

--- Page 1056 ---
additional processes are employed for debouncing
remote (lines 21–37) and sensors (lines 39–55). The
debounced signals are called delayed_remote and
delayed_sensors.
Note also in line 6 that the desired debouncing time
interval is entered using the GENERICstatement (the
corresponding number of clock cycles is actually
specified), so the code can be easily adjusted to any
clock frequency. A small value was adopted for this
parameter in the simulations to ease the visualization of
the results, which are depicted in Figure 23.8. Because
debounce = 3 was used, only inputs (remote and
sensors) lasting three clock edges or longer are
considered (that is, transferred to delayed_remote and
delayed_sensors).
FIGURE 23.8  Simulation results obtained from the
VHDL code for the FSM of Figure 23.6(b) with debouncers
included.

--- Page 1059 ---
Case 3 Alarm with debounced inputs and
ON/OFF chirps
This is the most complete implementation. Besides the
basic circuit plus the debouncers, chirps are added to
the system. When the alarm is activated, the siren must
emit one chirp (with duration chirpON ≈ 200 ms), while
during deactivation it must produce two chirps (with
separation chirpOFF ≈ 300 ms).
One alternative to implement this circuit is shown in
Figure 23.9(a). Note that this FSM contains five
additional states (chirp1 to chirp5) when compared to
the original FSM of Figure 23.5(b). Assuming that the
circuit is in the disarmed state, the occurrence of remote
= ‘1’ turns it ON. However, before reaching the armed
state, it must go through the chirp1 state, which turns
the siren ON and lasts chirpON clock cycles. When in
the armed state, the occurrence of sensors = ‘1’ moves
the system to the intrusion state in which the siren is
turned ON and remains so until a command to disarm

--- Page 1060 ---
the alarm (remote = ‘1’) is provided. Note the sequence
of chirp states that the system must go through during
the turn-off procedure, some with the siren ON during
chirpON clock cycles, others with it OFF during
chirpOFF clock periods.
FIGURE 23.9  State transition diagrams for a car
alarm with ON/OFF chirps: (a) Basic circuit with chirps
included, but with a loop problem when a long remote = ‘1’
command occurs; (b) Machine fixed using intermediate
states (lighter color) that put the system on hold until

--- Page 1061 ---
remote = ‘0’ occurs; (c) Machine fixed using a flag that also
monitors the occurrence of remote = ‘0’.
Similar to the original FSM of case 1 (Figure 23.5(b)),
the machine of Figure 23.9(a) also exhibits a loop
problem when a long remote = ‘1’ command is given (it
causes the system to circulate in the loop formed by the
six leftmost states). To fix it, any of the two alternatives
described in case 1 can be used. The option with
additional states (wait1 and wait2), which put the
system on hold until remote = ‘0’ occurs, is depicted in
Figure 23.9(b), while the option using a flag (also
monitoring the remote = ‘0’ condition) is presented in
Figure 23.9(c).
A VHDL code for the alternative illustrated in Figure
23.9(c) is shown below. Note that it also includes
debouncing procedures for both input signals (remote
and sensors), hence resulting a very robust (and
complete) alarm implementation. The time-related
parameters are specified using again the GENERIC
attribute (lines 6–9), so the code can be easily adapted
to any clock frequency. Small values were employed in
the simulations to ease the visualization of the results,
shown in Figure 23.10.


--- Page 1062 ---
FIGURE 23.10  Simulation results from the circuit
inferred with the VHDL code relative to the complete car
alarm of Figure 23.9(c), with debouncers and ON/OFF
chirps included.


--- Page 1066 ---
23.4 LCD Driver
Similar to Chapter 22, this chapter also closes with a longer
design.
Figure 23.11(a) shows a popular LCD (liquid crystal display)
that contains two lines of 16 characters each. This kind of
display is normally sold with an LCD controller installed on
the back, responsible for driving the display’s dots. Such a
controller normally is the HD44780U (Hitachi) or,
equivalently, the KS0066U (Samsung), whose pinout is
listed in Figure 23.11(b), with pins 15 and 16 used only
when the LCD is fabricated with backlight.

--- Page 1067 ---
FIGURE 23.11  (a) 16 × 2 LCD; (b) Corresponding pinout
(pins 15 and 16 are optional).
LCD controller
To use an LCD, the first step is to understand the
LCD controller. Looking at the pinout in Figure
23.11(b), we observe that, besides power, the
following four signals must be sent to the
controller:
 RS (register select): ‘0’ selects the
controller’s instruction register, while ‘1’
selects its data register (the latter is for
characters to be displayed in the LCD).
 R/W– (read/write–): If ‘0’, the next E
(enable) pulse will cause the present

--- Page 1068 ---
instruction or data to be written into the
controller’s register selected by RS,
while ‘1’ causes data to be read from the
controller’s register.
 DB (data bus): 8-bit bus whose content
(data or instruction) is written into the
controller’s register at the next pulse of
E if R/W– = ‘0’, or through which data
is read from the controller’s register if
R/W– = ‘1’.
 E (enable): Must be pulsed high to
write anything into the controller’s
register (the actual writing occurs at the
negative edge of E). A simplified timing
diagram for E is shown in Figure 23.12.
FIGURE 23.12  Simplified LCD controller
(HD44780U or KS0066U) timing diagram for (a)
write and (b) read operations.

--- Page 1069 ---
The signals above are sent to the controller. The
main signal received from the controller is
described below.
 BusyFlag: This signal is provided by
the controller through bit DB(7) of the
data bus, with ‘1’ indicating that the
controller is busy. In practice, the use of
this signal is normally avoided by simply
adopting for the instructions a time
separation longer than the maximum
required for the instructions to be
completed (listed later in the table of
Figure 23.13). If so, R/W– can be kept
permanently low.

--- Page 1070 ---
FIGURE 23.13  LCD controller (HD44780U
or KS0066U) instruction set.
The controller’s instruction set is shown in Figure
23.13 along with explanatory comments. Even
though their usage will be illustrated in a design
example ahead, a summary of their main features
follows.
 Display clear with reset of memory
address (Clear Display) or only reset of
memory address (Return Home).
 Increment or decrement of display
position (Entry Mode Set), plus

--- Page 1071 ---
individual shift or not for display and
cursor (Cursor or Display Shift).
 Individual choice of display, cursor,
and blink ON/OFF modes (Display
ON/OFF Control).
 Operation with 4- or 8-bit bus with one
line of 5 × 8- or 5 × 10-dot characters or
with two lines of 5 × 8-dot characters
(Function Set).
 7 bits for display character addressing
(Set DD RAM Address), allowing
individual access to 128 LCD positions,
divided into two rows of 64 characters
each. The address of the first character in
the first row is 0, while the address of
the first character in the second row is
64, regardless of the actual number of
characters in the LCD (hence
accommodating LCDs as big as 64 × 2).
Figure 23.13 also shows the maximum execution
times for all instructions, which are for the
controller’s internal oscillator operating at 270
kHz. This frequency is set by an external resistor
between 75 KΩ (for VDD= 3 V) and 91 KΩ (for
VDD= 5 V). If a different frequency is employed
(with different resistor values the range that can be
covered is roughly 100 kHz–500 kHz), then the
execution times must be multiplied by 270
kHz/foscillator.
One important design consideration is the
controller’s initialization procedure, which can be

--- Page 1072 ---
done in two ways: automatically at power up or by
instructions. The latter can be used when the
power supply conditions for automatic
initialization are not met or for safety. It consists of
the following:
1. Turn the power ON.
2. Wait > 15 ms after VDD rises to 4.5 V
(or > 40 ms after 2.7 V).
3. Execute instruction “Function set” (37
μs) with RW = ‘0’, RS = ‘0’, DB =
“0011XXXX”.
4. Wait > 4.1 ms.
5. Execute instruction “Function set” (37
μs) with RW = ‘0’, RS = ‘0’, DB =
“0011XXXX”.
6. Wait > 100 μs.
7. Execute instruction “Function set” (37
μs) with RW = ‘0’, RS = ‘0’, DB =
“0011XXXX”.
8. Execute instruction “Function set” (37
μs) with RW = ‘0’, RS = ‘0’, DB =
“0011NFXX” (choose N and F).
9. Execute instruction “Display on/off
control” (37 μs) with RW = ‘0’, RS =
‘0’, DB = “00001000”.
10. Execute instruction “Clear display”
(1.52 ms) with RW = ‘0’, RS = ‘0’, DB =
“00000001”.
11. Execute instruction “Entry mode set”
(37 μs) with RW = ‘0’, RS = ‘0’, DB =

--- Page 1073 ---
“000001 I/D S” (choose I/D and S).
(Note: The initialization procedure for KS0066U is
slightly simpler—consult data sheets for details).
Design example
We present next the design of a circuit that
interfaces with a 16 × 2 LCD (equipped with an
HD44780U or KS0066U controller) to have it
display the word “VHDL.” The LCD is set to
operate in 2-line 8-bit bus mode, covering the
following three cases:
 Case 1: With “VHDL” written in the
first four positions of the first line
(Figure 23.14).
 Case 2: Again with “VHDL” written in
the first four positions, like above, but
blinking with a frequency of 2 Hz (twice
per second).
 Case 3: With “VH” written in the first
two positions of the first line and “DL”
in the first two positions of the second
line.


--- Page 1074 ---
FIGURE 23.14  Text to be displayed by the
LCD in case 1 of the design example.
Case 1 With “VHDL” written in the first line
The FSM approach (Chapter 15 and Section 19.16) was
employed to design this circuit, whose state transition
diagram is presented in Figure 23.15. Note that it
includes the initialization by instructions (just in case
the controller has not been properly initialized at power
up), which consists of all steps listed earlier, performed
by the states shown on the left of Figure 23.15 (from
FunctionSet1 to EntryMode). A reset by hardware was
also included (shown on the right of Figure 23.15),
which consists of an RC circuit with a time constant of
390 ms, causing rst to be momentarily high every time
the circuit is powered up. A circuit with a potentiometer
for contrast adjustment (to be connected to pin 3 of the
LCD controller) was also included on the right of
Figure 23.15.

--- Page 1075 ---
FIGURE 23.15  FSM for a circuit that writes the
word “VHDL” on a 16 × 2 LCD (display contrast and FSM
reset circuits are also shown).
As mentioned above, the initialization and setup
procedure consists of seven states, which are shown on
the left of Figure 23.15. The initial four states
(FunctionSet1–4) initialize the controller in which the
LCD is set to operate with an 8-bit bus and 2-line mode,
with 5 × 8-dot characters. The fifth state (Clear
Display) causes the display to be cleared and the
memory address to be zeroed (cursor returns to the

--- Page 1076 ---
beginning of line 1). In the sixth state (DisplayControl)
the display is turned ON, while the cursor and blink are
kept OFF. Finally, in the seventh state (EntryMode), the
RAM address is set to increment mode. Note that in all
seven states RS is kept low to select the instruction
register, and so is R/W–, because information must
always be written into and never read from the
controller (at the next E pulse).
The five FSM states shown on the right of Figure 23.15
are where the task proper is executed. In the first four,
the characters ‘V’, ‘H’, ‘D’, and ‘L’ are written into the
data register when E is pulsed high (recall, however,
that the actual writing occurs at the negative edge of E).
During these four states, RS is kept high, thus selecting
the data register. The corresponding values for DB are
obtained from the controller’s data sheet, that is, ‘V’ =
“01010110”, ‘H’ = “01001000”, ‘D’ = “01000100”, and
‘L’ = “01001100”. Finally, in the last state
(ReturnHome), the memory address is zeroed (that is,
the cursor returns to the beginning of line 1), but
without clearing the display, so the characters are
overwritten.
A low-frequency clock (500 Hz) can be used to move
the FSM from one state to another, in which case the
busy-flag bit does not need to be checked because then
every instruction will have 2 ms to complete, which is
more than any execution time listed in the last column
of Figure 23.13. This clock can play the role of E
(Enable), which must be pulsed high to write any
instruction or data into the controller. However, because
the actual writing occurs at the negative edge of E, the
machine must move from one state to another at the
positive transition of E, such that RS, R/W–, and DB

--- Page 1077 ---
will be firmly available (ready) when E’s negative edge
occurs.
The corresponding VHDL code is shown below. The
only inputs are clk and rst, while the outputs are RS,
RW, E, and DB. Note that a generic parameter, called
clk_divider, was declared in line 3, with a value of
50,000 in this example, because the system clock was
assumed to be 25 MHz, which must therefore be
divided by 50K to attain the desired 500 Hz clock for
the FSM (and signal E). The enumerated data type
(called state) for the FSM was created in lines 11–13,
containing exactly the same names shown in the
diagram of Figure 23.15. Three processes were
employed in the architecture. The first (lines 17–27) are
responsible for generating the 500 Hz clock, while the
other two implement the FSM proper. The lower section
of the FSM (which contains the flip-flops) is in lines
29–38, while the upper section (combinational logic) is
in lines 40–92. Note that the last process is a direct
translation of the state transition diagram of Figure
23.15.

--- Page 1080 ---
Case 2 With “VHDL” blinking
The new VHDL code is shown below. The only
difference with respect to the previous solution is that it
now contains a built-in timer in the lower section’s
process, which acts as a secondary FSM, causing the
system to operate as a normal FSM during 0.25 s (lines
38 and 39), then stay in the state ClearDisplay during
0.25 s (lines 40–43), hence resulting two blinks per
second. The blinking frequency (2 Hz) can be easily

--- Page 1081 ---
modified by simply changing the value of the constant
timer_limit specified in line 15.


--- Page 1084 ---
Case 3 With “VH” in one line and “DL” in the
other
In this part, “VH” must be written in the first line and
“DL” in the second. This means that the automatic
address increment is not enough because after “VH” it
will point to address 2. Recall that the LCD controller
(HD44780U or KS0066U) employs 7 bits to address the
LCD characters, hence with a total of 128 addresses,
distributed in two lines of 64 addresses each (0–63 in
the first line, 64–127 in the second). This addressing
scheme is independent from the actual LCD size (which
can be as big as 64 × 2). In our case, the LCD size is 16
× 2, but still the first character in the first line is at
address 0, while the first in the second line is at address
64. To design our circuit, the only change needed in the
solution of case 1 is the inclusion of an extra state
(called SetAddress), that is:
This state must be located between the states
WriteData2 and WriteData3. Notice that in this state
DB = “11000000”, which then performs the instruction
“Set DD RAM Address” depicted in Figure 23.13,
setting the RAM address to 64. Obviously, the new state
(SetAddress) must also be included in the enumerated
data type state of lines 11–13 in the solution for case 1.
23.5 Exercises

--- Page 1085 ---
In all exercises below, the VHDL code must be written,
compiled, debugged, and then carefully simulated.
1. String detector
Improve the VHDL code for the string detector seen
in Section 23.1 by adding the capability to detect also
capital letters (that is, “m” or “M,” “p” or “P”, and
“3”).
2. “Universal” signal generator
Using VHDL and the FSM approach, design the
signal generator described in Exercise 15.15.
3. Switch debouncer
A switch debouncer was designed in Section 22.2
using regular sequential code. Redo that design using
the FSM approach (still using VHDL, of course).
Which approach is simpler in this case?
4. Two-window signal generator
a. Using VHDL, but not the FSM approach,
design a circuit for the two-window signal
generator of Exercise 14.33.
b. Redo the design using VHDL and the
FSM approach. Which technique is simpler
in this case?
5. Programmable two-window signal generator
Using VHDL and employing either regular sequential
code or the FSM approach, design the programmable
two-window signal generator of Exercise 14.34.
6. Car alarm #1
a. Explain why the FSM shown in Figure
23.5(b) needs improvements to implement
the car alarm described in Section 23.3.

--- Page 1086 ---
b. Using VHDL and the FSM approach,
redesign the car alarm seen in case 1 of
Section 23.3, but use the approach depicted
in Figure 23.6(a) instead of that in Figure
23.6(b).
7. Car alarm #2
a. Explain why the FSM shown in Figure
23.9(a) needs improvements to implement
the complete car alarm seen in case 3 of
Section 23.3.
b. Using VHDL and the FSM approach,
redesign that car alarm (with debouncers and
ON/OFF chirps included), but use the
approach depicted in Figure 23.9(b) instead
of that in Figure 23.9(c).
8. Garage-door controller
Design the garage-door controller of Exercise 15.18.
However, include in the circuit a 30 s timer for
automatic door closing.
9. Door lock
Design an FSM to control a door lock with the
features below.
a. The password should consist of three
numeric digits from 0 to 9 (consider that it is
123);
b. To simplify the design, assume that a
numeric keypad with digits from 0 to 9,
represented using the BCD code, is used to
generate the input signal;
c. Assume also that when no key is pressed
the keypad outputs “1111” (= 15);

--- Page 1087 ---
d. An LED should indicate the status of the
door lock (ON when locked, OFF when
unlocked).
e. The maximum time interval between key
punches should be 3 seconds (call it time1);
f. After accepting the password, the lock
must be unlocked and the LED turned OFF,
remaining so for 5 seconds (call it time2);
g. Assume that there is no limit on the
number of password trials.
Note: Enter time1 and time2 using
GENERIC. Their values should be the
number of clock cycles to produce 3- and 5-
second delays, respectively. To make the
simulations simpler to inspect, just consider
time1 = 3 and time2 = 5 when simulating the
circuit.
10. LCD driver
a. Using your CPLD/FPGA development kit,
plus a 16 × 2 LCD display, implement all
three designs presented in Section 23.4 to
get acquainted with this type of application.
Do not forget to include the contrast control
circuit shown in Figure 23.15.
b. Modify the code for it to display again the
word “VHDL”, but one digit at a time (from
“V” to “L”), with a time separation between
them of 0.5 s. Two seconds after the word
has been completed, erase it and restart
again, waiting 0.5 s before entering the first
digit.

--- Page 1088 ---
11. Signal generator with a quasi-single
machine
a. Redo the design of Section 23.2, this time
using the quasi-single-machine approach
described in Section 15.6.
b. In this example, was the solution
advantageous over that in Section 23.2?
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 1089 ---
24
Simulation with VHDL Testbenches
Chapter Contents
24.1 Synthesis versus Simulation
24.2 Testbench Types
24.3 Stimulus Generation
24.4 Testing the Stimuli
24.5 Testbench Template
24.6 Writing Type I Testbenches
24.7 Writing Type II Testbenches
24.8 Writing Type III Testbenches
24.9 Writing Type IV Testbenches
24.10 Exercises
Objective:
As mentioned earlier, VHDL allows circuit synthesis as well as circuit
simulation. In the preceding chapters we concentrated on the former, so all
VHDL statements and constructs employed there are synthesizable. We turn
now to circuit simulation, where fundamental simulation procedures are
introduced and then illustrated by means of complete examples. A brief
tutorial on ModelSim, a popular simulator for VHDL-based designs, which

--- Page 1090 ---
was employed to simulate all examples shown in this chapter, is included in
Appendix A.
24.1 Synthesis versus Simulation
VHDL is intended for circuit synthesis as well as circuit
simulation. Synthesis is the process of translating a source
code into a set of hardware structures that implement the
functionalities described in the code. Circuit simulation, on
the other hand, is a testing procedure used to ensure that the
synthesized circuit does implement the intended behavior
(normally performed before any physical implementation
actually takes place).
The general simulation procedure is illustrated in Figure
24.1, which shows the design under test (DUT) in the center,
the stimuli applied to the DUT on the left, and the
corresponding DUT’s response on the right. Two VHDL files
are mentioned, referred to as design file and test file. The
former contains the code from which the circuit (DUT) is
inferred, while the latter contains the testbench plus code for
interfacing with the design file. As shown in the figure, the
testbench is indeed composed of two parts: the first is for
input stimulus generation, while the second (optional) is for
output verification (that is, for comparing the actual outputs
against expected templates).


--- Page 1091 ---
FIGURE 24.1  Circuit simulation with VHDL. Two files
are needed, with the design file containing the DUT and the test file
containing the testbench.
The design file implements the circuit (DUT), so its
construction is that already described in the previous
chapters. On the other hand, the test file is for simulations
only, so its construction is described here. Such a file may
include the circuit’s internal propagation delays or not, and it
may also include expected results or not. This kind of
classification is described in the next section.
24.2 Testbench Types
The table below shows four types of simulation, which
depend on whether the circuit’s internal propagation delays
are included (timing analysis) or not (functional analysis),
and also on whether the analysis of the results is conducted
by visual inspection (manual analysis) or using VHDL
(automated analysis). A brief description of each one
follows.
Testbench 
type Circuit’s propagation delaysOutput waveform analysis
I Not included (functional 
analysis)
Visual inspection (manual 
analysis)
II Included (timing analysis)Visual inspection (manual 
analysis)
III Not included (functional 
analysis)
With VHDL (automated 
analysis)
IV Included (timing analysis)With VHDL (automated 
analysis)

--- Page 1092 ---
 Type I testbench: In this case the DUT’s internal
delays are not considered and the output is
manually verified (by visual inspection), being
therefore the simplest kind of VHDL code for
simulation. This testing procedure, also referred to
as stimulus-only functional analysis, will be
illustrated in Examples 24.2 and 24.3.
 Type II testbench: In this case the DUT’s internal
delays are taken into account, but the output is still
manually verified (by visual inspection). This
testing procedure, also referred to as stimulus-only
timing analysis, will be illustrated in Examples
24.4 and 24.5.
 Type III testbench: In this case the DUT’s
internal delays are not considered but the output is
automatically verified by the simulator. This
testing procedure is also referred to as automated
functional analysis.
 Type IV testbench: The DUT’s internal delays are
taken into account and the output is automatically
verified by the simulator. This is the most
complete and also the most complex type of
VHDL code for simulation. Also referred to as
full-bench or automated timing analysis, this
testing procedure will be illustrated in Example
24.6.
A final comment regarding the VHDL statements needed to
construct the testbenches and delayed DUTs. Only two
statements are needed: WAIT and AFTER. However, because
the former can do anything that the latter can, only WAIT is
actually needed.

--- Page 1093 ---
24.3 Stimulus Generation
Before we start working on actual simulations, it is
necessary to learn how to construct the stimuli that will be
included in the test file.
Figure 24.2 shows five typical waveforms used in circuit
simulations. In (a), a regular repetitive signal is depicted
(with period 2T), typical of a clock. In (b), a single-pulse
stimulus is shown, typical of reset. In (c), an irregular
nonrepetitive signal appears. In (d), the signal is again
irregular but repetitive. Finally, in (e), a multibit waveform is
presented.
FIGURE 24.2  Typical stimulus waveforms.
We describe below how VHDL can be used to create each
one of these waveforms (T = 30 ns will be assumed). Note in
the codes that the only time-related statements are WAIT and
AFTER, and that indeed any signal can be generated using
only the former.

--- Page 1094 ---
Case 1 Generation of a regular repetitive
waveform (Figure 24.2(a))
Option 1 (compact, but AFTER might not be supported):
Option 2 (recommended):
Option 3 (the longest):
Case 2 Generation of a single-pulse waveform
(Figure 24.2(b))
Note that the last WAIT statement in the code below is
unbounded.

--- Page 1095 ---
Case 3 Generation of an irregular
nonrepetitive waveform (Figure 24.2(c))
Instead of repeating the WAIT statement several times,
LOOP was employed in the code below with the
waveform values assigned fi rst to a CONSTANT (called
wave). Note that the last WAIT is again unbounded.
Case 4 Generation of an irregular repetitive
waveform (Figure 24.2(d))
The only difference with respect to the case above is the
removal of the last WAIT.

--- Page 1096 ---
Case 5 Generation of a multibit waveform
(Figure 24.2(e))
In this case an integer was employed to generate an 8-
bit waveform. Note that a signal can be declared
without an initial value (which must then obviously be
included in the code, as done below). The waveforms
generated from this code are repetitive.
24.4 Testing the Stimuli
This section describes a procedure for testing not the DUT,
but the testbenches themselves. This is important in order to
make sure that the signals being applied to the circuit are
indeed the intended signals.
A template for that purpose is shown in Figure 24.3. As can
be seen, it contains the same three classical code sections

--- Page 1097 ---
seen in Section 19.2, that is, library declarations (if
necessary), ENTITY, and ARCHITECTURE. However, note that
ENTITY (lines 5 and 6) is empty, and that ARCHITECTURE
(lines 8–27) contains only signal declarations (lines 9 and
10) and stimulus generation (lines 13–17 for a and 19–26 for
b). Note also that only WAIT was employed in the time-
related statements (no AFTER). This test file can be entered in
the simulator without a DUT (design file), in which case the
simulator will simply display the stimuli inferred from the
corresponding testbench. The complete testing procedure is
illustrated in the example below.
FIGURE 24.3  Template for a test file aimed not at
simulation but at testing the testbench itself.

--- Page 1098 ---
EXAMPLE 24.1 TESTING A TESTBENCH
Write a test file containing a testbench that generates the
waveforms of Figures 24.2(a)–(b), then test it without applying
the waveforms to any circuit.
SOLUTION
The solution is divided into two parts: test file and simulation.
Test file: The test file is shown in the template of Figure 24.3.
Simulation: A brief tutorial on ModelSim, which is a simulator
for VHDL- and Verilog-based designs, is included in Appendix
A. Consequently, to simulate the file above, the reader is
invited to go to that appendix and follow the steps described
there (feel free to use any other simulator). In the tutorial, it is
assumed that two files (design + test) are available, which is the
case in real simulations (seen ahead). However, because in the
present example we simply want to test the test file, the tutorial
should be followed ignoring any reference to the design file.
Set the simulation time to 500 ns. The expected result is
depicted in Figure 24.4.
FIGURE 24.4 Simulation results from the
testbench of Example 24.1.
24.5 Testbench Template
We introduce now a template for a test file used in real
simulations. It contains a full testbench (whose output-
verification part is optional) plus the code needed for that

--- Page 1099 ---
file to interface with a design file. The latter is assembled in
the same way it was done in the previous chapters, with the
only exception being that internal delay specifications are
now accepted (they were not used before because delays are
not synthesizable). The test file, on the other hand, is
assembled differently because its only purpose is to create
testbenches, having therefore nothing to do with the
hardware.
The template is shown in Figure 24.5. In this example, the
test file is called test_mycircuit.vhd (see the entity’s name in
line 5), while the design file to which it relates is called
mycircuit.vhd (see the component’s name in line 10). Note
that the file again contains the same three classical code
sections seen in Chapter 19 (Figure 19.2), that is, library
declarations (if necessary), ENTITY, and ARCHITECTURE.
However, the entity (lines 5–6) is empty and the architecture
(lines 8–38) contains only time-related statements (besides
declarations and instantiations).

--- Page 1100 ---
FIGURE 24.5  Template for a test file employed in actual
simulations (contains a full testbench plus interface with a design
file).
In the declarative part of the architecture (before the word
BEGIN), a COMPONENT must be declared (lines 10–13),
which is a copy of the DUT’s entity (as seen in Section
19.13). Next, local signals, resembling those in the
component, must also be declared (lines 15–17). These
signals were named t_clk (test clock), t_x, and t_y, but they

--- Page 1101 ---
could have received the same names as the original signals
(generally recommended to avoid confusion). Note that the
initial value for t_y (line 17) was not specified because it is
an output (initial values for inputs are optional).
The first part of the code proper (after the word BEGIN in the
architecture) contains a COMPONENT instantiation (lines
20 and 21), done exactly in the way seen in Section 19.13,
with nominal mapping chosen in this case. The second part
of the architecture (lines 22–31) contains the processes that
generate the input waveforms; in this example, it was
employed one process per signal, which is generally
recommended unless the signals are highly related. The third
(and final) part of the architecture (lines 32–37) is optional;
it contains output verifiers, with the ASSERT statement used
in this case.
Complete simulation examples, employing the template
above in both versions (stimulus-only and full), without and
with circuit propagation delays, are presented in the sections
that follow.
24.6 Writing Type I Testbenches
We present now complete simulation examples using VHDL
and ModelSim. Because this section deals with Type I
testbenches, the DUT’s internal propagation delays are not
included (functional analysis) and the output results are
examined by visual inspection (manual analysis). This type
of test is also called stimulus-only functional analysis.
EXAMPLE 24.2 TYPE I SIMULATION OF
A CLOCK DIVIDER

--- Page 1102 ---
This example shows the functional simulation of a circuit that
divides the clock frequency by 10. As shown in Figure 24.6, the
circuit also contains an enable input, which causes the output to
hold its value when unasserted. Output verification will not be
included yet, so a stimulus-only testbench must be employed.
FIGURE 24.6 Clock divider of Example 24.2.
SOLUTION
The solution is divided into three parts: design file, test file, and
simulation.
Design file: This is a very simple circuit (so we can concentrate
on the simulation aspects) for which a design file is shown
below. Because all signals are of type BIT, no additional library
declarations are needed (so the code has only the ENTITY and
ARCHITECTURE parts). As can be seen in the entity (lines 2–5),
the inputs are called clk and ena, while the output is called
output. The architecture (lines 7–25) contains a counter that
counts from 0 to 4, flipping the value of temp every time the
counter returns to zero, hence dividing the clock frequency by
10. The value of temp is eventually passed to output in line 22.
Note that the counter only progresses if ena = ‘1’; (lines 15 and
16).

--- Page 1103 ---
Test file: A test file for the clock_divider design is shown below
(called test_clock_divider), which directly resembles the
template of Figure 24.5 (without the optional output-
verification section). Note the following: the entity (lines 2 and
3) is empty; the declarative part of the architecture contains a
component declaration (lines 7–10) plus local signal
declarations (lines 12–14); the code proper (lines 15–31) starts
with a component instantiation (line 17) followed by one
process to generate the clock waveform (lines 19–23) and
another for enable (lines 25–30). The first signal (clk) is similar
to that in Figure 24.2(a), while the second (ena) is analogous to
Figure 24.2(b). T = 30 ns was assumed in this example.
Observe that again AFTER was not employed.

--- Page 1104 ---
Simulation: Simulation results, obtained with ModelSim (see
tutorial in Appendix A), are shown in Figure 24.7. Just to
practice with the simulator, after running the simulation the
reader is invited to add a cursor to the plot, then click the
output signal’s name (… /output) to highlight it, and last click
one of the Next Transition icons to force the cursor to snap to
one of the output transitions. Check the time value at the
cursor’s foot at every transition to certify that the transitions
coincide with proper clock edges and that the output frequency
is fclk/10.

--- Page 1105 ---
FIGURE 24.7 Simulation results from the clock
divider of Example 24.2.
EXAMPLE 24.3 TYPE I SIMULATION OF
AN ADDER
This example illustrates the generation of multibit waveforms
(as in Figure 24.2(e)). For that, an adder is designed with
unsigned inputs varying from 0 to 255.
SOLUTION
The solution is again divided into three parts: design file, test
file, and simulation.
Design file: This is another simple circuit, which suits perfectly
the purpose of illustrating multibit signal generation. The
design file is shown below, where a and b are 8-bit inputs and
sum is the corresponding 9-bit output.
Test file: The test file is shown next, again based on the
template seen in Figure 24.5. It generates two multibit stimuli

--- Page 1106 ---
(a and b), declared as integers (lines 9–10), with no initial
values. The first process (lines 16–26) generates a with the
following values: a = 0 for 50 ns, a = 150 for 50 ns more, a =
200 for 50 ns again, and finally a = 250 for other 50 ns, after
which the signal repeats itself. The second process (lines 28–
36) generates b with the following values: b = 0 for 75 ns, b =
120 for 75 ns more, and finally b = 240 for 50 ns, after which b
also repeats itself.

--- Page 1107 ---
Simulation: The reader is invited to simulate this circuit using
ModelSim and the tutorial presented in Appendix A. Set the
simulation time to 280 ns. The result should look like that in
Figure 24.8. Just to practice with the simulator, place the mouse
on the output signal’s name (… /sum), right-click it, and select
Properties > Wave Color > Colors = Yellow; this will
differentiate the output from the inputs. Click the output signal

--- Page 1108 ---
again, select Properties > Radix = Binary, and note that the
representation of sum changes from default (unsigned decimal)
to binary; next, return it to its original representation.
FIGURE 24.8  Simulation results from the adder
of Example 24.3.
24.7 Writing Type II Testbenches
Contrary to the examples above, the examples shown in this
section do take into account propagation delays inside the
circuits (timing analysis instead of functional analysis). The
output verification, however, is still not automated. This type
of simulation is also called stimulus-only timing analysis.
EXAMPLE 24.4 TYPE II SIMULATION
OF A CLOCK DIVIDER
The simulation of Example 24.2 must be redone, now with the
following DUT’s propagation delays included: 8 ns to
increment the counter, 5 ns to store the output.
SOLUTION
The solution is again divided into three parts: design file, test
file, and simulation.
Design file: Internal delays must be included in the design file,
so the design file of Example 24.2 was repeated below with
some modifications. Because when WAIT is employed the

--- Page 1109 ---
process cannot have a sensitivity list, WAIT UNTIL (line 14) was
employed instead of IF to detect clock events. The delay
relative to the counter is in line 16, while that relative to the
output flip-flop is in line 23 (the latter could have been located
between lines 18 and 19). With these delays, the output is only
expected to receive a new value 8 + 5 = 13 ns after the proper
clock edge. Note that again AFTER was not employed.
Test file: See Example 24.2.
Simulation: Simulation results (with ModelSim, Appendix A)
are shown in Figure 24.9. It is important to confirm that now
the output transitions do not coincide with clock transitions but
are 13 ns delayed with respect to them. To do so, after running
the simulation insert two cursors in the wave window, then

--- Page 1110 ---
click the output signal (… /output) to highlight it, and finally
use the Next Transition icons to have the cursors snap to two
adjacent transitions (as in Figure 24.9). Observe at the foot of
each cursor that, as expected, the transitions are 13 ns after the
proper clock edges and that the distance between the cursors is
300 ns.
FIGURE 24.9 Simulation results from the clock
divider with delay of Example 24.4.
EXAMPLE 24.5 TYPE II SIMULATION
OF AN ADDER
This example is similar to Example 24.3 but now with an
internal delay included. It illustrates the introduction of delay in
a combinational circuit. As we know from Sections 12.2 and
Section 12.3, the actual delay in an adder depends on which
bits have changed. Consequently, if a fixed value is used in the
simulations, it should correspond to the worst-case scenario.

--- Page 1111 ---
The simulation of Example 24.3 must be repeated here with a
fixed (worst-case) delay of 12 ns included in the design file.
SOLUTION
The solution is again divided into three parts: design file, test
file, and simulation.
Design file: The design file is shown below. Comparing it to
the file in Example 24.3, we observe that now a process is
required because WAIT is a sequential statement. Recall that a
process cannot have a sensitivity list when WAIT is employed.
Note also the presence of WAIT UNTIL in line 11, which is
fundamental to correctly establish a fixed event-based delay
(12 ns in this case).
Test file: See Example 24.3.
Simulation: Simulation results (with ModelSim, Appendix A)
are shown in Figure 24.10. It is important to confirm that now
the output transitions are 12 ns delayed with respect to any
input transition. To do so, after running the simulation use the
Next Transition icons to have the cursor jump from one

--- Page 1112 ---
transition to another, always checking the time value at the
cursor’s foot (as illustrated in Figure 24.10).
FIGURE 24.10 Simulation results from the adder
with delay of Example 24.5.
24.8 Writing Type III Testbenches
In this case, the DUT’s internal delays are not considered,
but the output is automatically verified by the simulator. This
procedure, also called automated functional analysis, can be
observed as part of the full testbench example shown in the
next section.
24.9 Writing Type IV Testbenches
This is the complete (and more complex) simulation
procedure. The DUT’s internal propagation delays are taken
into account and the output is automatically verified by the

--- Page 1113 ---
simulator. It is also called full-bench or automated timing
analysis.
EXAMPLE 24.6 TYPE IV SIMULATION
OF A CLOCK DIVIDER
We close the present series of examples with a timing
simulation where a full testbench is employed, thus
corresponding to the most encompassing verification option
(i.e., design file with internal delays plus test file with full
testbench). The clock divider of Examples 24.2 and 24.4 is
employed again, now with output-verification features included
in the testbench. This type of verification can be performed in
several ways, like comparison between the output signal and a
few reference values taken at particularly important points, or
comparison between the (almost) complete output waveform
against the expected waveform, or by comparing two text files,
one containing actual results and the other expected results.
The case illustrated in this example is a direct comparison
between the actual and the expected output waveforms.
SOLUTION
As in all previous examples, the solution is divided into three
parts: design file, test file, and simulation.
Design file: See Example 24.4 (internal delays of 8 ns and 5 ns
are included).
Test file: A full testbench is shown below. It is the same file
used in Examples 24.2 and 24.4, but with a few modifications
introduced. A signal called template was created, whose shape
is that expected for output. This signal (template) was declared
in line 15, then generated in the process of lines 32–39. It stays
low (initial value) during 343 ns (line 34), then switches

--- Page 1114 ---
between high and low, with 300 ns in each state (lines 36 and
37). A permanent loop (based on ena = ‘1’;, lines 35–38) was
employed to generate it. This signal is then compared against
the actual output in the next process (lines 41–48). Note that
the comparison is made every 1 ns (line 43), but it can be more
“tolerant” if that value is increased. To carry out the
comparisons, the ASSERT statement is employed (lines 44–47),
whose syntax is the following:
The severity level can be NOTE (to pass information from the
simulator), WARNING (to inform that something unusual has
occurred), ERROR (to inform that a serious unusual condition
has been found), or FAILURE (a completely unacceptable
condition). The message is written when the condition is
>false, with the last two (ERROR and FAILURE) causing the
simulator to halt. Therefore, if the assertion in line 44 is not
true, then the message of line 45 will be displayed and the
simulator will halt. If line 46 is replaced with line 47, then the
same message will be displayed, but just as a warning, and the
simulator would continue execution.

--- Page 1115 ---
Simulation: It is left to the reader to simulate the files above
using ModelSim and the tutorial presented in Appendix A
(Exercise 24.13). Set the simulation time to 1 μs. Include

--- Page 1116 ---
template in the wave window so it can also be visually
compared to output. Run the simulation in the following four
cases:
a. With the test file as shown above; in this case,
output = template, so no error messages are expected.
b. With the time in line 37 changed to 301 ns; now an
error (and halt) is expected at time = 644 ns.
c. With line 37 still with 301 ns but the “resolution”
(time in line 43) changed to 5 ns; errors can nowonly
be detected at time values that are multiples of 5 (the
first should occur at time = 1245 ns).
d. Same as (b) but with severity_level = WARNING
instead of FAILURE; several errors must bereported
(at 644 ns, 944 ns, etc.) but only as warnings (no
halt).
Final Notes:
 The attribute s’ LAST_EVENT can be useful in
simulations; it returns the time elapsed since the
last event occurred in the signal s. Example:
 The variable NOW can also useful; it returns the
current simulation time. Example:
 The use of data files to store/read simulation data
to/from is often helpful, specially in large designs.
For intance, ModelSim allows the creation of a
data memory whose contents can be written to or

--- Page 1117 ---
loaded from a file. The use of such files is
normally described in the tutorials that accompany
the simulation software.
24.10 Exercises
In all exercises below, run proper simulations to verify the
correctness of your solutions.
1. Stimulus generator #1
Write a VHDL code from which all waveforms of
Figure E24.1 can be inferred. Adopt T = 5 ns and
solve the exercise for the following cases:
a. With repetitive signals (that is, with the
signals of Figure E24.1 repeating themselves
withperiod = 8T).
b. With nonrepetitive signals (all values at
‘0’; for time > 8T).
FIGURE E24.1
To test your solutions, use the procedure
shown in Example 24.1.
2. Stimulus generator #2
Write a VHDL code from which the waveforms y and
z shown in Figure E24.2 can be inferred. Consider x
as a reference (given) signal and that T = 15 ns. To

--- Page 1118 ---
test your solution, use the procedure shown in
Example 24.1.
3. Stimulus generator #3
FIGURE E24.2
Write a VHDL code from which all waveforms of
Figure E24.3 can be inferred. Note that only x1 and x4
are repetitive. Adopt T1 = 10 ns and T2 = 25 ns. To
test your solution, use the procedure shown in
Example 24.1.
4. Stimulus generator #4
FIGURE E24.3
Write a VHDL code from which the testbench of
Figure E24.4 can be inferred. Note that the second
waveform is a sequence of ASCII characters (Figure
2.12), so lowercase and capital letters are represented
differently. That sequence must repeat indefinitely
(with period = 7T, where T = 20 ns). To test your

--- Page 1119 ---
solution, again use the procedure shown in Example
24.1.
5. Type I simulation of a parity detector
FIGURE E24.4
Create a stimulus-only testbench (as in Examples
24.2 and 24.3) for the parity detector of Example
19.3. The code should generate the stimulus x shown
in Figure 19.7. Use only the first six time intervals,
each lasting 100 ns (repetitivity is optional). Set the
simulation time to 600 ns. The design file is that in
Example 19.3 with no internal delays (functional
simulation); the GENERIC statement can be removed,
with N = 8 adopted in the design.
6. Type II simulation of a parity detector
In continuation to the exercise above, introduce a 5
ns delay in the design file corresponding to the time
needed for the circuit to compute y. Recall that a
process is then necessary because WAIT is a sequential
statement, and consequently GENERATE must be
replaced with LOOP. Because this is a combinational
circuit (therefore asynchronous), observe how WAIT
UNTIL was employed in the adder of Example 24.5.
Compile and simulate your code to check whether
the correct delay occurs at the output.
7. Type IV simulation of a parity detector

--- Page 1120 ---
Still in continuation to the exercise above, introduce
now in the test file some type of information about
expected values for y (it can be a waveform, like
Example 24.6), then create a process that compares
those values to the actual values of y using the
ASSERT statement. Run the simulation under different
circumstances (without and with error and with
different severity levels), as done in Example 24.6.
8. Type I simulation of a data sorter
Create a stimulus-only testbench (as in Examples
24.2 and 24.3) for the data sorter of Example 19.9.
The code should generate the stimuli a and b shown
in Figure 19.15 during six time intervals of 100 ns
each with the following values: a = 50 (fixed) and b
= (−25, 0, 25, 50, 75, 100). Set the simulation time to
600 ns. The design file is that in Example 19.9 with
no internal delays (functional simulation). Note that
the compiler might require the data range in the
package to be bounded.
9. Type II simulation of a data sorter
In continuation of the exercise above, introduce a 10
ns delay in the design file corresponding to the time
needed for the circuit to sort a and b and so produce x
and y. Recall that a process is then necessary because
WAIT is a sequential statement. Because this is a
combinational circuit, observe how WAIT UNTIL was
employed in the adder of Example 24.5.
10. Type I simulation of a shift register
Create a stimulus-only testbench (as in Examples
24.2 and 24.3) for the shift register with load
capability seen in Section 22.1. The test file should
generate the same (or approximately the same)

--- Page 1121 ---
stimuli used in the simulation with Quartus II (Figure
22.2). Set the simulation time to 1 μs. Compare your
result for q against that in Figure 22.2.
11. Type I simulation of a switch debouncer
Create a stimulus-only testbench (as in Examples
24.2 and 24.3) for the switch debouncer seen in
Section 22.2. The test file should generate the same
(or approximately the same) stimuli used in the
simulation with Quartus II (Figure 22.4). Set the
simulation time to 1 μs. Compare your result for y
against that in Figure 22.4.
12. Type I simulation of a finite state machine
In Section 23.1 an FSM capable of detecting the
sequence of characters “mp3” was designed, with
respective simulation results presented in Figure 23.2
(with Quartus II). Create now a stimulus-only
testbench to perform a functional simulation for that
circuit. The testbench must include the same
sequence of signals employed in Figure 23.2, that is,
a clock with period = 40 ns, a reset active only during
the initial 40 ns, and finally the string of characters
(‘0’;, ‘3’;, ‘;m’;, ‘p’;, ‘a’;, ‘m’;, ‘m’;, ‘p’;, ‘3’;, ‘3’;,
‘3’;, ‘0’;, ‘0’;), each lasting 40 ns. Set the simulation
time to 520 ns. (Suggestion: Create a 13-character
signal of type STRING to group all input characters
and then use LOOP to run through it.)
13. Type IV simulation of a clock divider
Using the type IV simulation procedure, test the
circuit seen in Example 24.6 (see simulating
conditions at the end of that example).
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 1122 ---
25
Simulation with SPICE
Chapter Contents
25.1 About SPICE
25.2 Types of Analysis
25.3 Basic Structure of SPICE Code
25.4 Declarations of Electronic Devices
25.5 Declarations of Independent DC
Sources
25.6 Declarations of Independent AC
Sources
25.7 Declarations of Dependent Sources
25.8 SPICE Inputs and Outputs
25.9 DC Response Examples
25.10 Transient Response Examples
25.11 AC Response Example
25.12 Monte Carlo Analysis
25.13 Subcircuits
25.14 Exercises Involving Combinational
Logic Circuits
25.15 Exercises Involving Combinational
Arithmetic Circuits

--- Page 1123 ---
25.16 Exercises Involving Registers
25.17 Exercises Involving Sequential
Circuits
Objective:
This chapter describes the use of SPICE (Simulation Program with Integrated
Circuit Emphasis) to model and simulate electronic circuits. The main types
of analysis (DC, AC, transient, and Monte Carlo) are illustrated by several
complete examples. This chapter is complemented with a tutorial on PSpice, a
popular SPICE simulator, in Appendix B.
25.1 About SPICE
SPICE (Simulation Program with Integrated Circuit
Emphasis) is a general purpose simulator for electronic
circuits, originally developed at UC Berkeley in the 1970s.
Even though intended mainly for analog and mixed (analog-
digital) circuits, it is also appropriate for relatively small
digital circuits, particularly in the characterization of
standard cells. For very large digital systems, other
simulation techniques, like VHDL testbenches (Chapter 24),
are normally more adequate.
There are several commercial versions of SPICE, of which
HSpice (for workstations, now provided by Synopsys) and
PSpice (for PCs, now from Cadence) are the most popular.
Version 15.7 of the latter is described is Appendix B and was
employed to simulate all circuits presented in this chapter. It
is important to mention, however, that the material presented
in this chapter is as independent from the simulating
platform as possible, so it can be easily adapted to any other
SPICE simulator.

--- Page 1124 ---
Such simulators normally allow two types of entries: by
means of schematics (graphical input) or by means of
SPICE code (textual input). In the former the circuit is drawn
and subsequently a schematics capture component of the
simulation platform is invoked to extract the SPICE code
from it. In the latter, the SPICE code is entered directly into
the simulation environment.
Coded inputs are recommended because they can be easily
modified, partitioned, and reused. Moreover, SPICE code is
extremely simple to learn, leaving no reason for using the
old-fashioned schematics-based inputs. Consequently, only
coded inputs will be used in this chapter. Nevertheless, in
Appendix B, which presents a tutorial on PSpice, the use of
graphical input will also be described.
As a final remark, when specifying a value in SPICE, the
corresponding unit is optional, in which case the SI
(International System of Units) is assumed (that is, distances
are measured in meters, time in seconds, voltages in volts,
currents in amperes, resistances in ohms, etc.). However, the
use of units might help understand and debug the code.
Additionally, SPICE simulators are generally not case
sensitive, so multiples of quantities can be expressed as
follows:
Femto (10−15): F or f
Pico (10−12): P or p
Nano (10−9): N or n
Micro (10−6): U or u
Milli (10−3): M or m
Kilo (103): K or k
Mega (106): MEG or meg

--- Page 1125 ---
Giga (109): G or g
Tera (1012): T or t
25.2 Types of Analysis
SPICE allows several types of simulations, which are
summarized below. The most common cases will be
illustrated with several examples later.
DC analysis (.DC and .OP commands): As seen in Section
1.11, the DC response of a circuit is its response to a large-
amplitude slowly-varying stimulus. To obtain it, a DC
voltage or current is applied to the circuit’s input and is
swept between two limits with all resulting steady-state
voltages and/or currents measured for each input value. The
.OP response produces similar results but for a single
operating point.
Transient analysis (.TRAN command): As also seen in
Section 1.11, this is the response of a circuit to a large-
amplitude fast-varying stimulus (normally a square pulse)
with propagation delays taken into account. This analysis,
also called time response, is used mainly for testing the
temporal behavior of digital circuits.
Fourier analysis (.FOUR command): This shows the
spectral components of the transient response.
AC analysis (.AC command): As seen in Section 1.11, this
is the response of a circuit to a small-amplitude sinusoidal
stimulus whose frequency is varied between two limits. The
input-output relationship between voltages and/or currents is
measured in magnitude and phase, so Bode diagrams can be
plotted. The main application of AC analysis is for testing
the frequency response of analog circuits.

--- Page 1126 ---
Noise analysis (.NOISE command): For each frequency of
the AC analysis, the simulator measures the noise
contributions at the output from all noise generators in the
circuit.
Monte Carlo analysis (.MC command): This is a statistical
analysis in which the circuit parameters for which tolerances
were specified are randomly varied and the resulting
voltages and/or currents are measured repeatedly. This type
of procedure can be incorporated to the DC, transient, and
AC analyses mentioned above.
Sensitivity/Worst-Case analysis (.WCASE command): In
this case the circuit parameters for which tolerances were
specified are varied one at a time in an attempt to obtain the
worst-case scenario. Like Monte Carlo, this type of
procedure can be incorporated to the DC, transient, and AC
analyses.
Of all analysis types above, DC and AC are by far the most
commonly used for analog circuits, while DC and transient
are the most frequently used for digital circuits. To all of
these the Monte Carlo option can be added.
25.3 Basic Structure of SPICE Code
The purpose of this first example is simply to introduce the
general architecture of SPICE code. Several other examples
with additional details will be presented later, after we have
described how electronic devices and voltage/current sources
can be modeled and declared.
The basic structure of SPICE code is depicted in Figure 25.1.
In (a), a simple RC (resistive-capacitive) circuit is shown,
while (b) presents a corresponding SPICE code. Note that all
circuit nodes are numbered, with zero (0) reserved for GND.

--- Page 1127 ---
In this example, the input stimulus is a voltage called Vin,
applied to node 1 and GND, which causes the other node
voltages and branch currents to also vary.
FIGURE 25.1  Basic structure of SPICE code.
Observe in the code of Figure 25.1(b) that an asterisk can be
used to comment out a line, while a semi-colon can be used
for comments anywhere. Lines 1, 3, 9, 13, and 16 were
included to divide the code into several parts, making it
simpler to describe.
The code starts with a comment (always recommended) in
line 2, followed by three sections. The first section (lines 4–
8) contains the circuit. Note that resistor names always begin
with R and capacitors with C. Note also that each declaration
includes the device’s connecting nodes followed by the
device’s value.

--- Page 1128 ---
The second code section (lines 10–12) contains analysis
specifications. Line 11 defines the stimulus source (called
Vin) as being a voltage source (because it begins with V),
which is connected between nodes 1 and 0. The .DC
command in line 12 determines that this is a DC response,
with Vin varying from 0 V to 5 V in steps of 10 mV.
The third code section (lines 14 and 15) contains output
instructions plus the mandatory .END command to close the
code. The .PROBE command in line 14 determines that the
output must be an oscilloscope-like display, where the
voltages on nodes 1, 2, and 3, as well as the currents through
R3 and C2, are plotted.
Simulation results obtained with PSpice (described in
Appendix B) are shown in Figure 25.2. In (a), the voltages
are shown, while (b) shows the currents. Because the
capacitors do not affect the DC (steady-state) response, the
following relationships are expected (and can be observed in
Figure 25.2):

--- Page 1129 ---
FIGURE 25.2  Simulation results obtained with the SPICE
code of Figure 25.1(b): (a) Voltages on nodes 1, 2, and 3; (b)
Currents through R3 and C2.
25.4 Declarations of Electronic Devices

--- Page 1130 ---
This section describes how resistors (R), capacitors (C),
inductors (L), diodes (D), and MOS transistors (M) can be
modeled and declared using the SPICE language. Several
other kinds of electronic and electrical devices can be
modeled as well, but only these five, which are among the
most often used, are included in this brief tutorial.
Resistor (R)
In the syntax above, Rxxx is the resistor’s name, which
must start with R (xxx can be any name or number).
+node and –node are the positive and negative nodes to
which the resistor is connected (the plus and minus
signs are important because they define how voltages
on and currents through the resistor will be referenced).
The resistor model is optional and will be described in
the Monte Carlo analysis section.
Capacitor (C)
In the syntax above, Cxxx is the capacitor’s name,
which must start with C (xxx can be any name or
number). +node and –node are the nodes to which the

--- Page 1131 ---
capacitor is connected, model is the capacitor model,
and init_voltageis its initial voltage. The capacitor
model is optional and will be described in the Monte
Carlo analysis section.
Inductor (L)
In the syntax above, Lxxx is the inductor’s name, which
must start with L (xxx can be any name or number).
+node and –node are the nodes to which the inductor is
connected, model is the inductor model, and
init_current is its initial current. The inductor model
is optional and will be described in the Monte Carlo
analysis section.
Diode (D)
In the syntax above, Dxxx is the diode’s name (which
must start with D), Anode and Knode are the anode and
cathode nodes, respectively, model is the diode model
(described below), and area is a multiplication factor
that indicates how many diodes of the same type are

--- Page 1132 ---
connected in parallel (the model parameters affected by
this factor are IS, RS, CJO, and IBV).
To enter a model, the .MODEL command must be used,
which, for the case of a regular diode, is shown below
(the model parameters are listed subsequently).
MOSFET (M)
In the syntax above, Mxxx is the MOSFET’s name
(which must start with M). Note that the “+” sign can
be used in SPICE to continue a statement in another
line. The meanings of the parameters are listed below.
Dnode = Drain node
Gnode = Gate node
Snode = Source node
Bnode = Bulk (substrate or well) node
W = Channel width
L = Channel length
AD = Area of drain
AS = Area of source
PD = Perimeter of drain
PS = Perimeter of source
NRx = Relative resistivity of x

--- Page 1133 ---
Example: In this example an nMOS transistor (M5) is
connected between nodes 3 (drain), 2 (gate), 0 (source),
and 0 again (bulk). Its model is called N and its gate
dimensions are W = 3μm and L = 2μm.
To enter a model, again the .MODEL command must be
used, which, for the case of a MOS transistor, is the
following (for n- and p-channel MOSFETs):
A general model for MOS transistors was described in
Section 9.3. In SPICE, several additional parameters are
included to account for second-order effects, which are
particularly notorious in deep-submicron devices.
Several MOSFET models, among many others
currently in use (including proprietary models), are
listed below. Level 3 and BSIM2 are fine even for small
transistors, but BSIM3v3 and BSIM4 are more accurate
for very small devices (particularly under 100 nm). An
approach based on compact models, which represents a
departure from the conventional approaches, is also
mentioned. To select a specific model, the LEVEL
variable must be used.
Level 1
This is the Shichman-Hodges model, which
consists of basic MOS equations (Equations 9.1–
9.3 Equation 9.2 Equation 9.3 of Chapter 9) with

--- Page 1134 ---
some second-order effects (channel-length
modulation and body effect) incorporated into
them.
Level 2
This is the Grove-Frohman model (also called
MOS2 model), which improves the Level 1 model
by adding other second-order effects, like mobility
degradation and subthreshold current.
Level 3
This model (also called MOS3) is based on
empiric equations. Its accuracy is similar to Level
2, but the simulations exhibit better convergence
and are faster. Like the other two models above,
this too is not appropriate for very small
transistors. A discontinuity with respect to the
KAPPA parameter was detected and fixed in
SPICE 3f2 and later.
BSIM3v3
BSIM (Berkeley Short-channel IGFET model,
where IGFET stands for insulated-gate field effect
transistor, a synonym for MOSFET) is a set of
MOSFET models developed by the BSIM group of
UC Berkeley targeting particularly very small-
channel transistors (especially sub-100 nm).
Versions BSIM1 and BSIM2 were rapidly
improved to version 3.3 for smaller transistors,
which became the industry standard. The first
version of BSIM3v3 (3.3.0) was released in
October 1995, and its most recent version (3.3.3)

--- Page 1135 ---
in July 2005. Its main improvements with respect
to previous versions include continuous I–V
characteristics through all three operating regions
(subthreshold, saturation, and linear—Figure 9.4),
threshold voltage sensitive to gate size, plus
several other short-channel effects. This model is
specified as Level 49 in HSpice and as Level 7 in
PSpice.
BSIM4
This model includes current leakage, which is
important for present 65 nm (and smaller) MOS
transistors. It also includes a more accurate
mobility prediction and new materials, like
nonsilicon channel and nonpolysilicon gate. The
first version of BSIM4 (4.0.0) was released in
March 2000, and its most recent version (4.6.1) in
May 2007.
BSIM-SOI
BSIM-SOI is a SPICE model for SOI (silicon-on-
insulator) transistors (seen in Section 9.8). It is an
extension of BSIM3v3, with SOI substrate effects
included.
Compact MOS Model
This is a promising approach for compact-
modeling next-generation MOSFETs. Based on a
unified inversion-charge and surface-potential
model, it leads to compact and consistent
expressions for circuit analysis and design. Details
can be found in [Galup-Montoro 2007].

--- Page 1136 ---
As an example of a MOSFET a model, BSIM3v3
parameters are shown below for a 0.13μm CMOS
process. Recall that LEVEL = 49 must be
employed instead of LEVEL = 7 if running HSpice
instead of PSpice. A large variety of model
parameters can be found at the MOSIS site
(www.mosis.org).


--- Page 1138 ---
25.5 Declarations of Independent DC Sources
This section describes how independent DC sources of
voltage (V) or current (I) can be modeled and declared using
the SPICE language. The following three cases will be
presented:
 Independent DC voltage source (V)
 Independent DC current source (I)
 Independent source with DC sweep
Independent DC Voltage Source (V)
In the syntax above, Vxxx is the voltage source’s name
(which must start with V), +node and –node are its
positive and negative terminals, respectively, DCis an
optional statement to emphasize that it is a DC source,
and value is its voltage.
Independent DC Current Source (I)
In the syntax above, Ixxx is the current source’s name
(which must start with I), +node and –node are its
positive and negative terminals (the current comes out

--- Page 1139 ---
of the “–” side), DC is an optional statement to
emphasize that it is a DC source, and value is the
current.
Examples:
Independent Source with DC Sweep
This type of source is needed for DC analysis. The first
line in the syntax above shows the source’s name
(which must start with V or I), its connecting nodes, the
optional word DC to emphasize that it is a DC source,
and an optional operating point (needed when the .OP
command is used). The second line contains the .DC
command to cause a DC sweep, followed by the
optional word LIN, then the source’s name, the initial
(V1) and final (V2) voltages (or currents), and finally
the voltage (current) increment. LIN (default) indicates
that the sweep is linear; the other options are octave and
decade, rarely used in DC analysis.
Example: In this example the source, called Vin, is a
voltage source connected between nodes 1 and 0, and
varies from 0 V to 3 V in increments of 5 mV. As
before, units are optional (though recommended).


--- Page 1140 ---
25.6 Declarations of Independent AC Sources
This section describes how independent AC sources of
voltage (V) or current (I) can be modeled and declared using
the SPICE language. The following six cases will be
presented:
 Independent pulsed AC source
 Independent piecewise linear AC source
 Independent sinusoidal AC source
 Independent exponential AC source
 Independent frequency-modulated AC source
 Independent AC source with sinusoidal sweep
Independent pulsed AC source
This type of signal is depicted in Figure 25.3,
where V1–V2 (I1–I2) are the pulse voltages
(currents), TD is the time delay, TR is the rise
time, TF is the fall time, PW is the pulse width,
and PER is the period. As before, the use of units
is optional, but it makes the declarations easier to
understand and debug.

--- Page 1141 ---
FIGURE 25.3  (a) AC signal of type PULSE;
(b) Corresponding schematics symbols.
Examples:
Independent piecewise linear AC source
This type of signal is depicted in Figure 25.4. In
the syntaxes above, V1 (I1) is the voltage (current)
at time T1, V2 (I2) is the voltage (current) at time
T2, and so on. As always, the use of units is
optional (but recommended).


--- Page 1142 ---
FIGURE 25.4  (a) AC signal of type PWL; (b)
Corresponding schematics symbols.
Examples:
Independent sinusoidal AC source
This declaration is for a fixed-frequency sinusoid.
For variable frequency (AC sweep), see the last
type of declaration in this section.
In the syntaxes above, offset is the voltage
(current) offset, ampl is the signal amplitude, delay
is the time interval until the sinusoid begins,
damping is the damping factor, α, which defines a
compressing exponential e−αt, and phase is the
signal’s initial phase. Again, the use of units is
optional.
This type of signal is illustrated in Figure 25.5,
which shows in (a) and (b) the signals specified
below and in (c) corresponding schematics
symbols.

--- Page 1143 ---
FIGURE 25.5  (a)–(b) AC signals of type SIN;
(c) Corresponding schematics symbols.
Independent exponential AC source
In the syntaxes above, V1–V2 (I1–I2) are the
regime voltages (currents), TD1–TD2 are the time
delays, and TC1–TC2 are the time constants.
This type of signal is illustrated in Figure 25.6,
which shows in (a) the signal specified below and
in (b) corresponding symbols employed in
schematics.

--- Page 1144 ---
FIGURE 25.6  (a) AC signal of type EXP; (b)
Corresponding schematics symbols.
Independent frequency-modulated AC source
This type of signal is called SSFM (single-
frequency frequency modulated). In the syntaxes
above, offset is the voltage (current) offset, c_ampl
is the carrier amplitude, c_freq is the carrier
frequency, mod_index is the modulation index, and
s_freq is the modulating signal’s frequency.
Example:
Independent AC source with sinusoidal sweep

--- Page 1145 ---
This type of source is needed for frequency-
response (AC) analysis. The first line in the syntax
above shows the signal’s name (which must start
with V or I), its connecting nodes, the optional
word DC, the DC offset, the optional word AC,
and finally the amplitude of the sinusoid. The
second and third lines (only one can be used at a
time) show the .AC command that causes the
frequency sweep, followed by the options DEC
(decade) or LIN (linear), the number of points per
decade or total (depending on the option chosen),
then the initial and final sweep frequencies. It is
important to mention that even if a linear sweep is
chosen, the results can still be plotted using a
logarithmic frequency axis (for Bode diagrams).
Example: In this example the source, called Vin, is
a voltage source, connected between nodes 1 and
0, with 0 V offset and 1.5 V amplitude. The
response is measured in decades (logarithmically),
with 100 points per decade, over the frequency
range from 10 Hz to 10 kHz. As before, units are
optional.
Example: This time the points (frequencies) for
which the output is measured are linearly
distributed, with a total of 1000 points (so
measurements are taken at ∼ 10 Hz from each

--- Page 1146 ---
other), over the same 10 Hz–10 kHz frequency
range.
25.7 Declarations of Dependent Sources
This section describes how dependent voltage (V) or current
(I) sources can be declared using the SPICE language.
Figure 25.7 will be employed in the example.
FIGURE 25.7  Inclusion of a dummy voltage source to
implement a current-dependent current source.
Voltage-controlled voltage source (E)
Current-controlled current source (F)
Voltage-controlled current source (G)


--- Page 1147 ---
Current-controlled voltage source (H)
To create a current-controlled source (Fxxx or Hxxx), a
dummy 0 V voltage source is needed (called oV_source in
the syntax above). The current through it is the control
current. This procedure is illustrated in the example below.
Example: Suppose that we want to simulate the circuit of
Figure 25.7(a), where the output current is controlled by the
input current (I2 = 100I1). In Figure 25.7(b) a dummy source
(VX) was introduced, so the SPICE code can now be, for
example, as follows (a DC analysis is shown, with the input
varying from 0 V to 50 mV in steps of 1 mV; consequently,
the output current varies from 0 to 5 mA, causing a voltage
drop on R2 from 0 V to 10 V).
25.8 SPICE Inputs and Outputs
This section describes how a circuit can be introduced into a
SPICE simulator and the options in which the results can be
subsequently displayed.

--- Page 1148 ---
SPICE inputs
As mentioned in Section 25.1, SPICE simulators
normally allow two types of entries: by means of
schematics (graphical input) or by means of
SPICE code (textual input). In the former the
circuit is drawn and subsequently a schematics
capture component of the simulation platform is
invoked to extract the SPICE code from it. In the
latter, the code is entered directly into the
simulation environment. Because coded inputs can
be easily modified, partitioned, and reused, they
constitute the recommended alternative.
A file containing SPICE code is normally saved
with the extension .cir. It must contain (i) the
circuit description, (ii) the models for all special
components (transistors, diodes, ICs, etc.), (iii)
analysis specifications, and finally (iv) output
specifications (most of these parts were already
seen in Figure 25.1).
With respect to the device models, these are often
left in a separate file (also saved with the extension
.cir) to keep the code as short and as clean as
possible. Such a file must then be called in the
main code using the command .INC (include). An
example is shown below, which contains two files,
the first called mosfet_models.cir, the second
inverter.cir. Note that the former is included in the
latter using the .INC command. Observe also that
the .OPTION command is used in the latter to
establish default values for transistor dimensions.

--- Page 1149 ---
SPICE outputs
Suppose that the input file is called inverter.cir.
Then PSpice (Appendix B) generates an output

--- Page 1150 ---
text file whose default name is inverter.out, which
is particularly helpful when errors occur. Such a
text file can contain two types of simulation
results, determined by the commands .PRINT and
.PLOT. The first consists of a numeric table, while
the second is a very simple plot using ASCII
characters. This file also contains a table with the
results when Monte Carlo analysis is performed.
Besides the inverter.out file, PSpice can also create
an inverter.dat file, which allows the simulation
results to be viewed in an oscilloscope-like screen
created by the .PROBE command. This option is
much more sophisticated than the other two and
makes the inspection of results much easier.
In summary, three types of simulation outputs are
available in PSpice, determined by the .PRINT,
.PLOT, and .PROBE commands, whose syntaxes are
shown below.
Prints the simulation results in the form of a table
in the output text file inverter.out.
Plots the simulation results in a rudimentary graph
in the output text file inverter.out.


--- Page 1151 ---
Displays the simulation results in an oscilloscope-
like screen created using the inverter.dat file.
Example: Suppose that we want to print, plot, and
probe the DC voltages at nodes 2, 3, and 6, and the
DC currents through resistor R1 and at the drain
terminal of a MOSFET called Mx. Then the
following should be included in the corresponding
SPICE code:
25.9 DC Response Examples
We present in this section complete SPICE simulations
illustrating the DC response. To make the analysis more
productive, circuits for which the actual results are well
known are employed, so the simulation results can be easily
compared against predictions.
EXAMPLE 25.1 DC RESPONSE OF A
DIODE-RESISTOR CIRCUIT
Figure 25.8(a) shows a very simple diode-resistor circuit.
Determine the DC current through the diode for Vin in the 0 V
to 2 V range and the following values of R1: 500Ω, 1 kΩ, and
1.5 kΩ.

--- Page 1152 ---
FIGURE 25.8 (a) Circuit of Example 25.1; (b)
Respective simulation results.
SOLUTION
This example illustrates the use of the .DC and .PARAM
commands. Because three curves must be determined (one for
each value of R1), the experiment could be run three times;
however, in this type of situation it is normally more productive
to run them all together because result comparisons are then
simpler.
A SPICE code for this circuit is shown below. It starts with a
comment (line 2), followed by five sections. The first section
(lines 4–7) contains the diode mode (available in your
simulator’s library). The second section (lines 9 and 10)
contains the circuit. Note that because the experiment must be
run for several values of R1, a parameter called value was
employed to represent R1’s actual value. The next section (lines
12 and 13) shows a parametric analysis, where the command
.PARAM is used to inform that value is a parameter (its initial

--- Page 1153 ---
value is needed but is not important), which must receive the
values listed in line 13 using the .STEP command and the
keywords PARAM and LIST. The fourth section shows the DC
analysis, which says that a voltage source called Vin, connected
between nodes 1 and 0, must vary from 0 V to 2 V in steps of
10 mV. Finally, the fifth section contains output specifications
(the oscilloscope-like output was chosen using the .PROBE
command) plus the final .END command.
The corresponding simulation results (obtained with PSpice—
see tutorial in Appendix B) are depicted in Figure 25.8(b), with
one curve for each value of R1. As expected, only after Vin
reaches the diode’s junction voltage (Vj ≈ 0.6 V) does current
starts flowing through it. Consequently, the diode current, given
by (Vin – Vj)/R1, should reach the following maximum values
(for Vin = 2 V): (2–0.6)/0.5k = 2.8 mA for R1 = 500Ω, 1.4 mA
for R1 = 1 kΩ, and 0.93 mA for R1 = 1.5 kΩ. These values are
very close to those that can be observed in Figure 25.8.

--- Page 1154 ---
EXAMPLE 25.2 DC RESPONSE OF A
CMOS INVERTER
Figure 25.9(a) shows a CMOS inverter. Its DC response was
analytically examined in Section 9.5. Simulate it using SPICE,
assuming that VDD = 5 V and the transistor sizes are (W/L)n =
1.5μm/1μm and (W/L)p = 4μm/1μm. For the MOSFETs,
employ the BSIM3v3 models seen in Section 25.4. Compare
the overall results against those obtained in Section 9.5 and also
determine the value of VTR (Equation 9.7).
FIGURE 25.9 (a) CMOS inverter of Example
25.2; (b) Approximate analytical DC response seen
in Section 9.5; (c) DC response obtained with
PSpice (transistor sizes and models in (b) and (c)
are not the same, so only the overall curve shapes
can be compared).
SOLUTION

--- Page 1155 ---
A SPICE code for this example is shown below. It again starts
with a comment in line 2, followed by three sections. The first
section (lines 4–8) contains the circuit. Note that the MOSFET
models were assumed to be in a separate file, called
mos_models.cir, included in the code using the .INC command
(line 4). In line 5, .OPTION is employed to enter default
MOSFET parameters, that is:
DEFW = Default width (shown in micrometers, μm)
DEFL = Default length
DEFAD = Default area of drain (shown in micrometers
square, pm)
DEFAS = Default area of source
Note in the last two that areas are represented by (μm · μm) =
10−6 · 10−6m2 = 10−12m2 = pm or PM.
The third section (lines 10–11) contains specifications for the
DC response, saying that a voltage called Vin, connected to the
input node 2 (see Figure 25.9(a)), must vary from 0 to 5 V in
steps of 5 mV. Finally, lines 13–15 contain output
specifications (.PRINT and .PROBE were chosen this time to
measure the voltages on nodes 2 and 3), followed by the
mandatory .END command.

--- Page 1156 ---
Simulation results obtained with PSpice (see tutorial in
Appendix B) are depicted in Figure 25.9(c). As can be seen,
they are very similar to the approximate results obtained
analytically in Section 9.5, shown in Figure 25.9(b). Because
the transistor sizes and models are not the same in (b) and (c),
only the overall behaviors should be compared, which are
similar. The value of VTR in this circuit is ∼ 1.8 V.
25.10 Transient Response Examples
We present in this section complete SPICE simulations
illustrating the transient response.
EXAMPLE 25.3 TRANSIENT RESPONSE
OF A CMOS INVERTER
A CMOS inverter was seen in Figure 25.9(a). Using SPICE,
obtain its transient response to square voltage pulses for the
same supply voltage and transistor sizes employed in Example
25.2.

--- Page 1157 ---
SOLUTION
A SPICE code for this example is shown below. The only
difference with respect to the code seen in the previous
example resides in the section where the type of response is
specified (lines 11 and 12).
Simulation results, obtained with PSpice (described in
Appendix B), are shown in Figure 25.10. The results in (a)
were obtained without any extra load, while those in (b)
correspond to the circuit with a 0.5 pF capacitor connected to
the output (see line 8 of the code). Observe in Figure 25.10 the
different time ranges employed in the horizontal axis.

--- Page 1158 ---
FIGURE 25.10 Transient response relative to the
CMOS inverter of Figure 25.9(a): (a) Without any
load; (b) With a 0.5 pF load.
EXAMPLE 25.4 TRANSIENT RESPONSE
OF A D LATCH
Figure 25.11(a) shows the circuit for a D-type latch (studied in
Section 13.3—see Figure 13.8(c)). Simulate it using SPICE and
compare the results against the approximate results seen in
Section 13.3 (Figure 13.5). Assume that lambda is 0.3 μm and
adopt only minimum-size transistors.

--- Page 1159 ---
FIGURE 25.11  (a) D latch of Example 25.4; (b)
Approximate expected results (borrowed from
Figure 13.5); (c) Simulation results obtained with
PSpice.
SOLUTION
The minimum size for MOS transistors normally is W/L =
3λ/2λ; therefore, (W/L)min = 0.9μm/0.6μm. Because all
transistors must have these dimensions, it is convenient to use
the .OPTION command to enter them as default values. A
corresponding SPICE code is shown below. As before, the code
starts with a comment, followed by three sections, the first
containing the circuit, the second the analysis specifications,

--- Page 1160 ---
and finally output specifications and the .END command in the
third section. Note that clk, being a regular waveform, was
declared using the keyword PULSE, while d (data), being
irregular, was specified using PWL.
Simulation results, obtained with PSpice (described in
Appendix B), are shown in Figure 25.11(c). As can be
observed, they are very similar to the expected results shown in
Figure 25.11(b), borrowed from Section 13.3 (Figure 13.5).
25.11 AC Response Example

--- Page 1161 ---
We present in this section a SPICE simulation focused on the
AC response. Even though this type of analysis only applies
to linear (hence analog) circuits, an example is included
below to illustrate the use-fulness of SPICE even further.
EXAMPLE 25.5 AC RESPONSE OF AN RC
CIRCUIT
Figure 25.12(a) shows an RC low-pass filter. Estimate its
frequency response, then obtain the Bode plot for the
magnitude of vout/vin using SPICE code and compare the
result against the predictions.
FIGURE 25.12 (a) RC low-pass filter of Example
25.5; (b) Simulation results (Bode plot) obtained
with PSpice.
SOLUTION
The RC circuit of Figure 25.12(a) is a single-pole low-pass
filter whose transfer function is given by

--- Page 1162 ---
G0 is the low-frequency gain, while wC is the circuit’s only
pole (given in rad/s). In this case, wC also represents the
circuit’s cutoff frequency, that is, the frequency at which the
gain is 3 dB lower than G0 (20log |G|w=wc=20log|G0–3 or,
equivalently, |Gw=wc=0.707|G0|). With the values given in
Figure 25.12(a), wC = 2 krad/s and G0 = 0.5 result. Therefore,
the cutoff frequency, in Hz, is fC=wC/2π=318 Hz, and G0, in
decibels, is 20logG0 = –6 dB.
A SPICE code for this circuit is shown below. It again starts
with a comment, followed by three sections, which contain the
circuit, analysis specifications, and finally output
specifications. Note that the source is an independent AC
source with sinusoidal sweep, described in Section 25.6. The
option with logarithmic sweep (DEC) was chosen, with 100
points/decade, starting at 10 Hz and finishing at 20 kHz, hence
encompassing the cutoff frequency of 318 Hz estimated above.
Simulation results, obtained with PSpice (described in
appendix B), are shown in Figure 25.12(b). Notice near the

--- Page 1163 ---
horizontal axis that the option DB(…) was employed to plot the
Bode diagram for the magnitude of V(2)/V(1). As can be seen,
the low-frequency gain is –6 dB, as expected, and the cutoff
frequency (where the gain is –6 dB – 3 dB = –9 dB) is around
318 Hz (this value can be observed with precision using the
cursor in the oscilloscope-like screen created by .PROBE within
PSpice).
25.12 Monte Carlo Analysis
Monte Carlo is a statistical analysis in which device
parameters are randomly varied by the simulator within the
specified tolerance range. The .MC command is used, whose
syntax is shown below, where #runs is the number of runs
(the first run is always performed with the nominal
parameter values), analysis is the analysis type (DC, AC, or
transient), and output_var is the output variable to be
measured; functionand option are explained below.
The alternatives for function are as follows.
MAX: Finds the maximum value of the specified
variable.
MIN: Finds the minimum value of the specified
variable.
YMAX: Finds the maximum difference from the
nominal (first) run.
RISE_EDGE value: Finds the first crossing of the
variable above the specified value.

--- Page 1164 ---
FALL_EDGE value: Finds the first crossing of the
variable below the specified value.
The main alternatives for option are listed next.
LIST: Prints in the .out file the parameter values
used in the first (nominal) run. The results are
obviously available to be displayed with the
.PROBE command.
LIST OUTPUT ALL: Prints in the .out file the
parameter values used in all runs. All results can
again be displayed using .PROBE.
Examples of Monte Carlo analysis declarations:
To enter the parameter tolerances, the .MODEL command
must be used. Its syntax for resistors, capacitors, and
inductors is illustrated in the examples below.
In these examples, the names chosen for the models are
Rmodel, Cmodel, and Lmodel. The tolerance can be for the
individual device (DEV) or for the lot (LOT); in the former
the variations are independent, whereas in the latter the same
variation is assigned to all devices of the same model. The
tolerance can be specified using percentage or absolute

--- Page 1165 ---
value, and with uniform or Gaussian distribution. The
options between parentheses also include a multiplication
factor (=1 in the examples above), which affects the
parameter’s nominal value. A complete example, illustrating
the use of Monte Carlo analysis, is shown next.
EXAMPLE 25.6 MONTE CARLO
ANALYSIS OF A DR CIRCUIT
Assume that the resistor (R1) in the DR (diode-resistor) circuit
of Example 25.1 (Figure 25.8(a)) exhibits a 20% tolerance.
Repeat that simulation, now for a single value for R1 (=1 kΩ),
but with the tolerance above and Monte Carlo statistics
included. Vin must again vary from 0 V to 2 V in steps of 10
mV.
SOLUTION
A SPICE code for this example is shown below. It again starts
with a comment in line 2, followed by the models for the diode
(lines 4–7) and for the resistor (line 8). Next, the circuit proper
is described (lines 10 and 11), which contains only two devices.
The following section contains the analysis specifications (DC
combined with Monte Carlo; remember that the latter is not an
analysis on its own, but a complement to another analysis,
namely DC, AC, or transient). Line 14 says that it is a DC
analysis, while line 15 specifies the associated Monte Carlo
analysis, where the number of runs is 3, the variable of interest
is I(D1), its maximum value must be measured, and the
parameter values in all runs must be recorded. The graphical
results are depicted in Figure 25.13. Note that the first run is
always for the nominal parameter values, so the curve in the
center coincides with the curve for R1 = 1 kΩ in Figure 25.8(b).
The corresponding .out file (not shown) informs that the first

--- Page 1166 ---
run was conducted with R1 = 1 kΩ (nominal value, as
expected), the second with R1 = 0.97702 kΩ, and the third with
R1 = 1.0575 kΩ.
FIGURE 25.13 Results from the combined DC +
Monte Carlo analysis for the circuit of Figure
25.8(a).
25.13 Subcircuits

--- Page 1167 ---
We conclude this chapter by showing how hierarchical
circuits can be built for simulations using SPICE code. To
instantiate a subcircuit, its code must start with .SUBCKT and
finish with .ENDS. In a subcircuit instantiation, the
subcircuit’s name must start with X. This technique is
illustrated in the example below.
EXAMPLE 25.7 DFF CONSTRUCTED
WITH SUBCIRCUITS
We saw in Chapter 13 that a D-type flip-flop (DFF) can be
constructed using two D-type latches (DLs) operating in a
master-slave configuration (see Figure 13.14(a)). Write a SPICE
code to simulate a positive-edge DFF using the .SUBCKT
command to instantiate two DLs and also the inverters needed
to process the clock. As in Example 25.4, assume that lambda
is 0.3μm and adopt minimum size for all transistors except for
the inverters that process the clock and the output inverter of
each DL, which must be designed with (W/L)n = 6λ/2λ and
(W/L)p = 12λ/2λ.
SOLUTION
Figures 25.14(a) and (b) show the same pair of inverters and
DL simulated in Example 25.4 (see Figure 25.11). Each of
these units is considered a subcircuit in the present example,
called INVERTERS and DLATCH, respectively. The use of these
subcircuits to construct the DFF is shown in Figure 25.14(c).
Observe that, for it to be a positive-edge DFF, the first DL
(master) must be transparent when the clock is low, while the
second (slave) must be transparent when the clock is high (see
the connections between the clock lines and the DLs). Note that
the enumeration of the internal nodes does not need to be

--- Page 1168 ---
different in one subcircuit with respect to the other (Figures
25.14(a) and (b)), but external repetitions obviously cannot
occur in the final circuit (Figure 25.14(c)).
FIGURE 25.14 DFF constructed with subcircuits:
(a) Inverters needed to process the clock (subcircuit
INVERTERS); (b) D latch (subcircuit DLATCH);
(c) Complete DFF, constructed with three
subcircuits.
A SPICE code for this example is presented below. It starts with
a comment in line 2, followed by global declarations in lines 4
and 5 (file where the MOSFET models are and default values
for transistor sizes). The next section (lines 7–18) contains the
DLATCH subcircuit (note that it starts with .SUBCKT and ends
with .ENDS). The other subcircuit (INVERTERS) is in lines 20–
25. The main circuit is in lines 27–30. Observe that the
subcircuits’ names start with X. The next section (lines 32–35)

--- Page 1169 ---
specifies the type of analysis (transient in this case) and
respective waveforms needed to perform the tests. The final
section (lines 37 and 38) contains output specifications
(PROBE was chosen) and the mandatory .END command.


--- Page 1170 ---
Simulation results (obtained with PSpice, described Appendix
B) are depicted in Figure 25.15. The first waveform shows the
clock, with period = 100 ns, while the second shows the data
(d) input. The third plot shows the master latch’s output, which
is transparent while clock = ‘0’, and the last plot exhibits the
slave latch’s output, which is the DFF’s output. As can be seen,
the circuit does behave as expected and exhibits the following
clk-to-q low-to-high and high-to-low propagation delays: tpLH
= 15.6 ns and tpHL = 21 ns (these two values are indicated in
the figure).
FIGURE 25.15 Transient response obtained with
PSpice for the DFF of Example 25.7 (Figure
25.14).
25.14 Exercises Involving Combinational Logic
Circuits
1. SPICE simulation of an AND gate
Figure E25.1(a) shows an AND gate constructed with
CMOS logic. All transistors are already named and
all nodes are numbered.

--- Page 1171 ---
a. Suppose that the propagation delays low-
to-high and high-to-low (see Figure 4.8) are
both 2 ns. Sketch the output signal (y) in
Figure E25.1(b).
b. Simulate this circuit with SPICE. Use the
BSIM3v3 model for the MOSFETs (similar
to that in Section 25.4—consult the MOSIS
site at www.mosis.org). Assume that λ =
0.1μm and adopt (W/L)n = 6λ/2λ for the
nMOS transistors and (W/L)p = 12λ/2λ for
the pMOS ones. Generate the signals a and b
shown in Figure E25.1(b) to verify the
circuit’s transient response. Finally, compare
the result against the sketch made in part (a).
What are the values of tpLH and tpHL in this
case?
2. SPICE simulation of a compound gate
FIGURE E25.1
After solving the exercise above, simulate the
combinational circuit of Example 4.2 (repeated in
Figure E25.2). Enter each gate as a subcircuit. Use
the same transistor models and sizes employed in the
previous exercise and the same stimuli employed in
Example 4.2 (Figure 4.11).

--- Page 1172 ---
3. SPICE simulation of a multiplexer
FIGURE E25.2
A TG-based 2 × 1 multiplexer was described in
Example 11.6 and then used in Example 11.7 to
construct a larger multiplexer.
a. Write a SPICE code to simulate the TG-
based 2 × 1 multiplexer of Figure 11.16(b).
This time assume that λ = 0.2μm and adopt
minimum size for the nMOS transistors and
twice that for the pMOS ones (that is, (W/L)n
= 3λ/2λ and (W/L)p = 6λ/2λ). Use either
Level 3 or BSIM 3v3 models for the
transistors (consult the MOSIS site at
www.mosis.org). Generate suitable signals
to verify the multiplexer’s functionality.
b. Using .SUBCKT to instantiate the
multiplexer of part (a) above, construct a
SPICE code and test the transient response
and operation of the 2 × 3 multiplexer of
Figure 11.17.
4. SPICE simulation of a Schmitt trigger
Three Schmitt trigger (ST) circuits were described in
Section 11.13. Write a SPICE code and simulate the
ST of Figure 11.30(a). Adopt the same model used in
the previous exercise for the transistors, with the
following sizes: (W/L)M5 = 3λ/2λ, (W/L)M1, M2, M6 =

--- Page 1173 ---
6λ/2λ, and (W/L)M3, M4 = 12λ/2λ. Assume that VDD =
5 V and employ a DC sweep from 0 V to 5 V, then
from 5 V back to 0 V, in steps of 5 mV, to obtain the
circuit’s DC response. Compare the overall results
against the curves in Figure 11.29(b), but observe
that the present circuit is an inverter. What are the
transition voltages and the corresponding hysteresis?
25.15 Exercises Involving Combinational
Arithmetic Circuits
5. SPICE simulation of a full-adder unit
The full-adder (FA) circuit was studied in Section
12.2, with Figures 12.1(b) and 12.2(b) repeated in
Figure E25.5 below.
a. Name all transistors and enumerate all
nodes in the circuit of Figure E25.5.
b. Write a SPICE code and simulate the
transient response of this circuit to test its
operation. Adopt for the transistors the same
models and sizes of Exercise 25.3. The
following propagation delays should be
measured:
-tpLH and tpHL from cin to cout.
FIGURE E25.5

--- Page 1174 ---
-tpLH and tpHL from a (or b) to cout.
-tpLH and tpHL between cout and s.
6. SPICE simulation of a carry-ripple adder
a. Using .SUBCKT to instantiate four times
the FA tested in the previous exercise,
simulate the transient response of the carry-
ripple adder of Figure 12.3(b) to test its
operation.
b. We know that the main advantage of this
adder is its compactness, but, in exchange, it
is slower than other architectures because
the carry bits must propagate through all
stages. Using proper stimuli, such that cin
causes all carry bits to change, measure the
carry propagation delay through each stage
and also the accumulated value (from cin to
count). Are tpLH and tpHL necessarily equal?
7. SPICE simulation of a comparator
Digital comparators were studied in Section 12.7. In
this exercise we want to obtain the transient response
of the comparator seen in Figure 12.15(b) (repeated
in Figure E25.7 below) to check its operation. Create
a subcircuit for the FAs (use the code written to solve
Exercise 25.5) and another for the NOR gate, then
instantiate them to obtain the complete circuit. Using
appropriate wave-forms, simulate the circuit and
check its overall behavior.
8. SPICE simulation of an array multiplier

--- Page 1175 ---
FIGURE E25.7
Multipliers were studied in Section 12.9, where a
parallel multiplier (also called array multiplier) was
shown in Figure 12.20. That figure was repeated in
Figure E25.8, this time for 3-bit inputs. Observe that
this circuit employs a standard cell, shown on the left
of Figure E25.8. Because the FA of Exercise 25.5
will be needed, employ for the transistors the same
specifications contained in that exercise.
a. Write two separate pieces of SPICE code,
one for the AND gate and the other for the
FA (full-adder) that compose the standard
cell.
b. Use .SUBCKT to instantiate the AND and
FA units to obtain the standard multiplying
cell (call it STD_CELL).
c. Use .SUBCKT again to instantiate 12 times
STC_CELL to create the full 3-bit multiplier
of Figure E25.8. Be careful about what to do
with unused inputs.
d. Finally, simulate your design using proper
stimuli and check its overall operation. What
is the longest-delay path in this circuit?

--- Page 1176 ---
FIGURE E25.8
25.16 Exercises Involving Registers
9. SPICE simulation of a D latch
D-type latches (DLs) were studied in Section 13.3,
with several architectures presented in Figures 13.8
(static) and 13.9 (dynamic). This exercise concerns
the transient response of the SRAM latch shown in
Figure 13.8(e). Adopt for the transistors the same
specifications of Example 25.3 and apply proper
input signals to verify this circuit’s transient response
and operation.
10. SPICE simulation of a DFF
Figure E25.10 shows a dynamic TSPC (true single-
phase clock) D-type flip-flop (DFF), which was seen
in Section 13.5 (see Figure 13.17(c)).
a. Assuming that the DFF’s propagation
delay from clk to q is tpCQ = 5 ns for both
low-to-high and high-to-low transitions,

--- Page 1177 ---
draw the resulting waveform for q in the
graph of Figure E25.10. Consider that the
clock period is 50 ns and that the DFF’s
initial state is q = ‘0’.
b. Now name all transistors and enumerate
all circuit nodes, then write a SPICE code
and simulate the transient response of this
circuit by applying to it the signals clk and d
depicted in the figure. Compare the shape of
q produced by the simulator to that sketched
in part (a) above. Adopt for the transistors
the parameters of Exercise 25.3 (or choose
some other).
c. What are the values of tpCQ in the low-to-
high and high-to-low transitions of this
circuit?
11. SPICE simulation of a TFF
FIGURE E25.10
Figure 13.24 shows the construction of T-type flip-
flops (TFFs) from D-type flip-flops (DFFs). Using
SPICE code, test the TFF of Figure 13.24(a). For the
DFF, use the same circuit simulated in the previous

--- Page 1178 ---
exercise. Apply a clock signal to verify its transient
response and operation.
12. SPICE simulation of a dual-edge DFF
Dual-edge DFFs were described in Section 13.7,
where a mux-based architecture was presented in
Figure 13.20(a).
a. Assuming that the DFF’s propagation
delay from clk to q is tpCQ = 5 ns for both
low-to-high and high-to-low transitions,
draw the resulting waveform for q in the
graph of Figure E25.12. Consider that the
clock period is 50 ns and that the DFF’s
initial state is q = ‘0’.
b. Write two separate pieces of SPICE code,
one for the DL (D latch) and the other for
the MUX (multiplexer). The code from
Example 25.4 or from Exercise 25.9 can be
used for the former, while the code from
Exercise 25.3 can be employed for the latter.
c. Use .SUBCKT to instantiate the DL and MUX
units to obtain the complete dual-edge DFF
of Figure 13.20(a).
d. Finally, simulate your design using the
stimuli of Figure E25.12. Check its overall
operation and compare the result against
your sketch for q.
FIGURE E25.12

--- Page 1179 ---
25.17 Exercises Involving Sequential Circuits
13. SPICE simulation of an asynchronous
counter
Asynchronous counters were described in Section
14.3. The circuit of Figure 14.15(b), which is a 4-bit
downward counter, was repeated in Figure E25.13
below. Each cell is simply a TFF (already simulated
in Exercise 25.11, so employ the same transistor
models and sizes).
a. Using the clock as a reference, and
assuming a propagation delay of 5 ns in each
TFF, draw the output signals (q0, q1, q2, q3).
Check whether the circuit counts downward.
b. Entering each TFF as a subcircuit, write a
SPICE code for this counter and simulate its
transient response. Check whether the
outputs are functionally similar to those
sketched in part (a) above. Also measure the
propagation delays produced in the
simulation.
14. SPICE simulation of a serial adder
FIGURE E25.13
A serial adder was described in Section 12.4 (see
Figure 12.12). Check its transient response and

--- Page 1180 ---
operation using SPICE. The two subcircuits needed in
this case (FA and DFF) can be those of Exercises
25.5 and 25.10.
15. SPICE simulation of an SR with load
A shift register (SR) with data-load capability was
seen in Section 14.1 (see Figure 14.2(b)). Using
.SUBCKT to construct the MUX and DFF units,
simulate its transient response and check its overall
operation. Note that MUX and DFF circuits were
already simulated in Exercises 25.3 and 25.10.
16. SPICE simulation of a data scrambler
Data scrambler-descrambler circuits were studied in
Section 14.8. This exercise concerns the operation of
the scrambler shown in Figure 14.34(a) (repeated in
Figure E25.16 below). Obtain its transient response
by applying to it the same data sequence of Example
14.13, then check whether the resulting output
sequence matches that in Figure 14.34. Note that the
two subcircuits (FA and DFF) needed in this case can
be those simulated in Exercises 25.5 and 25.10.
FIGURE E25.16
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 1181 ---
A
ModelSim Tutorial
Objective: This tutorial, which is a complement to Chapter 24, briefly
describes ModelSim, from Mentor Graphics, a popular simulator for
VHDL- and Verilog-based designs. The tutorial is based on ModelSim-
Altera Web Edition 6.1g, available free of charge from www.altera.com.
The presentation is divided into two parts, as follows:
 Part I: Simulation Procedure
In this part of the tutorial the simulation files are entered directly
into the simulation environment, and the steps needed to process
them are described.
 Part II: Creating a New Project
In this case a project is created before entering the simulation files,
which improves code organization and reusability. The subsequent
simulation procedure is exactly the same as that in Part I.
About ModelSim
A simplified view of ModelSim’s components and respective
design flow is presented in Figure A.1. The diagram shows
the VHDL (or Verilog) files at the top, which are combined
with the VHDL (or Verilog) libraries by the first two
components, vlib and vmap. Next appears the compiler
(vcom for VHDL, vlog for Verilog), and finally the simulator
(vsim).

--- Page 1182 ---
FIGURE A.1  Simplified diagram of ModelSim’s
components and design flow.
As seen in Chapter 24, at least two files are needed to
simulate a circuit. One is referred to as the design file
because it must contain the code from which the DUT is
inferred. The other is referred to as the test file because it
contains the testbench (input stimuli plus, optionally, output
verifiers).
In Part I of this tutorial, these files are entered directly into
the simulation environment, while in Part II a project is
created first, within which the same files are then located
(directly or indirectly). The simulation procedure is exactly
the same in both cases, but when a project is created its
status is stored (in a project file with extension .mpf) so it
can be continued later, also improving code organization and
reusability.

--- Page 1183 ---
Part I: Simulation Procedure
This part contains the following sections:
1. Preparing the VHDL design and test files
2. Creating the simulation library
3. Compiling the files
4. Running the simulation
5. Inserting breakpoints
6. Examining the results with the cursor
7. Examining the results with the zoom
8. Closing the simulation
1. Preparing the VHDL Design and Test Files
The files used in this tutorial are those in Example 24.2. The
first file, called clock_divider.vhd, is a design file for a
circuit that divides the clock frequency by 10. The second
file, called test_clock_divider.vhd, is a test file that creates
the external stimuli needed to test that design.
a. Create a directory where all simulation files
should to be saved.
b. If preexisting files are used, simply copy them
to the directory created above and go to part 2.
Otherwise, proceed to step (c).
c. Start ModelSim (ignore the welcome dialog
boxes).
d. Open its editor by selecting File > New >
Source > VHDL. Click the Zoom/Unzoom

--- Page 1184 ---
Window icon 
 to enlarge the editing window.
Now type the design file (clock_divider.vhd)
shown in Example 24.2 and save it in the directory
created in step (a).
e. Repeat the procedure above for the test file
(test_clock_divider.vhd) of Example 24.2 and save
it in the same directory. Click the Zoom/Unzoom
Window icon again to return the main window to
its original size.
2. Creating the Simulation Library
a. Start ModelSim if not done yet (ignore the
welcome dialog boxes).
b. Select File > Change Directory and select the
directory created in step 1(a).
c. Select File > New > Library and type work in
the Library Name and Library Physical Name
fields (in case they are not entered automatically)
and click OK.
d. In the Workspace (Library tab) check the
presence of the new library (work) at the top of the
list. This is a folder created inside the directory
created above.
3. Compiling the Files
a. To compile the design, click 
 or select Compile
> Compile. This opens the Compile Source Files
dialog box shown in Figure A.2.
b. With both files selected (Figure A.2), click Edit
Source, which will cause both VHDL files to be

--- Page 1185 ---
opened in the main window. Even though this step
is optional, it is very likely that you will need to
modify/debug the files anyway.
c. With both files selected (Figure A.2), click
Compile. When finished, click Done.
FIGURE A.2
Note: In case you are debugging a file, you can
compile it separately until the problems are fixed.
d. In the Workspace, select the Library tab and
click the ‘+’ icon next to work to confirm the
presence of the design units corresponding to the
two files compiled above (see Figure A.3).


--- Page 1186 ---
FIGURE A.3
4. Running the Simulation
a. Left double-click test_clock_divider in the
Workspace (see Figure A.3). Alternatively, you can
select Simulate > Start Simulation, then click the
‘+’ icon to expand the work library, select
test_clock_divider and click OK. The Objects
window will be opened with the three signals
shown in the blue part of Figure A.4. Note that a
new tab, called sim, was included in the
Workspace.
b. In the sim tab of the Workspace, right-click
test_clock_divider and select Add > Add to Wave.
The new situation will be that depicted in Figure
A.5 with the wave pane included (black area).
c. Any signal in the wave window can be dragged
up or down (normally clock and reset are wanted
at the top). To do so, press and hold the left mouse
button on the signal’s name and move it to the
desired position.
d. Set the simulation time interval by selecting
Simulate > Runtime Options, then type 1 μs in the
Default Run box. This means that every time the
simulation icon is clicked the simulator will
advance an additional 1 μs time interval.
e. Run the simulation by clicking the Run
Simulation icon 
 (see Figure A.5) or by selecting
Simulate > Run > Run 1 μs.

--- Page 1187 ---
f. Click the Zoom Full icon (see Figure A.5) to
have the complete plot displayed in the window.
The resulting waveforms are depicted in Figure
A.6.
g. Repeat steps (e–f) a few times and observe that
the plot grows 1 μs each time.
h. Clean the waveforms window by clicking the
Restart icon 
 (see Figure A.5), then repeat steps
(e–f) two or three times until the plot is the size
you want. Now inspect the results.
FIGURE A.4
FIGURE A.5

--- Page 1188 ---
FIGURE A.6
5. Inserting Breakpoints
a. Clean the waveforms window by clicking the
Restart icon 
.
b. Display the design file (clock_divider.vhd) in the
main window (see Figure A.7).
c. The red-numbered lines accept breakpoints.
Left-click 16 and 19, which inserts a red ball
(break-point) next to each line number (see Figure
A.7).
d. Left-click the red ball to disable the breakpoint
(black ball). Now right click it and select Remove
Breakpoint to eliminate it. Finally, reinsert the
breakpoints.
e. Run the simulation by clicking the Run-All icon
so the simulator will progress until the first
breakpoint is reached. Note that a blue pointer
stops at line 16 and the values of all signals at that
point are updated in the Objects pane. Click 
again several times, noting that the pointer stops in
line 16 during five iterations and in line 19 for one
iteration.
f. This is another way of seeing the values.
Highlight count in line 16, right-click it and select

--- Page 1189 ---
Examine. A balloon will be displayed with the time
coordinate and the corresponding signal value.
g. Finally, single-step through the code. Remove
all breakpoints and click 
 to advance one
iteration at a time (the simulator jumps between
red numbered lines). Do it several times and
observe the values in the Objects window.
FIGURE A.7
6. Examining the Results with the Cursor
a. Observe the five cursor-related and four zoom-
related icons in Figure A.8.
b. Undock the wave window by clicking 
(this
will separate the wave pane from the main
window). Now maximize it.
c. Click the Insert Cursor icon (#1 in Figure A.8),
then click anywhere in the black area of the wave
window. This will show a cursor with the time

--- Page 1190 ---
coordinate at its foot and also the corresponding
signal values in the column adjacent to the signal
names. Drag the cursor back and forth and observe
the time and signal values changing.
d. With the mouse over one of the waveforms,
click next to one of its transitions. Observe that in
this case the cursor snaps to the waveform edge.
e. Select one of the waveforms by clicking its
name (as depicted in Figure A.8, where clk was
selected). Now click one of the Next Transition
icons (#3 or #4 in Figure A.8) and note that the
cursor jumps to the next waveform transition.
f. Click the Insert Cursor icon (#1) again to insert a
second cursor. Click on the new cursor to high-
light it, and note that now the Next Transition
icons (#3 and #4) are related to this cursor.
g. Finally, click twice the Delete Cursor icon (#2 in
Figure A.8) to remove both cursors.
FIGURE A.8
7. Examining the Results with the Zoom
a. Click the Zoom Full icon (#9 in Figure A.8) to
have the plot fit the window.

--- Page 1191 ---
b. Click the Zoom In 2× icon (#7 in Figure A.8) to
have the plot enlarged, then click Zoom Full (#9)
again to return it to its original size.
c. Click the Zoom Out 2× icon (#8 in Figure A.8)
to have the plot reduced. To restore it to its previ-
ous size, this time, instead of clicking Zoom Full,
press the letter “L” on the keyboard, which
restores the last view (alternatively, select View >
Zoom > Zoom Last).
d. Click the Zoom Mode icon (#6 in Figure A.8)
and go to the waveforms region. Click the mouse
near one of the signal transitions and hold it while
dragging to the other side of the transition, as
illustrated in Figure A.9. When the mouse is
released, that section will be zoomed in. Click the
Zoom Full icon (#9) to restore the plot to its
original size.
e. Redock the wave window.
FIGURE A.9

--- Page 1192 ---
8. Closing the Simulation
a. Select Simulate > End Simulation > Yes to exit
ModelSim or to start another simulation.

--- Page 1193 ---
Part II: Creating a New Project
This part shows how to create a project before entering the
simulation files. It contains the following sections:
1. Creating the working directory
2. Setting the compile order
3. Compiling the project
4. Simulating the project
1. Creating the Working Directory
a. Create a directory where the project should be
saved.
b. Start ModelSim.
c. Select Create a Project in the Welcome dialog
box or select File > New > Project. This will open
the dialog of Figure A.10. Choose a name for the
project, then browse to the directory created above,
leave work as the default library name, and click
OK.
d. At the conclusion of step (c), the Add Items to
the Project dialog box shown on the left of Figure
A.11 is opened. Click Add Existing File. In the
next dialog (on the right of Figure A.11) include
the desired files (clock_divider.vhd and
test_clock_divider.vhd), then check the Copy to
project directory option and click OK.
e. Check in Figure A.12 what the Workspace
should look like at this point.

--- Page 1194 ---
FIGURE A.10
FIGURE A.11
FIGURE A.12
2. Setting the Compile Order

--- Page 1195 ---
a. Select Compile > Compile Order, which opens
the dialog box of Figure A.13.
b. The files are already correctly ordered in this
case (starting from the top). Press the Auto
Generate button (Figure A.13), which will cause
the compiler to read all project files to determine
their sequential interdependences. Click OK
(twice) when done.
FIGURE A.13
3. Compiling the Project
a. Select Compile > Compile All. The question
marks shown in the column Status of Figure A.12
should change to regular check marks.
4. Simulating the Project
a. Load the design by selecting the Library tab in
the Workspace and left double-clicking test_clock_

--- Page 1196 ---
divider (see Figure A.14). As before, this opens the
Objects pane (blue area) with all in/out signals
contained in the design.
b. Note that Figure A.14 is similar to Figure A.4.
Therefore, from this point on the procedure is
exactly the same as that seen in Part I. Hence go to
step 4(b) of Part I and proceed from there.
FIGURE A.14
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 1197 ---
B
PSpice Tutorial
Objective: This tutorial, which is a complement to Chapter 25, concisely
describes the use of PSpice A/D to perform circuit simulations. The version
used in this tutorial is Cadence OrCAD PSpice A/D 15.7.
The tutorial is divided in two parts, depending on how the circuit to be
tested is entered.
 Part I: SPICE Simulation with Coded Input
In this case the circuit is entered using SPICE code (recommended).
 Part II: SPICE Simulation with Graphical Input
In this case circuit schematics are entered instead (this is old
fashioned and difficult to modify or share).

--- Page 1198 ---
Part I: SPICE Simulation with Coded Input
In this case, the circuit is entered using a text file (that is,
SPICE code).
1. Entering the SPICE Code
The RC circuit of Example 25.5 (repeated in Figure
B.1) will be employed as an example, of which the
transient response will be examined.
a. Start PSpice A/D. A screen similar to
Figure B.2 will be shown.
b. Open a new text file by selecting File >
New > Text File or click
.
c. Type (or paste) the SPICE code for the
circuit of Figure B.1, with transient analysis
specifications included, as follows, where Vin
consists of a square wave with 10 ms period
and 50% duty cycle, and the total simulation
time is 25 ms divided in steps of 10 μs.
FIGURE B.1

--- Page 1199 ---
FIGURE B.2
d. Save the file above using the extension .cir
(rc_circuit.cir).
2. Simulation
a. Make sure that the active file (see bar
below) is the correct one (rc_circuit.cir).

--- Page 1200 ---
b. To run the simulation, select Simulation >
Run rc_circuit or click
.
c. Once PSpice A/D concludes the simulation,
the oscilloscope-like (PROBE) screen is
opened automatically, showing a black screen
similar to Figure B.3 but without any plots.
d. To show the plots of Figure B.3, select
Trace> Add Trace or click on 
 . Click on
V(1) and V(2) to have the voltages of nodes 1
(input) and 2 (output) exhibited (notice that
these signals are added to the Trace
Expression field of the Add Traces dialog box
when you click on their names). After
selecting both signals, click OK. The plots of
Figure B.3 will be displayed with axis ranges
automatically set by the simulator.
FIGURE B.3
3. Examining the Results

--- Page 1201 ---
a. Practicing with the axis settings: Change
the run time from 25 ms to 15 ms by selecting
Plot > Axis Settings > X Axis > Data Range >
User Defined and typing 0 s to 15 ms. A
single pulse should now result in the display.
b. Now change the vertical axis range to –1 V
to 6 V by selecting Plot > Axis Settings > Y
Axis > Data Range > User Defined and
typing –1 V to 6 V.
c. Practicing with the cursor: Click 
  to add
a cursor to the display. Click the mark before
V(2), as shown here 
 , to have the
cursor attached to the output signal. Because
this circuit’s time constant is τ = R1 // R2 · C1
=0.5 ms, V(2) is expected to grow from 0 V
to 63% of its final value (2.5 V) in 0.5 ms (in
other words, it should grow from 0 V to (1 −
e−1)2.5 = 1.58 V in 0.5 ms). Likewise, it is
expected to decrease from 2.5 V to (2.5 −
1.58) = 0.92 V also in 0.5 ms. Check these
values by placing the cursor at the time =
5.5ms coordinate and observing the values
displayed at the bottom right of the screen,
then repeating the test for the cursor at time =
10.5 ms.
d. Practicing with multiple plots: Select Plot >
Add Plot to Window. Next, select Trace >
Add Trace or click 
 , then click on I(R1),
I(R2), and I(C1) to have all three currents
displayed. At this point, the plots should look
like Figure B.4.

--- Page 1202 ---
e. Examine the new results. Note that the
currents must obey I(R1) = I(R2) + I(C1), and
that the steady-state currents (when the
voltages reach the regime values) should be
I(R1) = I(R2) = 2.5/1 k = 2.5 mA and I(C1) =
0.
FIGURE B.4
Note: To copy the display to a regular text file, use the
option Window > Copy to Clipboard.

--- Page 1203 ---
Part II: SPICE Simulation with Graphical Input
This section concisely describes how PSpice can be used to
perform simulations using graphical inputs (that is, circuit
schematics). OrCAD Capture is now needed in addition to
PSpice A/D.
1. Drawing the Circuit
The same RC circuit of Figure B.1 (repeated in Figure
B.5) will be employed as an example, of which the
transient response will again be determined.
a. Start OrCAD Capture.
b. Create a new project by selecting File >
New > Project. Mark Analog or Mixed A/D,
choose a name for the project, and provide the
location where it should be saved.
c. In the next window, select Create a Blank
Project, which displays a blank drawing
canvas.
d. To place the resistors, select Place > Part or
click 
 , then Add Library > PSpice >
analog.olb. Next, select R, then OK. A 1 kΩ
resistor will be made available. Click the
drawing area approximately where the
resistor should be placed (it can be dragged
around with the mouse). Repeat the procedure
for the second resistor. To rotate it, use Edit >
Rotate after selecting it. To leave the Place
Mode, click ESC or with the right mouse
button select End Mode.

--- Page 1204 ---
e. Place the capacitor by selecting C from the
same library. Click on 1 n to change its value
to 1 u. In all devices, the units (F, V, A, Ω, s,
etc.) are optional.
f. Place the pulse generator by clicking again
 and selecting Add Library > PSpice >
source.olb. Pick VPULSE and set the
following parameter values (this is a 5 V
square waveform with 10 ms period and 50%
duty cycle):
V1 (1st pulse voltage) = 0 V
V2 (2nd pulse voltage) = 5 V
TD (time delay) = 5 ms
TR (rise time) = 0
TF (fall time) = 0
PW (pulse width) = 5 ms
PER (period) = 10 ms.
g. Drag the parts to the desired positions
(click and hold the left mouse button on the
part to drag it).
h. Now use Place > Wire or 
  to
interconnect them.
i. Finally, place the reference voltage
(ground) by clicking 
  and selecting
0/Capsym.
j. Save the project.

--- Page 1205 ---
FIGURE B.5
2. Simulation
a. Create a simulation profile. Still in the
same OrCAD Capture screen, select Pspice >
New Simulation Profile or click 
 . In the
dialog box select/type:
Analysis Type: Time domain
(Transient)
Run to Time: 25 ms
Maximum Time Step: 10 μs
b. Run the simulation by selecting Pspice >
Run or by clicking 
.
c. After PSpice A/D concludes the simulation,
the oscilloscope-like (PROBE) screen is
opened automatically. This situation is exactly
the same as that in step 2(c) of Part I (Figure
B.3), so go to step 2(d) of Part I and proceed
from there.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 1206 ---
References
Ali S., Margala M. A design approach for a 6.7-mW 5-GHz
CMOS frequency synthesizer using dynamic prescaler. 48th
Midwest Symposium on Circuits and Systems. 2005:243–
246.
Altera CPLD and FPGA device descriptions, datasheets, and
application notes, available at www.altera.com
Armstrong J., Gray F. VHDL Design Representation and
Synthesis. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2000.
Ashenden P.J., The Designer’s Guide to VHDL, 2nd edition.
San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann. 2002.
Athas W., et al. Low-power digital systems based on
adiabatic-switching principles. IEEE Trans. on VLSI.
1994;2(4):390–407. Dec.
Berrou C., Glavieux A., Thitimajshima P. Near Shannon limit
error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes. Proc.
I993 IEEE Int. Conf. Communications. 1993:1064–1070.
Bhasker J., VHDL Primer, 3rd edition. Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Prentice Hall. 1999.
Boole B. An Investigation of the Laws of Thought. New
York: Dover, 1854.
Cooke M., Mahmoodi-Meinmand H., Roy K. Energy
recovery clocking scheme and flip-flops for ultra low-energy
applications. ISLPED’03, Seoul. 2003. Aug.
Craninckx J., Steyaert M. A 1.8GHz CMOS low-phase-noise
voltage-controlled oscillator with prescaler. IEEE J. Solid-
State Circuits. 1995;30(12):1474–1482. Dec.
Dike C., Burton E. Miler and noise effects in synchronization
flip-flops. IEEE J. SolidState Circuits. 1999;34(6):849–855.
June
Ding L., Mazumder P., Srinivas N. A dual-rail static edge-
triggered latch. IEEE Int. Symp. on Circuits and Systems
(ISCAS). 2001:645–648. II
Ding Y., et al. A low-power 17GHz 256/257 dual-modulus
prescaler fabricated in a 130 nm CMOS process. IEEE Radio
Frequency Integrated Circuits Symposium. 2005:465–468.

--- Page 1207 ---
Draper D., et al. Circuit techniques in a 266-MHz MMX-
enabled processor. IEEE J. SolidState Circuits.
1997;32(11):1650–1664. Nov.
Fano R. A heuristic discussion of probabilistic decoding.
IEEE Trans. Information Theory. 1963;9:64–76. April
Gallager R. Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 1963.
Galup-Montoro C., Schneider M.C. MOSFET Modeling for
Circuit Analysis and Design. Singapore: World Scientific,
2007. March
Geiger R., Allen P., Strader N. VLSI Design Techniques for
Analog and Digital Circuits. New York: McGraw Hill, 1990.
Gerosa G., et al. A 2.2W 80 MHz superscalar RISC
microprocessor. IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits.
1994;29(12):1440–1454. Dec.
A. Ghadiri and H. Mahmoodi, “Dual-edge triggered static
pulsed flip-flops,” IEEE 18th Conference on VLSI Design
(VLSID), 2005.
Ghiaasi G., Ismail M. A CMOS broadband divide-by-32/33
dual modulus prescaler for high-speed wireless applications.
48th Midwest Symposium on Circuits and Systems.
2005:183–186.
Griffith Z., et al. An ultra low-power (< 13.6 mW/latch) static
frequency divider in an InP/InGaAs DHBT technology. IEEE
Int. Microwave Symposium Digest. 2006:506–509.
Hamming R. Error detecting and error correcting codes. Bell
Syst. Tech. Journal. 1950;29:147–160.
Haykin S. Neural Networks: A Comprehensive Foundation.
New York: MacMillan, 1994.
Heydari P., Mohanavelu R. A 40-GHz flip-flop-based
frequency divider. IEEE Trans. on Circuits and Systems II.
2006;53(12):1358–1362. Dec.
Huang Q., Rogenmoser R. Speed optimization of edge-
triggered CMOS circuits for gigahertz single-phase clocks.
IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits. 1996;31(3):456–465. Mar.
Hung C., et al. Fully integrated 5.35 GHz CMOS VCOs and
prescalers. IEEE Trans. on Microwave Theory and
Techniques. 2001;49(1):17–22. Jan.
IEEE Standard VHDL Language Reference Manual, IEEE
1076-1987.

--- Page 1208 ---
IEEE Standard VHDL Language Reference Manual, IEEE
1076-1993.
Intel memory devices descriptions, available at
www.intel.com.
Kar B., Pradhan D. A new algorithm for order statistic and
sorting. IEEE Trans. on Signal Processing. 1993;41(8):2688–
2699. Aug.
Karnaugh M. A map method for synthesis of combinational
logic circuits. Trans. AIEE Communication and Electronics.
1953;72:593–599. Nov.
Kiaei S., Chee S., Allstot D. CMOS source-coupled logic for
mixed-mode VLSI. 1990 IEEE Int. Symp. on Circuits and
Systems (ISCAS). 1990:1608–1609.
Kim J., et al. CMOS sense-amplifier-based flip-flop with two
N-C2MOS output latches. Electronics Letters.
2000;36(6):498–500. Mar.
Kinniment D.J., et al. Synchronization circuit performance.
IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits. 2002;37(2):202–209. Feb.
Klass F., et al. A new family of semidynamic and dynamic
flip-flops with embedded logic for high-performance
processors. IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits. 1999;34(5):712–
716. May
Knapp H., et al. 2 GHz/2 mW and 12 GHz/30 mW dual-
modulus prescalers in silicon bipolar technology. IEEE J.
Solid-State Circuits. 2001;36(9):1420–1423. Sep.
Kong B., et al. Conditional-capture flip-flop for statistical
power reduction. IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits.
2001;36(8):1263–1271. Aug.
Kozu S., et al. A 100 MHz 0.4 W RISC processor with 200
MHz multi-adder using pulse-register technique. IEEE Int.
Solid-State Circuits Conference. 1996:140–141.
Kromer C., et al. A 40-GHz static frequency divider with
quadrature outputs in 80 nm CMOS. IEEE Microwave and
Wireless Components Letters. 2006;16(10):564–566. Oct.
MacKay D., Neal R. Near Shannon limit performance of low
density parity check codes. Electron. Letters.
1996;32(18):1645–1646. Aug.
Mano M., Kime C., Logic and Computer Design
Fundamentals, 3rd edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
Hall. 2004.

--- Page 1209 ---
Matsui M., et al. A 200 MHz 13mm2 2-D DCT machocell
using sense-amplifying pipeline flip-flop scheme. IEEE J.
Solid-State Circuits. 1994;29(12):1482–1489. Dec.
McCluskey E. Introduction to the Theory of Switching
Circuits. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1965.
Mitra S., Kaiser J. Handbook for Digital Signal Processing.
New York: Wiley, 1993.
Mizuno M., et al. A 3-mW 1-GHz silicon-ECL dual-modulus
prescaler IC. IEEE J. SolidState Circuits. 1992;27(12):1794–
1798. Dec.
Mizuno, et al. A GHz MOS adaptive pipeline technique using
MOS current-mode logic. IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits.
1996;31(6):784–791. June
Moisiadis Y., Bouras I. Differential CMOS edge-triggered
flip-flop based on clock racing. Electronics Letters.
2000;36(12):1012–1013. June
Moisiadis Y., et al. A high-performance low-power static
differential double edge-triggered flip-flop. IEEE Int. Symp.
on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS). 2001:802–805. IV
Montanaro J., et al. A 160 MHz 32-b 0.5W CMOS RISC
microprocessor. IEEE J. SolidState Circuits.
1996;31(11):1703–1714. Nov.
Transcript of speech by Gordon Moore at dinner following
groundbreaking for Moore Laboratory of Engineering, March
8, 1994, located in Historical File S3.2.1.
Naffziger S., et al. The implementation of the Itanium 2
microprocessor. IEEE J. SolidState Circuits.
2002;37(11):1448–1459. Nov.
Naffziger S., et al. The implementation of a 2-core multi-
threaded Itanium family processor. Proc. of the 2005 IEEE
Int. Conf. on Integrated Circuits and Technology. 2005:43–
48.
Nikolic B., et al. Improved sense-amplifier-based flip-flop:
Design and measurements. IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits.
2000;35(6):876–885. June
Oppenheim A., Schafer R. Digital Signal Processing.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1975.
Partovi H., et al. Flow-through latch and edge-triggered flip-
flop hybrid elements. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits
Conference (ISSCC ‘96). 1996:138–139.

--- Page 1210 ---
Patterson D., Hennessy J., Computer Organization and
Design: The Hardware/Software Interface, 2nd edition. San
Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann. 1998.
Pedroni V.A. Circuit Design with VHDL. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 2004.
Pedroni V.A. Compact Hamming-comparator-based rank
order filter for digital VLSI and FPGA implementations.
IEEE 2004 Int. Symp. on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS).
2004:585–588. II, 2004May
Pedroni V.A. Low-voltage high-speed Schmitt trigger and
compact window comparator. Electronics Letters.
2005;41(22):1213–1214. Oct.
Pellerin D., Taylor D. VHDL Made Easy. Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1997.
Peng Y., Lu L. A 16-GHz triple-modulus phase-switching
prescaler and its application to a 15-GHz frequency
synthesizer in 0.18um CMOS. IEEE Trans. on Microwave
Theory and Techniques. 2007;55(1):44–51. Jan.
Perry D.L., VHDL Programming by Example, 4th edition.
New York: McGraw Hill. 2002.
Pierret R. Semiconductor Device Fundamentals. Reading,
MA: Addison Wesley, 1996.
Rabaey J., Chandrakasan A., Nikolic D., Digital Integrated
Circuits: A Design Perspective, 2nd edition. Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 2003.
Reed I., Solomon G. Polynomial codes over certain finite
fields. SIAM Journal of Applied Mathematics. 1960;8:300–
304.
Sanduleanu M., et al. A 34 GHz 1V prescaler in 90 nm
CMOS SOI. Proc. of ESSCIRC. 2005:109–112. Grenoble
Shu K., Sanchez-Sinencio E. A 5 GHz prescaler using
improved phase switching. Int. Symp. on Circuits and
Systems (ISCAS). 2002:85–88. III
Shu K., Sanchez-Sinencio E. CMOS PLL Synthesizers
Analysis and Design. New York: Springer, 2005.
Navarro Soares J., Van Noije Wilhelmus. A 1.6 GHz dual-
modulus prescaler using the extended true-single-phase-clock
CMOS circuit technique (E-TSPC). IEEE Journal of Solid-
State Circuits. 1999;34(1):97–102. Jan.
Strollo A., Caro D. Low-power flip-flop with gating on
master and slaves latches. Electronics Letters.

--- Page 1211 ---
2000;36(4):294–295.
Strollo A., et al. A novel high-speed sense-amplifier-based
flip-flop. IEEE Trans. on Very Large Scale Integration
(VLSI) Systems. 2005;13(11):1266–1273. Nov.
Sze S.M., Semiconductor Devices Physics and Technology,
2nd edition. New York: Wiley. 2002.
Viterbi A.J. Error bounds for convolutional codes and an
asymptotically optimum decoding algorithm. IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory. 1967;13:260–269. April
Voss B., Glesner M. A low-power sinusoidal clock. IEEE Int.
Symp. on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS). 2001:108–111. IV
Wakerly J.F., Digital Design Principles and Practices, 4th
edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 2005.
Wang L., et al. Low power frequency dividers in SiGe:C
BiCMOS technology. Digest of Papers Topical Meeting on
Silicon Monolithic Integrated Circuits in RF Systems.
2006:357–360.
Weste N., Harris D., CMOS VLSI Design: A Circuit and
Systems Perspective, 3rd edition. Boston: Addison Wesley.
2005.
Widner A., Franaszek P. A DC-balanced, partitioned-block,
8B/10B transmission code. IBM Journal of Res. Develop..
1983;27(5):440–451. Sept.
Wohlmuth H., Kehrer D. A 24 GHz dual-modulus prescaler
in 90 nm CMOS. IEEE Int. Symp. on Circuits and Systems
(ISCAS). 2005:3227–3230.
Wolf W. Modern VLSI Design: System-on-Chip Design.
Upper Saddle River-NJ: Prentice Hall, 2002.
Xilinx CPLD and FPGA device descriptions, datasheets, and
application notes, available at www.xilin.com.
Yalamanchili S. Introductory VHDL from Simulation to
Synthesis. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2001.
Yamashina, et al. A low-supply voltage GHz MOS integrated
circuit for mobile computing systems. IEEE Symposium on
Low Power Electronics. 1994:80–81.
Yu X.P., Do M.A., Ma J.G., Yeo K.S. A new 5 GHz CMOS
dual-modulus prescaler. IEEE Int. Symp. on Circuits and
Systems (ISCAS). 2005:5027–5030.
Yuan J., Svensson C. High-speed CMOS circuits techniques.
IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits. 1989;24(1):62–70. Feb.

--- Page 1212 ---
Yuan J., Svensson C. New single-clock CMOS latches and
flip-flops with improved speed and power savings. IEEE J.
Solid-State Circuits. 1997;32(1):62–69. Jan.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 1213 ---
Index
10Base-T Ethernet interface, 134–135
100Base-TX Ethernet interface, 134–135
1000Base-T Ethernet interface, 134–135
4B/5B codes, 140–141
4D-PAM5 code, 143–148
6T SRAM cell, 326, 434
74/54-series parameters, 222–223, 228
8B/10B codes, 141–143
A
absolute-value comparator, 316
Absorption theorem, 105, 106, 120
abstraction, level of, 6
AC (alternating current) responses
AC current gain bipolar, 191
bipolar transistors, 191–192
Bode plots, 191–192, 209
introduction, 18
MOSFETs, 209
small-signal model bipolar, 191, 209
small-signal model MOSFET, 209
SPICE analysis, 622, 631–634
Transconductance bipolar, 191
Transconductance MOSFET, 209
acceptor-type dopant, 182, 198

--- Page 1214 ---
“Accidental Entrepreneur, The” (Moore), 2
accumulated (running) disparity and line codes, 142
active region, transistors, 184–185
adders
bit-serial adders, 300–301
carry-lookahead adders, 297–300, 540–543
carry-ripple adders, 291–292, 511–512, 539–
540
carry-select adders, 297
carry-skip adders, 296
decrementer, 303
fast adders, 293–300
full-adder units, 290–291
incrementer, 303
overview, 290
signed adders/subtractors, 301–303
signed and unsigned adders/subtractors,
VHDL, 543–544
VHDL testbench simulations of, 611–612,
614–615
addition
binary, 27–28
binary, vs. OR operation, 84
Boolean algebra, 103
floating-point, 59–61
MSB check for signed, 51
with N-bit inputs/(N+1)-bit output (signed),
51–52
with N-bit inputs/(N+1)-bit output
(unsigned), 49
with N-bit inputs/output (unsigned), 48
with N-bit inputs/output (signed), 50–51
overflow, 48–9, 50

--- Page 1215 ---
sign extension, 51–52
signed, 49–52
truth tables, 27–28, 48
unsigned, 47–49
additive scrambler-descrambler, 383–384
address decoders
described, 262–263
with enable, 264
large address decoders, 264–265
timing diagrams, 265–266
VHDL, 523–525
address encoders, 266–268
all-one detector, 95
all-zero detector, 95
ALMs (adaptive logic modules), 480–482
Altera CPLDs, 477–478
Altera Stratix III, 18–19
Altera website, 19, 492
ALU (arithmetic-logic unit)
algorithms for signed multiplication, 57
algorithms for unsigned division, 57
algorithms for unsigned multiplication, 55
combinational circuits, 306–307
unsigned/signed multipliers, 311–312
VHDL, 547–549
ALU-based unsigned/signed mutipliers, 311–312
analog- to-digital converter (A/DC), 4–5
analog vs. digital circuits, 4–5
AND function, 6, 103–105
AND gates, 8, 77–78, 258, 259
arithmetic, binary. See binary arithmetic
arithmetic circuits, 10
arithmetic operators, VHDL, 499

--- Page 1216 ---
arithmetic right shifter, 276
arithmetic shift
described, 52, 275
division using, 53
shifters, 275–277
array multiplier, 308, 653
array-based data types, 498
ASCII (American Standard Code for Information
Interchange)
described, 5–6, 35
extended ASCII, 36
assignment operators, VHDL, 498–499
asynchronous counters, 92, 368–371
0-to-5 counters, 370–371
downward, 92, 369
modulo-2N counters, 368–369
modulo-M counters, 369–371
T flip-flops, 346–347
upward, 92, 370
asynchronous scramblers-descramblers, 384–386
audio CD encoding, 159–161
concealing error bursts, 161
data frames, 160
disk (channel) bits, 161
frames, 161
information bits, 161
interleaving, 160
interpolation, 161
playing rates, 161
sampling rate, 161
sectors (blocks), 161
shortened RS codes, 160
subcoding bytes, 160

--- Page 1217 ---
track, 176
automated functional analysis, 602, 615
automated timing analysis, 602, 615
B
Bahl algorithm, 171
Bardeen, John, 1
barrel shifters, 275
base multilingual plane (BMP), 38
Basic Latin characters, 35, 37
Baugh-Wooley multiplier, modified, 56
BCD (binary-coded decimal) code, 25–26
BCD-to-SSD converter, 266–268, 525–527, 558–
560
Bell Laboratories (Murray Hill, New Jersey), 1–2,
183
BGA (ball grid array), 11, 12
BiCMOS (bipolar+CMOS)
logic, 232
technology, 211
binary arithmetic
binary addition, 27–28
Booth’s algorithm, 57, 312
division/multiplication with shift operators,
53–54
floating-point addition/subtraction, 59–61
floating-point multiplication/division, 61–62
majority functions, 47, 274
modified Baugh-Wooley multiplier, 56
odd parity function, 47, 81
overflow, 48–9, 50
shift operations, 52–54

--- Page 1218 ---
sign extension, 29–30, 51–52
signed addition/subtraction, 49–52
signed multiplication/division, 56–59
unsigned addition, 47–49
unsigned division, 57–58
unsigned multiplication, 54–55
binary functions, 6, 8
binary representations. See also line codes, error-
detecting/correcting codes
ASCII code, 35–36
BCD code, 25–26
binary code, 21–23, 25
bits, bytes, and words, 5–6
decimal-to-binary conversion, 22–23
decimal-to-binary example, 23
floating-point representation, 30–35
Gray code, 24
hexadecimal-to-decimal example, 24
for integers, 21–26
for negative integers, 26–30
IEEE 754, 30–35
number system examples, 25–26
octal and hexadecimal codes, 24
one-hot, 518
one’s complement code, 26–27
for real numbers, 30–35
sequential binary code, 21, 518
signed/unsigned decimals example, 29
sign-magnitude code, 26
two’s complement code, 28–30, 50
Unicode, 36–39
unit-distance code, 24
binary (bit) sorter, 274–275

--- Page 1219 ---
binary symbols, 21
binary waveforms, 15–16
biphase/Manchester codes, 139–140
bipolar codes, 139
bipolar transistors. See BJTs
bipolar+CMOS. See BiCMOS
bit (binary) sorter, 274–275
bit vectors, 5, 21
bits, 5, 21
bit-serial adders, 300–301
BJTs (bipolar junction transistors), 183–184
AC responses, 18, 191–192
compared to MOSFETs, 198
concepts, 2, 10–11
construction, 183
DC responses, 17, 185–189
DLT, 220–221
ECL, 225–226
HBT, 193–194
I-V characteristics, 184–185
load line, 185–187
logic families, 219–220
pnp/npn transistors, 183
polysilicon-emitter BJT, 192–193
pseudo-morphic materials, 194
saturation, 184–187
with Schottky (clamp) diode, 189–190
semiconductors, 181–182
transient responses, 17–18, 189–191
transition frequency, 190, 191–192
TTL, 221–225
block interleaver, 162
Bode plots, 191–192, 209

--- Page 1220 ---
Boole, George, 103
Boolean algebra
Absorption theorem, 105, 106, 120
Common-term theorem, 105, 106
concepts, 103–105
Consensus theorem, 105
DeMorgan’s law, 105, 106
AND function, 103–105
Karnaugh maps, 117–120
large Karnaugh maps, 120–121
maxterms and POS equations, 110–112
minterms and SOP equations, 108–110
OR function, 103–104
principle of duality, 105, 106–107, 112–113
propagation delays and glitches, 123–124
Quine-McCluskey algorithm, 121–122
Shannon’s theorem, 105, 106
simplification algorithms, 123
standard circuits for SOP and POS
equations, 112–117
symbols for operations, 103
truth tables, 108
Booth’s algorithm, 57, 312
borrow and signed subtraction, 49
Brattain, Walter, 1
break code and SPC codes, 154
breakpoints, inserting in simulations, 661
belief-propagation algorithms, 173
BSIMs (Berkeley Short-channel IGFET models),
SPICE, 628
buffer logic gates, 8
buffers, 84–85, 258, 259
buffered multiplexers, VHDL, 494–495

--- Page 1221 ---
open-drain, 86–87
regular, 84–85
timing diagrams, 76–77
tri-state, 85–86, 258, 259
burst error-correcting codes, 159
bus drivers (circuits), 85, 86
bypassing carry circuit, 296
bytes, 5
C
C2MOS flip flops, 333, 334
C2MOS latches, 324, 328
California Institute of Technology, 2
CAM (content-addressable memory) for cache
memories, 446–447
capacitive power consumption, 73
car alarms
basic alarm, 578–581
with debounced inputs, 581–583
with debounced inputs and ON/OFF chirps,
583–587
FSM approach, 430
carry and binary addition, 27, 47–48
carry delay, 296
carry-lookahead adders, 297–300, 540–543
carry-ripple adders, 291–292, 511–512, 539–540
carry-select adders, 297
carry-skip (carry-bypass) adders, 296
CASE statement, VHDL, 504
CCFF flip flops, 333, 343
CDs and RS codes, 159–161
channels

--- Page 1222 ---
MOSFET construction, 199
n-channel MOS, 69–71, 199
p-channel MOS, 69–71, 199
width-to-length ratio, 199
CIRC (cross-interleaved Reed-Solomon code), 160
circuit responses
AC responses, 18, 191–192, 209
concepts, 16
DC responses, 17, 185–189, 202–205
transient response, 17–18, 189–191
circuits, digital. See also combinational arithmetic
circuits; See also combinational logic circuits; See
also sequential circuits
analog circuits vs., 4–5
combinational vs. sequential, 10
concepts, 6–9
integrated circuits, 10–11
simulation with SPICE, 19–20, 621–622
for SOP and POS equations, 112–117
circular right shifter, 276
circular shift (rotation)
described, 53, 275
shifters, 275–277
circular timers, 376–377
CLB (configurable logic block), 479–80
clock dividers, VHDL testbench simulations, 608–
611, 613–614, 616–617
clock gating, 343
clock generators, 5, 277–278
clock management and FPGAs, 483–485
clock signals, 9
clock skew, 277–278, 333–335
clock transitions, slow, 334–335

--- Page 1223 ---
clocked registers, 9
clocked-CMOS (C2MOS) logic, 234
CML (current-mode logic), 225
CMOS (complementary MOS)
BiCMOS logic, 232
circuits, 227
clocked-CMOS logic, 234
CMOS-TTL interface, 228
concepts, 10–11, 71
fan-in/fan-out, 229
HC/HCT CMOS families, 227–228
inverter logic, 72–73, 206
I/O standards, 237
low-voltage CMOS, 229–230
noise margins, 229
physical vs. logic values, 14
power consumption, 73–74, 230
power-delay product, 230
supply voltage/signal voltages, 229, 236–240
transmission-gate logic, 231–232, 259
code spectrum, line codes, 135–136
codes. See binary representations; See also error
detecting/correcting; See also line codes
combinational arithmetic circuits
ALU-based unsigned/signed multipliers,
311–312
ALUs, 306–307, 547–549
arithmetic-logic unit, 547–549
bit-serial adders, 300–301
carry-lookahead adders, 297–300, 540–543
carry-ripple adders, 291–292, 539–540
carry-select adders, 297
carry-skip adders, 296

--- Page 1224 ---
vs. combinational logic circuits, 258, 289
comparators, 304–305
decrementer, 303, 304
dividers, 312
fast adders, 293–300
fast adders, approaches for, 294–295
faster carry propagation, 295
four-bit carry-lookahead circuit, 299–300
full-adders units, 290–291
generate, propagate, and kill signals, 293–
294
incrementer, 303, 304
Manchester carry-chain adders, 295–296
multibit adders, 291–292
multipliers, 307–312
parallel signed multipliers, 309
parallel unsigned multipliers, 308–309
parallel-serial multiplier functional analysis,
310
parallel-serial multiplier timing analysis,
310–311
parallel-serial unsigned multipliers, 309–311
signed adders/subtractors, 301–303
signed and unsigned adders/subtractors,
543–544
signed and unsigned multipliers/dividers,
545–546
signed vs. unsigned adders, 301
signed/unsigned addition, 292
subtractors, 301–303
two’s complementer, 303–304
combinational logic circuits. See also combinational
arithmetic circuits; See also sequential circuits

--- Page 1225 ---
address decoders, 262–263
address decoders with enable, 264
address encoders, 266–268
BCD-to-SSD converter, VHDL, 525–527,
558–560
binary sorter, 274–275
vs. combinational arithmetic circuits, 258,
289
compound gates, 259–262
described, 87
generic address decoder, VHDL, 523–525
generic multiplexer, VHDL, 527–528
generic priority encoder, VHDL, 529
large address decoders, 264–265
majority/median functions, 47, 274–275
memories, 280
multiplexers, 268–272
nonoverlapping clock generators, 277–278
parallel logic translators, 262
parity detectors, 272
POS-based CMOS circuit, 260–262
priority encoders, 272–274
propagation delays and glitches, 123–124
ROM design, VHDL, 530–532
Schmitt triggers, 279–280
vs. sequential circuits, 10, 257–258
shifters, 275–277
short-pulse generators, 278
SOP-based CMOS circuit, 260
standard circuits for SOP and POS
equations, 112–117
synchronous RAM design, VHDL, 532–535
system resolution and glitches, 410–411

--- Page 1226 ---
timing diagrams, 75–77, 78–79, 265–266
commercial temperature range, TTL chips, 222
common-cathode SSDs, 525, 558
common-emitter circuits, DC response examples,
186–189
common-source circuit, 202–203
Common-term theorem, 105, 106
compact MOS models, SPICE, 627, 628
comparators, 304–305
comparison operators, VHDL, 500
compiling simulations, 659, 665–666
complementary MOS. See CMOS
compound gates, 259–262
compressive strain, 211
concatenated RSV (Reed-Solomon-Viterbi) decoder,
167
concatenation operators, VHDL, 499
concurrent code, VHDL, 493–494, 501–503
conditional capture, 343–344
Consensus theorem, 105
CONSTANT object, VHDL, 506–507
constraint length and convolutional codes, 163
contamination delays
D-type flip-flops, 330–331
D-type latches, 322–323
continuous-valued signals, 4
control characters, 35, 37
control ports, DFFs, 344–345
convolutional codes, 163–167
constraint length, 163
decoders, 167
FSM model, 164–166
minimum free distance, 165

--- Page 1227 ---
serial bits, 163
transitions, 165
trellis diagrams, 165–166
Voyager spacecraft implementation, 164
Viterbi decoder, 167–169
correcting errors. See also error detecting/correcting
concepts, 153–154
convolutional codes, 163–167
Hamming codes, 156–159
low density parity check codes, 171–174
Reed-Solomon codes, 159–161
turbo codes, 170–171
Viterbi decoder, 167–169
counters
asynchronous. See asynchronous counters
design techniques, 399
downward asynchronous, 92–93, 368–369,
655
D-type flip-flops, 91–93, 357–358, 362–364
FSM synchronous 0-to-7counter, 402–404
FSM synchronous 3-to-9 counter, 404–406
FSM synchronous Gray-encoded counter,
425–426
FSM synchronous one-hot encoded counter,
424–425
full-scale/partial-scale, 91, 355
introduction, 91
partial-scale, 91
synchronous. See synchronous counters
VHDL, 508–509
CPLDs (complex programmable logic devices)
Altera, 477–478
architecture, 471–475

--- Page 1228 ---
concepts, 15, 18–19
Xilinx, 475–77
cutoff region, transistors, 184–185
CVSL (cascode voltage switch logic) latches, 324,
326, 328
cyclic Hamming codes, 159
cyclic redundancy check (CRC) codes, 155–156
D
data frames and RS codes, 160
data types, VHDL, 496–498
data-stable requirements
D-type flip-flops, 330–331
D-type latches, 322–323
DC component, line codes, 135
DC (direct current) responses
bipolar transistors, 185–189
introduction, 17
MOSFETs, 202–205
SPICE analysis, 622, 630–631
DCCER flip flops, 333, 343
decimal conversion to binary, 22–23
decimal range
binary code, 22
one’s complement code, 27
sign-magnitude code, 26
decoders (combinational circuits)
address decoders, 262–263
address decoders with enable, 264
generic address decoder, VHDL, 523–525
large address decoders, 264–265
seven-segment display, 266–268

--- Page 1229 ---
decoders
bipolar codes, 139
concatenated RSV, 167
convolutional codes, 167
cyclic redundancy check codes, 155–156
error detecting/correcting concepts, 153–154
Fano algorithm, 167
Hamming codes, 158–159
line codes, 133–136.See also specific line
codes
low density parity check codes, 171–174
mB/nB codes, 140–143
MLT codes, 140
PAM codes, 143–148
polar codes, 138–139
Reed-Solomon codes, 159–161
sequential, 167
single parity check codes, 154–155
turbo codes, 170–171
unipolar codes, 137–138
Viterbi decoder, 167–169
decrementer, 303, 304
degenerate truth tables, 108
delays. See also propagation delays
carry delay, 296
transient responses, 17–18, 189–191
DeMorgan’s law, 105, 106
deracer, 331, 340, 342
descramblers. See scramblers/descramblers
Design Compiler RTL Synthesis (Synopsys), 492
design file, VHDL, 601–602, 613
DESPFF flip flops, 333, 342, 343
detecting errors. See error detecting/correcting

--- Page 1230 ---
DE/TG-C2MOS flip flops, 333, 342
DFFs. See D-type flip-flops
differential amplifier, 240
differential Manchester codes, 140
digital circuits. See circuits, digital
digital logic families, 219. See also logic families
digital-to-analog converter (D/AC), 4
diode-resistor (DR) circuit, SPICE simulation, 638–
639, 646–647
DIP (dual in-line package), 11, 12
directories for simulations, 664–665
discrete states (digital), 4
discrete-valued signals, 4
disk (channel) bits, audio CD encoding, 161
displays. See LCDs; See also SSDs
divide-by-5 with symmetric phase FSM, 422–423
dividers
combinational arithmetic circuits, 312
frequency, 374–377
divine proportion, 561
division
as addition/subtraction plus shift operations,
58
ALU-based algorithms, 57–58
floating-point, 62
signed division, 58–59
unsigned, 57–58
using arithmetic shift, 53
using logical shift, 53
DLs. See D-type latches
DLT (diode-transistor logic), 220–221
DC response example, 188–189
junction voltage, 220

--- Page 1231 ---
short/open circuits, 220
domino logic, 233–234, 262
donor-type dopant, 181, 197
“don’t care” values
Karnaugh maps, 119
truth tables, 108
doping/dopants, semiconductors, 2, 181–182, 197–
198
double-precision floating-point, 31–32, 59
downward asynchronous counters, 92–93, 368–369,
655
drain, MOSFETs, 198
DRAM (dynamic random access memory)
chip architecture, 440–441
circuits, 439
memory-read, 439–440
memory-write, 440
refresh, 441
sense amplifier, 441–442
drivers, 85
DSETL flip flops, 333, 340, 341
DSP (digital signal processing) blocks, 482–483
DSPFF flip flops, 333, 342, 343
DSTC flip flops, 333, 336, 337
DSTC1/2 latches, 324, 328
DTG flip flops, 333, 334
DTG1/2 latches, 324, 327, 328
D-type flip-flops (DFFs)
with clear, 345
concepts, 9, 87–89
construction approaches, 331–332
contamination delays, 330–331
control ports, 344–345

--- Page 1232 ---
counters, 91–93, 355–371
data-stable requirements, 330–331
dual-edge D flip-flops, 342–343
with enable, 345
frequency divider, 9, 89
functional analysis, 329–330
list of, 333
master-slave DFFs, 331, 332–338
with NAND gates, 88
operation, 329–330
positive/negative-edge triggered, 87–88, 89,
329–330
propagation delays, 330–331
pseudo-random sequence generator, 93–94,
381–383
pulse-based/latched, 332, 338–342
with reset and preset, 344–345
semidynamic, 337, 341
shift registers, 89–90, 553–556
SPICE simulation, 648–650
statistically low-power DFFs, 343–344
symbol and truth table, 9, 87
synchronous modulo-2N counters, 357–358
synchronous modulo-M counters, 362–364
time-related parameters, 330–331
timing diagram, 88, 331
VHDL flip-flop inference, 508–509
D-type latches (DLs)
cascode voltage switch logic, 325, 326
clocked-CMOS logic, 234
contamination delays, 322–323
data-stable requirements, 322–323
dynamic DLs, 327–329

--- Page 1233 ---
functional analysis, 322
list of, 324
operation, 320–322
positive/negative, 321
propagation delays, 322–323
SPICE simulation, 642–644
static current-mode, 327
static multiplexer-based, 324–325
static RAM-type, 326–327
static ratio insensitive, 325, 326
time-related parameters, 322–323
timing analysis, 323
dual data rate (DDR) SDRAMs, 444–445
dual data rate (DDR) SRAMs, 438–439
dual-edge D flip-flops, 342–343
duality principle, 105, 106–107
converting to NAND-only circuits, 112–113
dual-modulus prescaler, 379–380
DUT (design under test), 601–603. See also
simulation with VHDL
duty cycles, 15–16
DVDs and RS codes, 159–161
dynamic D-type latches (DLs), 323, 324, 327–329
dynamic logic, 232–233
dynamic MOS architectures, 232–234
dynamic power consumption, 73
dynamic random access memory. See DRAM
E
ECL (emitter-coupled logic), 225–226
ECL flip flops, 333, 336, 338
ECL latches, 324, 325, 327, 336

--- Page 1234 ---
EDA (electronic design automation) tools, 492
EEPROM (electrically programmable ROM), 455–
456
effective mobility, MOSFETs, 202
encoders
biphase/Manchester codes, 139–140
bipolar codes, 139
convolutional codes, 163–167
cyclic redundancy check codes, 155–156
error detecting/correcting concepts, 153–154
Hamming codes, 158–159
line codes concepts, 133–136
low density parity check codes, 171–174
mB/nB codes, 140–143
MLT codes, 140
NRC, 170
PAM codes, 143–148
polar codes, 138–139
Reed-Solomon codes, 159–161
RSC, 171
single parity check codes, 154–155
turbo codes, 170–171
unipolar codes, 137–138
Viterbi decoder, 167–169
encoders, combinational circuits
address encoders, 266–268
priority encoders, 272–274
encoding scheme, VHDL, 518
encoding styles, FSMs, 423–426
Encounter RTL (Cadence), 492
energy recovery, 343–344
entity, VHDL, 493
enumerated data types, 498

--- Page 1235 ---
EPROM (electrically programmable ROM), 453–
455
EP/TG-C2MOS flip flops, 333, 339, 340
equivalent circuits, Boolean algebra, 107
error detecting/correcting
audio CD encoding, 159–161
burst codes, 159
CIRC, 160
codes, concepts, 153–154
convolutional codes, 163–167
cyclic redundancy check (CRC) codes, 155–
156
Hamming codes, 156–159
interleaving, 161–162
low density parity check (LDPC) codes,
171–174
nonsystematic codes, 157
parity-check equations, 155, 157–158, 172
Reed-Solomon codes, 159–161
single parity check (SPC) codes, 154–155
systematic codes, 154
turbo codes, 170–171
Viterbi decoder, 167–169
Ethernet applications, 134–135
ETOX flash memory, 456–458
E-TSPC flip flops, 333, 335, 336, 337
Euclidean distances, 144–146
evaluation/precharge phases, dynamic logic, 232
even parity, 82, 287
event-related attributes, VHDL, 501
explicit-pulsed (EP), 339
extension, sign, 29–30, 51–52

--- Page 1236 ---
F
Fairchild Camera, 2–3
Fairchild Semiconductor, 2–3
fall time, 17, 190
fan-in/fan-out, 224, 229
Fano algorithm, 167
fast adders, 293–300
approaches for, 294–295
carry-lookahead adders, 297–300, 540–543
carry-select adders, 297
carry-skip adders, 296
four-bit carry-lookahead circuit, 299–300
generate, propagate, and kill signals, 293–
294
Manchester carry-chain adders, 295–296
faster carry propagation/generation, 295
FBGA (fine-pitch ball grid array), 11, 12
FBGA Flip-Chip, 11, 12
Fibonacci, Leonardo, 561
Fibonacci series generators, 561–562
field programmable gate arrays. See FPGAs
field-effect transistor. See MOSFETs
finite state machines. See FSMs; See also state
machines
fixed ions and semiconductors, 181, 197
flash memory
ETOX cells, 456–457
ETOX programming, 457–458
multibit, 460–461
NOR vs. NAND, 459–460, 461
SONOS cells, 458
specifications, 461

--- Page 1237 ---
split-gate cells, 458
flip-flops
DFFs. See D-type flip-flops
JK flip-flop, 319, 348
SR flip-flop, 319, 348
T flip-flops, 345–347
types of, 87
floating-point (FP) operations, 59–62
floating-point (FP) representation
biased/actual exponent, 30–31, 59
conversion examples, 32–33
double-precision floating-point, 31–32, 59
hypothetical floating-point system, 34–35
IEEE 754 standard, 30–33, 59
vs. integer, 33–35
normalized scientific notation, 30–31
precision, 33
single-precision floating-point, 30–33, 59
footed dynamic logic, 233
Fourier analysis, 622
FPGA Advantage (Mentor Graphics), 492
FPGAs (field programmable gate arrays)
additional features, 485
architecture, 479–480
clock management, 483–485
concepts, 15, 18–19
DSP blocks, 482–483
I/O standards, 485
RAM blocks, 481–482
Stratix LAB and ALM, 481
summary and comparison, 485–486
technology, 478–479
Virtex CLB and Slice, 480

--- Page 1238 ---
FR-4 (flame resistant category 4), 13
FRAM (ferroelectric RAM), 462–463
frames, audio CD encoding, 161
free charge and semiconductors, 181, 197
free hole and semiconductors, 182, 198
frequency dividers
circuits with multiple dividers, 376–377
divide-by-2N, 374
divide-by-9 with symmetric phase, 375–376
divide-by-M with symmetric phase, 374–376
D-type flip-flops, 89
introduction, 9, 374
prescalers, 377, 379–381
symmetric-phase design, 421–423
timers, 376–377
frequency meters, 562–565
frequency response, 191, 209, 622, 634, 644
FSMs (finite state machines)
basic FSM, 399–01, 518–519
car alarm, VHDL, 578–587
circuit with synchronized machines, 418–
419
with complex combinational logic, 414–416
convolutional codes, 164–166
counter 0-to-7, 402–404
counter 3-to-9, 404–406
counter Gray-encoded, 425–426
counter one-hot encoded, 424–425
design techniques, 399
divide-by-5 with symmetric phase, 422–423
encoding styles, 423–426
generic signal generator design technique,
419–421

--- Page 1239 ---
Gray encoding, 424, 425–426
large FSM design, 411–414
large-window signal generator, 412–414
LCD driver, VHDL, 588–597
Mealy vs. Moore machines, 399
model, 397–399
multi-machine designs, 417–419
one-hot encoding, 424–425
pulse width modulator, 415–416
sequential binary encoding, 423–424
signal generators, 408–410, 412–414
smallest and simplest FSM, 401–402
state transition diagram, 164, 397, 516
string detectors, 406–408
string detectors, VHDL, 573–575
symmetric-phase frequency dividers, 421–
423
synchronism, 417
synchronous 3-to-9 counter, 404–406
system resolution and glitches, 410–411
two-hot encoding, 424
“universal” signal generator, VHDL, 575–
578
VHDL template, 516–519
full-adder (FA) units, 290–291
full-bench timing analysis, 602, 615
full-scale counters, 91, 355
functional timing diagrams, 75
functions
Boolean, 103–105
VHDL, 513–514
G

--- Page 1240 ---
GaAs (gallium arsenide), 2, 182, 198
GaAs-AlGaAs HBT, 193–194
GAL (generic PAL) devices, 471
Gallager, Robert, 171
garage door controller, 430–431
gates
Boolean functions, 103–104
buffer logic gates, 8
compound, and combinational logic circuits,
259–262
digital, described, 8
gate-level digital circuits, 6–7
gate-level vs. transistor-level analysis, 20
AND gates, 8, 77–78, 258, 259
MOSFETs, 200
NAND gates, 8, 77–78, 258
NOR gates, 8, 79–80, 259
OR gates, 8, 79–80, 259
XOR gates, 8, 81–83, 259
Gauss-Jordan transformation, 158
GCFF flip flops, 333, 343
Ge (germanium), 2, 182, 198
GENERATE statement. VHDL, 502–503
generator matrix, 158
generator polynomial and CRC codes, 155–156
GENERIC MAP declaration, VHDL, 512
GF-TSPC flip flops, 333, 336, 337
glitches
propagation delays, 123–124
system resolution, 411
golden ratio, 561
Gray code, 24, 25
Gray encoding for FSMs, 424, 425–426

--- Page 1241 ---
Greek numbers, 37
group generate/propagate, 294, 298
Grove-Frohman MOSFET model, SPICE, 628
H
Hamming codes, 156–159
encoding-decoding procedure, 158–159
generator matrix, 158
minimum Hamming distance, 157
parity-check equations, 157–158
parity-check matrix, 158
rate, 157
syndrome decoding procedure, 158–159
systematic/nonsystematic codes, 157
Hamming distances, 146
hard decisions
LDPC decoders, 168
Viterbi decoders, 168
hardware description language, 19, 492
hardware programmable ICs, 15, 18–19
HBT (heterojunction bipolar transistor), 193–194
HC/HCT CMOS families, 227–228
HD44780U (Hitachi) LCD controller, 588–591
hexadecimal code, 24, 25–26
hexadecimal-to-decimal example, 24
high-to-low propagation delays, 17, 123–124
HLFF/Partovi flip flops, 333, 339, 340, 341
HSpice (Synopsys), 621. See also simulation with
SPICE
HSTL (high-speed transceiver logic) standards, 244
I

--- Page 1242 ---
IEEE 754 standard, 30–33, 59
ieee library, 496
IF statement, VHDL, 504
implementation complexity, line codes, 136
implicants and SOP, 109
implicit-pulsed (IP), 339
inactivity factor, 392, 563
incrementer, 303, 304
independent DC/AC sources, SPICE, 630–634
industrial temperature range, TTL chips, 222
input/output. See I/O standards
integers
codes for, 21–26
floating-point vs., 33–35
negative, binary representation, 26–30
VHDL data types, 496–498
integrated circuits (ICs)
concepts, 10–11
examples, 12
levels of abstraction, 7
programmability, 15
Intel Corporation, historical notes, 3
Intel PCI Express, 246–247
interleaving, 161–162
audio CD encoding, 160
block interleaver, 162
compared to scrambling, 162
pseudo-random interleaver, 162
interpolation, 161
inversion functions, 6, 8, 103
inverted logic, 8, 267, 284
inverters, 8
Boolean functions, 103–104

--- Page 1243 ---
DC response, 186–189
nMOS/pMOS operation, 70, 216, 217
summary, 258, 259
inverters, CMOS
CMOS logic, 72–73, 206
concepts, 258, 259
function and properties, 71–72
logic voltages, 75
MOSFETs, 205–207
n-well, 205
parameters, 206–207
power consumption, 73–74
power-delay product, 74–75, 208
SPICE simulation, 639–642
switching frequency, 74
symbol and truth table, 72
timing diagrams for combinational circuits,
75–77, 78–79
transition voltage, 206
I/O buses and synchronous RAM design, VHDL,
532–535
I/O standards
CMOS, 237
compared to logic families, 235
concepts, 235–236
differential, 235–236
HSTL, 244
LVCMOS, 237–240
LVDS, 244–247
LVTTL, 236–237
single-ended, 235–236
single-ended voltage-referenced terminated,
235–236

--- Page 1244 ---
SSTL, 240–244
TTL, 236
IP-SRAM flip flops, 333, 342
irreducible SOP/POS. See POS; See also SOP
irregular waveforms for simulations, 603–605
irregular/regular LDPC codes, 171
ISE (Xilinx), 492
Itanium-based flip flops, 333, 340, 341
I-V characteristics for bipolar transistors, 184–185
collector signals, 184
cutoff/active/saturation regions, 184–185
I-V characteristics for MOSFETs, 201–202
effective mobility, 202
saturation curve, 201–202
saturation/linear/subthreshold regions, 201
J
jamb latch, 324, 325, 326
JEDEC standards
CMOS and LVCMOS, 237–240
HSTL, 244
SSTL, 240–244
TTL and LVTTL, 236
JK flip-flop, 319, 348
junction voltage, diodes, 220
K
K6 flip flops, 333, 340, 341
Karnaugh maps
Absorption theorem, 120
described, 117

--- Page 1245 ---
essential implicants, 118
large maps, 120–121
minimum (irreducible) SOP, 119
prime implicants, 118
truth tables, 117, 121
for zeros, 120
Kilby, Jack, 3
kill signals, 293–294
KS0066U (Samsung) LCD controller, 588–591
L
lanes, PCIe, 247
latches
DL circuits, 323–324
DL operation, 320–322
dynamic DLs, 327–329
SR latch, 320
static current-mode DLs, 327
static multiplexer-based DLs, 324–325
static RAM-type DLs, 326–327
time-related parameters, 322–323
types of, 87
layers
pseudo three-layer circuit, 81
two-layer circuit, 80
LCDs (liquid crystal displays)
controllers, 588–591
SSD decoders, 266–268, 525–527, 558–560
with “VH” and “DL” in two lines, 597
with “VHDL” blinking, 595–597
with “VHDL” written in first line, 591–595
LDPC. See low density parity check (LDPC) codes

--- Page 1246 ---
leading zeros, VHDL, 505–506
least significant bit (LSB), 5, 21
LEDs (light emitting diodes), 266
Leonardo Spectrum (Mentor Graphics), 492
level-sensitive memory circuits, 320
libraries, VHDL
declarations, 492
ieee library, 496
packages, 495–496
std library, 495
line codes. See also binary representations
4B/5B, 134, 140–141
8B/10B, 141–143
4D-PAM5, 134, 143–148
biphase/Manchester codes, 139–140
bipolar codes, 139
code spectrum, 135–136
concepts, 134
convolutional encoding, 146
DC component, 135
encoder-decoder pair, 134
Ethernet applications, 134–135
Euclidean distances, 144–146
Hamming distances, 146
implementation complexity, 136
Manchester, 139–140
maximum run length, 136
mB/nB codes, 140–143
MLT codes, 140
PAM codes, 143–148
parameters and types of, 135–137
parity bits, 144, 146–147
polar codes, 138–139

--- Page 1247 ---
sublattices, 146
transition density, 136
types of, 136–137
unipolar codes, 137–138
use of, 133
line drivers, 85
linear region, MOSFETs, 201 linear-feedback shift
register (LFSR), 93–94, 381–383
load line, 185–187, 202, 204–205
logic families
BiCMOS logic, 232
BJT-based, concepts, 219–220
clocked-CMOS logic, 234
CMOS logic, 227–230
CMOS-TTL interface, 228
compared to I/O standards, 235
diode-transistor logic, 220–221
domino logic, 233–234, 262
dynamic logic, 232–233
dynamic MOS architectures, 232–234
emitter-coupled logic, 225–226
HC/HCT CMOS families, 227–228
MOS-based, 226–227
pseudo-nMOS logic, 230–231, 262
static MOS architectures, 230–232
transmission-gate logic, 231–232
TTL, 221–225
logic gates
compound gates, 259–262
concepts and circuits, 258, 259
introduction, 7–8
logic vs. physical values, 13–14
logical circuits, 10

--- Page 1248 ---
logical operators, VHDL, 499
logical right rotator, 287
logical shift
described, 52, 275
division using, 53
multiplication using, 53–54, 55
shifters, 275–277
long words, 5
LOOP statement, VHDL, 505
low density parity check (LDPC) codes, 171–174
4-pass cycles (short cycles), 172
brief-propagation algorithms, 173
combinational designs, 173
decoding algorithms, 173
hard/soft decisions, 173
information passing, 173
logarithms, 173
majority functions, 173
message-passing algorithms, 173
parity-check matrix, 171
parity-check sparcity, 171
probabilities, 173
random designs, 173
regular/irregular code, 171
sum-product algorithms, 173
Tanner graphs, 172
low-to-high propagation delays, 17, 123–124
low-voltage CMOS, 229–230
I/O standards, 237–240
low-voltage TTL (LVTTL), 236–237
LQFP (low-profile quad flat pack), 11, 12
LVCMOS (low-voltage CMOS), 75

--- Page 1249 ---
LVDS (low-voltage differential signaling) standards,
244–247
M-LVDS, 246
operating modes, 246
PCI Express bus example, 246–247
M
majority functions
binary arithmetic, 47
binary sorter example, 274–275
full-adder units, 290
LDPC codes, 173
make code and SPC codes, 154–155
Manchester carry-chain adders, 295–296
Manchester codes, 139–140
master-slave D flip-flops, 331, 332–338
classical implementations, 332–334
clock skew and slow clock transitions, 334–
335
high-performance, 335–338
maxterms
defined, 110
expansion and irreducible POS, 111–112
expansion, defined, 111
and minterms, 111
POS equations, 110–112
truth tables for maxterm expansion, 112
mB/nB codes, 140–143
4B/5B codes, 140–141
8B/10B codes, 141–143
running disparity, 142
Mealy machines, 399

--- Page 1250 ---
median functions, 47, 274–275
memories
CAM for cache memories, 446–447
combinational logic circuits, 280
digital circuits, 8–9, 10
DRAM, 439–442
dual and quad data rate SRAMs, 438–439
dual data rate SDRAMs, 444–445
EEPROM, 455–456
EPROM, 453–455
flash, 456–61
FRAM, 462–463
MP-ROM, 452–453
MRAM, 463–464
next-generation nonvolatile, 461–465
nonvolatile, 451–465
OTP-ROM, 453
PRAM, 464–465
RAM blocks and FPGAs, 481–482
ROM design, VHDL, 530–532
SDRAM, 442–444
SRAM, 434–437
synchronous RAM design, VHDL, 532–535
types of, 433–434, 451–452
Viterbi decoder, 168
volatile, 433–447
message-passing algorithms, 173
military temperature range, TTL chips, 222
minimum Hamming distance, 157, 165
minterms
defined, 108
expansion and irreducible SOP, 110

--- Page 1251 ---
expansion and Quine-McCluskey algorithm,
122
expansion, defined, 109
and maxterms, 111
prime implicants, 109
SOP equations, 108–110
truth tables for minterm expansion, 109, 110
MLT (multilevel transition) codes, 140
MLT-3 codes, 140
M-LVDS (multipoint LVDS), 246
ModelSim (Mentor Graphics), 19, 492
creating new projects, 664–666
simulation procedure, 657–663
tutorial, 657–666
ModelSim-Altera Web Edition, 492
modular circuit, binary sorter, 274
modulo-2 adders, 83–84
N-bit parity function, 83
XOR gate, 83
modulo-2 addition, 47
monotonicity condition, 233
Monte Carlo analysis, SPICE, 623, 645–647
Moore, Gordon, 2–3
Moore machines, 399
MOS transistors. See MOSFETs
MOS-based architectures
BiCMOS logic, 232
clocked-CMOS logic, 234
CMOS logic, 227–230
concepts, 226–227
domino logic, 233–234, 262
dynamic architectures, 232–234
dynamic logic, 232–233

--- Page 1252 ---
pseudo-nMOS logic, 230–231, 262
static architectures, 230–232
transmission-gate logic, 231–232, 259
MOSFETs (metal oxide semiconductor field effect
transistors)
advantages, compared to BJTs, 198
BiCMOS technologies, 211, 232
channel width-to-length ratio, 199
CMOS inverter, 205–207
common-source circuit, 202–203
compressive strain, 211
construction, 198–199
DC responses, 202–205
effective mobility, 120
introduction, 10–11, 69–71
I-V characteristics, 201–202
load line, 202, 204–205
logic. See logic families
negative/positive charges, 199
nMOS, 69–71
operation, 200
pMOS, 69–71
semiconductors, 197–198
SOI MOSFETs, 211
SPICE models, 627–630
strained layers, 210
strained Si-SiGe MOSFETs, 210–211
tensile strain, 211
threshold voltage, 200
transient responses, 207–208
transition frequency, 209
most significant bit (MSB), 5, 21

--- Page 1253 ---
MP-ROM (mask-programmed read only memory),
452–453
MRAM (magnetoresistive RAM), 463–464
MSB reflected code, 24, 425
multibit adders, 291–292
multibit flash, 460–61
multibit waveforms for simulations, 603, 605
multidrop LVDS, 246
multiplexers, 268–272
basic, 269–270
buffered, VHDL, 494–495
with larger inputs, 270–271
with more inputs, 271
mux-based dual-edge D flip-flops, 333, 342
NAND-based, 269–270
static multiplexer-based DLs, 324–325
timing diagrams, 271–272
VHDL, 527–528
multiplication
as addition plus shift operations, 55, 57
ALU-based algorithms, 55, 57
Boolean algebra, 103
Booth’s algorithm, 57, 312
floating-point, 61–62
modified Baugh-Wooley multiplier, 56
signed, 56–57
unsigned, 54–55
using logical shift, 53–54, 55
using logical shift and wider output, 54
multiplicative scrambler-descrambler, 384–386
multipoint LVDS, 246
mutipliers, 307–312
ALU-based unsigned/signed, 311–312

--- Page 1254 ---
parallel-serial, functional analysis, 310
parallel-serial, timing analysis, 310–311
parallel-serial unsigned, 309–311
signed parallel, 309
unsigned parallel, 308–309
mux. See multiplexers
N
NAND gates, 8, 77–78, 258
Boolean functions, 103–104
CMOS circuit, 78
concepts, 259
DFF implementation, 88
NAND latches, 321, 324, 325
NAND-only circuits, 112–113, 115–117
NASA and Voyager spacecraft, 164
N-bit parity function, 83
n-channel MOS, 69–71, 199
negation functions, 6
negative integers, binary representation, 26–30
negative-level DLs, 321
neural networks (NNs), 565–571
implementations, 566–567
VHDL code, 567–571
nibbles, 5
nMOS inverters, 70, 216, 217
nMOS transistors, 69–71
Nobel Prize in Physics, 2, 3
noise analysis, SPICE, 623
noise margins
CMOS logic, 229
high/low, 75

--- Page 1255 ---
TTL, 22
nominal mapping, VHDL, 510
nonoverlapping clock generators, 277–278
nonprogrammable ICs, 15
nonrecursive scramblers-descramblers, 383
nonsystematic codes, 157
nonsystematic solutions, 157 nonvolatile memory.
See memories
NOR gates, 8, 79–80, 259
Boolean functions, 103–104
normalized scientific notation, 30–31
NOT functions, 6, 8
NOT logic gates, 8
Noyce, Robert, 2–3
npn/pnp transistors, 183
NRC (nonrecursive convolutional) encoders, 170
NRZ (nonreturn to zero) line codes, 138–139
NRZ-I (NRZ invert) line codes, 138–139
number system examples, 25–26
n-well, 205
O
octal code, 24, 25
odd parity function, 47, 81
full-adders units, 290
one-hot encoding, 424–425
one’s complement code, 26–27
opcode (operation-select port), 306–307
open-drain (OD) buffers, 86–87
operators
Boolean algebra, 103
VHDL, 498–500

--- Page 1256 ---
OR function, 6, 103–104
OR gates, 8, 79–80, 259
binary addition vs. OR operation, 84
Boolean functions, 103–104
CMOS circuit, 80
pseudo three-layer circuit, 81
two-layer circuit, 80
OTP-ROM (one-time programmable ROM), 453
output layer, 80
overflow, 48–9, 50
P
packages, VHDL, 509–510
PAL (programmable array logic) devices, 468–470
PAM (pulse amplitude modulation) codes, 143–148
parallel enable, synchronous counters, 355–358,
367–368
parallel logic translators, 262
parallel signed multipliers, 309
parallel unsigned mutipliers, 308–309
parallel-serial unsigned multipliers, 309–311
parity bits
error detecting/correcting codes, 154
line codes, 144, 146–147
low density parity check codes, 171–174
single parity check codes, 154–155
parity detectors, 272, 502–503
parity-check equations, 155, 157–158, 172
parity-check matrix, 158, 171
parity-check sparcity, 171
partial-scale counters, 91, 355
p-channel MOS, 69–71, 199

--- Page 1257 ---
PCI Express bus example, 246–247
PGA (pin grid array), 11, 12
PGA2 Flip Chip, 11, 12
physical vs. logic values, 13–14
pins, ICs, 11–12
pits and line codes, 138
PLA (programmable logic array) devices, 470–471
PLCC (plastic leaded chip carrier), 11, 12
PLDs (programmable logic devices)
concepts, 18–19, 467–468
CPLDs, 15, 18–19, 471–478
FPGAs, 15, 18–19, 478–86
SPLDs, 468–471
PLL (phased lock loop) circuits, 377–381
basic PLL, 378–379
prescalers, 379–381
programmable, 381
pMOS transistors, 69–71
pnp/npn transistors, 183
point-contact transistors, 1–2
point-to-point half-duplex LVDS, 246
point-to-point simplex LVDS, 246
polar codes, 138–139
polysilicon-emitter BJT, 192–193
POS (product-of-sums)
complemented form, 120
concepts, 80, 111
maxterm expansion and irreducible POS,
111–112
maxterms and POS equations, 110–112
POS-based CMOS circuit, 260–262
standard circuits for SOP and POS
equations, 112–117

--- Page 1258 ---
positional code, 21
positional mapping, VHDL, 510–511, 541, 554
position-related attributes, VHDL, 501
positive-edge triggered DFFs, 87–88, 89, 342–343
positive-level DLs, 321
power consumption
capacitive, 73
inverter and CMOS logic, 73–74, 230
short-circuit, 73–74
static/dynamic, 73
power-delay (PD) product, 74–75, 208, 230
PQFP (plastic quad flat pack), 11, 12
PRAM (phase-change RAM), 464–465
precharge/evaluation phases, dynamic logic, 232
precision and FP representation, 33
prescalers, 377, 379–381
preset, DFFs, 344–345
prime implicants
Karnaugh maps, 118
minterms, 109
printed circuit boards (PCBs)
concepts, 11, 13
traces, 13
priority encoders, 272–274, 529
procedures, VHDL, 514–516
programmable ICs, 15
programmable logic devices. See PLDs
programmable PLL (phased lock loop), 381
propagate signals, 293–294
propagation delays
D-type flip-flops, 330–331
D-type latches, 322–323
glitches, 123–124

--- Page 1259 ---
high-to-low, 17, 123–124
Karnaugh maps, 123–124
low-to-high, 17, 123–124
parallel-serial multiplier, 310–311
transient responses, 17–18, 189–191
PS/2 devices, 21, 154–155
pseudo-morphic materials, 194
pseudo-nMOS logic, 230–231
pseudo-random interleaver, 162
pseudo-random sequence generators, 93–94, 381–
383
PSpice (Cadence), 621
SPICE simulation with coded input, 667–
669
SPICE simulation with graphic input, 670–
671
PT (pass transistor), 231, 258, 259
pulse response. See transient responses
pulse-based dual-edge D flip-flops, 342
pulse-based/latched D flip-flops, 338–342
implementations, 339–342
short-pulse generators, 278, 338–339
pulsed latch. See pulse-based/latched D flip-flops
PWM (pulse width modulator), 390–391, 415–416
Q
quad data rate (QDR) SRAMs, 438–439
Quartus II Web Edition, 19, 492
Quine-McCluskey algorithm, 121–122
quotation marks, VHDL syntax, 5, 22
R

--- Page 1260 ---
RAM. See memories
randomization
LDPC random designs, 173
pseudo-random interleaver, 162
pseudo-random sequence generator, 93–94,
381–383
range of values, 14
range-related attributes, VHDL, 500–501
reading memory
DRAM, 439–440
SRAM, 434–435
read-only memory (ROM). See memories
receive/transmit data, 99
reciprocals, 27
recursive inputs and turbo codes, 170
redundancy
bits. See parity bits
cyclic redundancy check codes, 155–156
Reed-Solomon (RS) codes, 159–161. See also audio
CD encoding
CIRC, 160
concatenated RSV decoder, 167
symbols, 159
reference physical values, 13
refresh, DRAM, 441
registers
clocked, 9
D flip-flop control ports, 344–345
D flip-flops, 9, 87–89, 329–332
D latch, 320–329
digital, described, 8–9
dual-edge D flip-flops, 342–343
JK flip-flop, 319, 348

--- Page 1261 ---
level-sensitive memory circuits, 320
master-slave D flip-flops, 331, 332–338
pulse-based D flip-flops, 338–342
sequential vs. combinational logic, 319–320
shift register, 89–90, 553–556
SR flip-flop, 319, 348
SR latch, 320
statistically low-power D flip-flops, 343–344
T flip-flops, 347
regular waveforms for simulations, 603–605
regular/irregular LDPC codes, 171
reset, DFFs, 344–345
resistive-capacitive (RC) circuit, SPICE, 644–645
resolution, system, 410–411
responses. See circuit responses
rise time, 17, 190
ROM. See memories
rotation (circular shift)
described, 53, 275
shifters, 275–277
RSC (recursive systematic convolutional) encoders,
171
running (accumulated) disparity and line codes, 142
running simulations, 659–660
RZ (return to zero) line codes, 138–139
S
SAFF flip flops, 333, 336, 337–338
sample and hold (S&H) circuit, 4
sampling rate
A/D conversion, 5
audio CD encoding, 161

--- Page 1262 ---
saturation buildup, 190
saturation curve, MOSFETs, 201–202
saturation, transistors, 184–187, 201–202
Scan Code Set 2, 21, 154
Schmitt triggers (STs), 279–280
Schottky (clamp) diode, 189–190, 223
Schottky TTL, 223
SCL flip flops, 333, 336, 338
SCL latches, 324, 325
scramblers/descramblers, 383–386
additive (synchronous), 383–384
introduction, 134, 143
multiplicative (asynchronous), 384–386
pseudo-random sequence generator, 381–383
scrambling compared to interleaving, 162
S-CVSL latches, 324, 325
SDFF/Klass flip flops, 333, 340, 341
SDRAM (synchronous DRAM), 442–444
semiconductors
bipolar transistors, 181–182
materials, 182, 198
MOS transistors, 197–198
negative/positive charges, 2, 181–182, 197–
198
relaxed layers, 210
straining, 194, 210
semidynamic DFFs, 337, 341
sense amplifier
DRAM, 441–442
SRAM, 436–437
sensitivity/worst-case analysis, SPICE, 623
sequential binary encoding, 423–424

--- Page 1263 ---
sequential circuits. See also combinational
arithmetic circuits; See also combinational logic
circuits
asynchronous counters, 368–371
bit-serial adders, 300–301
vs. combinational circuits, 10, 257–258
described, 87
Fibonacci series generators, VHDL, 561–
562
finite state machines. See FSMs
frequency dividers, 374–377
frequency meters, VHDL, 562–565
neural networks, VHDL, 565–571
PLL and prescalers, 377–381
propagation delays and glitches, 123–124
pseudo-random sequence generators, 93–94,
381–383
registers, 319–320. See also registers
scramblers/descramblers, 383–386
shift register with load, VHDL, 553–556
shift registers, 353–355
signal generators, 371–374
state machines. See state machines
switch debouncer, VHDL, 556–558
synchronous counters, 355–368
system resolution and glitches, 410–411
timers, VHDL, 558–560
timing diagrams, 88–89
sequential code, VHDL
vs. concurrent code, 493–494, 501
IF, CASE, LOOP, and WAIT statements,
503–506
sequential decoders, 167

--- Page 1264 ---
serial bits and convolutional codes, 163
serial enable, synchronous counters, 355–358, 367–
368
Shannon’s theorem, 105, 106
Shichman-Hodges MOSFET model, SPICE, 627
shift operations
division/multiplication with, 53–54
shifters, 275–277
types of, 52–53, 275
shift operators, VHDL, 499
shift registers (SRs)
concepts, 89–90, 353–355
convolutional code implementation, 163
Hamming code implementation, 159
with load, VHDL design, 553–556
timing diagram, 90
shift_integer function, VHDL, 513–514
shifters, 275–277
Shockley Semiconductor, 2
Shockley, William, 1–3
short-circuit power consumption, 73–74
shortened RS codes, 160
short-pulse generators, 278, 338–339
Si (silicon), 2, 181–182, 197–198
sign extension, 29–30, 51–52
signal generators
concepts, 374–375
dual-edge, 375
four-window, 373–374
FSM design, 408–410
generic design technique, 419–121
large-window FSM design, 412–414
programmable, 390

--- Page 1265 ---
single-edge, 372
two-window, 372–373
“universal”, VHDL, 575–578
SIGNAL object, VHDL, 507
signal voltages
CMOS logic, 229
TTL, 224–225
signals
continuous-valued vs. discrete valued, 4
physical, vs. logic values, 13–14
signed adders/subtractors, 301–303, 543–544
signed comparators, 304–305
signed number operations
addition/subtraction, 49–52
Booth’s algorithm, 57, 312
division, 58–59
modified Baugh-Wooley multiplier, 56
multiplication, 56–57
shift operations, 53–54
signed adders/subtractors, 301–303
significand, 31
sign-magnitude code, 26
decimal range, 26
Silicon Valley (California), 2–3
simulation with SPICE
AC response of RC circuits, 644–645
AC source with sinusoidal sweep, 634, 644
basic structure of SPICE code, 623–625
capacitor declarations, 625
DC analysis, 623
DC response of CMOS inverters, 639–641
DC response of diode-resistor circuits, 638–
639

--- Page 1266 ---
DC sweep, 631
dependent source declarations, 635
DFFs with subcircuits, 648–650
diode declarations, 626
exponential AC source, 633
frequency-modulated AC source, 633–634
independent AC source declarations, 631–
634
independent DC source declarations, 630–
631
inductor declarations, 625–626
inputs, 636–637
Monte Carlo analysis, 623, 645–646
Monte Carlo analysis of DR circuits, 646–
647
MOSFET declarations, 627–630
outputs, 637–638
overview, 19–20, 621–622
parametric analysis, 639
piecewise linear AC source, 632
PSpice tutorial, 667–671
pulsed AC source, 631–632
resistor declarations, 625
schematics capture component, 622, 636
sinusoidal AC source, 632–633
subcircuits, 648–650
transient response of CMOS inverters, 641–
642
transient response of D-type latches, 642–
644
types of simulations, 622–623
simulation with VHDL
adders, 611–612, 614–615

--- Page 1267 ---
clock dividers, 608–611, 613–614, 616–617
ModelSim tutorial, 657–666
overview, 19
stimulus generation and waveforms, 603–
605
synthesis vs. simulation, 492, 601–602
testbench templates, 607
testbench testing, 606
testbench types, 602–603
testing stimuli, 605–607
writing Type I testbenches, 607–612
writing Type II testbenches, 612–615
writing Type III testbenches, 615
writing Type IV testbenches, 615–617
single parity check (SPC) codes, 154–155
single-precision floating-point, 30–33, 59
single-pulse waveforms for simulations, 603–605
sinusoidal global clock, 343
Si-SiGe HBT, 193–194
Si-SiGe MOSFETs, strained, 210–211
skew, clock, 277–278, 333–335
slave DFFs. See master-slave D flip-flops
small-signal model, 191, 209
SMD (surface mount device), 11
soft decisions
LDPC decoders, 168
Viterbi decoders, 168
SOI MOSFETs, 211
SONOS cells, 458
SOP (sum-of-products)
complement of, 120
concepts, 80, 104
Karnaugh maps and irreducible SOP, 119

--- Page 1268 ---
minterm expansion and irreducible SOP, 110
minterms and SOP equations, 108–110
SOP-based CMOS circuit, 260
standard circuits for SOP and POS
equations, 112–117
sort_data procedure, VHDL, 515–516
source, MOSFETS, 198
SPICE (Simulation Program with Integrated Circuit
Emphasis). See simulation with SPICE
SPLDs (simple programmable logic devices), 468–
471
GAL devices, 471
PAL devices, 468–470
PLA devices, 470–471
split-gate cells, 458
SR (set-reset) flip-flop, 319, 348
SR (set-reset) latches, 320
SRAM (static random access memory)
chip architecture, 436
circuits, 434
dual and quad data rate, 438–439
memory-read, 434–435
memory-write, 435–436
sense amplifier, 436–437
SRAM latches, 324, 325
SRIS (static ratio insensitive) latches, 324, 325, 326
SRs. See shift registers
SSDs (seven-segment displays), 266–268, 525–527,
558–560
SSTC flip flops, 333, 336, 342, 343
SSTC1/2 latches, 321, 324, 325, 327, 328
S-STG latch, 324, 325, 326

--- Page 1269 ---
SSTL (stub series terminated logic) standards, 240–
244
classI/II circuits, 241–242
differential amplifier, 240
termination resistors, 241
state machines. See FSMs
state transition diagram, 164, 397, 516
static DL circuits, 323
static D-type latches (DLs)
current-mode, 327
list of, 324
multiplexer-based, 324–325
RAM-type, 326–327
static MOS architectures, 230–232
static power consumption, 73
static RAM. See SRAM
staticizers, 326, 341
statistically low-power DFFs, 343–344
std library, 495
steady-state voltages/currents, 622
STG (static transmission-gate-based) flip flop, 333,
334
STG (static transmission-gate-based) latch, 324,
325, 326
stimulus generation for VHDL simulations, 603–605
stimulus-only functional analysis, 602, 607
stimulus-only timing analysis, 602, 612
storage delay time, 190
strained Si-SiGe MOSFETs, 210–211
straining, semiconductor, 194, 210
Stratix III features, 485–486
Stratix LAB and ALM, 481
string detectors, 406–408, 573–575

--- Page 1270 ---
StrongARM flip flops, 333, 336, 337
subcoding bytes and RS codes, 160
sublattices, 146
subsystem-level digital circuits, 7
subthreshold regions, MOSFETs, 201
subtraction
borrow, 49
floating-point, 59–61
MSB check for signed, 51
with N-bit inputs/(N+1)-bit output (signed),
51–52
with N-bit inputs/output (signed), 50–51
signed, 49–52
truth tables, 49
subtractors, 301–303, 543–544
sum and binary addition, 27, 47–48
sum-product algorithms, 173
supply voltages, 14, 75
CMOS logic, 229, 237–240
TTL, 224–225, 236–237
surrogate pairs and Unicode, 38
switch debouncer, 431, 556–558, 581–587
switches, 258, 259
switching frequency, 74 symmetric-phase frequency
dividers, 421–423
synchronism and FSMs, 417
synchronous counters, 91–92, 355–368, 404–406,
424–426
0-to-7 counter, 402–404
0-to-9 counters, 360–364
3-to-9 counters, 365–367
circuit and timing diagram, 91
concepts, 355

--- Page 1271 ---
DFF-based, modulo-2N, 357–358
DFF-based, modulo-M, 362–364
with four DFFs, 365
large, 367–368
with nonzero initial states, 364–376
with parallel enable, 355–358, 367–368
with regular DFFs, 362
with regular TFFs, 360
with serial enable, 355–358, 367–368
TFF-based, modulo-2N, 355–357
TFF-based, modulo-M, 358–361
with three DFFs, 366–367
using DFFs with clear, 362–364
using TFFs with clear, 361
synchronous scramblers-descramblers, 383
syndrome decoding procedure, 158–159
Synplify Pro (Synplicity), 492
synthesis vs. simulation, VHDL, 19, 492, 601–602
systematic solutions, 154, 157, 170, 373
system-level digital circuits, 6–7
T
T flip-flops (TFFs), 345–347
asynchronous counters, 346–347
synchronous modulo-2N counters, 355–357
synchronous modulo-M counters, 358–361
Tanner graphs, 172
tapped delay line, 354–355
technology node, 11
temperature ranges, TTL, 222
tensile strain, 211
termination resistors, 241

--- Page 1272 ---
test file, VHDL, 601–602, 606
testbenches. See simulation with VHDL
Texas Instruments, 3
TG (transmission-gate)
logic, 231–232, 259
switches, 258, 259
TG-C2MOS flip flop, 333, 334, 339, 340
TG-C2MOS latch, 324, 325, 339
three-state buffers. See tri-state buffers
threshold voltage, MOSFETs, 200
TIA/EIA-644-A (Telecommunications Industry
Association/Electronic Industries Alliance no. 644-
A) standard, 244
time delays
binary waveforms, 15–16
transient responses, 190
time response, 17, 190, 622
timers
circuits with multiple dividers, 376–377
VHDL design, 558–560
timing diagrams
address-decoder, 265–266
binary waveforms, 15–16
for combinational circuits, 75–77, 78–79
for multiplexers, 271–272
for parallel-serial multipliers, 310–311
for sequential circuits, 88–89
toggle flip-flops. See T flip-flops
traces, PCB, 13
transconductance, 191, 209
transient responses
bipolar transistors, 189–191
introduction, 17–18

--- Page 1273 ---
MOSFETs, 207–208
saturation buildup, 190
Schottky (clamp) diode, 189–190
SPICE analysis, 622
SPICE simulation, 641–644
time response, 17, 190, 622
transistors
AC responses, 18, 191–192, 209
bipolar. See bipolar transistors
BJT. See BJTs
commercial, and transition frequency, 190
DC responses, 17, 185–189
diode-transistor logic, 188–189, 220–221
emitter, collector, and base, 1, 183
field-effect. See MOSFETs
gate-level vs. transistor-level analysis, 20
HBT, 193–194
historical notes, 1–3
I-V characteristics, 184–185
load line, 185–187, 202, 204–205
MOSFET. See MOSFETs
polysilicon-emitter BJT, 192–193
saturation, 184–187
semiconductors, 181–182, 197–198
transient responses, 17–18, 189–191
transistor-level digital circuits, 6–7
TTL, 221–225
transition density, line codes, 136
transition frequency
BJTs, 190, 191–192
of commercial transistors, 191
MOSFETs, 209
transition voltage, 17, 206

--- Page 1274 ---
transmit/receive data, 99
trellis diagrams, 165–166
triggers, 279–280
triode region, MOSFETs, 201
tri-state buffers, 85–86, 258
buffered multiplexers, VHDL, 494–495
bus drivers, 86
concepts, 259
symbol, truth table, and implementation, 85
truncation
floating-point operations, 60, 61–62
two’s complement example, 29–30
truth tables
concepts, 7–9
types of, 108
TSPC flip flops, 333, 336
TSPC latches, 324, 328
TTL (transistor-transistor logic)
circuits, 221–222
CMOS-TTL interface, 228
fan-in/fan-out, 224
I/O standards, 236
noise margins, 225
supply voltage/signal voltages, 224–225,
236–137
temperature ranges, 222
versions, 223–224
turbo codes, 170–171
Bahl algorithm, 171
parallel RSCs, 171
recursive inputs, 170
turn-off delays, 17
turn-on delays, 17

--- Page 1275 ---
two-hot encoding, 424
two’s complement code, 28–30
extension and truncation example, 29–30
signed subtraction, 50
signed/unsigned decimals example, 29
two’s complementer, 303–304
U
UDC (unit-distance code), 24
Unicode
base multilingual plane, 38
characters, 36
surrogate pairs, 38
UTF-16 encoding, 37, 38–39
UTF-32 encoding, 37, 39
UTF-8 encoding, 36–38
Windows Glyph List 4, 36
unipolar codes, 137–138
unsigned adders/subtractors, 301–303, 543–544
unsigned number operations
addition, 27–28, 47–49
division, 57–58
multiplication, 54–55
shift operations, 53–54
UTF-16 encoding, 37, 38–39
UTF-32 encoding, 37, 39
UTF-8 encoding, 36–38
UTP (unshielded twisted pair), 134–135
V
VARIABLE object, VHDL, 507

--- Page 1276 ---
vertically reflected circuits, 261
VHDL
adders/subtractors and INTEGER, 543–544
adders/subtractors and STD_LOGIC_VECTOR,
544
address decoder, 523–525
architecture, 493, 493–495
arithmetic-logic unit, 547–549
attributes, 500–501
BCD-to-SSD converter, 525–527
bit/bit vector syntax, 5, 22
car alarm, 578–587
carry-lookahead adders, 540–543
carry-ripple adders, 539–540
carry-ripple adders with COMPONENT, 511–
512
CASE statement, 504, 517–519
circuit synthesis and simulation with, 19,
492
code structure, 492–495
combinational arithmetic circuits, 539–549
combinational logic circuits, 523–535
concurrent code statements, 502–503
concurrent vs. sequential code, 493–494, 501
CONSTANT, SIGNAL, and VARIABLE objects,
506–509
conventional code, 510
counting leading zeros, 505–506
declarations, 510
entity, 493
Fibonacci series generators, 561–562
frequency meters, 562–565

--- Page 1277 ---
functions, 513–514
GENERATE statement, 502–503, 512
GENERIC MAP declaration, 512
GENERIC statement, 493, 501, 503, 506
IF statement, 504, 508
instantiation, 510
introduction, 492
LCD driver, 588–597
library declarations, 492
LOOP statement, 505–506
multiplexer, 527–528
multipliers/dividers with INTEGER, 545–546
multipliers/dividers with STD_LOGIC_VECTOR,
547
neural networks, 565–571
operators, 498–500
packages, 509–510
packages and libraries, 495–496
parity detectors, 502–503
predefined data types, 496–197
priority encoder, 529
procedures, 514–516
ROM memory design, 530–532
sequential circuits, 533–571
sequential code statements, 503–506
shift register with load, 553–556
shift_integer function, 513–514
signed and unsigned adders/subtractors,
543–544
signed and unsigned multipliers/dividers,
545–546
sort_data procedure, 515–516

--- Page 1278 ---
state machines, 516–519, 573–597
string detectors, 573–575
subprograms, 493, 501, 503
switch debouncer, 556–558
synchronous RAM memory design, 532–535
template for FSMs, 516–519
timers, 558–560
“universal” signal generator, 575–578
user-defined data types, 498
WAIT statement, 504
WHEN statement, VHDL, 502–503, 523–525
VHSIC hardware description language. See VHDL
Virtex 5, features, 485–486
Virtex CLB and Slice, 480
Viterbi decoder, 167–169
delays, 168
depth, 168
hard/soft decisions, 168
memory needed, 168
volatile memory. See memories
W
WAIT statement, VHDL, 504
waveforms. See also timing diagrams
binary, 15–16
generation for VHDL simulations, 603–605
WHEN statement, VHDL, 502–503
Windows Glyph List, 4, 36
words, 5, 21
writing to memory
DRAM, 440

--- Page 1279 ---
SRAM, 435–436
X
Xilinx CPLDs, 475–477
Xilinx Virtex 5, 18–19
XNOR gates, 8, 81–83, 259
CMOS circuit, 82
even parity function, 82
XOR gates, 8, 81–83, 259
CMOS circuit, 82
modulo-2 adders, 83
odd parity function, 81
Z
zeros
Karnaugh maps for, 120
leading zeros, VHDL, 505–506
nonreturn to zero line codes, 138–139
return to zero line codes, 138–139
OceanofPDF.com