--- Page 2 ---
iOS Cloud Development For
Dummies®
Visit www.dummies.com/cheatsheet/iosclouddevelopment to
view this book's cheat sheet.
Table of Contents
Introduction
About This Book
Conventions Used in This Book
Foolish Assumptions
How This Book Is Organized
Part I: Mobile Apps Need to Be Mobile
Part II: Adding iCloud
Part III: Web Services
Part IV: Building Your Own Web Service
Part V: The Part of Tens
Icons Used in This Book
Where to Go from Here
Part I: Mobile Apps Need to Be Mobile
Chapter 1: Compelling Mobile Applications
What Makes Mobile Devices So Compelling

--- Page 3 ---
Creating zero degrees of separation
Benefiting from the mobility, not the mobile devices
Increasing the quality of life
Making the technology disappear
Reveling in the aesthetics
An Application Ecosystem
iCloud and universal apps
Web services
The Model View Controller (MVC) Architecture
Evolving the Model View Controller
Chapter 2: The Lonely RoadTrip App
Starting at Square 7
The RoadTrip App
Points of Interest and the Itinerary
How RTModel Manages the Data
Part II: Adding iCloud
Chapter 3: Setting Up Core Data
Managing Your Itinerary
Core Data Basics
Starting with the Objects — The Managed Object Model
Adding the attributes
Generating your classes
Thinking managed objects through

--- Page 4 ---
The Core Data Stack
The managed object context
The Persistent Store coordinator and persistent store
Adding the Core Data Stack
Adding the properties needed by the Core Data
stack
The managed object context
Concurrency support for managed object contexts
The Persistent Store coordinator
The managed object model
Notifications
ARC and blocks
Adding the Core Data framework
Putting Core Data to Work
Chapter 4: Putting Core Data to Work
Adding a Point of Interest to the Itinerary
Adding a Point of Interest to the Itinerary Using Core
Data
The fetch request
Predefining fetch requests in a managed object
model
Creating a SharedPointOfInterest
Displaying Your Itinerary
Adding the Fetched Results controller

--- Page 5 ---
The Fetched Results controller delegate
Displaying the SharedPointOfInterests
Cleaning Up the ItineraryController and RTModel
Classes
Loading the Itinerary
Timing is Everything
Removing a Point Of Interest From the Itinerary
How it works now
Updating for Core Data
Chapter 5: Adding iCloud Support
iCloud
Putting iCloud to work for you
Enter Core Data
Setting up Core Data for iCloud
Handling changes
Configuring Your App’s iCloud Entitlements
Provisioning Your App for iCloud
Testing
Part III: Web Services
Chapter 6: Living in the Cloud
Understanding How Networks Work
The Internet
The World Wide Web

--- Page 6 ---
What Exactly Is a Web Service?
Message-oriented web services
Resource-based web services
A Web Service Request
It’s about client-server
And it’s about the URL
URI or URL?
HTTP
The HTTP session
Initial line — Request
Initial line — Response (Status line)
Headers
An optional message body
The RESTful Web Service Architecture
REST requirements
The rationale behind the requirements
It doesn’t matter that most web services aren’t really
RESTful
Chapter 7: Exploring an Existing Web Service
The Google Geocoding API
The request
The response
Status codes

--- Page 7 ---
How RoadTrip Currently Does Geocoding
Creating the Plumbing: The WSManager
Having the Model Use the Geocoding Web Service
Chapter 8: Working With XML
Parsing the XML Response
Putting the parser through its paces
The NSXMLParser delegate methods
Dealing with errors
Good, But Not Good Enough
Chapter 9: Asynchronous URL Loading
Reviewing Your Choices
URL Loading System Overview
Authentication and credentials
Cookie storage
Protocol support
Using NSURLConnection — Downloading data
asynchronously
Using Web Services Asynchronously
Adding the WSLoaderClass
Using the WSLoader
Chapter 10: Adding the JSON Response
Working with JSON

--- Page 8 ---
Parsing the JSON Response
Processing a JSON Response
There’s a Pattern to Using Web Services
Add a method to WSManager that makes the
request
Add a method to WSManager to set up the request
Add a method to WSManager to create the
NSURLRequest
Add a method to YourModel to make the request to
the WSManager
Adding a method to YourModel that processes the
JSON response
Putting It All Back Together
Part IV: Building Your Own Web Service
Chapter 11: The RoadTrip Web Services
Designing Web Services
The Point of a Web Services Architecture
Design for extensibility (and change)
Optimizing network performance
The Basic Model — Stateless Client Server
Making Services Extensible
Keep things private with encapsulation
Loose coupling
Making services cohesive, complete, and non-
overlapping

--- Page 9 ---
Well-Formed Services
Services are not functions
Services are not methods
The Resource
The Response
Limiting Unauthorized Web Service Use
Designing a Web Service
The pointsofinterest Web Service
The request
The response
The lastupdate Web Service
The request
The response
The allpointsofinterest Web Service
The request
The response
The addpointofinterest Web Service
The request
The response
The deletepointofinterest Web Service
The request
The response

--- Page 10 ---
Additional Error Considerations
Chapter 12: The App Engine Implementation
Google App Engine
The application environment
How App Engine works
App Engine SDKs
Using Python with App Engine
What You Need to Develop for App Engine
The webapp2 Starter Kit
The webapp Framework
Now a little about Python
And more on routing
Handling handlers
A little more Python
The Model Application Controller Architecture in App
Engine
Chapter 13: The Model’s Model
What’s in the Model?
The App Engine Datastore
The webapp Model classes
Adding a method to the model
The TestData Class
Testing in Your Browser

--- Page 11 ---
Chapter 14: Creating and Using the pointsofinterest Web
Service
The pointsofinterest Web Service
Updating RoadTrip
Setting up the WSManager methods to make the
request and do the setup
Adding the RTModel methods to make the request
and process the JSON response
Adding the required methods to PointOfInterest
Send the new message
Using Cached Data
Adding the UpdateRecord model
Updating RoadTrip to use cached data
Keeping the Points Of Interest Current
Chapter 15: Deploying Your Web Services
Cleaning Up Your App
Transmitting Data Securely Across the Network
Storing Data Securely
Deploying rtpointsofinterest to Google App Engine
What’s Next
Part V: The Part of Tens
Chapter 16: Ten Ways to Extend the RoadTrip App
Dealing with Errors

--- Page 12 ---
Make Events a Web Service
Expand the Point of Interest Data
Crowd Source Points of Interest
Cache Data
Post to Facebook and Twitter
Send Postcards from the Road
Add Hotels and Reservations
It’s Never Early Enough to Start Speaking a Foreign
Language
In the Road Trip Editor
Chapter 17: Ten Ways to Be a Happy Developer
Keep Things Loosely Coupled
Remember Memory
Don’t Reinvent the Wheel
Understand State Transitions
Do the Right Thing at the Right Time
Avoid Mistakes in Error Handling
Use Storyboards
Remember the User
Keep in Mind that the Software Isn’t Finished Until the
Last User Is Dead
Keep It Fun
Cheat Sheet
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 13 ---
iOS Cloud Development For
Dummies®
by Neal Goldstein


--- Page 14 ---
iOS Cloud Development For Dummies®
Published by
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
111 River St.
Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774
www.wiley.com
Copyright © 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey
Published simultaneously in Canada
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as
permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States
Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the
Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy
fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers,
MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600. Requests to the
Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions
Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ
07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at
http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Trademarks: Wiley, the Wiley logo, For Dummies, the Dummies Man
logo, A Reference for the Rest of Us!, The Dummies Way, Dummies
Daily, The Fun and Easy Way, Dummies.com, Making Everything
Easier, and related trade dress are trademarks or registered trademarks of
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliates in the United States and
other countries, and may not be used without written permission. All
other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. John Wiley

--- Page 15 ---
& Sons, Inc. is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in
this book.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: The publisher and the author
make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all
warranties, including without limitation warranties of fitness for a
particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales or
promotional materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may
not be suitable for every situation. This work is sold with the
understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering legal,
accounting, or other professional services. If professional assistance is
required, the services of a competent professional person should be
sought. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for damages
arising herefrom. The fact that an organization or Website is referred to
in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of further
information does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the
information the organizatiotn or Website may provide or
recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware that
Internet Websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared
between when this work was written and when it is read.
For general information on our other products and services, please
contact our Customer Care Department within the U.S. at 877-762-2974,
outside the U.S. at 317-572-3993, or fax 317-572-4002.
For technical support, please visit www.wiley.com/techsupport.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-
on-demand. Some material included with standard print versions of this
book may not be included in e-books or in print-on-demand. If this book
refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version
you purchased, you may download this material at
http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information about Wiley
products, visit www.wiley.com.

--- Page 16 ---
Library of Congress Control Number: 2012944693
ISBN 978-1-118-02623-6 (pbk); ISBN 978-1-118-22226-3 (ebk); ISBN
978-1-118-23582-9 (ebk); ISBN 978-1-118-26073-9 (ebk)
Manufactured in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1


--- Page 17 ---
About the Author
Neal Goldstein is a recognized leader in making state-of-the-art and
cutting-edge technologies practical for commercial and enterprise
development. He was one of the first technologists to work with
commercial developers at firms such as Apple Computer, Lucasfilm, and
Microsoft to develop commercial applications using object-based
programming technologies. He was a pioneer in moving that approach
into the corporate world for developers at Liberty Mutual Insurance,
USWest (now Verizon), National Car Rental, EDS, and Continental
Airlines, showing them how object-oriented programming could solve
enterprise-wide problems. His book (with Jeff Alger) on object-oriented
development, Developing Object-Oriented Software for the Macintosh
(Addison Wesley, 1992), introduced the idea of scenarios and patterns to
developers. He was an early advocate of the Microsoft .NET framework,
and he successfully introduced it into many enterprises, including
Charles Schwab. He was one of the earliest developers of Service
Oriented Architecture (SOA), and as Senior Vice President of Advanced
Technology and the Chief Architect at Charles Schwab, he built an
integrated SOA solution that spanned the enterprise, from desktop PCs
to servers to complex network mainframes. (He holds four patents as a
result.) As one of IBM’s largest customers, he introduced the folks at
IBM to SOA at the enterprise level and encouraged them to head in that
direction.
Since the release of the iPhone SDK in March 2008, he has been
focusing on mobile applications. He has had eight applications in the
App Store. These include a series of Travel Photo Guides (developed
with his partners at mobilefortytwo), and a Digital Field Guides series
(http://lp.wileypub.com/DestinationDFGiPhoneApp), developed in
partnership with John Wiley & Sons, Inc. He also has a free app called
Expense Diary that allows you to keep track of things like expenses,
mileage, and time by adding them to your calendar.

--- Page 18 ---
He has developed mobile strategies for a number of businesses, ranging
from National Cinemedia to the American Automobile Association
(AAA). His strategies focus on Mobile 2.0 — integrating mobile across
the enterprise, creating a consistent user experience across devices and
applications in an application ecosystem, and developing a user
experience architecture that both leverages — and is constrained by —
the device. He has spent the last three years working with mobile device
users and developers to determine what makes mobile devices so
appealing, what users want from an application on a phone or tablet, and
what makes an app compelling. These efforts have resulted in the
Application Ecosystem model for mobile applications and an underlying
Model Application Controller Architecture based on web services that
has become a key element in his client work and his books.
In his copious spare time, he also teaches introductory and advanced
classes on iPhone and iPad development (for clients as well as some
public classes) and does expert witness work.
Along with those apps and his consulting, he has written several books
on iPhone programming: iPhone Application Development For Dummies
(multiple editions) (Wiley), Objective-C For Dummies (Wiley), and he
co-authored (with Tony Bove) iPad Application Development For
Dummies (including multiple editions) (Wiley) and iPhone Application
Development All-in-One For Dummies (Wiley). He’s also the primary
author (with Jon Manning and Paris Buttfield-Addison) of iPhone &
iPad Game Development For Dummies.
Dedication
To my friends and family — especially to my children, Sarah and Evan,
and to my wife, Linda. She deserves special recognition for her support
and patience and for maintaining her (and my) sense of humor. Without
her support, I never would have been able to write 12 books in 3.5 years.
Thank you so much.

--- Page 19 ---
This is for you
As day follows night
The tunnel ends in the light
Finally time to play
Author’s Acknowledgments
Acquisitions Editor Katie Feltman has done a superb job of maintaining
the vision of this book and keeping this project on track. The editing
team on this book was the A+ team and I would give anything to work
with them on every book I do. Project editor Paul Levesque is the project
editor’s project editor, and the best in the known and unknown universe.
If there were one, he would deserve an entry in the Hitchhiker’s Guide to
the Galaxy. Copy editor Virginia Sanders did an amazing job, helping to
both clarify things and pointing out inconsistencies in places I had long
forgotten about. Tech editor Jesse Feiler kept me on my toes and his
comments made this a better book. Great job, team, and I deeply
appreciate all of your work.
Thanks again to my agent Carole Jelen for her continued work and
support in putting and keeping these projects together.

--- Page 20 ---
Publisher’s Acknowledgments
We’re proud of this book; please send us your comments at
http://dummies.custhelp.com. For other comments, please contact our
Customer Care Department within the U.S. at 877-762-2974, outside the
U.S. at 317-572-3993, or fax 317-572-4002.
Some of the people who helped bring this book to market include the
following:
Acquisitions, Editorial
Senior Project Editor: Paul Levesque
Acquisitions Editor: Katie Feltman
Copy Editor: Virginia Sanders
Technical Editor: Jesse Feiler
Editorial Manager: Leah Michael
Editorial Assistant: Leslie Saxman
Sr. Editorial Assistant: Cherie Case
Cover Photo: ©iStockphoto.com / Marcin Krygier; ©iStockphoto.com /
ranplett
Cartoons: Rich Tennant (www.the5thwave.com)
Composition Services
Project Coordinator: Sheree Montgomery
Layout and Graphics: Lavonne Roberts

--- Page 21 ---
Proofreaders: Lindsay Amones, John Greenough
Indexer: Potomac Indexing, LLC
Publishing and Editorial for Technology Dummies
Richard Swadley, Vice President and Executive Group Publisher
Andy Cummings, Vice President and Publisher
Mary Bednarek, Executive Acquisitions Director
Mary C. Corder, Editorial Director
Publishing for Consumer Dummies
Kathleen Nebenhaus, Vice President and Executive Publisher
Composition Services
Debbie Stailey, Director of Composition Services
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 22 ---
Introduction
When you talk about iOS cloud programming, you’re talking about two
distinct things. The one is iCloud, which is implemented for you by
Apple and allows you to synch data between devices. The other is web
services, which enable you to have some of your app’s processing done
by a remote computer somewhere in the middle of who-knows-where.
iCloud is relatively new; web services have been around for a long time.
In fact, web services and I go way back.
Although I had used them for quite a while, the value of web services
was driven home when I was consulting for a large mainframe-based
organization. (Yes, that was a long time ago.) The organization had
acquired a company and needed to interface the two computer systems.
The systems were very different, and time-to-market and (especially)
cost considerations made wholesale rewriting of the acquired company’s
systems impractical, not to mention foolish.
So, instead I took the functionality of the acquiring company’s computer
systems and made that functionality accessible (wrapping them as the
terminology goes) as web services. Then all I had to do was go in and
make some small changes to the acquired company’s system to call
those web services and, voilà, I was done.
Okay, the solution required a bit more work than that, but a lot less than
rewriting all those COBOL programs. (I told you this was a long time
ago.)
Worked great.
Later on, I did the same thing for a company whose architecture had
stood them well for years but was becoming brittle with the new
demands of customer access on the web — it was getting harder and
harder to add the functionality needed in an Internet-based, real-time

--- Page 23 ---
world. In addition, the company’s current architecture was synchronous,
so the slightest hiccup could cause the whole system to grind to a halt.
In that situation, I wrapped existing functionality in an asynchronous
service-oriented architecture that made it easy to add new functionality
as well as replace the old technology as necessary without breaking
anything.
Worked great there, too.
Given this successful background in service-oriented architecture — an
architecture that serves as the foundation for all web services — you can
imagine that I jumped at the chance when the folks at Wiley asked me to
write a book on cloud computing.
Even though all this talk about wrapping and service-oriented
architecture may not sound like the web services you’ve heard about, it
actually is the same thing. Web services, like objects, allow you to hide
the implementation behind a defined interface, allowing you to evolve
the implementation without breaking the clients. And, as described in
Chapter 6, this is one of the things that make web services so powerful.
Hiding the implementation is exactly what you’ll be doing in this book
— having a server in the cloud do some processing for you. Although
this time, instead of wrapping existing functionality, you’ll write the
service as well (with lots of help from me).
I’ll let you in on a little secret. I also jumped at the chance to write this
book because it is my firm belief that web services (and here I include
iCloud) provide a game changer within a game changer. When the
iPhone SDK was first released, I saw a game changer that could rank
right up there with the introduction of the Macintosh personal computer.
When web services get added to the mix, they elevate a mobile device to
a full-fledged computing device as well as extend the value that
technology can provide to the everyday user.

--- Page 24 ---
What makes this even easier is iOS 5 and, more importantly, Xcode 4.3,
where the nuts and bolts of application development — especially the
ability to take advantage of web services — have changed dramatically.
Even though Xcode 4.3 has added much more functionality to the
Integrated Development Environment (IDE) with which you develop
iOS applications, especially when it comes to writing syntactically
correct (and bug-free) code that’s better able to manage memory, it’s the
whole storyboard concept that is the real headline.
Storyboards, one of my all-time favorite new features, allow you to
develop applications in a new way, with much less code and a better idea
of what the flow of the application (and subsequent user experience) will
be.
But what’s more, storyboards all of a sudden make it easier to develop
universal applications — applications that run with equal aplomb on the
iPad or iPhone — using the same code base! And when you do that,
using iCloud and web services becomes a whole lot easier.
This is great stuff!
About This Book
iOS Cloud Development For Dummies is a guide to using iCloud, using
web services on iOS devices, and developing your own web services.
This book distills the hundreds (or even thousands) of pages of
documentation (not to mention my own development experience) into
only what’s necessary to start you developing and using web services.
But this is no recipe book that leaves it up to you to put it all together;
rather, it starts with an existing universal application and shows you how
to extend its functionality. You’ll be able to share data between an iPad
and iPhone running the app, and you’ll be able to keep the application
data current by using web services.

--- Page 25 ---
I assume that you’re in this for the long haul and you want to master the
use of web services. I use a real-world application to show the concepts
and give you the background on how things actually work. So be
prepared! There may be some places where you might want to say, “Get
on with it,” but — based on my experience, including eight apps in the
App Store, 12 books (and counting), and untold hours spent on in-person
classes and technical talks — I’m giving you what you need to move
from following recipes in a cookbook by rote to modifying and even
creating your own recipes.
Conventions Used in This Book
Code examples in this book appear in a monospaced font so that they
stand out. That means the code you see will look like this:
#import <UIKit/ UIKit.h>
Objective-C is based on C, which (I want to remind you) is case-
sensitive, so please enter the code that appears in this book exactly as it
appears in the text. I also use the standard Objective-C naming
conventions — for example, class names always start with a capital
letter, and the names of methods and instance variables always start with
a lowercase letter.
The width of a page may force me to show you a single line of code on
two lines. This can be a problem with string literals — text with quotes
around it — so when you see a string on two lines, you’ll need to keep it
on a single line in your code.
All those details are also true for the Python programming language
(which I explain to you as you need it). In addition, Python is based on
indentation, so I make sure to point out where you need to be careful.
Let me also mention that all URLs in this book look like this:
www.nealgoldstein.com

--- Page 26 ---
Sometimes I ask you to delete some of the code you have in place for
your project in order to make room for new stuff. When that happens, I
refer to code I want you to delete as bolded-underlined-italicized code,
because said code will show up as bold, underlined, and italic. Simple
enough. For example,
Delete this
If you’re ever uncertain about anything in the code, you can always look
at the source code on my website at www.nealgoldstein.com. From time
to time, I provide updates for the code there and post other things you
may find useful. (You can grab the same material from the For Dummies
website at www.dummies.com/go/iosclouddev.)
To make things easier for you, I also have you download two Xcode
projects — RoadTrip and Road Trip Editor. You can find these two
projects at my website at www.nealgoldstein.com and of course from
the handy For Dummies website at www.dummies.com/go/iosclouddev.
Foolish Assumptions
To begin developing apps that use web services — as well as the
services themselves — you’re going to need an Intel-based Macintosh
computer with the latest possible version of the OS X on it. You also
need to download the iOS Software Development Kit (SDK), which is
free. And, oh yeah, you need an iPad or an iPhone. You’ll also use the
Simulator that Apple provides with the iPad SDK during the initial
stages of development, but at some point, you’ll want to test your
application on a real, live device. Note as well that, when you’re
working with iCloud, you’ll need access to two devices if you want to be
able to test your work.
This book is not an introductory book. It assumes that you have some
knowledge of iOS development, object-oriented programming, and

--- Page 27 ---
Objective-C. On the other hand, it assumes you know nothing about
networking, the cloud, or web services.
How This Book Is Organized
iOS Cloud Development For Dummies has five main parts.
Part I: Mobile Apps Need to Be Mobile
In Part I, I explain why users find their mobile devices so compelling
and also explore how applications can take advantage of the similar and
unique characteristics of the iPhone and the iPad. I explain the
Application Ecosystem, where users can choose the right device for the
right job with their application data shared between the devices.
I also show you how web services can help you create more compelling
applications that increase the mobility of the user while still keeping
them firmly plugged in to their person ecosystems.
You also embark on a brief tour of the RoadTrip app — a universal app
that runs on both the iPhone and iPad. This is the app you’ll be
extending and enhancing to make it far more appealing to a user by
evolving it to a true Application Ecosystem app by adding iCloud
support and web services.
Part II: Adding iCloud
In this part of the book, you discover how you can use iCloud to
synchronize data between two devices running the same application. I
explain Core Data, which is a way to store persistent objects, and I show
you how to use Core Data to manage the points of interest you have in

--- Page 28 ---
your itinerary — all parts of the RoadTrip app that you’ll get to know in
detail.
I start with the Core Data stack and then show you how to use Core Data
within an application. Then I show you how to use Core Data to add
iCloud support, enabling you to manage that trick of sharing data
between multiple devices running RoadTrip.
Part III: Web Services
Part III starts you on the process of having your application actually use
web services. I start by explaining about networks, the Internet, and the
World Wide Web and the technology behind web services.
You then begin your real work by stepping through what actually
happens when you make use of a web service — in this case, the Google
Geocoder web service. I take you through how to use the URL loading
system to make asynchronous web service requests, and I show you how
to parse both XML and JSON response to use the web service data in
your application.
In the process, you’ll create two classes that you will continue to use in
the book and can easily use in your own applications.
The first is the WSManager — it handles the actual construction of your
web service request. The second is the WSLoader, which uses the URL
loading system to asynchronously make the request and download the
response from a web service.
Part IV: Building Your Own Web Service
Part IV is where you actually get to build your own web services.

--- Page 29 ---
You use Google App Engine to host your web service as well as
GoogleAppEngineLauncher to develop your web services on your local
machine.
I take you through the criteria for good web services and the
specification of the web services that you’ll use in RoadTrip and in the
Road Trip Editor, which will enable you to add and delete points of
interest from your web services database. (The actual Adding and
Deleting business gets covered in an extra special Bonus Chapter,
available for download from this book’s website.)
I explain how Google App Engine works and give you a tutorial (in
context) on how to code your web services in Python.
I close by talking a bit about security, and then you finally get to upload
your app to App Engine, and off you go.
Part V: The Part of Tens
Part V consists of some tips to help you avoid having to discover
everything the hard way. This part talks about approaching application
development in an adult way right from the beginning (without taking
the fun out of it, I assure you). I also revisit the RoadTrip app and
explain what else you would need to do to make this app a commercial
and critical success.
Icons Used in This Book
 This icon indicates a useful pointer that you shouldn’t skip.

--- Page 30 ---
 This icon represents a friendly reminder. It describes a vital
point that you should keep in mind while proceeding through a
particular section of the chapter.
 This icon signifies that the accompanying explanation may be
informative (dare I say “interesting”?), but it isn’t essential to
understanding iPad application development. Feel free to skip past
these tidbits if you like (though skipping while learning may be
tricky).
 This icon alerts you to potential problems that you may
encounter along the way. Read and obey these blurbs to avoid
trouble.
Where to Go from Here
It’s time to explore the cloud!
Also, be sure to visit my website, www.nealgoldstein.com, and the
companion website for this book, www.dummies.com/go/iosclouddev,
for source code, a handy Bonus Chapter, and other information. For
updates to this edition, check out
www.dummies.com/go/iosclouddevupdates. Now, go out there and have
some fun!
Please note that some special symbols used in this eBook may not
display properly on all eReader devices. If you have trouble determining
any symbol, please call Wiley Product Technical Support at 800-762-
2974. Outside of the United States, please call 317-572-3993. You can

--- Page 31 ---
also contact Wiley Product Technical Support at
www.wiley.com/techsupport.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 32 ---
Part I
Mobile Apps Need to Be
Mobile
In this part . . .

--- Page 33 ---
You’ve decided that it’s time to be in the cloud. In this part, I explain
why that’s a smart decision and then go on to tell you how you can really
take advantage of cloud computing. I also go ahead and explain
RoadTrip, the sample app you’ll work with throughout this book.
RoadTrip is an almost commercially viable app (but please don’t go
selling it in the store) that just needs a few more features to make it take
off. After I explain RoadTrip’s nuts and bolts, you’ll be set to take the
next step and elevate it to the cloud.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 34 ---
Chapter 1
Compelling Mobile Applications
In This Chapter
 Discovering what makes mobile devices so appealing
 Acknowledging the strengths and weaknesses of mobile devices
 Working with Application Ecosystems
 Tweaking your Model Application Controller
Let me be honest with you. The dirty little secret is that cloud computing
is nothing new. It’s really just a variation (yet another one) on client-
server computing.
The client-server model of computing distributes the tasks of an
application between the providers of a resource or service (called
servers) and service requesters (called clients). It’s been around for quite
a while — since the 1980s, in fact, when it was used in the context of
personal computers on a network (usually a LAN). It has evolved over
time and is also one of the central ideas of network computing. As I
explain in Chapter 2, the Internet’s main application protocols, HTTP,
SMTP, Telnet, and DNS use client-server computing, and web browsers
and web servers have a client server relationship.
I talk a lot about client-server in this book, but in this chapter I
concentrate on your application design. And, although this book focuses
on the client-server design and implementation in an application, I spend
at least a little time talking about your application functionality as well.
I’d hate to have you spend all that time implementing iCloud and web
services in an application that no one finds particularly useful.

--- Page 35 ---
So start at the beginning with a simple question: What is it about the
iPhone and the iPad that makes them so appealing?
What Makes Mobile Devices So
Compelling
Although I had been somewhat involved with the mobile platform for a
number of years, it became my number one passion when the iPhone
SDK was released in March of 2008.
It became obvious at that point that the SDK was a real game changer,
up there with the release of the Macintosh.
I realized that the iPhone wasn’t simply a smaller personal computer. It
was, in fact, an entirely new way of using technology, one that could
create an entirely new user experience
“Why?” you ask? Let me count the ways.
First of all, because your iPhone is always on, it gives you immediate
access to everything that’s important to you — your personal contacts,
calendar, music, videos, and even games. And if what you want isn’t
right there on the iPhone, you can immediately access it through the
Internet using its “always there” connection. It also gives you immediate
access to everyone that’s important to you through the phone itself, text
messaging, and (recently) notifications and Voice over IP.
But to be honest, that access is already possible on your personal
computer. The new wrinkle comes from the fact that the phone can come
with you — you don’t have to go to it. Moreover, you’re always
connected through the cellular network, rather than tethered to an
Ethernet cable or relying on the limited reach of Wi-Fi. What’s more, not
only does it come with you, but it knows where it is, letting you know

--- Page 36 ---
where you are. It even knows its orientation, heading, and movement as
you take it from place to place.
And not only does it come with you, but it also works as you move.
Certain applications are able to run in background and update you with
information you might be interested in as you travel from place to place.
Well, to continue being honest, that’s also possible on your personal
computer using a cellular modem.
What really makes an iPhone different from a small, portable personal
computer is the way you interact with it. The Multi-Touch experience
makes you more naturally connected to the device. You can cup it in
your hand and interact with the iPhone directly, with no mouse or
keyboard acting as an intermediary. You can even use gestures whenever
possible rather than controls. This interaction creates a degree of
intimacy, making the technology disappear, as it becomes a personal
extension of the user. An app may have an infrastructure the size of
Texas behind it, but to the user, it always appears to be just him and his
app.
 Of course, it’s not just another small mobile personal computer
for another reason. Although its features make it possible to be
something beyond a personal computer and do things that either
can’t be done — or done easily — on a personal computer, this is a
two-edged sword. A laptop does some things far better than an
iPhone, and it’s critical to understand that an iPhone is not a
replacement for a laptop computer either.
And then along came the iPad, and things changed yet again, albeit not
so dramatically.
Creating zero degrees of separation

--- Page 37 ---
The iPhone and iPad create what I call zero degrees of separation
between the user and his or her Personal Ecosystem, an ecosystem I
define as being made up of
 Themselves and their personal stuff
 Other people
 Things such as events, information, data, institutions, tools, and
entertainment
 The device
Having that zero degrees of separation produces a sense of freedom. The
user isn’t tethered to her desktop and has everything she needs with her,
or if not, she can get it and can instantaneously communicate to anyone
anywhere.
Benefiting from the mobility, not the
mobile devices
Achieving zero degrees of separation may be the equivalent of
technological Nirvana, but it still sounds a bit abstract. Back in the world
of brass tacks, the beauty of the iPad and iPhone comes from the fact
that there are applications and features on both devices that dramatically
enhance the mobility of the user.
I must admit than when I first started working with the iPhone (and later
the iPad), I focused mainly on the mobile device and its features. But
after thinking about it for several years (okay, I guess I’m not really the
world’s fastest thinker), I realized that the real value lies not in the
mobility of the device, but rather in the mobility of the user. In fact, a
large part of the appeal of the device is that it makes being mobile much
easier.

--- Page 38 ---
 The iPhone is small and unobtrusive enough to have it with you
wherever you go. More importantly, it allows you to carry all
your personal stuff with you — things such as contacts and
calendars, music and videos, and even games. Add in the camera
(the iPhone is the second-most-popular camera on Flickr), and
you have everything you need.
And even though the iPad may not be as mobile if you don’t
have 3G and you may not be able to fit it in your pocket, it’s still
small enough to feel like you can take it with you. With iPad in
hand, you can lounge on your couch or bed and feel connected
to everything.
 The device is easily connected. This fact leads to an interesting
corollary: You don’t need to have everything stored on the
device. All you really need to know is how to jump on the
Internet and grab what you need from there (or have an
application that does it for you). That functionality lets you
perform tasks and access information from anywhere.
 The device knows where it is, its orientation, and can even show
you on a map.
 Thanks to the phone, Voice over IP, e-mail, and SMS, you can
instantaneously communicate with anyone anywhere.
Increasing the quality of life
At the end of the day, mobile devices and applications enable the kind of
Personal Ecosystem you see illustrated in Figure 1-1. More importantly,
the iPhone and iPad show how people can successfully use mobile
devices to improve the quality of their everyday (non-technical) life.
Although engineers think in terms of applications, it really is all about
the role a device can play as part of a user experience linked to what
flesh and blood people actually do in the real world.

--- Page 39 ---
Figure 1-1:
A Personal
Ecosystem.
I talk more about creating applications that achieve that goal, but before
I do, I want to explore something that developers often tend to ignore,
and that is how the device itself engages the user.
Making the technology disappear
Hats off to mobility and all that, but enhancing mobility (on its own) is
not enough. As I said before, I can be mobile using a laptop and a
cellular modem. But what you can’t take away from the iPhone and iPad
is how easy being mobile can be with their help.
So while people normally speak about user experience in using
applications, I’m here to tell you that the device itself also creates a
unique user experience. When an application is done right on an iPad or
iPhone, a couple of things happen:
 Direct manipulation makes people feel more in control. On
the desktop, that meant a keyboard and mouse; on the iPhone
and iPad, the Multi-Touch interface serves the same purpose.
People use their fingers, rather than a mouse, to select and
manipulate objects onscreen. In fact, using fingers gives a user a
more immediate sense of control; there’s no longer anything
between the user and the object onscreen.

--- Page 40 ---
The moves that do the work, called gestures, give the user a
heightened sense of control and intimacy with the device.
There’s a set of standard gestures — tap, pinch-close, pinch-
open, flick, and drag — that are used in the applications supplied
with the iPhone.
 There’s a consistency within the device. One other thing that
makes the device so appealing in this regard is the consistency
of the use of gestures across applications as well as standard user
interface components.
 Immediate feedback keeps the users engaged. Great
applications respond to every user action with some visible
feedback, such as highlighting list items briefly when users tap
them. Users have come to expect onscreen objects to be visible
while they manipulate those objects.
In addition, the iPhone and iPad use animation to provide
feedback. (I especially like the flipping transitions in the
Weather application when I touch the Info button.)
 The iPhone allows an immediacy and intimacy as it blends
mobility and the power of the desktop to create a new kind of
freedom. I like to use the term user experience because it implies
more than a pretty user interface and nice graphics. A compelling
user experience enables users to do what they need to do with a
minimum of fuss and bother. But more than that, it forces you to
think past a clean interface and even beyond basic convenience
(such as not having to scroll through menus to do something
simple).
Reveling in the aesthetics

--- Page 41 ---
Smart design, elegant controls, and quality, quality, quality are all
elements that the iPhone and iPad are known for. Speaking of quality,
although you’re probably pretty much used to it by now, it doesn’t hurt
to remind yourself how extraordinary the quality of the screen — and
thus media playback — can be. Although it is tempting to think of the
iPad here, the iPhone delivers that experience as well, albeit in a smaller
format.
Never underestimate the importance of style and panache — and the
cool factor. There were, after all, MP3 players before the iPod, smart
phones before the iPhone, and tablets before the iPad.
All praise aside, though, I want to make one thing absolutely clear: This
is not about being an Apple fan. It’s about recognizing how these
characteristics of the Apple devices appeal to ordinary (not technical)
people and make such devices special in their eyes.
An Application Ecosystem
In one corner, you have a light, small mobile device that you can take
with you — one that almost disappears as it become part of your daily
life. In the other corner, you have a device that shines at presentation and
can immerse you in content — a device you can think of as something
between an iPhone and a Mac.
But oftentimes it’s not one or the other. I would, for example, want to
use an iPad to research and plan a road trip, but while I’m travelling I’d
like to be able to access all that information on my iPhone — it’s a lot
easier to take along as I explore. What I don’t want is one app for
planning and a different app for traveling. What I want is a seamless
integration between the two, and although I may prefer to do one task on
one device versus the other, I also want to be able to do either on both.
It’s a function of user interface design and (how I access) primary versus
secondary functionality based on what the device does best.

--- Page 42 ---
Figure 1-2:
The
Application
Ecosystem.
What’s more, go ahead and add the laptop/desktop back into the mix.
(Yes, personal computers have a place in this new world.) A word to the
wise: Don’t ignore the laptop, or even the desktop. If I have to do a lot of
manipulation or data entry, the laptop is far better at that than the iPad.
What you end up with is an Application Ecosystem, kind of like what
you see in Figure 1-2. The idea here is to distribute functionality to the
device that does it best. And to do that, it would help to understand what
application functionality is best suited for which device.
For example, imagine an application aimed at photographers. Its claim to
fame would be that it could show you the best sites to photograph,
pinpoint those sites on a map, tell you the best time of day to take the
photographs, and list the setting to use on your camera. On an iPad, you
could take advantage of the large display to go through the proposed
photographs and decide which ones you wanted to take. You could select
those photographs to create a shot list that you could then order by time
of day and location. Then, when you were done, you could access that
shot list from your iPhone. That means you could then carry just the
iPhone with you; as you took the photographs, you could update the
ones you had taken with the actual settings and time of day and then be
able to access that information from your iPad.
Or imagine a road trip. You would plan it on your iPad and then access
directions, maps, hotel reservations, and places to eat from your iPhone.
You could even take notes on your phone about your experience and add
your photographs from your phone to document your trip. You could
then use your iPad to create a trip album.
The possibilities are endless.

--- Page 43 ---
If you want the right device for the right function and you want
seamlessness and consistency across all platforms, does that mean one
universal app, or two or three apps with lots of duplicate functionality?
In the past, that would have been a difficult question to answer. Now,
fortunately, the answer’s pretty simple: You don’t need lots of apps —
that’s where iCloud and Xcode come in.
iCloud and universal apps
My ideas about the Application Ecosystem predated iCloud. Way back
when, I talked about creating web services to allow a user to share data
between two devices using the same application. And even though
creating web services can be pretty easy (as you’ll see in Part IV of the
book), it’s always better and a heck of a lot easier to use than to build —
and iCloud does indeed make things much easier. You’ll find that out for
yourself in Part II.
One of the requirements for running the same application on both the
iPhone and iPad is that the user interface and user experience be
optimized for the device. Before Xcode 4.2 and Storyboards, creating
universal apps wasn’t that easy, but creating an app for each device
turned into a development and maintenance nightmare.

--- Page 44 ---
Storyboards have completely turned that around. I now have no qualms
recommending that you use a universal app to implement iCloud and
web services, and that’s the approach this book takes.
While iCloud does let you share data between the same application
running on different devices, and universal apps do allow you to have
the same business logic on all your devices, neither allows you to
implement that zero degrees of separation I mention at the beginning of
this chapter, where the user has everything she needs with her, or if not,
can get it and can instantaneously communicate to anyone anywhere.
For that to work, you need data that’s continually being updated. What’s
more, iCloud doesn’t allow multiple users to access shared data —
something you would definitely want in a social networking or calendar
application for example.
For that last piece of the puzzle, we turn to web services.
Web services
Web services really are a way to take full advantage of the benefits of
client-server computing. I’ve highlighted a number of them in the
discussion so far, but I summarize them here:
 Offload processing and data to a larger, more powerful
computer, allowing you to create applications that would
normally tax the device’s capability.
 Deliver the most up-to-date information.
 Allow multiple applications — even multiple instances of the
same application — to share data.
 Have a greater control over data and business rules, enabling a
way to make them authoritative.
 Deliver a seamless and consistent user experience across not
only multiple types of devices (tablet, phones, the web), but also

--- Page 45 ---
across multiple applications that share data and business rules.
That’s all fine and dandy, but if you’re going to go down the path of an
Application Ecosystem (as you will in this book), you also need an
implementable architecture within which to design your applications.
Fortunately, all you have to do is evolve an architecture you should
already be familiar with: the Model View Controller, the design pattern
you (or almost anyone, for that matter) would use to develop
applications for the iPhone or iPad. But before I explain how to extend
the Model View Controller pattern to designing applications in an
Application Ecosystem using web services, I’m thinking a little review
wouldn’t hurt.
The Model View Controller (MVC)
Architecture
The Model View Controller (MVC) Architecture (often referred to as a
design pattern) is a well-established way to group application functions
into objects. Variations of it have been around at least since the early
days of Smalltalk, one of the very first object-oriented languages. The
MVC is a high-level pattern, which means it addresses the architecture
of an application and classifies objects according to the (very) general
roles they play in an application.
The MVC pattern creates, in effect, a miniature universe for the
application, populated with three kinds of objects. It also specifies roles
and responsibilities for all three objects as well as spelling out the way
they’re supposed to interact with each other. To make things more
concrete (that is, to keep your head from exploding), imagine a big,
beautiful, 60-inch flat-screen TV. Here’s the gist:
 Model objects: These objects together make up the content
engine of your application. They contain the application’s data
and logic — making your application more than just a pretty
face. In a road trip application, for example, the model knows all

--- Page 46 ---
the details of the trip and — if such details are not resident on
the device — where to find them.
You can think of the model (which may be one object or several
that interact) as a particular television program. The TV
program, quite frankly, doesn’t care about what TV set it’s being
shown on.
In fact, the model shouldn’t care. Even though it owns its data, it
should have no connection at all to the user interface and should
be blissfully ignorant about what’s being done with its data.
 View objects: These objects display things on the screen and
respond to user actions. Pretty much anything you can see is a
kind of view object — the window and all the controls, for
example. Your view knows how to display information that it
has gotten from the model object, and how to get any input from
the user the model may need. But the view itself should know
nothing about the model. It may handle a request to tell the user
a little more about the giant ball of twine owned by Ripley’s
Believe It or Not in Brooks, Missouri, although it doesn’t care
about the content options it displays for you.
You can think of the view as a television screen that doesn’t care
about what program it’s showing or what channel you just
selected.
If the view knows nothing about the model, and the model
knows nothing about the view, how do you get data and other
notifications to pass from one to the other? To get that
conversation started (for example, the model says, “I’ve just
updated my data,” and the view says, “Hey, give me something
to display!”), you need the third element in the MVC triumvirate
— the controller.
 Controller objects: These objects connect the application’s
view objects to its model objects. They supply the view objects

--- Page 47 ---
Figure 1-3:
The Model
View
Controller
on a device.
with what they need to display (getting it from the model) and
also provide the model with user input from the view.
You can think of the controller as the circuitry that pulls the
show off of the cable and sends it to the screen, or it can request
a particular pay-per-view show.
Figure 1-3 shows what an MVC pattern would look like for an iPhone.
(You’ll also notice a greyed-out iPad and a laptop as well. That’s
because the same architecture is used on those devices.)
Evolving the Model View
Controller
Here’s your takeaway of the day: The Model View Controller is not
limited to working just within an application. You can evolve it to
implement the Application Ecosystem powered by web services. If you
end up doing that, you replace the View with an Application that delivers
a user experience tailored to the device — a Model Application
Controller — supported by web services in the cloud. This setup enables

--- Page 48 ---
you to tailor the user experience to the device while maintaining a
seamless and consistent user experience. Figure 1-4 gives you an idea of
what that would look like.
What exactly does a seamless and consistent user experience really
mean?
To start with, what it does not mean is the identical user interface or look
and feel across devices.
What it does mean is a user experience based on what the device does
best, with the same underlying data, business rules, and logic underlying
the various user interfaces. It also means that the user experiences the
same application functionality where applicable — doing the same
things in the same way — although the functionality is based on the
device characteristics. It also means the user has access to whatever
tasks he has done on any other device — changing his profile
information, for example, or adding information on a trip he may be
creating.
The Model Application Controller Architecture is based on a synthesis of
client-server, service-oriented, and object-oriented architectures that I
explain in more detail in Chapter 6.
Using this architecture, the views in the Model View Controller become
the applications you see in Figure 1-4. These applications become
primarily responsible for delivering a user experience best tailored to the
capabilities and limitations of the device. These applications have the
“normal” MVC Architecture. They have the views that you would
expect, and these views do what views do best, such as display data and
receive input from the user — all the stuff I explain in “The Model View
Controller (MVC) pattern” section, earlier in the chapter. Similarly, the
applications have controllers that do controller-like things — connect the
model and the view, in other words — although instead of the model
being (completely) co-located on the device, some part of it lives in the
cloud, and the device controllers send web service requests to another set

--- Page 49 ---
Figure 1-4:
The Model
Application
Controller
Archi tecture.
Figure 1-5:
A Multi-
Application
Ecosystem.
of controllers (or service routers), which connect to the effective model
for the application. These controllers provide the services for all the
applications in an Application Ecosystem, enabling a seamless
experience when the user moves from device to device. The user gets a
consistency of business rules and logic as well as a consistent
experience. The key is to design the applications running on each device
to take advantage of the strengths and limitations of each device in a
way that is as consistent as possible across devices.
 This even works for a Multi-Application Ecosystem, where you
can create consistency across multiple applications, as shown in
Figure 1-5.

--- Page 50 ---
In this case, you can maintain a seamless and consistent user experience
across related applications — for example, a single user sign in or
allowing a user to maintain the same profile or preferences across
applications.
Pretty impressive, right? Welcome to Mobile 2.0.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 51 ---
Chapter 2
The Lonely RoadTrip App
In This Chapter
 Discovering the RoadTrip app
 Exploring RoadTrip’s features and functions
 Seeing how RoadTrip’s Itinerary feature works
 Adding points of interest
 Working through how RTModel manages points of interest and the
itinerary
As you dive into this book, you’ll discover that there are at least four
critically important skills you’ll need to take away from the work you do
on the RoadTrip app. They are as follows:
1. How to implement the application ecosystem in such a way that you
can share user data between a user’s various devices so that the app
you create will work well on the right device for the right job.
2. How to share application data and logic across all devices running
the same application so you can keep them all up to date and consistent
without having to publish new versions of your app.
3. How to deal with the asynchronous nature of cloud computing,
especially its direct impact on both the current view and hidden views
that may be impacted by the completion of a task. This task is made
more complex on the iPad because you may have multiple views
visible at the same time.
4. How to deal with the connections in an application’s architecture
and the indirect impact a change in one view may have on other visible
and hidden views. (See the comment in Step 2 about the iPad.)

--- Page 52 ---
Starting at Square 7
Now, I could have taken the easy way out to show you the mechanics of
using iCloud and web services by having you develop a simple
application on the iPhone. By doing that, however, I would not have
been able to really accomplish the goal I had set for myself, which
centered around you, dear reader, walking away from this book secure in
your knowledge of the four preceding skills.
So, instead of taking the easy way out, I decided to build upon an
existing application — known affectionately as RoadTrip, which I had
helped readers develop in both iPhone Application Development For
Dummies, 4th Edition and iPad Application Development For Dummies,
3rd Edition. By building upon RoadTrip, I show you how a complex,
real-world application can make use of the unique opportunities
provided by iCloud and web services.
 The iPhone version of RoadTrip and the iPad version of
RoadTrip are very similar, but not identical. And don’t worry if you
haven’t read those particular books — I explain the app in detail in
this chapter.
The RoadTrip application had the reader implement the basic
functionality of:
1. Choosing a destination
2. Presenting events happening at that destination
3. Displaying on a map the default points of interest included with the
application
4. Displaying on a map a customized point of interest or an address the
user enters
For this book, I took RoadTrip and extended it a bit so I could meet the
four goals I list earlier. Here are the extensions I added:

--- Page 53 ---
 I added the logic to allow the user to create her own itinerary by
choosing from the points of interest included in the application.
The user can then add or delete points of interest from the
itinerary at any point.
This is a great example of the right device for the right job. The
user might want to create the itinerary on the iPad because its
display is bigger and can display two views at the same time.
When it comes time to actually hit the road, though, the user
may want to access (or even update) the itinerary on the iPhone
because it’s a lot more mobile and easier to carry around. (As
you’ll soon see, this accessing and updating business is a job for
iCloud.)
 Instead of displaying all the points of interest on the map, I have
the map display only those listed in the itinerary.
 I added the iPhone user interface in the storyboard. In iPad
Application Development For Dummies, 3rd Edition, I had the
reader create a universal app, although I left it up to the reader to
create the iPhone user interface on his own.
In this chapter, I take you on a tour of the RoadTrip app. In the chapters
to come, you extend RoadTrip so that it can take advantage of A) iCloud
support to share a user’s itinerary amongst all her devices, and B) web
services so that you, as the developer, can add more points of interest
and the user can have immediate access to them without you having to
add them as defaults to the app and send out a new version.
Before I get you started on your tour of the RoadTrip app, I want to
make a couple of additional points:

--- Page 54 ---
 Starting with a fully functioning app makes the task of mastering
the whole iCloud/web services ball of wax a lot easier. If
something doesn’t work, you can be sure it’s in your
implementation of the iCloud or web services functionality and
not in the app functionality itself. Starting from Square Seven
rather than Square One also parallels the incremental
development process, where you add functionality in a
methodical step-by-step basis.
 I’ve set up the system architecture for the application in such a
way that the changes you have to make are either implemented
in new classes or limited to a small number of existing classes.
(Hey, I’m a big fan of making a task as easy as possible.) In fact,
adding the iCloud functionality is mostly isolated to the RTModel
class, with minor changes to the ItineraryController class.
Adding web services requires mostly changes to the RTModel
class, with minor changes to the PointsOfInterestController
class.
So to start things off, go ahead and download the RoadTrip Project from
www.nealgoldstein.com/support/downloads/ (you can check out my
website while you are there), or the For Dummies website associated
with this book. While you’re at it, you should also download the
RoadTrip Editor Project at this time, although you won’t be using that
until you make your way to the Bonus Chapter, “Adding and Deleting
Points of Interest,” available for download from this book’s website.
That app will enable you to add and delete points of interest from your
web service.
Ready for the tour? In the rest of the chapter, I explain how RoadTrip
works, concentrating mostly on the functionality you’ll be working with
as part of your iCloud and web services boot camp — more specifically,
adding and deleting points of interest to an itinerary. I strongly suggest
that you build and run the RoadTrip app and explore its functionality as I
go through this chapter, as well as do some exploring of the app on your
own.

--- Page 55 ---
The RoadTrip App
Necessity is the mother of invention, and the original RoadTrip idea was
inspired by a necessity of a sort. My daughter was about to leave on a
7,000-mile road trip around the United States and I walked in one day
and found her on her living room floor, with maps and tour books spread
out every which way. Although I never did develop the app for her, or
my evil twin Skippy who was also planning a road trip, it did start me
thinking about how much better it would be if she didn’t have to spread
out these maps and paper all over her car.
I eventually decided that the road-trip planning scenario really called for
two apps: one that was optimized for the planning that could take
advantage of the larger screen size on an iPad (as well as the ability to
see two views), and the other that was optimized for travel with the
smaller and more mobile iPhone being the better solution. Of course, I
wanted to be able to do everything on either device, but the user
interface would be targeted to take advantage of a device’s specific
features. Not wanting to write the same app twice led me down the
universal app route using storyboards — much easier these days, by the
way, with the arrival of Xcode 4 and iOS 5. Using a storyboard enables
me to have single code base while still employing a user interface
tailored for the device. What’s more, all the work to determine which
user interface to present is done for you at runtime without any effort on
your part.
In Figures 2-1 through 2-3, you can see how the iPad user interface takes
advantage of the larger display and the ability to see two views at once.
In Figure 2-1, the pane on the left displays the application functionality
in what Xcode calls the Master view. The pane on the right displays the
appropriately named Detail view — with the weather being displayed as
the default view when you launch the app and have selected a
destination). (For more on Master and Detail views, check out iPad
Application Development For Dummies, 3rd edition.)

--- Page 56 ---
Figure 2-1:
A real-life
example of
the Master
view and
Detail view
combination
.
Figure 2-2:
Add a point
of interest to
This division into Master view and Detail view is an elegant way of
allowing the user to pick a task from the navigation tree on the left and
see the content associated with that task on the right. This elegance
becomes even more apparent when you want to add a point of interest to
your itinerary and display it in a List view, as shown in Figure 2-2, or
when you want to add a point of interest to your itinerary by selecting
the point of interest from the list on the left and display it on the map, as
you can see in Figure 2-3.
While I’m on the topic of points of interest, you can even add your own
customized point of interest, as shown in Figure 2-4.
You can see the same kind of functionality that you see on the iPad on
the iPhone (although you’ll can only see one view at a time) in Figure 2-
5.


--- Page 57 ---
your
itinerary.
Figure 2-3:
Add a point
of interest to
your map.
Figure 2-4:
I’ve always
wanted to
see New
Jersey’s


--- Page 58 ---
fabulous
skyline.
On the iPhone version of RoadTrip, the main tasks you’d want to do on
the road — things like checking the weather, going over maps and
checking for events — are on the main screen (Figure 2-5, left). Tasks
associated with the pre-trip planning, however, are all on a supplemental
screen (Figure 2-5, right).
 Major caveat here! The user interface I’ve described and the user
experience I’m about to explain aren’t necessarily the “best” in
terms of design and usability. That’s because I’m first and foremost
concerned with being able to use RoadTrip as a vehicle to get you
up and running on the Cloud Computing Technology side, and not
on the Design and User Interface and Experience for a Travel App
side. So I end up doing some things — and not doing some things
— in the name of optimizing your learning experience. The long
and short of it is that the RoadTrip application could use some
tweaks to make it production ready (and I indicate some of those
tweaks throughout the book) and I describe the broader,
application-wide issues in Chapter 16.

--- Page 59 ---
Figure 2-5:
Using
RoadTrip on
the iPhone.
Before I start in with the explanations about the points of interest and the
itinerary implementation — stuff you’ll use (and modify) when you
implement iCloud and web services — let me run through the rest of
RoadTrip’s functionality. Although it’s possible to do everything on both
devices, I use the iPad version for the screenshots because the split
screen makes it easier to get a handle on the RoadTrip application as
whole.
The tasks I came up with for my RoadTrip app are as follows:
 Get real-time weather access. Snow in New York in August?
Not likely, but these days you never can tell. You can see real-
time weather access at work in Figure 2-6.
 Find out what’s going on wherever you are. Figure 2-7 shows
an event that a user might be interested in, with fancy page
turning no less.

--- Page 60 ---
Figure 2-6:
The weather
in New York.
Figure 2-7:
RoadTrip
describes
some things
for you to do
while in a
city.
 Bring up a map based on the destination. The map shows the
destination, offers points of interest, and even allows the user to
zero in on his current location, as shown in Figure 2-8.


--- Page 61 ---
Figure 2-8:
Finding your
way with
pinpoint
accuracy.
Figure 2-9:
Where is
Radio City
Music Hall,
anyway?
 Find a place on a map. If the user has an address that she wants
to find on the map, she should be able to do that and get its GPS
coordinates. Figure 2-9 gives an example of finding a point of
interest on a map.
 Choose your destination, as shown in Figure 2-10.
 Turn off those annoying notifications about how far you are
from your destination. (See Figure 2-11.)
 If you choose a location from the Find selection (refer to
Figure 2-8) and shake the device, it will tell you how far
away you are from that location, as shown in Figure 2-12.

--- Page 62 ---
Figure 2-
10: Where
would I like
to go today?
Figure 2-
11: Enough
already.


--- Page 63 ---
Figure 2-
12: A long
way to drive
for a movie
Points of Interest and the Itinerary
All this talk about the wonders of RoadTrip is fine and dandy, but the
point here is to take the current version of the RoadTrip application and
upgrade it so that it can take advantage of iCloud and web services.
The first thing you’ll do in Part II of this book is add iCloud support.
That means that if you add a point of interest from the Points of Interest
list to your Itinerary list on the iPad (refer to Figure 2-2), it will also
automatically show up on the iPhone, and vice versa.
You’ll be using Core Data to implement iCloud support — more on that
in Part II as well.
You’ll also be changing how you actually get the points of interest that
you display. (Again, refer to Figure 2-2.) The points of interest that get
displayed by default are currently bundled in the app in the
Destinations.plist file shown in Figure 2-13. In the upgraded version

--- Page 64 ---
Figure 2-
13: Not
many places
to go.
of the app, you’ll be getting the points of interest from a web service.
(I’ll also be showing you how to use another application — RoadTrip
Editor — to add and delete points of interest, but I explain that
application in the Bonus Chapter, “Adding and Deleting Points of
Interest.”)
The Itinerary view you see back in Figure 2-2 is managed by the
Itinerary Controller, and like all other good little controllers, it
manages the connection between the model (in this case, the RTModel)
and the view (in this case, a Table view). The ItineraryController is a
subclass of the RTDetailViewController (a UIViewController) which
has all the logic for managing the popover and the button that displays in

--- Page 65 ---
Portrait orientation on the iPad. (The RTDetailViewController is not
germane to adding iCloud and web services support, but I do cover it in
great detail in my iPad Software Development For Dummies, 3rd
Edition, if you’re interested.)
What gets displayed in the ItineraryController’s Table view is in the
data encapsulated in a PointOfInterest object. The code for its
interface looks like the following:
@interface PointOfInterest : NSObject <MKAnnotation>
@property (nonatomic, readwrite)
                        CLLocationCoordinate2D
coordinate;
@property (nonatomic, readwrite, copy) NSString *title;
@property (nonatomic, readwrite, copy) NSString
*subtitle;
@property (nonatomic, readwrite, copy) NSString
*address;
@property (nonatomic, readwrite, copy) NSString
*location;
@property (nonatomic, readwrite, copy) NSString
*comment;
- (id)initWithData:(NSDictionary *)data;
- (NSDictionary *)returnPointOfInterestData;
@end
A PointOfInterest object supplies the data the ItineraryController
sends to the Table view to display in its
tableView:cellForRowAtIndexPath: method, as shown in the bolded
parts of Listing 2-1.
Listing 2-1: Displaying PointOfInterest data in the
Table View
- (UITableViewCell *)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView
cellForRowAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath
{

--- Page 66 ---
  UITableViewCell *cell = [tableView
        dequeueReusableCellWithIdentifier:kItineraryCell
];
  PointOfInterest *pointOfInterest =
       [itineraryPointsOfInterest      
                             objectAtIndex:indexPath.row
];
  cell.textLabel.text = pointOfInterest.title;
  cell.detailTextLabel.text = pointOfInterest.subtitle;
  return cell;
}
The ItineraryController has a reference to an array of PointOf
Interest objects that make up the itinerary — itineraryPoints
OfInterest. This array is managed by the RTModel, and I’ll get to that
shortly.
The PointOfInterestController works in the exact same way as the
ItineraryController, and pointsOfInterest is its reference to the
PointOfInterest objects that are not part of the itinerary.
The PointOfInterest objects you see displayed in the itinerary and the
Point of Interest Table views together make up the complete set of points
of interest available to the user. Every point of interest is always in either
one list or the other, but never in both. When the user chooses a point of
interest to add to his itinerary (by selecting a row in its Table view) the
PointsOfInterestController, in its
tableView:didSelectRowAtIndexPath: method, sends the
addToItinerary:objectAtIndex: message to the RTModel, as shown in
Listing 2-2.
Listing 2-2: Selecting a Point of Interest to Add to
the Itinerar
- (void)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView

--- Page 67 ---
          didSelectRowAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath
*)indexPath
{
  [tableView deselectRowAtIndexPath:
                                  indexPath
animated:YES];
  [[RTModel model] addToItinerary:
          [pointsOfInterest
objectAtIndex:indexPath.row]];
}
As shown in Listing 2-3, the RTModel simply removes the point of
interest from the PointsOfInterestController array, adds it to the
Itinerary Controller array, and then notifies the controllers of the
change by posting a notification. (I explain the ins and outs of
notifications in Chapters 3 and 4.) The controllers respond by reloading
their respective views.
Listing 2-3: Adding a PointOfInterest to the
Itinerary
- (void)addToItinerary:
                      (PointOfInterest *)pointOfInterest
{
  
  [itinerary addObject:pointOfInterest];   
  [pointsOfInterest removeObject:pointOfInterest];
  
  [itineraryData addObject:
             [pointOfInterest
returnPointOfInterestData]];
  RTAppDelegate *appDelegate =
             [[UIApplication sharedApplication]
delegate];
  NSString *fileComponent =

--- Page 68 ---
    [NSString stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”,
@”Itinerary”,  
              appDelegate.destinationPreference,
@”.poi”];
  NSString *filePath = [RTModel filePath:fileComponent];
  NSURL *itineraryDataURL =
                         [NSURL
fileURLWithPath:filePath];
  [itineraryData writeToURL:itineraryDataURL
                                          atomically:YES
];
  [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
postNotificationName:@”ItineraryChanged” object:self
userInfo:nil];
  [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
postNotificationName:@”PointsOfInterestChanged”
object:self userInfo:nil];
  UIAlertView *alert = [[UIAlertView alloc]
       initWithTitle:pointOfInterest.title
       message:@”Was added to your itinerary”
       delegate:self cancelButtonTitle:@”Thanks”
       otherButtonTitles:nil];
  [alert show];
}
Similarly, when the user removes a point of interest from his itinerary by
tapping the Deletion control and then the Delete button when the Table
view is in editing mode, the ItineraryController, in its
tableView:commitEditingStyle:forRowAtIndexPath: method, sends
the remove FromItinerary: message to the RTModel, as shown in
Listing 2-4.
Listing 2-4: Deleting a Point of Interest Using
tableView:
commitEditingStyle:forRowAtIndexPath:

--- Page 69 ---
- (void)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView
     commitEditingStyle:
       (UITableViewCellEditingStyle)editingStyle   
              forRowAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath
{
  
  PointOfInterest *pointOfInterest =
      [itineraryPointsOfInterest
                           objectAtIndex:indexPath.row];
  [[RTModel model] removeFromItinerary:pointOfInterest];
}
And, as you might have guessed, this time the RTModel simply removes
the PointOfInterest from the ItineraryController array (itinerary)
and adds it to the PointsOfInterestController array (pointsOf
Interest) and then notifies the controllers of what’s happened by
posting a notification. The controllers respond by reloading their
respective views. (I go into this in a bit more detail in Chapter 4.)
 Actually, there’s a bit more going on in RTModel than simply the
removal of a PointOfInterest object from one array and the
adding of it to another. RTModel also removes the point of interest
data from an itinerary file (and then saves the file) which it then
uses to restore the itinerary’s array. It also maintains a file of points
of interest which contains all the points of interest, including those
currently in the itinerary, but filters what is in the
PointsOfInterestController array by not including those points
of interest in the itinerary when it creates the pointsOfInterest
array from the data file. (I show you how that works in the next
section when I present Listing 2-6.)
Both controllers have no idea — nor do they care — where those Point
OfInterest objects come from; they are supplied by the RTModel (as

--- Page 70 ---
they should be). So, except for changing a few RTModel method names
and types in the ItineraryController, the modifications to support
iCloud (and subsequently web services) are all encapsulated in the
RTModel.
How RTModel Manages the Data
This section gives you an overview of how RTModel manages the
itinerary and points of interest; for more detail, check out Chapter 4,
where I walk you through all the modifications you need to make in
order to use Core Data. (As for web services, you have to wait until
Chapter 11 to get the scoop on the modifications you need to make in
order to use them.)
The RTModel creates and manages the two arrays — itinerary and
pointsOfInterest. The itineraryPointsOfInterest instance variable
in the ItineraryController refers to itinerary, and the pointsOf
Interest instance variable in the PointsOfInterestController refers
to pointsOfInterest.
When the RTModel is created, it uses two methods — one to load the
itinerary (loadItinerary) and another to load its points of interest
(loadPoints OfInterest).
When RoadTrip is launched for the first time, the RTModel creates an
empty itinerary file and an empty itinerary array in its
loadItinerary method, as you can see in Listing 2-5.
Listing 2-5: loadItinerary
- (void)loadItinerary {
  
  RTAppDelegate *appDelegate =

--- Page 71 ---
            [[UIApplication sharedApplication]
delegate];   
  NSString *fileComponent = [NSString
stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”, @”Itinerary”,
appDelegate.destinationPreference, @”.poi”];
  NSString *filePath = [RTModel filePath:fileComponent];
  NSURL *itineraryDataURL =
                       [NSURL fileURLWithPath:filePath];
  itineraryData = [NSMutableArray
                 arrayWithContentsOfURL:itineraryDataURL
];
  
  if (itineraryData) {
    itinerary = [NSMutableArray
                 arrayWithCapacity:[itineraryData
count]];
    for (NSDictionary *pointOfInterestData in
                                          itineraryData)
{
      PointOfInterest *pointOfInterest =
           [[PointOfInterest alloc]          
                        initWithData:pointOfInterestData
];
      [itinerary addObject:pointOfInterest];
    }
  }
  else {
    NSDictionary *destinationPointOfInterestData =
      [destinationData objectForKey:
                                  @”DestinationLocation”
];
    itineraryData = [NSMutableArray
          arrayWithObject:destinationPointOfInterestData
];
    [itineraryData writeToURL:itineraryDataURL

--- Page 72 ---
                                          atomically:YES
];
    PointOfInterest *destinationPointOfInterest =
      [[PointOfInterest alloc]
             initWithData:destinationPointOfInterestData
];
    itinerary = [NSMutableArray
              arrayWithObject:destinationPointOfInterest
];
  }
}
Then, in the loadPointsOfInterest method, it takes the points of
interest data from the Destinations.plist (refer to Figure 2-13; it’s an
NSDictionary object) and adds it to pointOfInterestData. The method
stores that data in a file (see Listing 2-6) and also creates the
PointsOfInterest array.
Listing 2-6: Loading the Points of Interest for the
First Time
- (void) loadPointsOfInterest {
  
  RTAppDelegate *appDelegate =
             [[UIApplication sharedApplication]
delegate];
  NSString *fileComponent =
     [NSString stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”, @”POI”,  
              appDelegate.destinationPreference,
@”.poi”];
  NSString *filePath = [RTModel filePath:fileComponent];
  NSURL *pointsOfInterestDataURL =
                         [NSURL
fileURLWithPath:filePath];
  pointsOfInterestData = [NSMutableArray

--- Page 73 ---
          arrayWithContentsOfURL:pointsOfInterestDataURL
];
  
  if (!pointsOfInterestData) {
    pointsOfInterestData = [NSMutableArray
arrayWithArray:
      [destinationData
objectForKey:@”PointsOfInterest”]];
    [pointsOfInterestData writeToURL:  
                  pointsOfInterestDataURL
atomically:YES];
  }
  pointsOfInterest =
             [NSMutableArray arrayWithCapacity:
                            [pointsOfInterestData
count]];
  
  BOOL isInItinerary = NO;
  
  for (NSDictionary *aPointOfInterest in   
                                  pointsOfInterestData)
{
    for (PointOfInterest *pointOfInterest in itinerary)
{
      if ([pointOfInterest.title isEqualToString:
           [aPointOfInterest objectForKey:@”Name”]])
                                     isInItinerary =
YES;
    }
    if (!isInItinerary) {
      [pointsOfInterest addObject:[[PointOfInterest
alloc]      
                         initWithData:aPointOfInterest]]
;
    }
    else {

--- Page 74 ---
      isInItinerary = NO;
    }
  }
}
Notice that, before the loadPointsOfInterest method adds a point of
interest to the pointsOfInterest array, it checks to see whether that
point of interest is in the itinerary array. Of course, there won’t be any
points of interest in the itinerary the first time the application is
launched, but on subsequent launches, it won’t add any
PointOfInterest that is already in the itinerary to the
pointsOfInterest array.
  BOOL isInItinerary = NO;
  
  for (NSDictionary *aPointOfInterest in   
                                  pointsOfInterestData)
{
    for (PointOfInterest *pointOfInterest in itinerary)
{
      if ([pointOfInterest.title isEqualToString:
           [aPointOfInterest objectForKey:@”Name”]])
                                     isInItinerary =
YES;
    }
    if (!isInItinerary) {
      [pointsOfInterest addObject:[[PointOfInterest
alloc]      
                         initWithData:aPointOfInterest]]
;
    }
    else {
      isInItinerary = NO;
    }
  }
}

--- Page 75 ---
When the user selects a PointOfInterest to add to his itinerary, the
RTModel method addPointOfInterest: removes the PointOfInterest
from the pointsOfInterest array and adds it to the itinerary array, as
you can see in Listing 2-7. It also takes the PointsOfInterest data,
adds it to the itineraryData array, and saves the itineraryData array
to the file system. (Note that the PointsOfInterest method
returnPoint OfInterestData returns its data in a dictionary.) All this
converting back and forth from NSDictionary to the PointsOfInterest
object and then back to the dictionary is necessary because you can’t
simply store the PointsOfInterest object as an object . . . yet — but
that’s what you have Code Data do for you in Chapter 4.
Listing 2-7: Adding a PointOfInterest to the
Itinerary
- (void)addPointOfInterest:(NSMutableDictionary *)
                                     pointOfInterestData
{
  
  void (^clGeocodeCompletionHandler)(NSArray *, NSError
*) = ^(NSArray *placemarks, NSError *error){
    CLPlacemark *placemark = [placemarks
objectAtIndex:0];
    if (error!= nil || placemark == nil) {
      NSLog(@”Geocoder Failure! Error code: %u,
description: %@, and reason: %@”, error.code, [error
localizedDescription], [error
localizedFailureReason]);
      UIAlertView *alert = [[UIAlertView alloc]
          initWithTitle:@”Couldn’t add”
          message:[pointOfInterestData
          objectForKey:@”location”] delegate:self
          cancelButtonTitle:@”Thanks”
          otherButtonTitles:nil];
      [alert show];

--- Page 76 ---
    }
    else {
      
      [pointOfInterestData setObject:[NSNumber
         numberWithDouble:placemark.location.coordinate.
                            latitude]
forKey:@”Latitude”];
      [pointOfInterestData setObject:[NSNumber
         numberWithDouble:placemark.location.coordinate.
                          longitude]
forKey:@”Longitude”];
      
      RTAppDelegate *appDelegate = [[UIApplication
sharedApplication] delegate];
      NSString *fileComponent =
        [NSString stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”, @”POI”,  
              appDelegate.destinationPreference,
@”.poi”];
      NSString *filePath =
                         [RTModel
filePath:fileComponent];
      NSURL *pointsOfInterestDataURL =
                         [NSURL
fileURLWithPath:filePath];
      [pointsOfInterestData
                           addObject:pointOfInterestData
];
      [pointsOfInterestData
         writeToURL:pointsOfInterestDataURL
                                          atomically:YES
];
      
      PointOfInterest *addedPointOfInterest =
        [[PointOfInterest alloc]
                        initWithData:pointOfInterestData
];

--- Page 77 ---
      [self addToItinerary:addedPointOfInterest];
    }
  };
  
  CLGeocoder* geocoder = [[CLGeocoder alloc] init];
  NSString* findLocation = [[pointOfInterestData
    objectForKey:@”Address”] isEqualToString:@””] ?
    [pointOfInterestData objectForKey:@”Name”]:
            [pointOfInterestData
objectForKey:@”Address”];
  [geocoder geocodeAddressString:findLocation
completionHandler:clGeocodeCompletionHandler];
}
When the user creates a new point of interest (refer to Figure 2-4), the
AddPointOfInterestController sends the data in an NSDictionary to
the RTModel by sending the addPointOfInterest; message. The method
geocodes the point of interest — gets it GPS coordinates — and then
creates the PointOfInterest object from the data, adds it to the
pointsOf InterestData array, and stores it to the file system. It also
sends itself the addToItinerary: message to add the newly created
PointOfInterest to the itinerary. You can see how this works in Listing
2-8. (I cover this in more detail in Chapter 7 when you start to use a web
service to get the points of interest.)
Listing 2-8: Adding a PointOfInterest
- (void)addPointOfInterest:(NSMutableDictionary *)
                                     pointOfInterestData
{
  
  void (^clGeocodeCompletionHandler)(NSArray *, NSError
*) = ^(NSArray *placemarks, NSError *error){
    CLPlacemark *placemark = [placemarks
objectAtIndex:0];
    if (error!= nil || placemark == nil) {

--- Page 78 ---
      NSLog(@”Geocoder Failure! Error code: %u,
description: %@, and reason: %@”, error.code, [error
localizedDescription],
                        [error localizedFailureReason]);
      UIAlertView *alert = [[UIAlertView alloc]
           initWithTitle:@”Couldn’t add”
           message:[pointOfInterestData
                               objectForKey:@”location”]
delegate:self cancelButtonTitle:@”Thanks”
           otherButtonTitles:nil];
      [alert show];
    }
    else {
      
      [pointOfInterestData setObject:
              [NSNumber numberWithDouble:
                   placemark.location.coordinate.latitud
e] forKey:@”Latitude”];
      [pointOfInterestData setObject:
              [NSNumber numberWithDouble:
                  placemark.location.coordinate.longitud
e] forKey:@”Longitude”];
      
      RTAppDelegate *appDelegate =
             [[UIApplication sharedApplication]
delegate];
      NSString *fileComponent =
        [NSString stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”, @”POI”,
appDelegate.destinationPreference, @”.poi”];
      NSString *filePath =
                         [RTModel
filePath:fileComponent];
      NSURL *pointsOfInterestDataURL =
                         [NSURL
fileURLWithPath:filePath];
      [pointsOfInterestData

--- Page 79 ---
                           addObject:pointOfInterestData
];
      [pointsOfInterestData writeToURL:
                  pointsOfInterestDataURL
atomically:YES];
      
      PointOfInterest *addedPointOfInterest =
       [[PointOfInterest alloc]
                        initWithData:pointOfInterestData
];
      [self addToItinerary:addedPointOfInterest];
    }
  };
  
  CLGeocoder* geocoder = [[CLGeocoder alloc] init];
  NSString* findLocation = [[pointOfInterestData
    objectForKey:@”Address”] isEqualToString:@””] ?
    [pointOfInterestData objectForKey:@”Name”]:
          [pointOfInterestData objectForKey:@”Address”];
  [geocoder geocodeAddressString:findLocation
completionHandler:clGeocodeCompletionHandler];
}
Similarly, when the user removes a point of interest from his itinerary,
the RTModel reverses the process in the removePointOfInterest
method.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 80 ---
Part II
Adding iCloud
In this part . . .
Now that you understand where you’re coming from and where you
want to go — a useful idea because, to paraphrase the Cheshire Cat in

--- Page 81 ---
Alice in Wonderland, “If you don’t know where you’ re going, any road
will get you there” — it’s time to get started.
In this part, you start your trip off of Terra Firma by adding Core Data to
RoadTrip and letting it manage all your iCloud synchronization for you.
Personally, I’m a big fan of letting someone else do all the drudge work
leaving me to have all the fun.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 82 ---
Chapter 3
Setting Up Core Data
In This Chapter
 Discovering Core Data
 Looking at managed objects
 Understanding the Core Data architecture
 Adding a Core Data stack
As I explain in Chapter 1, the Application Ecosystem is based on two
distinct technologies: iCloud and web services.
Although web services are very cool — so cool, in fact, that they were
the original focus of this book — in some ways iCloud is actually more
important. That’s because if you believe in using the right device for the
right job, then for many applications (RoadTrip, for example), you’ll
want to be able to work on different devices depending on what you’re
doing. For example, if you’re traveling, you’re probably going to be
using your iPhone because it’s mobile and easy to carry around. For
sitting at home on the couch and planning your trip, the iPad is the more
likely choice — with its larger screen, you can see a lot more at the same
time, which makes it easier for you to really get into what you’re doing.
When the ability to switch between multiple devices is a high priority,
you need to make sure that data is synched among all devices. Of course,
you could do this with web services, but that would mean creating a
large infrastructure to support your users (you’ll need to store their data,
make sure it’s secure, have lots of bandwidth, and so on), and why do
that when Apple has already done all that work for you?

--- Page 83 ---
Figure 3-1:
Your
itinerary.
Managing Your Itinerary
As you can see in Figure 3-1, RoadTrip allows you to create (and save)
an itinerary — the places you’d like to see on your trip — by tapping a
point of interest in the popover (Figure 3-1, left). (I use iPad screen shots
because they make it a little easier to see what’s going on in the app, but
keep in mind that, because RoadTrip is a universal app, the same
functionality is found on the iPhone.) These places are represented by
PointOfInterest objects in your code and are created from
PointsOfInterest data included with RoadTrip in the Destinations plist
(one set of PointsOfInterest data for each destination). In Chapter 14,
the PointsOfInterest data will be downloaded using a web service
instead of being bundled with the app, but for now just use it as is.
Being the firm believer in crowd sourcing (under some circumstances)
that I am, I’ve set up RoadTrip in such a way that the user can also add a
new point of interest to the PointsOfInterest data by tapping the
Create button on the right side of the points of interest list toolbar, as
shown in Figure 3-2, and then add that to his or her itinerary as well.
This is an obvious candidate for the Right Device for the Right Job
approach. When I’m planning my trip, I like to be able to lie on my
couch and scope out all the great places I want to see. (Did you know
there are multiple claims to the world’s largest ball of twine?) On the
other hand, when I’m actually traveling, I like to have that same
information on my iPhone because it fits in my pocket and is easier to

--- Page 84 ---
Figure 3-2:
Adding a
point of
interest.
carry around. What’s more, I want the ability to update my itinerary on
the iPhone and have it update the iPad accordingly, and vice versa.
Apple provides a couple of basic approaches to implement iCloud’s
ability to share data between devices — the UIDocument class (which
supports managing multiple documents) and Core Data (an object
persistence framework where, instead of saving and retrieving an
object’s data, the object is saved and retrieved as an object). And even
though both do work, I’ve found that, for applications such as RoadTrip,
Core Data is hands-down the best choice, especially because RoadTrip
isn’t document-based. Hey, RoadTrip isn’t a word processor, if you
haven’t noticed. And even if it were document-based, there’s a Core
Data UIManagedDocument class, which is a subclass of UIDocument.
(Great stuff, but outside the scope of this book.)
So, the place to start is Core Data, and in this chapter, you start the
migration of your itinerary from a saved file to Core Data — which, as
explained in Chapter 4, offers some help when it comes to displaying the
data as well.

--- Page 85 ---
Core Data Basics
Core Data is a deep, wide, and very mature technology, used on the Mac
for years — a long and successful history that makes the iPhone version
very attractive. Core Data not only makes it easy to create, manage, and
delete objects, but it also incorporates the handy shake feature for
undoing and redoing actions.
In this chapter and the next, I show you how to implement Core Data in
RoadTrip to support the display, modification, and saving of your
itinerary. You replace the way you currently display, modify, and save
your itinerary in RoadTrip — where you’re forced to save your itinerary
as a file and then convert that data into objects — and vice versa — for
any modifications. Because Core Data is very broad and deep, I don’t
get into all the bells and whistles of Core Data — it would take an entire
book to do that. Instead, I focus on the basics as well as what you need
to know to implement Core Data by using iCloud. I give you enough
background and understanding so you’ll be comfortable exploring Core
Data on your own — and you’ll be able to use the great sample code that
Apple provides that shows you how to use Core Data to do most of what
you want to do in your application.
Core Data makes it easy for a developer to do the two things you’ll need
to do in this book (actually, there is way more to Core Data than that, but
that is beyond the scope of this book).
 Create, save, and fetch objects as objects — including their
connections to other objects — from a persistent store, such as a
file on disk. As explained in Chapter 4, going the traditional
route of first turning objects into data to save them and then
reconstructing them as objects can be quite a chore.
 Keep data synchronized between devices running the same
application for the same user.
To do those two things you start by taking these steps:

--- Page 86 ---
1. Creating a managed object (data) model that describes the object’s
data and relationships to other objects.
2. Deriving your classes that are to be managed by Core Data from
NSManagedObject instead of NSObject.
3. Creating a managed object context that manages your collection of
objects — a context that would be responsible for lifecycle
management, validation, maintaining relationships between objects,
undo/redo, and managing the persistent store. This mechanism is for
storing your objects to disk and is pretty much handled for you.
4. Creating your objects in the more or less usual way — within the
managed object context, of course — and then saving them.
5. Fetching your saved objects, optionally using a
FetchedResultsController to get your objects in a way that is
optimized for Table views.
Before you go any further and get your hopes up, I want to explain what
Core Data is not:
 Although Core Data can use a relational database — SQLite —
as one of its persistent store types, it isn’t in and of itself a
relational database or a relational database management system.
It’s about providing an infrastructure for saving objects to (and
retrieving them from) storage as well as Undo and Redo support.
 Core Data is not an application generator — you still have to
write code.
You need to do quite a bit of (boilerplate) plumbing to set up Core Data.
To start off, you need a managed object context, a managed object
model, and a Persistent Store coordinator, all of which I explain in the
sections that follow.
Before you go there, though, keep one thing in mind: In RoadTrip,
you’re already doing what you’re going to use Core Data to do —
managing a selection of PointOfInterest objects. (That’s what you see
displayed on the left side of Figure 3-1.) But as I explain, it’s quite a

--- Page 87 ---
chore to manage all that content. Core Data makes it all easier —
including making it easier to take your itinerary list and making it more
useful to the users by allowing them to access it from multiple devices.
Starting with the Objects — The
Managed Object Model
Believe me, the idea of Core Data can be overwhelming at first — a lot
of the documentation assumes that you’re both an expert in object-
oriented programming (which I am) and a database aficionado (which I
am not). When it comes right down to it, though, after you wade through
the mess (I personally have taken the bullet for you here), it actually
makes sense.
So start at the beginning by understanding what you need done and how
Core Data is going to do it for you.
You want to have Core Data manage your itinerary for you. That means
you want to be able to create, save, and modify the PointOfInterest
objects in your itinerary. (You could also support Undos, but that’s not
really necessary in this case.)
The right place to start is with a new object class,
SharedPointOfInterest, which will eventually be shared between all of
an individual user’s devices running the RoadTrip app. The
SharedPointOfInterest class is remarkably like the existing
PointOfInterest class currently used in RoadTrip.
 You continue to use PointOfInterest when you want to create
a non- ManagedObject object. (I explain ManagedObject in a sec.)

--- Page 88 ---
If you were going to create a SharedPointOfInterest class on your
own, it would sort of look like what you see in Listing 3-1.
Listing 3-1: A SharedPointOfInterest Class
#import <Foundation/Foundation.h>
#import <CoreData/CoreData.h>
@interface SharedPointOfInterest : NSObject
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * name;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * address;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * comment;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSNumber * displayOrder;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * latitude;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * location;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * longitude;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * subtitle;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * title;
@end
This code looks a lot like the other model objects I’d made use of in
RoadTrip and, as I said, remarkably like the PointOfInterest class.
As you might have guessed, though, instead of having to manage these
objects on my own, I’m going to let Core Data do it for me. But for Core
Data to do it, it needs a description of its objects. You provide this
description by creating a managed object model — a schema (a diagram
that represents the elements in a system using symbols, in other words)
that describes the entities (objects) your application uses and the
relationships between them. Such a schema is illustrated in Figure 3-3 on
the left, where you see the SharedPointOfInterest entity. Even though
in your particular model you’re going to go with only one entity, you can
opt for more than one and can also set up relationships between entities.
(The right side of Figure 3-3 shows an example). (As much as I would
like this book to be an exhaustive study of Core Data, it just wasn’t
meant to be, so I leave you to explore this business of multiple entities
on your own.)

--- Page 89 ---
Figure 3-3:
The
managed
object
model.
 Core Data uses the schema to map between the managed objects
in your application and the records in a database used to create said
objects. It’s important to be aware that if you change the schema in
your application, Core Data won’t be able to read stores you created
using the previous model — for that to work, you’d need to use a
migration mechanism (which I explain in Chapter 5) or simply
delete the application from the simulator or the device or iCloud
and start over from scratch. (You’ll need to take that step for now
— at least until I explain your alternatives in Chapter 5.)
The managed object model is a collection of objects that provide Core
Data with information, or metadata as it’s called, about each entity. This
data includes the entity’s name, the class that represents it in your
application (which doesn’t have to be the same as its name), its attributes
(which become class properties), and its relationships to other objects
(which become pointers to other objects). Similarly, attribute and
relationship description objects provide the information about attributes
and relationships the Core Data needs, as illustrated in Figure 3-4.
(Admittedly, I haven’t covered all of what you see in Figure 3-4; I just
want you to be aware of some of the possibilities, and as I said, there’s a
lot for you to explore in Core Data on your own.)
So, with that info in hand, you’re ready to go build a managed object
model for SharedPointOfInterest in the RoadTrip app.

--- Page 90 ---
Figure 3-4:
Entity,
attribute,
and
relationship
descriptions.
I show you how to use the Xcode modeling tool (one that’s quite similar
to Interface Builder) to create the model graphically.
 I’m going to put my model in the Model Classes folder, so
before you start, be sure to select that folder first.
1. Choose File⇒New⇒File from the main menu (or press 
+N) to
open the New File dialog.
2. In the leftmost column of the dialog, select Core Data under the
iOS heading.
3. Select the Data Model template in the topmost pane (as I have in
Figure 3-5) and then click Next.
You see a new dialog asking for some more information.
4. In the new dialog that appears, leave the Model option selected
in the Save As field, make sure Targets has RoadTrip selected and
that the Group drop-down menu shows Model Classes (or
wherever you want to put the model), and then click the Create
button.
Your new managed object model, Model.xcdatamodel, gets placed
in the Model Classes group. If you now close the Navigator area, you
should see the same thing I see in Figure 3-6.

--- Page 91 ---
Figure 3-5:
Create a
data model.
Figure 3-6:
An empty
model.
The Core Data Model editor is made up of two areas:
 The Top-Level Components area, showing the various entities,
fetch requests, and configurations and

--- Page 92 ---
Figure 3-7:
The Core
Data Model
editor in
Graph style.
 The Detail area, showing the attributes, relationships, and
fetched properties of the item selected in the Top-level
Components area
Figure 3-6 shows the Core Data Model editor in all its glory.
 The Core Data Model editor has two styles: Table style and
Graph style. Figure 3-6 show the Table style, but you can switch to
the Graph style (shown in Figure 3-7) by using the Editor Style
segmented control you see in the bottom-right corner of the Core
Data Model editor.
Now that you have your data model in place, it’s time to add some actual
content to it:
1. With your brand-spanking-new (and empty) data model open,
click the Add Entity button on the bottom toolbar of the Core Data
Model editor.

--- Page 93 ---
Figure 3-8:
Your first
entity.
You can alternatively choose Editor ⇒ Add Entity from the main
menu.
Figure 3-8 shows what you should see after adding an entity.
 You also use the Add Entity button to add a fetch request or
configuration. Just hold down the Add Entity button until it shows
the other options. The button name will change to whatever option
you choose — it remains in the state that you last used it in.
You should see a new entry (called Entity) appear in the Entity
section of the Top-Level Components area at the top left of the Core
Data Model editor. Since you are in Graph style, a graphical
representation of the entity (a rounded rectangle) appears in the
Detail area.
 Think of entities as classes in your application that become
objects at runtime and hold the data that’s described in their
properties.

--- Page 94 ---
Figure 3-9:
The name of
your entity is
Shared
PointOf
Interest.
Now you can set the name for the new entity.
2. Make sure you have the new entity selected in the Top-Level
Components area and open the Core Data Model inspector by
clicking the Hide or Show the Utilities button in toolbar (as I have
in Figure 3-9) so that you see information about the entity.
3. Change the name of the entity to SharedPointOfInterest, as I
have in Figure 3-9.
Be sure to press Return after you enter the text and be sure not to
change the class name — that will be filled in for you when you
generate the SharedPointOfInterest class in the “Generating your
classes” section, later in this chapter.
 The Core Data Model inspector displays the information you
select in the Detail area. By making a multiple selection in the Detail
area, you can edit several properties at the same time — the Attribute
Type for a number of attributes, for example.
 The name of the entity and the name of the Objective-C class
used to represent instances of the entity aren’t the same thing. Core

--- Page 95 ---
Data uses the entity name to manage its data objects, so that name
doesn’t have to be the same as its class name. In fact, you can often
get away without really using any classes (although I use them in
this example) other than NSManagedObject, which I explain later.
Adding the attributes
The next milestone on the road to managed object model nirvana comes
when you add the attributes to the entity. These attributes correspond to
the instance variables you’re used to using, which correspond to the
model’s data.
You start by adding the Name attribute. To do that, you want to switch to
the Table style in the Core Data Model editor.
 I find Graph style is great for giving me the big picture of the
whole schema, but Table style is better for editing. (Refer to Figure
3-6.)
1. Make sure SharedPointOfInterest is selected in the Entities
section of the Core Data Model editor.
I know it’s the only entity listed, but if you’ve done a bit of exploring
on your own you’ll need to select an entity to get back to it.
2. Click the Add Attribute button on the bottom toolbar of the
Core Data Model editor.
You can also choose Editor ⇒ Add Attribute from the main menu, or
you can even click the + control at the bottom of the Attributes
section of the Detail area.
No matter how you do this step, you end up seeing an attribute
waiting for you in the Attributes section in the Detail area. (See
Figure 3-10.) You also see information about the attribute in the Core
Data Model inspector in the Utility area. All you have to do now is
set the attribute’s name and type.

--- Page 96 ---
Figure 3-
10: Table
style with an
attribute just
waiting for
you to set.
3. Make sure you’ve selected the new attribute in the Attributes
section. Then, in the Core Data Model inspector, change the name
of the attribute to name, as I have in Figure 3-11.
You can also double-click the attribute in the Attributes section and
enter the new name there.
Next up, you need to tell Core Data what type of attribute this is. The
warning in the Activity window in the Xcode toolbar is a subtle hint
that you really need to take care of this.
4. Choose String from the Attribute Type pop-up menu in the
Attributes section of the Core Data Model inspector (or in the
Attributes section of the Detail area), as shown in Figure 3-12.
You don’t need to set any of the other values.
5. Repeat Steps 1—3 to add attributes for
address
comment
displayOrder
latitude

--- Page 97 ---
Figure 3-
11: Setting
the name.
Figure 3-
12: Setting
the type.
location
longitude
name
subtitle
and
title


--- Page 98 ---
Figure 3-
13: Your
completed
model.
All of them, except for displayOrder should be of type String. The
displayOrder attribute should be of type Integer 16.
When you’re done, your model should look like Figure 3-13.
Generating your classes
Of course, you still need the classes for your program. Remember, all
you’ve done thus far is create a data model for Core Data to use to
create, fetch, and save your SharedPointOfInterest objects. You still
need the classes to describe them in your program.
Does that mean a lot of boring copying and pasting? Of course not. You
can now use Xcode to generate the files for your
SharedPointOfInterest class.
1. Select SharedPointOfInterest in the Entities section and then
choose Editor⇒Create NSManagedObject Subclass from the main
menu.
2. In the dialog that appears (see Figure 3-14), select Model Classes
from the Group drop-down menu and then click the Create
button.
Core Data generates a class for you using the entity name as the class
name and turning each of the attributes into properties.

--- Page 99 ---
Figure 3-
14: Creating
a managed
object class.
 Although not a particular issue here, make sure that the Use
Scalar Properties for Primitive Data Types check box is deselected
— you want to be able to use objects (such as NSNumber) instead of
single values (such as int). Note as well that you would have to also

--- Page 100 ---
Figure 3-
15: The
generated
managed
object
classes.
implement your own accessor methods if you selected this particular
check box.
3. Create a new Group in the Model Classes Group and move
those classes in there.
See Figure 3-15, where I’ve selected the SharedPointOfInterest
header file as well.
Take a look at Listings 3-2 and 3-3 which display the .h and .m files for
SharedPointOfInterest
Listing 3-2: Generated SharedPointOfInterest.h
Class File
#import <Foundation/Foundation.h>
#import <CoreData/CoreData.h>
@interface SharedPointOfInterest : NSManagedObject
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * name;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * address;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * comment;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSNumber * displayOrder;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * latitude;

--- Page 101 ---
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * location;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * longitude;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * subtitle;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * title;
@end
Listing 3-3: Generated SharedPointOfInterest.m
Class File
#import “SharedPointOfInterest.h”
@implementation SharedPointOfInterest
@dynamic name;
@dynamic address;
@dynamic comment;
@dynamic displayOrder;
@dynamic latitude;
@dynamic location;
@dynamic longitude;
@dynamic subtitle;
@dynamic title;
@end
You should take notice of a few things here:
 The SharedPointOfInterest class is derived from NSManaged
Object, not NSObject. I explain that bit of business in the “Core
Data Basics” section, earlier in the chapter.
 In the implementation files, properties are implemented as
@dynamic, not the usual @synthesize. Core Data generates the
accessor methods at runtime. @dynamic instructs the compiler
not to generate a warning if it can’t find implementations of
accessor methods.
 The model has been updated. The SharedPointOfInterest
entities are now SharedPointOfInterest classes instead of

--- Page 102 ---
NSManaged Object. (You can double-check this by looking in
the Core Data Model inspector in the Class field).
You also have to add a few things to SharedPointOfInterest.h if you
want it to actually work in RoadTrip the way PointOfInterest does.
Because each individual SharedPointOfInterest will appear on the
map as an annotation, just as PointOfInterest does, you have to add a
coordinate property. To do that, add the code in bold in Listing 3-4 to
SharedPointOfInterest.h.
Listing 3-4: Updating the SharedPointOfInterest
Interface
#import <Foundation/Foundation.h>
#import <CoreData/CoreData.h>
#import <MapKit/MapKit.h>
@interface SharedPointOfInterest : NSManagedObject
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * name;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * address;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * comment;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSNumber * displayOrder;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * latitude;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * location;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * longitude;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * subtitle;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * title;
@property (nonatomic, readwrite)
                       CLLocationCoordinate2D
coordinate;
@end
The idea here is that you have to import the MapKit header so the
compiler knows all about the CLLocationCoordinate2D type.
You also have a bit of work to do with SharedPointOfInterest.m. More
specifically, you have to synthesize the accessor for the file’s coordinate

--- Page 103 ---
property. For good measure, I also have you add a get accessor. You
have to override the accessor that will be synthesized for the coordinate
property because you’ll be creating the coordinate using the latitude
and longitude properties. Adding the code in bold in Listing 3-5 to
SharedPointOf Interest.m takes care of all that for you.
Listing 3-5: Synthesizing the New Accessor and
Adding a Get Accessor
#import “SharedPointOfInterest.h”
@implementation SharedPointOfInterest
@dynamic name;
@dynamic address;
@dynamic comment;
@dynamic displayOrder;
@dynamic latitude;
@dynamic location;
@dynamic longitude;
@dynamic subtitle;
@dynamic title;
@synthesize coordinate;
- (CLLocationCoordinate2D) coordinate {
  
  CLLocationCoordinate2D theCoordinate;
  theCoordinate.latitude = [self.latitude doubleValue];
  theCoordinate.longitude = [self.longitude
doubleValue];
  return theCoordinate;
}
@end
As I’ve mentioned a number of times, instead of being derived from
NSObject, SharedPointOfInterest is derived from NSManagedObject.
Read on to find out why Managed slipped its way between NS and
Object.

--- Page 104 ---
Thinking managed objects through
NSManagedObject contains the methods and properties necessary to
represent any entity. It has a reference to the entity description for the
entity that it’s an instance of — including the information in the entity
description as well as its attributes and relationships descriptions. You
can also create subclasses of NSManagedObject to implement additional
behavior (as you just did with SharedPointOfInterest).
If you feel so inclined, you can think of a managed object as the object
representation of a record in a table in a database. Each managed object
represents the data you operate on in your application — in this case,
SharedPointOfInterest objects and their associated data (name,
location, and so on). You can even add in other properties (as you just
did in Listing 3-5) and even methods. Just remember, though, that any
properties you add will not be saved for you — to do that you would
have to add the properties as attributes in the managed object model.
NSManagedObject connects your objects to the managed object context,
as explained in the next section.
 If you regenerate the classes because you made a change to the
entity, all your work will be lost. If you need to regenerate, I
suggest you rename the classes, generate the new ones, and then
copy and paste your additions back in. (For more on this topic, see
the “Generating your classes” section, earlier in this chapter.)
The Core Data Stack
After you’ve created the managed object model and generated your
classes, you still need to set up what is known as the Core Data Stack in
your application. This involves creating the following:

--- Page 105 ---
1. The NSManagedObjectContext
2. The NSManagedObjectModel
3. The NSPersistentStoreCoordinator
I run through the creation of each one of these in the next few sections,
but quite frankly, for what you’ll be doing in RoadTrip — and for quite a
while in your own application — you’ll probably be using the
boilerplate I’ve provided.
The managed object context
Now that you have your Core Data managed object model as well as
your classes, your next step is to create, save, and then restore your
objects. (You can also implement Undos and Redos, although you won’t
be doing that in this book.)
Luckily for you, the CoreData framework provides most of this
functionality for you automatically, primarily through a managed object
context (or just plain context) object. Its primary responsibility is to
manage a collection of managed objects. The managed object context is
the way you’ll use the Core Data objects that make up what’s called the
persistence stack — all the lower level plumbing objects that connect
your object to its data. This is shown in Figure 3-16.
You add objects and remove objects using the managed object context. It
tracks the changes you make, both to object attributes and to the
relationships between objects. Because of that, the context is able to
provide Undo and Redo support. It also ensures that if you change
relationships between objects, the integrity of the relationship is
maintained.
When you create a new managed object, you insert it into a context. You
fetch existing records in the database into the context as managed
objects. (I explain fetching in the next chapter when you actually put
Core Data to work.)

--- Page 106 ---
Figure 3-
16: The
managed
object
context and
its friends.
In any application, you could have multiple managed object contexts.
This would, for example, allow you to do things in one context in
background while allowing the user to interact with objects in another
context.
When you fetch objects from a persistent store (I explain that next), you
bring temporary copies into memory. You can then operate on these
objects by changing their attributes and relationships and/or by adding
and deleting objects. When you’re done, you save the changes you’ve
made, and the context ensures that your objects are in a valid state. Then
the changes are written to the persistent store (or stores), new records are
added (for objects you created), and records are removed (for objects
you deleted). But unless you actually save those changes, the persistent
store remains unchanged — persistent, isn’t it?
The Persistent Store coordinator and
persistent store

--- Page 107 ---
A Persistent Store coordinator (persistent here describes the store or file,
not the coordinator) is an instance of NSPersistentStoreCoordinator
and manages precisely what you’d think it would manage — a collection
of persistent object stores. A persistent object store is simply an external
store (file) of persisted data. The Persistent Store coordinator is the
object that actually maps between objects in your application and
records in the database. In iOS, you usually just have a single store, but
in RoadTrip you’ll have a separate store for each destination. (You could
add all of them to a single store, but that could increase the iCloud
overhead.) The Persistent Store coordinator manages these stores and
makes them appear to the managed object contexts as a single store. (If
you did have multiple managed object contexts, each of these would use
the same coordinator.)
The Persistent Store coordinator handles the nitty gritty of reading and
writing data files. You probably won’t ever directly interact with the
Persistent Store coordinator after you’ve specified the location of a new
external data store to be associated with your application.
Adding the Core Data Stack
If you’ve been reading closely, you’ll remember that I mention earlier
that the Core Data Stack consists of the following:
1. The NSManagedObjectContext
2. The NSManagedObjectModel
3. The NSPersistentStoreCoordinator
Here’s where I briefly explain the code in each of these puppies,
although, as I mention earlier, for what you’ll be doing in RoadTrip (and
for quite a while in your own application), you’ll probably just be using
the boilerplate I’m about to provide.

--- Page 108 ---
 I want to point out, though, that when you create a Master-Detail
project, you can check a box in the “Choose Options for Your New
Project” dialog and the stack will be generated for you. Note,
however, that it gets generated in the appDelegate instead of in the
model and you’ll have to move it into the class you want to manage
it.
Adding the properties needed by the
Core Data stack
You’re going to have to add some instance properties to the RTModel.h
interface that will be used by the Core Data stack. It’s a good idea to do
that first to avoid a lot of compiler warnings/error messages. Make the
modifications you see bolded in Listing 3-6 to RTModel.h to add the
properties. When you’re done with that, add the bolded code in Listing
3-7 to synthesize the accessors.
Listing 3-6: Adding the required Core Data
properties to RTModel.h
#import <Foundation/Foundation.h>
#import <MapKit/MapKit.h>
#import <CoreData/CoreData.h>
@class Annotation;
@class PointOfInterest;
@interface RTModel : NSObject
+ (RTModel *)model;
- (id)initWithDestinationIndex:
                             (NSUInteger)destinationInde
x;
- (void)loadItinerary;
- (NSArray *)returnItinerary;

--- Page 109 ---
- (void)addToItinerary:(PointOfInterest
*)pointOfInterest;
- (void)removeFromItinerary:
                       (PointOfInterest
*)pointOfInterest;
- (void)loadPointsOfInterest;
- (NSArray *)returnPointsOfInterest;
- (void)addPointOfInterest:
               (NSMutableDictionary
*)pointOfInterestData;
- (UIImage *)destinationImage;
- (NSString *)destinationName;
- (CLLocationCoordinate2D)destinationCoordinate;
- (NSString *)weather;
- (void)loadEvents;
- (NSUInteger)numberOfEvents;
- (NSString *)getEvent:(NSUInteger)index;
- (NSArray *)returnPointsOfInterest;
- (NSString *)mapTitle;
- (NSArray *)createAnnotations;
- (void)addLocation:(NSString *)findLocation
     completionHandler:(void (^)(Annotation *annotation,
                              NSError* error))
completion;
- (CLLocation *)foundLocation;
+ (NSString *)filePath:(NSString *)fileComponent;
@property (readonly, strong, nonatomic)
             NSManagedObjectContext
*managedObjectContext;
@property (readonly, strong, nonatomic)
                 NSManagedObjectModel
*managedObjectModel;
@property (readonly, strong, nonatomic)
NSPersistentStoreCoordinator
*persistentStoreCoordinator;
@end

--- Page 110 ---
Listing 3-7: Synthesizing the Accessors in
RTModel.m
@implementation RTModel
@synthesize managedObjectContext =
_managedObjectContext;
@synthesize managedObjectModel = _managedObjectModel;
@synthesize persistentStoreCoordinator =
                              _persistentStoreCoordinato
r;
Notice that the properties you just added are readonly. You do that
because there is no reason for other objects to set those properties.
The managed object context
The managed object context does the creating, saving, and restoring of
your objects for you. Listing 3-8 shows you the code for accessing the
managed ObjectContext property. It’s actually an explicit
implementation of the managedObjectContext property getter and is
invoked every time you access the property.
managedObjectContext returns the NSManagedObjectContext for the
application. If the context doesn’t already exist, it’s created and
connected to the Persistent Store coordinator for the application —
clever, isn’t it?
Add the code in Listing 3-8 to RTModel.m to get managedObjectContext
working for you.
Listing 3-8: Creating the managedObjectContext
- (NSManagedObjectContext *)managedObjectContext
{
  if (_managedObjectContext != nil) {
    return _managedObjectContext;

--- Page 111 ---
  }
  
  NSPersistentStoreCoordinator *coordinator =
                        [self
persistentStoreCoordinator];
  
  if (coordinator != nil) {
    NSManagedObjectContext* managedObjectContext =
     [[NSManagedObjectContext alloc]
      initWithConcurrencyType:NSMainQueueConcurrencyType
];
    
    [managedObjectContext performBlockAndWait:^{
      [managedObjectContext
               setPersistentStoreCoordinator:
coordinator];
    }];
    _managedObjectContext = managedObjectContext;
  }
  return _managedObjectContext;
}
Listing 3-8 first gets the Persistent Store coordinator. Just as with the
managed object context, if the Persistent Store coordinator hasn’t been
created yet, the getter method (which is added next in Listing 3-8) will
add it for you.
NSPersistentStoreCoordinator *coordinator =
                        [self
persistentStoreCoordinator];
  
if (coordinator != nil) {
Next in line in Listing 3-8, you create and initialize the
NSManagedObjectContext using the Persistent Store coordinator:
    NSManagedObjectContext* managedObjectContext =

--- Page 112 ---
     [[NSManagedObjectContext alloc]
      initWithConcurrencyType:NSMainQueueConcurrencyType
];
    
     [managedObjectContext performBlockAndWait:^{
      [managedObjectContext
              setPersistentStoreCoordinator:
coordinator];
    }];
    _managedObjectContext = managedObjectContext;
  }
  return _managedObjectContext;
}
I am going to have you use the new NSManagedObjectContext
concurrency API. As you can see, you’ll be using the
NSMainQueueConcurrencyType because you’ll be interacting with
RoadTrip objects that are all running on the main thread.
Wait a second . . . unless you already understand concurrency in iOS (or
OS X), you probably have no idea what I’m talking about. Maybe it’s
time for me to introduce you to concurrency in iOS?
Concurrency support for managed
object contexts
Over the years, chip manufacturers have been adding more processor
cores on each chip as part of their never-ending search for increased chip
performance. But to take advantage of multiple cores, a computer needs
software that can do multiple things simultaneously. Although that
already does happen in modern multitasking operating systems (for
system daemons or system background applications, for example),
taking full advantage of multiple cores requires that individual
applications use them as well.

--- Page 113 ---
In the past, the traditional way for an application to use multiple cores is
to use multiple threads. Each application within iOS is made up of one
or more threads, each of which represents a single path of execution
through the application’s code. Every application starts with a single
thread, which runs the application’s main function. The main thread
encompasses the application’s main run loop, and it’s where the
NSApplication object receives events. Applications can add (or spawn
in tech lingo) additional threads, each of which executes the code you
specify.
Threads, then, are simply a unit or stream of execution — an ordered
sequence of instructions (some of your code). As I said, your program
usually will be running on the main thread, but you can specify that
pieces of your program (blocks of code) should run on other threads
(which can be on other cores) — which results in doing more than one
thing at once. However, there are some problems with actually
implementing threads in a program — problems that are beyond the
scope of this book.
Fortunately, in iOS (and OS X), rather than creating threads directly, all
you have to do is define the task (in a block object) you want performed
on a separate thread and tell the system to perform it. You do this by
specifying a dispatch queue — a structure that manages the tasks you
submit to it. There are three types of dispatch queues in iOS: Serial,
Concurrent, and the Main Dispatch Queue. All three are first in, first out
(i.e., first come first served), but with each one executing a task in a
particular way. (The particularities, again, are out of scope for this book.)
Trust me, though; dispatch queues provide a much simpler (and more
efficient) programming model.
So why should you care?
Well if you run everything on the main thread, as most apps do in iOS, a
task has to complete before the next task can start. And if the task that’s
running takes a long time to complete — such as downloading to your
iPhone from iCloud the itinerary you created on your iPad — everything

--- Page 114 ---
stops until that data is downloaded, which means the user can’t do
anything else with your application.
Threading has always been a part of Core Data, but the new concurrent
Core Data model makes threading much easier. In the past, if you
wanted to create multiple managed object contexts on different threads
(to keep the user interface responsive while Core Data is executing a
long running task, for example), you had to do all the work yourself.
Now, all you have to do is associate a managed object context with a
queue. Instead of you creating and managing a thread or queue, the
managed object context manages all the details for you. But in the case
of RoadTrip and other applications which use only a single managed
object context on the main thread, you can also use threading to
download the persistent store on a different thread, so the user can
continue to interact with the app while the download (spun off on a
different thread) happens. Of course, if the user actually wants to look at
the itinerary, he or she has to wait for the download to complete (and
handling that situation is elegantly managed by Core Data, as you see
later), but that doesn’t limit the user from doing other things in your app
while waiting for the download to complete.
The Core Data initWithConcurrencyType: method from Listing 3-8
creates the managed object context in background, associating it with a
queue you specify.
NSManagedObjectContext* managedObjectContext =
  [[NSManagedObjectContext alloc]
    initWithConcurrencyType:NSMainQueueConcurrencyType];
Queues, as I mention earlier, are beyond the scope of this book, but the
queue you’ll be using — NSMainQueueConcurrencyType — executes
tasks on the application’s main thread (where it will be used). You create
RoadTrip’s managed object context on the main thread because that
enables you to link to your program objects (such as the model and view
controllers) that are also running on that thread.

--- Page 115 ---
Making your way further down Listing 3-8, you see that the
performBlock AndWait: block method sends the message to the
managed object context that you want to set the Persistent Store
coordinator:
[managedObjectContext performBlockAndWait:^{
  [managedObjectContext
              setPersistentStoreCoordinator:
coordinator];
    }];
Using the performBlockAndWait: method, the managed object context
executes the block on its own thread; the main thread in this case, but it
could be a different thread if you were, for example, using multiple
managed object contexts. The performBlockAndWait: method ensures
that the messages you send to the managed object context are executed
on the same thread as the managed object context itself. These messages
include things like setting the Persistent Store coordinator as well as the
post initialization that you will do later for iCloud. (Using the
performBlockAndWait: method isn’t really necessary here, because
you’ll be working on the main thread, but it’s good to understand this
more general form.)
The Persistent Store coordinator
Listing 3-9 shows the code for accessing the
persistentStoreCoordinator property. It, too, is an explicit
implementation of a getter, in this case of the
persistentStoreCoordinator property getter which is invoked every
time you access the property. Add it to RTModel.m.
It returns the NSPersistentStoreCoordinator for the application. If the
coordinator doesn’t already exist, it’s created, and the application’s store
is added to it.

--- Page 116 ---
Listing 3-9: Creating the
persistentStoreCoordinator
- (NSPersistentStoreCoordinator *)
                              persistentStoreCoordinator
{
  if (_persistentStoreCoordinator != nil) {
    return _persistentStoreCoordinator;
  }
  _persistentStoreCoordinator =
   [[NSPersistentStoreCoordinator alloc]
    initWithManagedObjectModel:[self
managedObjectModel]];
  
  RTAppDelegate *appDelegate =
             [[UIApplication sharedApplication]
delegate];
  NSString *storePathComponent =
   [NSString stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”,@”Model”,
           appDelegate.destinationPreference,
@”.sqlite”];
  NSString *storePath = [RTModel
                             filePath:storePathComponent
];
  dispatch_async(dispatch_get_global_queue(
                   DISPATCH_QUEUE_PRIORITY_DEFAULT, 0),
^{
    NSURL *storeUrl = [NSURL fileURLWithPath:storePath];
    NSDictionary* options = nil;
     NSError *error = nil;
    
    [_persistentStoreCoordinator lock];
    if (![_persistentStoreCoordinator
      addPersistentStoreWithType:NSSQLiteStoreType
       configuration:nil URL:storeUrl options:options

--- Page 117 ---
                                          error:&error])
{
      NSString *errorMessage = [error
                                    localizedDescription
];
            UIAlertView *alertView = [[UIAlertView
alloc]
                                
           initWithTitle:@”Error in accessing your
             itinerary. Restart Road Trip and contact
             customer support if it continues.”
           message:errorMessage delegate:nil
           cancelButtonTitle:@”OK”
           otherButtonTitles:nil];
      [alertView show];
      NSLog(@”Core Data Failure! Error code: %u,
description: %@, and reason: %@”, error.code,
            [error localizedDescription],
            [error localizedFailureReason]);
      return;
    }    
    [_persistentStoreCoordinator unlock];
    dispatch_async(dispatch_get_main_queue(), ^{
      NSLog(@”Persistent store added”);
      [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
        postNotificationName:@”PersistentStoreAdded”  
                                object:self
userInfo:nil];
      
    });
  });
  return _persistentStoreCoordinator;
}
This method returns the NSPersistentStoreCoordinator for the
application. If the coordinator doesn’t already exist, it’s created, and the

--- Page 118 ---
application’s store is added to it.
if (_persistentStoreCoordinator != nil) {
    return _persistentStoreCoordinator;
  }
Although it’s true that you’re going to add the persistent store in
background, you’re actually going to create and assign the Persistent
Store coordinator to persistentStoreCoordinator property before you
add the persistent store proper. That’s because in Core Data you can
create the NSManaged ObjectContext and fetch requests even if the
Persistent Store coordinator doesn’t (yet) have a store. In that case, a
fetch request just returns an empty array. For example, the user may see
an empty list when she initially taps the Itinerary button. Creating and
assigning the Persistent Store coordinator to the
persistentStoreCoordinator property before you add the persistent
store allows you, however, to bring up the user interface, which will
require you to notify the view controllers when the persistent store is
there so that they can tell their views to refresh themselves. That means
that, as soon as the persistent store is created, the list will be refreshed,
and the user will see her itinerary.
As I’ve stressed a number of times, doing things in background will be
important when you implement iCloud, because any synchronizations or
downloads can take some time.
_persistentStoreCoordinator =
  [[NSPersistentStoreCoordinator alloc]
   initWithManagedObjectModel: [self
managedObjectModel]];
After creating and assigning the Persistent Store coordinator to
persistent StoreCoordinator property, you need to create the path to
the persistent store. You’ll have to do that before you dispatch the task
that will asynchronously (on another thread) create the persistent store,
because NSBundle is not thread safe — meaning NSBundle can be used
from any thread, but just one thread at a time (so use it from the main

--- Page 119 ---
thread). (Code is thread safe when it can be executed simultaneously on
multiple threads. This includes access to the same data and making sure
when necessary — during an update, for example — a piece of data is
accessed by only one thread at any given time.) Your path-creating goes
as follows:
RTAppDelegate *appDelegate =
             [[UIApplication sharedApplication]
delegate];
NSString *storePathComponent =
  [NSString stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”,@”Model”,
           appDelegate.destinationPreference,
@”.sqlite”];
NSString *storePath =
                    [RTModel
filePath:storePathComponent];
Notice that I’m creating a separate Persistent Store path for each
destination and hence a separate persistent store. I could have, of course,
added an attribute that specified which destination an itinerary was
attached to, but doing it this way allows me to show you how to create
multiple persistent stores, and it makes the code simpler.
 Notice here that the persistent store uses SQLite as its store. You
can use other file formats if you like, but just be sure not to make
any assumptions about the store. Core Data supports a number of
file formats; if you don’t make any assumptions about what the
current format is, then you can change store implementation
without causing all sorts of problems in your app.
Next, you create the persistent store on another thread for the simple
reason that, if you’re using iCloud and this is the first time this device is
syncing with existing iCloud content, it may take a long, long time to
download. While it’s not important in RoadTrip the way it stands now

--- Page 120 ---
(unless you are using iCloud), it could become a real issue as your
application grows. So you might as well take care of business now.
dispatch_async(dispatch_get_global_queue
                 (DISPATCH_QUEUE_PRIORITY_DEFAULT, 0),
^{
dispatch_async tells iOS to run this task in background using the global
dispatch queue.
dispatch_get_global_queue returns a global concurrent queue of a
given priority level. The queue has been created for you by Grand
Central Dispatch, which implements the concurrency model I explain in
the “Concurrency support for managed object contexts” section, earlier
in the chapter. Grand Central Dispatch actually creates three queues for
you:
DISPATCH_QUEUE_PRIORITY_HIGH,
DISPATCH_QUEUE_PRIORITY_DEFAULT, and
DISPATCH_QUEUE_PRIORITY_LOW.
DISPATCH_QUEUE_PRIORITY_DEFAULT is the priority of the
queue you want.
In order to run something on a separate thread, all you need to do is tell
the system to do it (as you just did) and pass in a block with the task to
run. In this case, the block is as follows:
^{
    NSURL *storeUrl = [NSURL fileURLWithPath:storePath];
    NSDictionary* options = nil;
    NSError *error = nil;
    
    [_persistentStoreCoordinator lock];
    if (![_persistentStoreCoordinator
      addPersistentStoreWithType:NSSQLiteStoreType
        configuration:nil URL:storeUrl options:options

--- Page 121 ---
                                          error:&error])
{
      NSString *errorMessage = [error
                                    localizedDescription
];
      UIAlertView *alertView = [[UIAlertView alloc]
         initWithTitle:@”Error in accessing your
itinerary. Restart Road Trip and contact customer
support if the error continues.”
         message:errorMessage delegate:nil
          cancelButtonTitle:@”OK”
otherButtonTitles:nil];
       [alertView show];
       NSLog(@”Core Data Failure! Error code: %u,
description: %@, reason: %@, recovery: %@”,
error.code, [error localizedDescription], [error
localizedFailureReason],
          [error localizedRecoverySuggestion]);
    }    
    [_persistentStoreCoordinator unlock];
    _persistentStoreCoordinator
_async(dispatch_get_main_queue(), ^{
      NSLog(@”Persistent store added”);
      [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
        postNotificationName:@”RefetchAllDatabaseData”  
                                object:self
userInfo:nil];
      
    });
  });
The first thing you do in this block is lock the Persistent Store
coordinator, giving you exclusive access and ensuring no changes will
be made to it while you’re working with it. The lock method will keep
your new thread from executing until the Persistent Store coordinator
can be locked — meaning it can’t be changed by another object.

--- Page 122 ---
[_persistentStoreCoordinator lock];
Then you add the persistent store
if (![_persistentStoreCoordinator
  addPersistentStoreWithType:NSSQLiteStoreType
    configuration:nil URL:storeUrl
options:options        
                                          error:&error])
{
Again, you’re adding an SQLLite store, but as I mention earlier, Core
Data supports several other file types (such as NSBinaryStoreType and
InMemoryStoreType) as well as custom types. (configuration is used
when you want to store different entities in different stores with a given
Store coordinator and is beyond the scope of this book.)
 options is a dictionary, and you won’t need that until you start
working with iCloud in Chapter 5.
Notice the error checking :
if (![psc addPersistentStoreWithType:NSSQLiteStoreType
  configuration:nil URL:storeUrl options:options  
                                         error:&error])
{
You’ll see this particular error (in addition to when the store is not
accessible) when the schema for the persistent store is incompatible with
current managed object model. That happens when you change the
managed object model (which happens frequently during development)
and either don’t migrate to the new one (out of scope for this book) or
delete the old one and start from scratch.
The current code merely posts an alert and logs the error. You’ll want to
go beyond merely posting an alert and logging the error in a shipping

--- Page 123 ---
application by providing recovery options or retrying if that’s possible.
NSString *errorMessage = [error localizedDescription];
UIAlertView *alertView = [[UIAlertView alloc]
  initWithTitle:@”Error in accessing your itinerary.
Restart Road Trip and contact customer support if the
error continues.”
  message:errorMessage delegate:nil
  cancelButtonTitle:@”OK” otherButtonTitles:nil];
[alertView show];
NSLog(@”Core Data Failure! Error code: %u, description:
  %@, reason: %@, recovery: %@”, error.code,
  [error localizedDescription],
  [error localizedFailureReason],
  [error localizedRecoverySuggestion]);
NSLog(@”Unresolved error %@, %@”, error,
                                        [error
userInfo]);
Then you unlock the Persistent Store coordinator.
  [_persistentStoreCoordinator unlock];
Finally, now that the persistent store has been added, you need to tell the
view controllers (and the model) on the main thread that they can now
load their data. But because you’re doing all your executing on a
different thread, you need to post that info on the main thread.
dispatch_async(dispatch_get_main_queue(), ^{
  NSLog(@”Persistent store added”);
  [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
    postNotificationName:@”RefetchAllDatabaseData”
                                object:self
userInfo:nil];
You post a notification that — as you’ll soon see — may be subscribed
to by RoadTrip objects. (I cover this in the next chapter, but you can
guess what they are.) You need this because in Core Data you can create

--- Page 124 ---
the NSManagedObjectContext and fetch requests even when the
Persistent Store controller has no persistent store. (Again, setting it up
this way allows you to bring up the user interface even when a RoadTrip
user hasn’t entered anything yet for the itinerary.)
 Until you actually have a persistent store, fetch requests are
going to return empty arrays. After the persistent store gets added,
you’ll be broadcasting that fact through the notification center so
RoadTrip knows that the data should be refetched and will be
displayable by the views.
Creating the persistent store
synchronously
If you don’t want to bother with creating the persistent store
asynchronously (if you aren’t even going to use iCloud, for
example), you can get the code to do that by creating an
application in Xcode using the Master-Detail template and
selecting Use Core Data. You can then examine the generated
code, which creates the store synchronously — it will look kind of
like this:
- (NSPersistentStoreCoordinator *)
persistentStoreCoordinator
{
if (__persistentStoreCoordinator != nil) {
return __persistentStoreCoordinator;
}
NSURL *storeURL =
[[self applicationDocumentsDirectory]
URLByAppendingPathComponent:@”cdsynch.sqli
te”];
NSError *error = nil;
__persistentStoreCoordinator =

--- Page 125 ---
[[NSPersistentStoreCoordinator alloc]
initWithManagedObjectModel:[self
managedObjectModel]];
if (![__persistentStoreCoordinator
addPersistentStoreWithType:NSSQLiteStoreTy
pe
configuration:nil URL:storeURL options:nil
error:&error]) {
/*
Replace this implementation with code to
handle the error
appropriately.
*/
}
return __persistentStoreCoordinator;
}
I’d like to point out one other thing — the RTModel filePath class
method. This class method simply creates the file path for you. (I got
tired of the repetitious code, so I added this method, and it’s used
throughout the app.)
#pragma mark - Create the file path
+ (NSString *)filePath:(NSString *)fileComponent {
  
  return [[NSSearchPathForDirectoriesInDomains
   (NSDocumentDirectory, NSUserDomainMask, YES)
      lastObject] stringByAppendingPathComponent:
                                          fileComponent]
;
}
If you’re an eagle-eyed reader, you might have noticed that the Persistent
Store coordinator uses the managedObjectModel property:
_persistentStoreCoordinator =

--- Page 126 ---
  [[NSPersistentStoreCoordinator alloc]
   initWithManagedObjectModel:[self
managedObjectModel]];
It’s time now to take a closer look at this property and the managed
object model behind it.
The managed object model
As I explain in the “Starting with the Objects — The Managed Object
Model” section, earlier in this chapter, the managed object model
describes the entities (objects) your application uses and the
relationships between them.
Listing 3-10 shows you the code for accessing the managedObjectModel
property. This code, like Listing 3-8 and Listing 3-9 before it, is an
explicit implementation of the managedObjectModel property getter and
is invoked every time you access the property — when you create the
Persistent Store coordinator, for example. Add it to RTModel.m.
It returns the managed object model for the application. If the model
doesn’t already exist, it’s created from the application’s model (the one
you created and named in the “Starting with the Objects — the Managed
Object Model” section).
Listing 3-10: Creating the managedObjectModel
- (NSManagedObjectModel *)managedObjectModel
{
  if (_managedObjectModel != nil) {
    return _managedObjectModel;
  }
  
  NSURL *modelURL = [[NSBundle mainBundle]
URLForResource:@”Model” withExtension:@”momd”];
  _managedObjectModel = [[NSManagedObjectModel alloc]

--- Page 127 ---
                          initWithContentsOfURL:modelURL
];
  return _managedObjectModel;
}
There really isn’t much going on here, other than the fact that you’re
creating a managed object model. The only thing you’re wondering is,
although you probably recognize the name Model, what’s up with this
momd extension business? In the Project navigator, notice that the
extension stands revealed as the (relatively more straightforward)
xcdatamodel. So why the name change?
When the data model is compiled (using the model compiler, momc),
extraneous elements such as its layout are removed, and an xcdatamodel
“source” directory is compiled into a momd deployment directory. In a
model that supports versioning, as this one does, such a directory groups
different versions of the model, each represented by an individual
.xcdatamodel file, into one bundle. After you have all the versions tied
together into one neat package, you load this particular .momd model
bundle using the init WithContentsOfURL: method of
NSManagedObjectModel.
Notifications
With RoadTrip — and with any app with any degree of complexity —
it’s often necessary to know that a certain kind of event has occurred. A
PointOfInterest may be added to an Itinerary, or a PointOfInterest
removed from the PointsOfInterest list, which means the view
displaying the Itinerary or PointsOfInterest list would need to
redraw itself using the newly updated data. In terms of the discussion in
this chapter, you want to know when the persistent store has been
downloaded, and it’s now time for all those views that display data
associated with that persistent store to go ahead and redraw themselves.

--- Page 128 ---
One way to send information to an object is by sending a message.
Another way is by having the object become a delegate. Both of these
methods require that the sender know all about the observer, which
naturally increases the coupling in the system. Instead of going that
route, you can use the Notification Center object (an
NSNotificationCenter) which will broadcast information within a
program, thereby decoupling the sender and the observer and making for
a more flexible system. Every iOS application has a default Notification
Center — all you have to do is use it.
 The UIKit and Foundation frameworks make extensive use of
notifications, and I suggest you explore this on your own. (You can
usually find a listing of the notifications that a framework class
posts in the Notifications section of its Class reference
documentation.)
The beauty of the Notification Center is that any object can use it to post
a notification and objects can register themselves with the Notification
Center as observers so they receive notifications whenever they get
posted. And this is what RoadTrip has done. Now, when a persistent
store gets added, the Persistent Store coordinator posts a notification.
(The NSLog is for your information.) The relevant code — shown here —
can be found in Listing 3-9.
dispatch_async(dispatch_get_main_queue(), ^{
  NSLog(@”Persistent store added”);
  [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
    postNotificationName:@”RefetchAllDatabaseData”
                                object:self
userInfo:nil];
In a multithreaded application, notifications are always delivered in the
thread in which the notification was posted — which may not
necessarily be the same thread in which an observer registered itself. So
the Persistent Store coordinator needs to post it on the main thread as

--- Page 129 ---
well to ensure that it will be delivered on the main thread where the
RoadTrip objects live.
dispatch_async(dispatch_get_main_queue(),
As for the syntax to use, posting a notification includes the notification
name (RefetchAllDatabaseData), the object that is doing the posting
(self), and an optional user information dictionary (nil in this case).
[[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
    postNotificationName:@”RefetchAllDatabaseData”
                                object:self
userInfo:nil];
To get a notification, an object registers with the Notification Center.
You’ll see an example of that in Chapter 4, when you have the RTModel
register for the RefetchAllDatabaseData notification by doing the
following:
__block __weak RTModel *weakSelf = self;
[[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
  addObserverForName:@”PersistentStoreAdded” object:self
queue:nil usingBlock:^(NSNotification *notif) {
  [weakSelf loadItinerary];
  [weakSelf loadPointsOfInterest];
  [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
postNotificationName:@”DestinationChanged”
                            object:weakSelf
userInfo:nil];
  }];
I know the declaration and references to _weakSelf look a bit odd — it
has to do with how Automatic Reference Counting (ARC) handles
references from within blocks. Let me explain notifications first and I’ll
get to that particular oddity.

--- Page 130 ---
addObserverForName:object:queue:usingBlock: is an
NSNotificationCenter instance method that adds a block that is passed
in as an argument. When the notification is posted, the block is added to
the operation queue you specify to be executed — if you specify nil, the
block is run synchronously on the posting thread.
The object parameter is the object whose notifications you want to
register for. If you specify nil, the Notification Center will execute the
block for any object that posts a notification with that name.
When the block is executed, the optional user information dictionary that
is sent by the object that posts the notification is passed into the block as
an argument.
^(NSNotification *notif) {
 An object that registers for a notification needs to remove itself
as an observer before it is de-allocated . For example, in
RTDetailViewController — the base class for the view controllers
in RoadTrip — that is done in the dealloc method:
-(void) dealloc {
  
  [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
                                     removeObserver:self
];
}
ARC and blocks
Although not explicitly explained in Apple’s Transitioning to ARC
Release Notes, there is a subtlety if you are using blocks and you refer to
objects outside that block. While the whole topic really is outside of the
scope of this book, I want to examine it because it has, in the past,

--- Page 131 ---
caused me hours of pain, and I’ll make a long boring story into a short
boring one.
When you use a block, it has to be retained in order to be used later —
think of it as becoming an object. All fine and good and when it is doing
its thing it can be released. If, however, (and this is a big however) it
needs to use something in the object within which it is declared (like
self — the RTModel — to send the loadItinerary message above) then
that object will also have to be retained. Whoops! This is known as the
retain or reference cycle. I can’t delete the RTModel because it is being
retained by the block.
The solution is not to use self inside the block. To do that I define a
__block variable
__block weak RTModel *weakSelf = self;
weakSelf is the same value as self — a reference to the RTModel — and
since it has the __block storage type (which means it can be modified by
the block) the RTModel will be retained so the block can use weakSelf.
Once the block completes, however, it sets weakSelf to nil and both the
RTModel and the block can be released.
weakSelf is the same value as self — a reference to the RTModel — and
since it has the __block storage type (which means it can be modified by
the block) the RTModel will be retained so the block can use weakSelf.
Since the weakSelf variable has a weak pointer (has the __weak storage
type) to the RTModel, however, once the block completes, both the
RTModel and the block can be released.
There is actually, an easier way to deal with this in notifications. While I
really like blocks, and use them whenever I can, you can also take
advantage of notification without using blocks. For example, in Chapter
4 the ItineraryController adds itself as an observer for the Itinerary
Changed notification in the following way:

--- Page 132 ---
[[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter] addObserver:self
  selector:@selector(itineraryChanged:)   
                   name:@”ItineraryChanged” object:nil];
addObserver:selector:name:object: is virtually identical to
addObserverForName:object:queue:usingBlock: except you pass in a
selector which does the same thing as the block.
- (void)itineraryChanged:(NSNotification *) notif {
  
  [self.itineraryTableView reloadData];
}
The only disadvantage here is that the selector can’t use the originating
method’s local variables, which is not a problem in this particular case.
So even though I prefer blocks, as you look through the code you’ll see
mostly the selector rather than block implementation of notifications
Adding the Core Data framework
Okay, you have a Core Data Stack, which — admit it — didn’t require
much heavy lifting. But to be able to actually use Core Data, you’ll have
to add the CoreData framework.
1. In the Project navigator, select the Project icon (in this case,
RoadTrip) at the top of the Project Navigator content area to
display the Project editor.
2. In the TARGETS section in the Project editor, select RoadTrip.
3. In the Summary tab, scroll down to the Linked Frameworks
and Libraries section.
4. Expand the Linked Frameworks and Libraries section (if it isn’t
already expanded) by clicking the disclosure triangle, as shown in
Figure 3-17.
5. Click the + (plus sign) button underneath the list of current
project frameworks.

--- Page 133 ---
Figure 3-
17: Adding a
framework.
Figure 3-
18: Adding a
A list of frameworks appears.
6. Scroll down the list and select CoreData Framework, as shown
in Figure 3-18.
7. Click the Add button.
You see the framework added to the Linked Frameworks and
Libraries section.
8. Click the disclosure triangle yet again to close the Linked
Frameworks and Libraries section.
9. In the Project navigator (don’t do this from the Linked
Frameworks and Libraries section!), drag the CoreData.framework
file to the Frameworks group to get it out of the way.
 You can also add a framework by clicking the Build Phases tab
in the Project editor, expanding the Link Binary with Libraries
section, and following the same procedure.


--- Page 134 ---
new
framework.
You’re now ready to actually use Core Data. Your project should
compile and execute with no errors.
Putting Core Data to Work
At this point, you have what you need to start using Core Data. In the
next chapter, you do just that by using Core Data to create, manage, and
save SharedPointOfInterest objects which will make up your itinerary.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 135 ---
Chapter 4
Putting Core Data to Work
In This Chapter
 Using Core Data
 Figuring out fetch requests
 Adding, saving, and loading SharedPointOfInterest objects with
Core Data
Chapter 3 is all about setting up Core Data. This chapter shows you how
you can now use Core Data to manage your itinerary. Here, you move
RoadTrip away from saving your itinerary in a file (the old way to do
things) to storing it in Core Data (the new way to do things). Along the
way, I have you add a new feature for displaying your data — displaying
the points of interest in your itinerary by location. Actually, Core Data
makes this little trick really easy, so it’s not much to brag about.
The image on the left in Figure 4-1 shows you the way it works now.
You can see that the pre-Core Data RoadTrip allows you to create (and
save) an itinerary — the places you’d like to go. After Core Data, you
can see from the middle image in Figure 4-1 that I’ve added a nice
location heading to the itinerary. While that is certainly stylish, the real
change occurs under the covers. All those itinerary objects that actually
contain the information about each point of interest in my itinerary are
now managed by Core Data.
You may think that making a change like that could bend your
established code out of shape, but it turns out that the decision to update
the model implementation to use Core Data doesn’t bring with it a whole
set of messy repercussions. Because I’ve been pretty obsessive all along
about encapsulating all content-based functionality in a loosely coupled

--- Page 136 ---
Figure 4-1:
Your
itinerary
before and
after Core
Data.
model, the changes you’ll need to make to ItineraryController will
be minor and transparent to MapController, which — as you can see
from the image on the right in Figure 4-1 — actually takes all of those
points of interest and plots them on a map.
Okay, nice overview, but how does that actually work?
In this chapter, I start off by explaining how this works in the old school
version of RoadTrip — the pre–Core Data one. Now, I don’t necessarily
go into excruciating detail, especially when you’re going to replace the
current implementation with one that uses Core Data, but you get the
general outline. After that, I highlight the changes you need to make to
the old version of RoadTrip for it to handle the new way of doing things.
 Core Data has a lot to it — enough to write a book about — so I
can’t explain everything. I do, however, make suggestions for
things you might want to explore on your own.
As I mention in Chapter 2, the RoadTrip application is a bit complex.
That’s kind of the point. I want to show you how to use iCloud and web
services in the context of a real application, and by using RoadTrip in
particular, I can also illustrate some of the issues that arise when dealing
with a more complex application (like the ones you’re likely to build).
On the other hand, I’ve architected the app by obsessively making sure
the model is loosely coupled, making it easier to evolve, and also much

--- Page 137 ---
easier for you to follow. As a result, it turns out (as it should) that all the
changes you’ll be making in order to incorporate Core Data and iCloud
capabilities are limited to two classes — RTModel and
ItineraryController.
Adding a Point of Interest to the
Itinerary
In the RoadTrip application, the PointsOfInterestController is what’s
behind the display of PointOfInterest objects in the list you saw in the
popover back in 4-1.These PointOfInterest objects are created by the
RTModel — initially from the RoadTrip’s Destinations.plist file —
and stored in the PointsOfInterest array. The PointsOfInterest array
is accessed by the PointsOfInterestController using its pointsOf
Interest instance variable.
When the user selects a row in the PointsOfInterestController’s
Table view, as shown back in Figure 4-1, the
PointsOfInterestController tableView:didSelectRowAtIndexPath:
method sends the addToItinerary:objectAtIndex: message to the
RTModel, as you can see in Listing 4-1.
Listing 4-1: The User Selects a Point of Interest to
Add to His Itinerary
- (void)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView
          didSelectRowAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath
*)indexPath
{
  [tableView deselectRowAtIndexPath:
                                  indexPath
animated:YES];
  [[RTModel model] addToItinerary:

--- Page 138 ---
          [pointsOfInterest
objectAtIndex:indexPath.row]];
}
The PointsOfInterestController deselects the row and then sends the
RTModel the addToItinerary:objectAtIndex: message to add the
selected point of interest to the itinerary.
In the RTModel’s addToItinerary:objectAtIndex: method, shown in
Listing 4-2, the selected point of interest is added to the itinerary
array. The returnPointOfInterestData method returns the object’s
data in a dictionary, which is added to the itineraryData array and then
saved to the file system.
Listing 4-2: Adding to the Itinerary
- (void)addToItinerary:
                      (PointOfInterest *)pointOfInterest
{
  
  [itinerary addObject:pointOfInterest];   
  [pointsOfInterest removeObject:pointOfInterest];
  
  [itineraryData addObject:
             [pointOfInterest
returnPointOfInterestData]];
  RTAppDelegate *appDelegate =
             [[UIApplication sharedApplication]
delegate];
  NSString *fileComponent = [NSString
stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”, @”Itinerary”,
appDelegate.destinationPreference, @”.poi”];
  NSString *filePath = [RTModel filePath:fileComponent];
  
  NSURL *itineraryDataURL =
                       [NSURL fileURLWithPath:filePath];

--- Page 139 ---
  [itineraryData writeToURL:
                       itineraryDataURL atomically:YES];
  [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
postNotificationName:@”ItineraryChanged” object:self
userInfo:nil];
  [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
postNotificationName:@”PointsOfInterestChanged”
object:self userInfo:nil];
  UIAlertView *alert = [[UIAlertView alloc]
      initWithTitle:pointOfInterest.title
      message:@”Was added to your itinerary”
      delegate:self cancelButtonTitle:@”Thanks”
      otherButtonTitles:nil];
  [alert show];
}
Walking through Listing 4-2, you can see that, to add a point of interest
to the itinerary, the RTModel adds the pointOfInterest object to the
itinerary array and removes it from the pointsOfInterest array. As a
result, when the ItineraryController and
PointsOfInterestController reload their table data, the
PointOfInterest will appear in the Itinerary list (shown in the main
window in the leftmost image in Figure 4-1) and disappear from the
Points of Interest list (the popover window in the leftmost image in
Figure 4-1).
[itinerary addObject:pointOfInterest];   
[pointsOfInterest removeObject:pointOfInterest];
Then the selected PointOfInterest data is used to create a dictionary,
which will be added to the itineraryData array and also saved in the
Itinerary file (which will be loaded at application launch).
returnPointOfInterestData does what it says, and I leave you to
investigate it on your own, because you’ll replace it in Listing 4-6 when
you implement the Core Data functionality:

--- Page 140 ---
[itineraryData addObject:
             [pointOfInterest
returnPointOfInterestData]];
RTAppDelegate *appDelegate =
             [[UIApplication sharedApplication]
delegate];
NSString *fileComponent = [NSString
stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”, @”Itinerary”,
appDelegate.destinationPreference, @”.poi”];
NSString *filePath = [RTModel filePath:fileComponent];
  
NSURL *itineraryDataURL =
                       [NSURL fileURLWithPath:filePath];
[itineraryData writeToURL:
                       itineraryDataURL atomically:YES];
One of the more interesting parts of Listing 4-2 is the fact that the
RTModel posts notifications telling the world that both the Itinerary
and PointsOfInterest arrays have changed. This ends up being the
primary mechanism to make sure that if something changes in the data,
all views that are visible have the opportunity to redisplay themselves
with that new data. (I explain notifications in Chapter 3.)
  [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
postNotificationName:@”ItineraryChanged” object:self
userInfo:nil];
  [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
postNotificationName:@”PointsOfInterestChanged”
object:self
Both the PointsOfInterestController and the ItineraryController
have added themselves as observers of those notifications in their
viewDidLoad methods and as a result will reload their views when they
receive the appropriate notifications. As I explain in Chapter 3, each
controller starts off by sending the
addObserver:selector:name:object: message:

--- Page 141 ---
[[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter] addObserver:self
    selector:@selector(itineraryChanged:)
                    name:@”ItineraryChanged”
object:nil];
The object parameter is nil, which means that it wants to be registered
for an ItineraryChanged notification posted by any object out there.
The selector sends a message to the Table view to reload said data:
- (void)itineraryChanged:(NSNotification *)notif {
  
[self.itineraryTableView reloadData];
}
Finally, the addToItinerary: method posts an alert to inform the user
that the addition to the itinerary has been carried out.
UIAlertView *alert = [[UIAlertView alloc]
         initWithTitle:pointOfInterest.title
         message:@”Was added to your itinerary”
         delegate:self cancelButtonTitle:@”Thanks”
         otherButtonTitles:nil];
[alert show];
All eminently doable, I suppose, but take a look at how you could do all
this by using Core Data.
Adding a Point of Interest to the
Itinerary Using Core Data
When you work with Core Data, you (necessarily) work with managed
objects. (Chapter 3 has more on the whole managed objects topic.) So,
you’ll need to modify the RTModel to use the new NSManagedObject that

--- Page 142 ---
you created in Chapter 3 — SharedPointOfInterest. To do that, add
the code in bold in Listing 4-3 to RTModel.m.
Listing 4-3: Updating the RTModel.m
Implementation
#import “RTModel.h”
#import “RTAppDelegate.h”
#import “Destination.h”
#import “PointOfInterest.h”
#import “Annotation.h”
#import “SharedPointOfInterest.h”
After importing SharedPointOfInterest, you’re going to implement a
new method in it which will take a dictionary and update its properties
accordingly. You take care of all that by adding the code in bold in
Listing 4-4 to SharedPointOfInterest.h.
Listing 4-4: Updating the
SharedfPointOfInterest.h Interface
#import <Foundation/Foundation.h>
#import <CoreData/CoreData.h>
#import <MapKit/MapKit.h>
@interface SharedPointOfInterest : NSManagedObject
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * name;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * address;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * comment;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSNumber * displayOrder;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * latitude;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * location;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * longitude;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * subtitle;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * title;
@property (nonatomic, readwrite)
                        CLLocationCoordinate2D
coordinate;

--- Page 143 ---
- (void)loadData:(NSDictionary *)data;
@end
Add the code in Listing 4-5 to SharedPointOfInterest.m to implement
the loadData: method.
Listing 4-5: Adding the loadData: Method
- (void)loadData:(NSDictionary *)data {
  
  self.latitude =
            [[data objectForKey:@”Latitude”]
stringValue];
  self.longitude =
           [[data objectForKey:@”Longitude”]
stringValue];
  self.title = [data objectForKey:@”Name”];
  self.name = [data objectForKey:@”Name”];
  self.address = [data objectForKey:@”Address”];
  self.location = [data objectForKey:@”Location”];
  self.comment = [data objectForKey:@”Description”];
  self.subtitle = [data objectForKey:@”Description”];
}
As I mention earlier, in this method, you take a dictionary and use it to
initialize the SharedPointOfInterest properties. You don’t have to do
anything with the coordinate property. That’s because back in Chapter
3 you created an accessor for it that constructs the
CLLocationCoordinate2D from the latitude and the longitude
properties.
In a bit, you’ll be modifying addToItinerary so that instead of creating
a PointOfInterest object and adding it to the itinerary array, you’ll
have the managed object context create a new SharedPointOfInterest
all on its own, which the managed object context will then manage. (The
object’s data will be added in the loadData: method as you’ll see in

--- Page 144 ---
Listing 4-9.) You’ll also execute a fetch request to reload the list of
SharedPointOfInterest objects that you’ll use to display the point of
interest information.
So what is a fetch request? I’m glad you asked.
The fetch request
In Listing 4-7, you’re going to be creating a Fetch Request accessor
following the same process you used to create the other Core Data stack
accessors — persistentStoreCoordinator for example — back in
Chapter 3. Before you take that step, however, you need to prepare the
ground a bit by adding the bolded code in Listing 4-6 to RTModel.m so
you can get the property added and synthesize the accessors.
You’re making the reference to the fetch request a property to take
advantage of the same kind of accessor plumbing you used to create the
other Core Data stack accessors in Chapter 3, but you aren’t making this
property accessible to other objects. Rather, you’re ensuring that the
property is private — OK, sort of private — by being hidden in the
RTModel.m implementation rather than published in the interface. You’re
also making it readonly to be consistent with the other properties.
Listing 4-6: Adding the
sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest Instance
Property
#import “RTModel.h”
#import “RTAppDelegate.h”
#import “Destination.h”
#import “PointOfInterest.h”
#import “Annotation.h”
#import “SharedPointOfInterest.h”
typedef void (^addLocationCompletionHandler)(Annotation
*annotation, NSError* error);

--- Page 145 ---
@interface RTModel () {  
  NSDictionary *destinationData;
  Destination* destination;
  NSMutableArray *events;
  NSMutableArray *pointsOfInterest;
  NSMutableArray *itinerary;
  NSMutableArray *itineraryData;
  NSMutableArray *pointsOfInterestData;
  addLocationCompletionHandler
                         addFindLocationCompletionHandle
r;
  CLLocation *foundLocation;
}
@property (readonly, strong, nonatomic)
        NSFetchRequest
*sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest;
@end
@implementation RTModel
@synthesize managedObjectContext =
_managedObjectContext;
@synthesize managedObjectModel = _managedObjectModel;
@synthesize persistentStoreCoordinator =
                              _persistentStoreCoordinato
r;
@synthesize sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest =
                       _sharedPointOfInterestFetchReques
t;
Keep things moving along by adding the code in Listing 4-7 to
RTModel.m to add the needed Fetch Request accessor.
Listing 4-7: Adding the
sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest Accessor
- (NSFetchRequest *)sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest {
  

--- Page 146 ---
  if (_sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest != nil) {
    return _sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest;
  }
  _sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest = [NSFetchRequest
     fetchRequestWithEntityName:@”SharedPointOfInterest”
];
  
  return _sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest;
}
A fetch request is an object that specifies what data you want from the
persistent store. You could, for example, specify that you want “all
SharedPoint OfInterest objects ordered by location,” or “all
SharedPointOfInterest objects in New York.”
A fetch request must specify an entity to search for. fetchRequestWith
EntityName: creates a fetch request with the entity name you specify —
SharedPointOfInterest. It also can contain one (or both) of the
following:
 A predicate object that specifies conditions that objects must
match (for example, “last name begins with an ‘X’”): If you
don’t specify a predicate (and you won’t be using predicates in
RoadTrip), you’ll get all instances of the entity.
 An array of Sort Descriptor objects that specifies the order
in which the objects should appear: For example, by location
then by sortOrder. (Both are SharedPointOfInterest
attributes.)
You can also specify other things, such as the maximum number of
objects that a request should return, even distinct property values and
attribute values that satisfy a given function — all of which are out of
scope for this book.

--- Page 147 ---
One thing you might want to think about, though, is the batch size. set
FetchBatchSize: allows you to control the memory footprint of your
application. The default value of 0 is treated as infinite. But, if you set a
non-zero batch size, the collection of objects returned when the fetch is
executed is broken into batches, and no more than the set batchSize
objects’ data will be fetched from the persistent store at a time. If you
need an object that isn’t in the batch, Core Data will go out and get it for
you transparently — no need for you to tell it what to do, in other words.
You send a fetch request to a managed object context, which gets the
objects that match your request (possibly none), adds them to the
managed object context, and returns them to the application. If a context
already contains a managed object for an object returned from a fetch,
then the existing managed object is returned in the fetch results.
The framework tries to be as efficient as possible — you get only the
objects you asked for. If you follow a relationship to an object that hasn’t
yet been fetched, it’s fetched automatically for you. If you stop using an
object, by default it will be de-allocated. (This is, of course, not the same
as deleting it.)
And, as I mention earlier, unless you really need all the objects of a
particular entity, you can also use a predicate to limit the number of
objects returned to those you’re actually interested in.
 Your fetch request can also cache the results so that if the same
data is subsequently needed, the work doesn’t have to be repeated.
Core Data also uses a mechanism called faulting, which reduces the
amount of memory your application requires by using a placeholder
object that represents a managed object until the data is actually
accessed.
If you’re displaying objects in a Table view, you can use a Fetched
Results controller, NSFetchedResultsController. It, too, tries to

--- Page 148 ---
minimize the amount of data held in memory. It efficiently manages the
results returned from a Core Data fetch request to provide data for a
UITableView object. You use this class to get the objects you need in
order to create the cells in in a Table View, as well as to determine the
number of sections you need and the number of rows in each section.
(By the way, you just happen to create and use a Fetched Results
controller in the “Add the Fetched Results Controller” section, later in
this chapter.) A Fetched Results controller can also monitor changes to
objects and report changes to a delegate, which can then do what’s
necessary to update the Table view accordingly, including reloading the
data.
Predefining fetch requests in a managed
object model
While I’ll keep on using the code you just entered, you can also just
predefine fetch requests in your managed object model. To do that, take
these steps:
1. Open the Model.xcdatamodel in the Core Data Model editor and
select the SharedPointOfInterest entity in the top-level
components area.
For an overview of how the Core Data Model editor works, check
out Chapter 3.
2. Hold down the Add Entity button until you see the pop-up menu
and then select Add Fetch Request, as I have in Figure 4-2. (The
button retains the selection you make here, so it functions as the
default.)
You can also choose Editor ⇒ Add Fetch Request.
3. Using the Core Data Model inspector, name the Fetch Request
SharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest, as I have in Figure 4-3, and
set any other fetch request properties you’d like.

--- Page 149 ---
Figure 4-2:
Creating a
fetch
request.
Figure 4-3:
The Shared
PointOf
Interest
Fetch
Request.
For your purposes, you won’t need to select any additional filtering
properties; you want all the objects.
I clicked the + button in the SharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest
entry in the Core Data Model Editor Detail area (see Figure 4-4) to
show you what kinds of things you can specify in a fetch request,
either in the template or in your own code.
To actually use the new fetch request you just created in the managed
object model, you need to modify
sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest. To do that, delete the bolded-
underlined-italicized code in Listing 4-8 and then add the listing’s
bolded code to sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest in RTModel.m.


--- Page 150 ---
Figure 4-4:
Further
nailing down
the request.
Listing 4-8: Using a Fetch Request Predefined in
the Managed Object Model
- (NSFetchRequest *)sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest {
  
  if (_sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest != nil) {
    return _sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest;

--- Page 151 ---
  }
  _sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest = [NSFetchRequest
     fetchRequestWithEntityName:@”SharedPointOfInterest”
];
  _sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest =  
     [self.managedObjectModel
fetchRequestTemplateForName:
                    @”SharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest”
];  
  return _sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest;
}
 If you do go down this road, understand that this code creates a
fetch request that you can’t modify. If you want to set any
properties; either you’ll need to use
fetchRequestFromTemplateWithName:substitutionVariables:
or you’ll have to copy the result.
Creating a SharedPointOfInterest
With fetch requests out of the way, you can now modify
addToItinerary so that, instead of going to the trouble of creating a
PointOfInterest object and adding it to the itinerary array, you have
the managed object context create a new SharedPointOfInterest,
which the managed object context will in turn manage. To do that bit of
modification, delete the bolded-underlined-italicized code and add the
bolded code in Listing 4-9 to addToItinerary in RTModel.m.
Listing 4-9: Updating addToItinerary: in
RTModel.m
- (void)addToItinerary:

--- Page 152 ---
                      (PointOfInterest *)pointOfInterest
{
  
  [itinerary addObject:pointOfInterest];   
  [pointsOfInterest removeObject:pointOfInterest];
  [itineraryData addObject:[pointOfInterest
                              returnPointOfInterestData]
];
  RTAppDelegate *appDelegate =
             [[UIApplication sharedApplication]
delegate];
  NSString *fileComponent =
    [NSString stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”,
@”Itinerary”,   
              appDelegate.destinationPreference,
@”.poi”];
  NSString *filePath = [RTModel filePath:fileComponent];
  NSURL *itineraryDataURL =
                         [NSURL
fileURLWithPath:filePath];
  [itineraryData
              writeToURL:itineraryDataURL
atomically:YES];
  NSManagedObjectContext* context =  
                               self.managedObjectContext
;
  SharedPointOfInterest *sharedPointOfInterest =
   [NSEntityDescription insertNewObjectForEntityForName:
      @”SharedPointOfInterest”
                          inManagedObjectContext:context
];
  [sharedPointOfInterest loadData:
             [pointOfInterest
returnPointOfInterestData]];
  sharedPointOfInterest.displayOrder =

--- Page 153 ---
          [NSNumber numberWithInteger:[itinerary
count]];
  NSError *error = nil;
  if ([[[context persistentStoreCoordinator]  
        persistentStores] count] > 0) {
    if (![context save:&error]) {
      NSString *errorMessage =
                             [error
localizedDescription];
      UIAlertView *alertView = [[UIAlertView alloc]
      initWithTitle:@”Error in accessing your itinerary.
Restart Road Trip and contact customer support if the
error continues.”
      message:errorMessage delegate:nil
      cancelButtonTitle:@”OK” otherButtonTitles:nil];
      [alertView show];
      NSLog(@”Core Data Failure! Error code: %u,
description: %@, and reason: %@”, error.code,
            [error localizedDescription],
            [error localizedFailureReason]);
      return;
    }
    itinerary = [NSMutableArray arrayWithArray:
      [context executeFetchRequest:
        self.sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest
                                           error:&error]
];
    if (error)
      NSLog(@”Core Data Failure! Error code: %u,
description: %@, and reason: %@”, error.code, [error
localizedDescription], [error
localizedFailureReason]);
}
  [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
postNotificationName:@”ItineraryChanged” object:self
userInfo:nil];

--- Page 154 ---
  [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
postNotificationName:@”PointsOfInterestChanged”
object:self userInfo:nil];
  UIAlertView *alert = [[UIAlertView alloc]
       initWithTitle:pointOfInterest.title
       message:@”Was added to your itinerary”
       delegate:self cancelButtonTitle:@”Thanks”
       otherButtonTitles:nil];
  [alert show];
}
Looking at the changes, you see that the first thing you do is delete the
instruction that added the PointOfInterest to the itinerary array.
[itinerary addObject:pointOfInterest];  
You can get away with doing this because you’ll be using a Core Data
fetch request to load the array instead.
Next, you keep the instruction that removes the PointOfInterest from
the pointsOfInterest array because the PointsOfInterestController
is going to remain the way it is.
[pointsOfInterest removeObject:pointOfInterest];
You then delete the block of code that adds the object to the itinerary
Data array and then saves it as a file, like so:
[itineraryData addObject:[pointOfInterest
                              returnPointOfInterestData]
];
RTAppDelegate *appDelegate =
             [[UIApplication sharedApplication]
delegate];
NSString *fileComponent =
    [NSString stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”,
@”Itinerary”,   

--- Page 155 ---
              appDelegate.destinationPreference,
@”.poi”];
NSString *filePath = [RTModel filePath:fileComponent];
NSURL *itineraryDataURL =
                         [NSURL
fileURLWithPath:filePath];
itineraryData writeToURL:itineraryDataURL
atomically:YES];
All that code is now moot because you’ll have the managed object
context create a new SharedPointOfInterest managed object instead.
NSManagedObjectContext* context =  
                               self.managedObjectContext
;
SharedPointOfInterest *sharedPointOfInterest =
  [NSEntityDescription insertNewObjectForEntityForName:
      @”SharedPointOfInterest”
                          inManagedObjectContext:context
];
insertNewObjectForEntityForName:inManagedObjectContext: is an
NSEntityDescription method that creates an instance of the class you
specify — in this case, a SharedPointOfInterest — in the managed
object context you specify. (Okay, you have only one here, so that’s a bit
of a no-brainer.) NSEntityDescription describes a Core Data entity and
is where you find all that metadata I describe back in Chapter 3.
 Again, back in Chapter 3 when I was doing similar managed
object context stuff, I used the performBlockAndWait: block
method to send the necessary message to the managed object
context to set the Persistent Store coordinator. I went that route
because using the performBlockAndWait: method results in the
managed object context executing the block on its own thread:

--- Page 156 ---
[managedObjectContext performBlockAndWait:^{
  [managedObjectContext
              setPersistentStoreCoordinator:coordinator]
;
    }];
I admitted back in Chapter 3 that this wasn’t really necessary because
the managed object context was created on the main thread. In Chapter
3, I just wanted to show you how to work with a managed object context
on a different thread. Because I don’t need to use
performBlockAndWait:, I don’t from here on out, and I just send the
message directly to the managed object context.
After you have the new SharedPointOfInterest, you initialize its
properties with the properties from the selected PointOfInterest.
[sharedPointOfInterest loadData:
             [pointOfInterest
returnPointOfInterestData]];
You’ll also add a display order — it can be used to order the list of
SharedPointsOfInterest. (Its inner workings are outside the scope of
this book, but I encourage you to explore that on your own.) When you
create the SharedPointsOfInterest, you end up adding it to the end of
the list.
sharedPointOfInterest.displayOrder =
          [NSNumber numberWithInteger:[itinerary
count]];
Finally, you save SharedPointsOfInterest to the managed object
context.
  NSError *error = nil;
  if ([[[context persistentStoreCoordinator]  
        persistentStores] count] > 0) {
    if (![context save:&error]) {

--- Page 157 ---
      NSString *errorMessage =
                             [error
localizedDescription];
      UIAlertView *alertView = [[UIAlertView alloc]
        initWithTitle:@”Error in accessing your
itinerary. Restart Road Trip and contact customer
support if the error continues.”
      message:errorMessage delegate:nil
      cancelButtonTitle:@”OK” otherButtonTitles:nil];
      [alertView show];
      NSLog(@”Core Data Failure! Error code: %u,
description: %@, and reason: %@”, error.code,
            [error localizedDescription],
            [error localizedFailureReason]);
      return;
    }
The idea here is that you need to make sure that there is at least one
store; with that fact established, you then save the new
SharedPointOfInterest. Keep in mind that, although the
SharedPointOfInterest object was created by
insertNewObjectForEntityForName, it isn’t added to the store until you
save it.
If you get an error, you post an alert and log the error. (You’ll want to
expand this in a shipping application.) Then you execute a fetch request
you created to reload the itinerary data used by the RTModel in its
methods. This array is used by several methods in the RTModel class and
especially by load PointsOfInterest, as you will soon see. Because
that’s the case, whenever you make changes to the
SharedPointOfInterest object in your itinerary — as you most
definitely do in addToItinerary — you need to reload the array.
itinerary = [NSMutableArray arrayWithArray:
  [context executeFetchRequest:

--- Page 158 ---
    self.sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest
error:&error]];
}
Again, if you get an error, you log the error. You’ll want to expand this
in a shipping application. (I’ll stop saying that now — I’m sure you get
the point.)
NSLog(@”Core Data Failure! Error code: %u, description:
%@, and reason: %@”, error.code,
   [error localizedDescription],
   [error localizedFailureReason]);
The last little bit of Listing 4-9 stays the same: You continue to post the
notification to inform anyone interested that both the itinerary and the
Points of Interest list have changed.
Now, I do explain notifications in Chapter 3, but look at what’s
happening here. The Notification Center (an NSNotificationCenter
object) will broadcast information within the program, thereby
decoupling the sender and the observer and making for a more flexible
system. Every iOS application has a default Notification Center — all
you have to do is use it.
In this case, the RTModel posts the notifications, which include the
notification name (ItineraryChanged and PointsOfInterestChanged),
the object that is doing the posting (self), and an optional user
information dictionary (nil in this case).
In the “Displaying the SharedPointOfInterests” section, later in this
chapter, you see what happens when the ItineraryController (which
has subscribed for this notification) is notified.
Displaying Your Itinerary

--- Page 159 ---
After you have the data you need safely stored in the SharedPointOf
Interest managed objects, you need to make some changes to the
ItineraryController in order to display them. It turns out you’ll still
be displaying them in the ItineraryController Table view, but you’ll
be getting a little help from NSFetchedResultsController to make that
possible.
You have to get your head around two aspects of NSFetchedResults
Controller. The first is the fetch part — getting the objects you want
and need. The second is the controller part — how the controller helps
you when it comes to displaying managed objects in a Table view.
First, the fetching part. You make the ItineraryController an
NSFetchedResultsControllerDelegate and import the Core Data
header file. To do that, add the bolded code in Listing 4-10 to
ItineraryController.h.
Listing 4-10: Updating the ItineraryController.h
Interface
#import <UIKit/UIKit.h>
#import “RTDetailViewController.h”
#import <CoreData/CoreData.h>
@class PointOfInterest;
@interface ItineraryController : RTDetailViewController
  <UITableViewDelegate, UITableViewDataSource,
      UIPopoverControllerDelegate,  
                       NSFetchedResultsControllerDelegat
e>
@property (strong, nonatomic)NSMutableArray  *itinerary;
@property (weak, nonatomic)
                 IBOutlet UITableView
*itineraryTableView;
- (IBAction)add:(id)sender;
@end

--- Page 160 ---
Next, you need to create the Fetched Results controller, just as you
created a SharedPointOfInterstFetchRequest in the section entitled
“The fetch request,” earlier in the chapter, to take advantage of the same
kind of accessor plumbing that you used to create the other Core Data
stack accessors in Chapter 3.
Before you can do that, though, you need to add the bolded code in
Listing 4-11 to ItineraryController.m in order to import the
SharedPointOf Interest header file. (You need that to access the
SharedPointOf Interest properties.) The bolded code also adds the
fetchedResults Controller property and synthesizes the accessors.
Listing 4-11: Updating the ItineraryController
Interface and Implementation in
ItineraryController.m
#import “RTDefines.h”
#import “ItineraryController.h”
#import “RTAppDelegate.h”
#import “RTModel.h”
#import “PointsOfInterestController.h”
#import “PointOfInterest.h”
#import “AddPointOfInterestController.h”
#import “SharedPointOfInterest.h”
@interface ItineraryController () {
  NSDictionary* POIEntry;
  NSArray *itineraryPointsOfInterest;
  UIPopoverController *popover;
}
@property (readonly, strong, nonatomic)
     NSFetchedResultsController
*fetchedResultsController;
@end
@implementation ItineraryController
@synthesize itinerary = _itinerary;
@synthesize itineraryTableView = _tableView;

--- Page 161 ---
@synthesize fetchedResultsController =
                                _fetchedResultsControlle
r;
Adding the Fetched Results controller
One of the things that makes Core Data so useful, besides being able to
store and retrieve objects, is its ability to retrieve objects based on
certain criteria, as you saw when you created the
SharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest in “The fetch request” section,
earlier in the chapter.
As I mention earlier in the chapter, if you plan on displaying objects in a
Table view, you can use a Fetched Results controller — NSFetched
ResultsController to be precise — to take care of that for you.
NSFetchedResultsController, like any good controller, tries to
minimize the amount of data held in memory. It efficiently manages the
results returned from a Core Data fetch request to provide data for a
UITableView object. You use this class to get the objects you need in
order to create cells in a Table view, as well as to determine the number
of sections you need as well as the number of rows in each section. (I
pointed out how Fetch Results controller can be used to monitor changes
to objects and report changes to a delegate, which can then do what’s
necessary to update the Table view accordingly — including reloading
the data.)
You create the Fetched Results controller in the same way you create all
the other Core Data properties you need. Just as you did with the shared
PointOfInterestFetchRequest back in “The fetch request” section,
you set it up as a property with an accessor that you code.
Add the code in Listing 4-12 to ItineraryController.m.
Listing 4-12: The fetchedResultsController
Accessor

--- Page 162 ---
#pragma mark - Fetched results controller
- (NSFetchedResultsController *)fetchedResultsController
{
  
  if (_fetchedResultsController == nil) {
    NSFetchRequest *fetchRequest =
      [NSFetchRequest fetchRequestWithEntityName:
                                @”SharedPointOfInterest”
];
    NSSortDescriptor *sectionSortDescriptor =
     [[NSSortDescriptor alloc] initWithKey:@”location”
                                           ascending:YES
];
    NSSortDescriptor *sharedPointOfInterestDescriptor =
     [[NSSortDescriptor alloc]
initWithKey:@”displayOrder”
                                           ascending:YES
];
    NSArray *sortDescriptors = [[NSArray alloc]
initWithObjects:sectionSortDescriptor,
                    sharedPointOfInterestDescriptor,
nil];
    [fetchRequest setSortDescriptors:sortDescriptors];
    NSFetchedResultsController
*aFetchedResultsController
      = [[NSFetchedResultsController alloc]
          initWithFetchRequest:fetchRequest
managedObjectContext:
                   [RTModel model].managedObjectContext
sectionNameKeyPath:@”location” cacheName:nil];
    aFetchedResultsController.delegate = self;
    _fetchedResultsController =
aFetchedResultsController;
    
  }
  NSError *error = nil;

--- Page 163 ---
  if (![_fetchedResultsController performFetch:&error])
{
    NSString *errorMessage = [error
localizedDescription];
    UIAlertView *alertView = [[UIAlertView alloc]
       initWithTitle:@”Error in accessing your
itinerary. Restart Road Trip and contact customer
support if the error continues.”
       message:errorMessage delegate:nil
       cancelButtonTitle:@”OK” otherButtonTitles:nil];
    [alertView show];
    NSLog(@”Core Data Failure! Error code: %u,
description: %@, and reason: %@”, error.code,
          [error localizedDescription],
          [error localizedFailureReason]);
    NSLog(@”Unresolved error %@, %@”, error,
                                        [error
userInfo]);
    return nil;
  }
  return _fetchedResultsController;
}
Looking at Listing 4-12, the first thing you do to set up your very own
Fetched Results controller is create the fetch request for the entity.
NSFetchRequest *fetchRequest =
      [NSFetchRequest fetchRequestWithEntityName:
                                @”SharedPointOfInterest”
];

--- Page 164 ---
 If you think this looks familiar, that’s probably because it is.
This is (pretty much) the same thing you did in “The fetch request”
section, earlier in the chapter. (If you aren’t clear on exactly what
you’ve just accomplished here by creating a fetch request accessor,
refer to the discussion following Listing 4-7.)
Note one slight difference, however. In this case, you’re adding a set of
sort descriptors.
NSSortDescriptor *sectionSortDescriptor =
[[NSSortDescriptor alloc] initWithKey:@”location”    
                                           ascending:YES
];
NSSortDescriptor *sharedPointOfInterestDescriptor =
[[NSSortDescriptor alloc] initWithKey:@”displayOrder”
                                           ascending:YES
];
The first sort descriptor specifies that you want the returned fetch to be
sorted by location (initWithKey:@”location”) in ascending order
(ascending:YES). Within that sorted order, the second sort descriptor
specifies sort SharedPointOfInterest objects by display order — this
was an attribute I had you add in the original managed object model
which, right now, is simply the order in which you added a
SharedPointOf Interest to the itinerary. You can, however, use the
Table View delegate methods to allow the user to reorder
SharedPointOfInterest objects within a location (or even reorder the
location), but I leave that up to you.
Then, you add the sort descriptors to an array and add it to the fetch
request, as follows:
NSArray *sortDescriptors =
  [[NSArray alloc]
initWithObjects:sectionSortDescriptor,

--- Page 165 ---
Figure 4-5:
Adding
location and
sorting to
your
itinerary.
                    sharedPointOfInterestDescriptor,
nil];
[fetchRequest setSortDescriptors:sortDescriptors];
After that’s done, you create the Fetched Results controller and initialize
it with the fetch request and then the section name key path and cache.
You finish up by setting self as the delegate:
NSFetchedResultsController *aFetchedResultsController =
  [[NSFetchedResultsController alloc]
          initWithFetchRequest:fetchRequest
managedObjectContext:
                  [RTModel model].managedObjectContext
sectionNameKeyPath:@”location” cacheName:nil];
aFetchedResultsController.delegate = self;
_fetchedResultsController = aFetchedResultsController;
sectionNameKeyPath: is what you use to create the section information.
cacheName is the name of the cache that should (eventually) be used. If
there isn’t one with that name, one is created for you. If you pass in nil,
as you have here, no caching is done. Given the amount of data you
have, you really don’t need to cache, but as your itinerary grows, you
should consider it.
To keep things in perspective, Figure 4-5 shows you what all this code
leads up to, practically speaking — assuming, of course, that you add
Hoboken of all places as a point of interest by tapping Add in the Points
of Interest popover shown back in left-most image of Figure 4-1 to see
how the points of interest are neatly placed in their location.

--- Page 166 ---
The Fetched Results controller delegate
Even though you made ItineraryController a delegate of the Fetched
Results controller, you aren’t implementing any of the delegate methods
. . . but I do suggest you explore them on your own.
For example, the NSFetchedResultsController always sends the
following controllerWillChangeContent: message to the
NSFetchedResults ControllerDelegate method before the Fetched

--- Page 167 ---
Results controller has completed processing of an Add, Remove, Move,
or Update.
- (void)controllerWillChangeContent:
               (NSFetchedResultsController *) controller
{
  [self.itineraryTableView doSomething];
}
Along the same lines, the following controllerDidChangeContent:
message is sent after the Fetched Results controller has completed
processing of an Add, Remove, Move, or Update.
- (void)controllerDidChangeContent:
  [self.itineraryTableView doSomethingElse];
}
Although they’re beyond the scope of this book, the NSFetchedResults
Controller and its delegate methods come with a lot of functionality
that allows you to deal not only with content changes, but also with
moving rows and sections in a Table view.
Displaying the SharedPointOfInterests
Currently, RoadTrip is set up so that the ItineraryController displays
its data in a Table view using the following UITableViewDataSource
methods:
tableView:numberOfSectionsInTableView:
tableView:numberOfRowsInSection:
update tableView:cellForRowAtIndexPath:
In this section, you make the changes necessary to use the Fetched
Results controller. For good measure, you also add two methods that

--- Page 168 ---
take advantage of one of the things a Fetched Results controller makes
easy — displaying entries by section.
Currently, the ItineraryController displays the SharedPointOf
Interests in a single section. Because you initialized the Fetched
Results controller with sectionNameKeyPath:@”location”, you need to
change that. To do so, delete the bolded-underlined-italicized code and
add the bolded code in Listing 4-13 to
tableView:numberSectionsInTableView: in ItineraryController.m.
Listing 4-13: Updating
tableView:numberSectionsInTableView: in
ItineraryController.m
- (NSInteger)numberOfSectionsInTableView:
                                  (UITableView
*)tableView
{
  return 1;
  return [self.fetchedResultsController.sections count];
}
sections is an NSFetchedResultsController property — an array of
objects that contains information about each section. (You don’t need to
use that information in RoadTrip — all you care about is how many
sections there are.)
Each object in the sections arrays adopts the NSFetchedResults
SectionInfo protocol, which has as a required method numberOf
Objects. You’ll use numberOfObjects to determine the number of rows
in each section instead of the total number of objects in the itinerary
PointsOfInterest array.
To get this working for you, delete the bolded-underlined-italicized code
and add the bolded code in Listing 4-14 to
tableView:numberOfRowsInSection: in ItineraryController.m.

--- Page 169 ---
Listing 4-14: Updating
tableView:numberOfRowsInSection: in
ItineraryController.m
- (NSInteger)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView
numberOfRowsInSection:(NSInteger)section
{
  return [itineraryPointsOfInterest count];
  id<NSFetchedResultsSectionInfo> sectionInfo =
[[self.fetchedResultsController
sections]                   
                                  objectAtIndex:section]
;
  return [sectionInfo numberOfObjects];
}
Because you now have section information, you can also display section
headers. The default header view doesn’t work the way I want it to,
however, so I have you create your own by implementing the
UITableViewData Source methods
tableView:viewForHeaderInSection: (which allows you to create and
return a view for each section) and
tableView:heightForHeaderInSection: method (which allows you to
specify the height). Add these two methods as spelled out in Listing 4-15
to ItineraryController.m.
Listing 4-15: Adding
tableView:viewForHeaderInSection: and
tableView: heightForHeaderInSection:
- (UIView *)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView
viewForHeaderInSection:(NSInteger)section {
  UIView *headerView = [[UILabel alloc] initWithFrame:
       CGRectMake (0,0,tableView.frame.size.width-
10,40)];
  headerView.backgroundColor = [UIColor clearColor];

--- Page 170 ---
  
  UILabel *labelView = [[UILabel alloc] initWithFrame:
   CGRectMake (tableView.frame.origin.x+10,0,  
                       tableView.frame.size.width-
20,40)];
  labelView.numberOfLines = 2;
  labelView.font = [UIFont boldSystemFontOfSize:21];
  labelView.textColor = [UIColor darkGrayColor];
  labelView.opaque = YES;
  labelView.alpha = 1.0;
  labelView.backgroundColor = [UIColor clearColor];
  id <NSFetchedResultsSectionInfo> sectionInfo =
     [self.fetchedResultsController.sections  
                                   objectAtIndex:section
];
  labelView.text = sectionInfo.name;
  [headerView addSubview:labelView];
  return headerView;
}
- (CGFloat)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView
heightForHeaderInSection:(NSInteger)section {
  
  return 40;
}
All you do to create the header in Listing 4-15 is create a label (with a
transparent background) that uses the text you get from the section
object that has implemented the required name property.
Finally, to display the cell containing the header, you use the title and
subtitle of the SharedPointOfInterest returned by the Fetched Results
controller instead of the PointOfInterest in the itineraryPoints
OfInterest array.
To do that, delete the bolded-underlined-italicized code and add the
bolded code in Listing 4-16 to tableView:cellForRowAtIndexPath: in

--- Page 171 ---
ItineraryController.m.
Listing 4-16: Updating
tableView:cellForRowAtIndexPath: in
ItineraryController.m
- (UITableViewCell *)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView
cellForRowAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath
{
  UITableViewCell *cell = [tableView
        dequeueReusableCellWithIdentifier:kItineraryCell
];
  PointOfInterest *pointOfInterest =
    [itineraryPointsOfInterest
                             objectAtIndex:indexPath.row
];
  SharedPointOfInterest *sharedPointOfInterest =
  (SharedPointOfInterest *)
             [self.fetchedResultsController           
                             objectAtIndexPath:indexPath
];
  cell.textLabel.text = pointOfInterest.title;
  cell.textLabel.text = sharedPointOfInterest.title;
  cell.detailTextLabel.text = pointOfInterest.subtitle;
  cell.detailTextLabel.text =     
                           sharedPointOfInterest.subtitl
e;
  return cell;
}
objectAtIndexPath: is an NSFetchedResultsController method that
returns the object for a row within a section (index path).
As you can see, between providing section information, doing the
necessary sorting, and gaining access to an object by way of its index

--- Page 172 ---
Figure 4-6:
Adding to
your
itinerary.
path, the NSFetchedResultsController controller does make your life a
lot easier.
If you just can’t wait to see what changes you’ve wrought, you can run
the app as is, which produces an empty Itinerary. You need to add the
destination as a SharedPointOfInterest. (Refer to Figure 4-5.) You
also can add a point of interest, as shown in Figure 4-6 — you just can’t
delete one, but you find out how to do that next. (Hey, it’s a start.)


--- Page 173 ---
Cleaning Up the
ItineraryController and RTModel
Classes
Because you’ve changed the ItineraryController around a bit so you
can use SharedPointOfInterest objects managed by Core Data instead
of having to do it yourself in the RTModel class, feel free to get rid of the
code in the ItineraryController that uses the RTModel methods as well
as the code that does all the SharedPointOfInterest managing in
RTModel. (A little spring cleaning can’t hurt, can it?)
You’ll want to delete the message in ItineraryController
viewDidLoad to the RTModel that updates the
itineraryPointsOfInterest array. Core Data is doing that for you via
the NSFetchedResultsController.
To do that, delete the bolded-underlined-italicized code in viewDidLoad
in ItineraryController.m, as shown in Listing 4-17.
Listing 4-17: Updating viewDidLoad
- (void)viewDidLoad
{
  [super viewDidLoad];
  self.title = @”Itinerary”;
  
  itineraryPointsOfInterest =
                        [[RTModel model]
returnItinerary];
  …
}

--- Page 174 ---
Now, because the RTModel no longer has to manage your itinerary
array, you can delete the methods associated with doing that. Delete the
bolded-underlined-italicized code in both Listing 4-18 (to delete the
returnItinerary declaration in RTModel.h) and in Listing 4-19 (to
delete implementation in RTModel.m).
Listing: 4-18: Deleting returnItinerary from the
RTModel Interface
@interface RTModel : NSObject
+ (RTModel *)model;
- (id)initWithDestinationIndex:
(NSUInteger)destinationIndex;
- (void)loadItinerary;
- (NSArray *)returnItinerary;
…
@end
Listing: 4-19: Deleting returnItinerary from the
RTModel Implementation
-(NSArray *)returnItinerary {
  
  return itinerary;
}
Loading the Itinerary
Understanding the mechanics of adding something to the itinerary (see
the previous section) is only half the battle. You also need to know how
the file gets created to start with.
Listing 4-20 shows you how it all starts — with the RTModel’s
loadItinerary method that’s used to load the saved itinerary at
application startup.

--- Page 175 ---
Listing 4-20: Loading the Itinerary, Part I
- (void)loadItinerary {
  RTAppDelegate *appDelegate =
            [[UIApplication sharedApplication]
delegate];   
  NSString *fileComponent = [NSString
stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”, @”Itinerary”,  
             appDelegate.destinationPreference,
@”.poi”];
  NSString *filePath = [RTModel filePath:fileComponent];
  NSURL *itineraryDataURL =
                       [NSURL fileURLWithPath:filePath];
  itineraryData = [NSMutableArray
arrayWithContentsOfURL:
                                        itineraryDataURL
];
  
  if (itineraryData) {
    itinerary = [NSMutableArray arrayWithCapacity:
[itineraryData count]];
    for (NSDictionary *pointOfInterestData in
                                          itineraryData)
{
      PointOfInterest *pointOfInterest =
        [[PointOfInterest alloc]  
                        initWithData:pointOfInterestData
];
      [itinerary addObject:pointOfInterest];
    }
  }
  else {
    NSDictionary *destinationPointOfInterestData =
       [destinationData objectForKey:
                                  @”DestinationLocation”
];

--- Page 176 ---
    itineraryData = [NSMutableArray
          arrayWithObject:destinationPointOfInterestData
];
    [itineraryData writeToURL:
                         itineraryDataURL
atomically:YES];
    PointOfInterest *destinationPointOfInterest =
[[PointOfInterest alloc]
             initWithData:destinationPointOfInterestData
];
    itinerary = [NSMutableArray
arrayWithObject:destinationPointOfInterest];
  }
}
Listing 4-20 starts by loading the itineraryData file using its URL:
  RTAppDelegate *appDelegate =
             [[UIApplication sharedApplication]
delegate];   
  NSString *fileComponent =
    [NSString stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”,
@”Itinerary”,  
              appDelegate.destinationPreference,
@”.poi”];
  NSString *filePath = [RTModel filePath:fileComponent];
  NSURL *itineraryDataURL =
                         [NSURL
fileURLWithPath:filePath];
  itineraryData = [NSMutableArray
arrayWithContentsOfURL:
                                        itineraryDataURL
];
The filename is a concatenation of Itinerary and the destination
(identified as an integer). The file type is .poi (short for point of

--- Page 177 ---
interest), and the filePath method simply adds the filename and type
(file component) to the file path for the application’s Documents
directory.
+ (NSString *)filePath:(NSString *)fileComponent {
return [[NSSearchPathForDirectoriesInDomains
(NSDocumentDirectory, NSUserDomainMask, YES)
lastObject]stringByAppendingPathComponent:fileComponent]
;
}
Next, you turn the file path into a URL. This change isn’t necessarily a
requirement, but Apple encourages the use of URLs to access files. You
then load the contents into the itineraryData array instance variable.
If there’s already a file present, you create the itinerary array and then
create a PointOfInterest object for each dictionary in the file.
  if (itineraryData) {
    itinerary = [NSMutableArray arrayWithCapacity:
                                   [itineraryData
count]];
    for (NSDictionary *pointOfInterestData in
                                          itineraryData)
{
      PointOfInterest *pointOfInterest =
        [[PointOfInterest alloc]  
                        initWithData:pointOfInterestData
];
      [itinerary addObject:pointOfInterest];
    }
  }
If there isn’t a file yet (there won’t be the first time RoadTrip is
launched), you create a PointOfInterest object from the
DestinationLocation data in the Destinations plist. Go on and create
the itineraryData array, and then save it to the file system.

--- Page 178 ---
  else {
    NSDictionary *destinationPointOfInterestData =
      [destinationData objectForKey:
                                  @”DestinationLocation”
];
    itineraryData = [NSMutableArray arrayWithObject:
                          destinationPointOfInterestData
];
    [itineraryData writeToURL:
                         itineraryDataURL
atomically:YES];
    PointOfInterest *destinationPointOfInterest =
     [[PointOfInterest alloc]
             initWithData:destinationPointOfInterestData
];
    itinerary = [NSMutableArray  
              arrayWithObject:destinationPointOfInterest
];
  }
The good news is that, with your handy managed object model, you no
longer need to do any of that. (Okay, the first time through, you still
need to add the DestinationLocation as SharedPointOfInterest, but
that’s not asking too much.) Instead, you do a fetch (the one you created
in “The fetch request”) to load the SharedPointOfInterest objects into
the itinerary array that you can now access in the RTModel.
 The itinerary array is used by several methods in the RTModel
class — most importantly by loadPointsOfInterest, as you soon
see. Because that’s the case, when you make any changes to
itinerary array — as you did, for example, in addToItinerary —
you need to reload the array.

--- Page 179 ---
To start working with your new and improved version of
loadItinerary, delete the bolded-underlined-italicized code and add
the bolded code in Listing 4-21 to the loadItinerary method in
RTModel.m.
Listing 4-21: Loading the Itinerary, Part II
- (void)loadItinerary {
  
  RTAppDelegate *appDelegate = [[UIApplication
sharedApplication] delegate];   
  NSString *fileComponent = [NSString
stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”, @”Itinerary”,
appDelegate.destinationPreference, @”.poi”];
  NSString *filePath = [RTModel filePath:fileComponent];
  NSURL *itineraryDataURL = [NSURL
fileURLWithPath:filePath];
  itineraryData = [NSMutableArray
arrayWithContentsOfURL:itineraryDataURL];
  
  if (itineraryData) {
    itinerary = [NSMutableArray arrayWithCapacity:
[itineraryData count]];
    for (NSDictionary *pointOfInterestData in
itineraryData) {
      PointOfInterest *pointOfInterest =
[[PointOfInterest alloc]
initWithData:pointOfInterestData];
      [itinerary addObject:pointOfInterest];
    }
  }
  else {
    NSDictionary *destinationPointOfInterestData =
[destinationData objectForKey:@”DestinationLocation”];
    itineraryData = [NSMutableArray
arrayWithObject:destinationPointOfInterestData];

--- Page 180 ---
    [itineraryData writeToURL:itineraryDataURL
atomically:YES];
    PointOfInterest *destinationPointOfInterest =
[[PointOfInterest
alloc]initWithData:destinationPointOfInterestData];
    itinerary = [NSMutableArray
arrayWithObject:destinationPointOfInterest];
  }
  
  NSManagedObjectContext *context =
                                self.managedObjectContex
t;
  NSError *error = nil;
  itinerary = [NSMutableArray arrayWithArray:
    [context executeFetchRequest:
    self.sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest
error:&error]];
  if (error)
      NSLog(@”Core Data Failure! Error code: %u,
description: %@, and reason: %@”, error.code,
          [error localizedDescription],
          [error localizedFailureReason]);
  if (![itinerary count]) {
    SharedPointOfInterest *sharedPointOfInterest =
     [NSEntityDescription
insertNewObjectForEntityForName:
                                  @”SharedPointOfInteres
t”
        inManagedObjectContext:self.managedObjectContext
];
    NSDictionary *destinationDataDictionary =
      [destinationData objectForKey:
                                  @”DestinationLocation”
];
    [sharedPointOfInterest  

--- Page 181 ---
                     loadData:destinationDataDictionary]
;
    sharedPointOfInterest.displayOrder =
          [NSNumber numberWithInteger:[itinerary
count]];
    itinerary = [NSMutableArray arrayWithArray:
     [context executeFetchRequest:
       self.sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest
                                         error:&error]];
  
    if (error)
      NSLog(@”Core Data Failure! Error code: %u,
description: %@, and reason: %@”, error.code,
          [error localizedDescription],
          [error localizedFailureReason]);
    if ([[[context persistentStoreCoordinator]   
                         persistentStores] count] > 0) {
      if (![context save:&error]) {
        NSString *errorMessage = [error
localizedDescription];
        UIAlertView *alertView = [[UIAlertView alloc]
           initWithTitle:@”Error in accessing your
itinerary. Restart Road Trip and contact customer
support if the error continues.”
           message:errorMessage delegate:nil
           cancelButtonTitle:@”OK”
otherButtonTitles:nil];
        [alertView show];
        NSLog(@”Core Data Failure! Error code: %u,
description: %@, and reason: %@”, error.code, [error
localizedDescription],
          [error localizedFailureReason]);
        return;
      }
    }
  }

--- Page 182 ---
}
You start off by fetching the SharedPointOfInterests.
itinerary = [NSMutableArray arrayWithArray:
[context executeFetchRequest:
   self.sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest
error:&error]];
Notice here that, if I get an error, all I do is log it and merrily continue
on. Although this works for development, you need to add more robust
error handling in any project that you actually end up shipping.
With all that fetching out of the way, you then check to see whether
you’ve already added the Destination SharedPointOfInterest.
  if (![itinerary count]) {
You do this because, if no Destination SharedPointOfInterest is there,
you definitely want to add one, but if you already have one in place, you
don’t want to confuse things by adding a new one. After you add the
Destination SharedPointOfInterest for the first time, your fetch will
have at least SharedPointOfInterest in it.
 This is similar to the old way of doing things illustrated in
Listing 4-20 — you’d simply add a new Destination
PointOfInterest if the itinerary array was empty.
So, if no Destination SharedPointOfInterest has been added yet, you
create a SharedPointOfInterests for the DestinationLocation and
add it to the managed object context:
SharedPointOfInterest *sharedPointOfInterest =
  [NSEntityDescription insertNewObjectForEntityForName:
    @”SharedPointOfInterest” inManagedObjectContext:
                            self.managedObjectContext];

--- Page 183 ---
NSDictionary *destinationDataDictionary =
    [destinationData
objectForKey:@”DestinationLocation”];
[sharedPointOfInterest          
                      loadData:destinationDataDictionary
];
sharedPointOfInterest.displayOrder =  
          [NSNumber numberWithInteger:[itinerary
count]];
itinerary = [NSMutableArray arrayWithArray:
  [context executeFetchRequest:
    self.sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest
error:&error]];  
if (error)
  NSLog(@”Core Data Failure! Error code: %u,
description:
     %@, and reason: %@”, error.code,
     [error localizedDescription],
     [error localizedFailureReason]);
Then you save the new SharedPointOfInterest:
if ([[[context persistentStoreCoordinator]   
                         persistentStores] count] > 0) {
  if (![context save:&error]) {
    NSString *errorMessage = [error
localizedDescription];
      UIAlertView *alertView = [[UIAlertView alloc]
         initWithTitle:@”Error in accessing your
           itinerary. Restart Road Trip and contact  
           customer support if the error continues.”
         message:errorMessage delegate:nil
         cancelButtonTitle:@”OK” otherButtonTitles:nil];
      [alertView show];
      NSLog(@”Core Data Failure! Error code: %u,
description: %@, and reason: %@”, error.code, [error

--- Page 184 ---
localizedDescription],
          [error localizedFailureReason]);
        return;
    }
  }
Because you’re now using SharedPointOfInterest objects in the
itinerary instead of PointOfInterest objects, you need to tweak the
loadPointsOf Interest method — the method you’ll use to compare
your PointOfInterest objects to the SharedPointOfInterest objects.
If a PointOfInterest is already in the itinerary, you don’t want it to
display in the Points of Interest list that displays the points of interest
you can add to your itinerary.
To do that tweaking, delete the bolded-underlined-italicized code and
add the bolded code in Listing 4-22 to the loadPointsOfInterest
method in RTModel.m.
Listing 4-22: Updating loadPointsOfInterest
- (void) loadPointsOfInterest {
  
  RTAppDelegate *appDelegate =
             [[UIApplication sharedApplication]
delegate];
  NSString *fileComponent = [NSString
stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”, @”POI”,
appDelegate.destinationPreference, @”.poi”];
  NSString *filePath = [RTModel filePath:fileComponent];
  
NSURL *pointsOfInterestDataURL =
                        [NSURL
fileURLWithPath:filePath];
  pointsOfInterestData = [NSMutableArray
          arrayWithContentsOfURL:pointsOfInterestDataURL
];

--- Page 185 ---
  if (!pointsOfInterestData) {
    pointsOfInterestData = [NSMutableArray
arrayWithArray:
      [destinationData
objectForKey:@”PointsOfInterest”]];
    NSDictionary *destinationPointOfInterestData =
    [destinationData
objectForKey:@”DestinationLocation”];
    [pointsOfInterestData insertObject:
                destinationPointOfInterestData
atIndex:0];
    [pointsOfInterestData writeToURL:
pointsOfInterestDataURL atomically:YES];
  }
  pointsOfInterest =
    [NSMutableArray arrayWithCapacity:
                            [pointsOfInterestData
count]];
  BOOL isInItinerary = NO;
  for (NSDictionary *aPointOfInterest in
                                   pointsOfInterestData)
{
    for (PointOfInterest *pointOfInterest in itinerary)
{
      if ([pointOfInterest.title isEqualToString:
               [aPointOfInterest objectForKey:@”Name”]])
    for (SharedPointOfInterest *sharedPointOfInterest
                                          in itinerary)
{
      if ([sharedPointOfInterest.title isEqualToString:
               [aPointOfInterest objectForKey:@”Name”]])
       isInItinerary = YES;
    }
    if (!isInItinerary) {
            [pointsOfInterest addObject:
[[PointOfInterest

--- Page 186 ---
Figure 4-7:
Now you’re
going
someplace.
alloc]initWithData:aPointOfInterest]];
    }
    else {
      isInItinerary = NO;
    }
  }
}
The idea here is that you simply replace a PointOfInterest with a
SharedPointOfInterest. Not a big deal, right?
To see what you’ve accomplished so far, delete the old RoadTrip from
the simulator or your device and then load the new RoadTrip. If you run
it now, you’ll see that you have the destination in the list, just like in
Figure 4-7.

--- Page 187 ---
 Because Core Data does a very good job of being persistent, you
need to delete RoadTrip, which will delete the persistent store,
whenever you make any significant changes (those that impact
what is (or should be) in the Core Data store).
Timing is Everything

--- Page 188 ---
You want to be sure to add the SharedPointOfInterest managed object
you created from the destination information to the persistent store right
when you load the itinerary for the very first time. To be sure you get
your timing right, wait until the store is actually loaded before you create
the itinerary (and then the points of interest).
Luckily for you, you’re going to know when the persistent store has
been created because, in the persistentStoreCoordinator accessor
that you added in Chapter 3, you post a notification that lets you know
when that happens:
dispatch_async(dispatch_get_main_queue(), ^{
  NSLog(@”Persistent store added”);
  [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
       postNotificationName:@”PersistentStoreAdded”  
                                object:self
userInfo:nil];
});
 You could use the destinationAddedKey in NSUserDefaults to
decide whether you should wait for the adding of the Destination
SharedPointOf Interest before loading the itinerary. However, to
make things simpler, I just have you wait anyway.
To set it up so that your timing jibes, delete the bolded-underlined-
italicized code and add the bolded code in Listing 4-23 to
initWithDestination Index: in RTModel.m.
Listing 4-23: Updating initWithDestinationIndex:
- (id)initWithDestinationIndex:
                         (NSUInteger)destinationIndex {
  
  if ((self = [super init])) {
    

--- Page 189 ---
    NSURL *destinationsURL = [[NSBundle mainBundle]
URLForResource:@”Destinations”
withExtension:@”plist”];
    NSDictionary *destinations = [NSDictionary
dictionaryWithContentsOfURL:destinationsURL];
    NSArray *destinationsArray = [destinations
objectForKey:@”DestinationData”];
    destinationData = [destinationsArray
objectAtIndex:destinationIndex];
    destination = [[Destination alloc]
initWithDestinationIndex:destinationIndex];
    [self loadEvents];
    [self loadItinerary];
    [self loadPointsOfInterest];
    [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
postNotificationName:@”DestinationChanged” object:self
userInfo:nil];
    NSManagedObjectContext *context =
                              self.managedObjectContext;
    NSError *error = nil;
    itinerary = [NSMutableArray arrayWithArray:
      [context executeFetchRequest:self.
         sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest
error:&error]];
    if (error)
      NSLog(@”Core Data Failure! Error code: %u,
description: %@, and reason: %@”, error.code, [error
localizedDescription], [error
localizedFailureReason]);
    __block weak RTModel *weakSelf = self;
    [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
addObserverForName:@”PersistentStoreAdded” object:self
queue:nil usingBlock:^(NSNotification *notif) {
      [weakSelf loadItinerary];
      [weakSelf loadPointsOfInterest];

--- Page 190 ---
      [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
postNotificationName:@”DestinationChanged”
object:weakSelf userInfo:nil];
    }];
  }
  return self;
}
Here you’re simply deferring the sending of any and all loadItinerary
and loadPointsOfInterest messages until you get notification that the
persistent store had been loaded.
 Because you’re using a block here that references RTModel
methods using self, you need to be concerned about the Retain
cycle and declare __block weak weakSelf and use weakSelf
instead of self. (I explain this fully in Chapter 3, where I talk about
notifications in greater depth.)
__block weak RTModel *weakSelf = self;
[[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
      addObserverForName:@”PersistentStoreAdded”
object:self queue:nil  
                     usingBlock:^(NSNotification *notif)
{
      [weakSelf loadItinerary];
      [weakSelf loadPointsOfInterest];
      [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
postNotificationName:@”DestinationChanged”
                            object:weakSelf
userInfo:nil];
    }];
Note that you’re also moving the DestinationChanged notification into
that block. Because it’s possible for the ItineraryController to be

--- Page 191 ---
Figure 4-8:
Changing
the
destination
while the
Itinerary
Controller is
visible.
visible when you change the destination (see Figure 4-8), you notify it of
any relevant change. (You, of course, have planned ahead and have
registered it for the DestinationChanged notification.)
You also need to update the ItineraryController destination
Changed: selector used by the Notification Center. When the destination
changes, you need to create a new Fetched Results controller for the new
managed object context; setting the fetchedResultsController
property to nil will cause that to happen.
To do that, add the bolded code in Listing 4-24 to
destinationChanged: in ItineraryController.m.
Listing 4-24: Updating destinationChanged:
- (void)destinationChanged:(NSNotification *)notif {
  
  _fetchedResultsController = nil;
  if (popover) {
    [popover dismissPopoverAnimated:YES];
    popover = nil;
  }
[self.itineraryTableView reloadData];

--- Page 192 ---
Figure 4-9:
I changed
my mind
about
MOMA.
}
When the data is reloaded, the fetchedResultsController is accessed
by the Table View delegate methods. Because it’s nil, the accessor
method will create a new one using the current (new) managed object
context.
Removing a Point Of Interest From
the Itinerary
Currently, you can remove a point of interest from your itinerary by
selecting any point of interest in the list, holding it down for two seconds
to show the editing controls (or hide the editing controls if they’re
visible), tapping the Delete icon (Figure 4-9, left), and then tapping
Delete (Figure 4-9, middle). The point of interest is then put back in the
Points of Interest list (Figure 4-9, right). Although this isn’t necessarily
the best user experience, it’s good enough for me to be able to show you
how to delete a managed object from the managed object context.
How it works now
Pressing in the cell in the ItineraryController is recognized as a long
press gesture. This was added to the view in the ItineraryController’s

--- Page 193 ---
viewDidLoad method, as shown in Listing 4-25.
Listing 4-25: Creating the Gesture Recognizer in
viewDidLoad
  - (void)viewDidLoad
{
…
UILongPressGestureRecognizer *longPressGesture =
  [[UILongPressGestureRecognizer alloc]
initWithTarget:self
action:@selector(handleLongPressGesture:)];
  longPressGesture.minimumPressDuration = 2;
[self.view addGestureRecognizer:longPressGesture];
..
}
Then, in the handleLongPressGesture method, editing is toggled —
turned on if it’s off or turned off if it’s on — as shown in Listing 4-26.
Listing 4-26: Working with the
handleLongPressGesture
- (void)handleLongPressGesture:
                           (UIGestureRecognizer *)sender
{
  
  if (sender.state == UIGestureRecognizerStateEnded)
  [self.itineraryTableView
    setEditing:!self.itineraryTableView.editing
                                            animated:YES
];
}
[self.itineraryTableView setEditing:!self.itinerary
TableView.editing animated:YES] toggles the Table View editing
mode. If you send the Table view the setEditing: message with a value

--- Page 194 ---
of YES, the Table view goes into editing mode. Sending a value of NO,
turns off editing mode. In editing mode, the cells of the table might show
an insertion or deletion control on the left side of each cell and a
reordering control on the right side — what is displayed is controlled by
various UITableViewDataSourceDelegate methods. editing is a Table
View property and indicates if the Table view is in editing mode.
 You can also control whether a row can be edited. In RoadTrip, I
don’t want the user to be able to delete the Destination
PointOfInterest because it is used to focus the map on the
destination. I disable editing for that row in the Table View delegate
method tableView:canEditRowAtIndexPath:indexPath, as you
can see in Listing 4-27.
Listing 4-27: You can’t delete the first row
- (BOOL)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView
canEditRowAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath
{   
  if ((indexPath.section == 0) && (indexPath.row == 0))
  
  return NO;
  
  else
    return YES;
}
Here all I do is check to see if the selection is in the first row of the first
(and only) section, and if it is I simply return NO
The Fetched Results controller has an array of its sections and the
interface for a section is defined in the NSFetchedResultsSectionInfo
protocol. name is a required property of that protocol. Here you check to
see if destinationName, and the section name are the same. If it is, you

--- Page 195 ---
won’t allow the user to delete the first entry in that section — the
destination — by returning NO.
When the Table view is in editing mode and the user first taps the
Deletion control and then the Delete button, the
UITableViewDataSourceDelegate
tableView:commitEditingStyle:forRowAtIndexPath: message is sent
to the delegate and, as you can see in Listing 4-28, the selected
PointOfInterest is sent to the RTModel for deletion.
Listing 4-28: Using
tableView:commitEditingStyle:forRowAtIndexPat
h:
- (void)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView
    commitEditingStyle:
      (UITableViewCellEditingStyle)editingStyle
forRowAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath {
  
  PointOfInterest *pointOfInterest =
    [itineraryPointsOfInterest
                           objectAtIndex:indexPath.row];
  [[RTModel model] removeFromItinerary:pointOfInterest];
}
Updating for Core Data
When you start using the Fetched Results controller and displaying
multiple sections, determining which SharedPointOfInterest is the one
that represents the destination is a bit trickier. To finesse that bit of
business, start by deleting the bolded-underlined-italicized code and
adding the bolded code in Listing 4-29 to
tableView:canEditRowAtIndexPath:indexPath in
ItineraryController.m.

--- Page 196 ---
Listing 4-29: You can’t delete the first row, part II
- (BOOL)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView
          canEditRowAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath
{
  
  if ((indexPath.section == 0) && (indexPath.row == 0))
  
id <NSFetchedResultsSectionInfo> section  =
     [[self.fetchedResultsController sections]     
                         objectAtIndex:indexPath.section
];
  
if ([section.name isEqualToString:[[RTModel model]
destinationName]] && indexPath.row == 0)
    return NO;
  
  else
    return YES;
}
The Fetched Results controller has an array of its sections, and the
interface for any particular section is defined in the
NSFetchedResultsSection Info protocol. name is a required property
of that protocol. Here you check to see if the destinationName, and the
section name are the same. If it is, you won’t allow the user to delete
the first entry in that section — the destination — by returning NO.
But because you’re now using SharedPointOfInterest, you need to
update tableView:commitEditingStyle:forRowAtIndexPath: to use
that class.
To do that, delete the bolded-underlined-italicized code and add the
bolded code in Listing 4-30 to
tableView:commitEditingStyle:forRowAtIndexPath:
ItineraryController.m.

--- Page 197 ---
Listing 4-30: Updating
tableView:commitEditingStyle:
forRowAtIndexPath:
- (void)tableView:(UITableView *)tableView
   commitEditingStyle:
       (UITableViewCellEditingStyle)editingStyle    
             forRowAtIndexPath:(NSIndexPath *)indexPath
{
  
  PointOfInterest *pointOfInterest =
    [itineraryPointsOfInterest  
                           objectAtIndex:indexPath.row];
  [[RTModel model] removeFromItinerary:pointOfInterest];
  SharedPointOfInterest *sharedPointOfInterest =
      (SharedPointOfInterest *)
          [self.fetchedResultsController  
                          objectAtIndexPath:indexPath];
  [[RTModel model]
removeFromItinerary:sharedPointOfInterest];
}
Close but no cigar. You still need to update RTModel.h to use the Shared
PointOfInterest in removeFromItinerary: (in fact there will be a
compiler warning to inform you of that). To take care of that, delete the
bolded-underlined-italicized code and add the bolded code in Listing 4-
31 to RTModel.h.
Listing 4-31: Change the removeFromItinerary:
declaration
#import <Foundation/Foundation.h>
#import <MapKit/MapKit.h>
#import <CoreData/CoreData.h>
@class Annotation;
@class PointOfInterest;

--- Page 198 ---
@class SharedPointOfInterest;
@interface RTModel : NSObject
+ (RTModel *)model;
- (id)initWithDestinationIndex:
(NSUInteger)destinationIndex;
- (void)loadItinerary;
- (void)addToItinerary:(PointOfInterest
*)pointOfInterest;
- (void)removeFromItinerary:
                       (PointOfInterest
*)pointOfInterest;
- (void)removeFromItinerary:
                 (SharedPointOfInterest
*)pointOfInterest;
…
@end
You’re getting there, but you still need to update the
removeFromItinerary method in RTModel.m so that it can use a
SharedPointOfInterest.
Delete the bolded-underlined-italicized code and add the bolded code in
Listing 4-32 to removeFromItinerary: in RTModel.m.
Listing 4-32: Updating removeFromItinerary:
- (void)removeFromItinerary:
                      (PointOfInterest *)pointOfInterest
{
- (void)removeFromItinerary:
          (SharedPointOfInterest *)sharedPointOfInterest
{
  
  UIAlertView *alert = [[UIAlertView alloc]
    initWithTitle:pointOfInterest.title
    initWithTitle:sharedPointOfInterest.title

--- Page 199 ---
    message:@”Was removed from your itinerary”
    delegate:self cancelButtonTitle:@”Thanks”
    otherButtonTitles:nil];
  [alert show];
  
  NSDictionary *itineraryItemToRemove;
  for (NSDictionary *itineraryItem in itineraryData) {
    if ([[itineraryItem objectForKey:@”Name”]
isEqualToString:pointOfInterest.title]) {
      itineraryItemToRemove = itineraryItem;
      break;
    }
  }  
  
  [itineraryData removeObject:itineraryItemToRemove];
  [itinerary removeObject:pointOfInterest];  
  RTAppDelegate *appDelegate =
             [[UIApplication sharedApplication]
delegate];
  NSString *fileComponent =
    [NSString stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”,
@”Itinerary”,  
              appDelegate.destinationPreference,
@”.poi”];
  NSString *filePath = [RTModel filePath:fileComponent];
  NSURL *itineraryDataURL =
                        [NSURL
fileURLWithPath:filePath];
  [itineraryData writeToURL:
                        itineraryDataURL
atomically:YES];
  NSManagedObjectContext* context =
sharedPointOfInterest.managedObjectContext;
  [context deleteObject:sharedPointOfInterest];
  NSError *error = nil;

--- Page 200 ---
  if ([[[context persistentStoreCoordinator]
persistentStores] count] > 0) {
    if (![context save:&error]) {
      NSString *errorMessage =
                            [error
localizedDescription];
      UIAlertView *alertView = [[UIAlertView alloc]
          initWithTitle:@”Error in accessing your
itinerary. Restart Road Trip and contact customer
support if the error continues.”
           message:errorMessage delegate:nil
           cancelButtonTitle:@”OK”
otherButtonTitles:nil];
      [alertView show];
      NSLog(@”Core Data Failure! Error code: %u,
description: %@, and reason: %@”, error.code, [error
localizedDescription], [error
localizedFailureReason]);
      return;
    }
    itinerary = [NSMutableArray arrayWithArray:
       [context executeFetchRequest:
          self.sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest
                                         error:&error]];
    NSLog(@”Core Data Failure! Error code: %u,
description: %@, and reason: %@”, error.code, [error
localizedDescription],
          [error localizedFailureReason]);
  }
  [self loadPointsOfInterest];
   
  [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
     postNotificationName:@”ItineraryChanged”
                                object:self
userInfo:nil];
  [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]

--- Page 201 ---
     postNotificationName:@”PointsOfInterestChanged”
                                object:self
userInfo:nil];
}
This pretty much does the same thing as the addToItinerary: method I
highlight in Listing 4-9, except in reverse so I don’t go through the logic
here.
Deleting a managed object is also similar to adding one, as you’ll soon
see.
To delete a managed object:
[context deleteObject:sharedPointOfInterest];
To add a managed object:
[NSEntityDescription insertNewObjectForEntityForName:
@”SharedPointOfInterest”
inManagedObjectContext:context];
Because you won’t need itineraryData any more, you can delete it
from RTModel.m. Just delete the bolded-underlined-italicized code in
Listing 4-33 in RTModel.m.
Listing 4-33: Update RTModel.m
#import “RTModel.h”
#import “RTAppDelegate.h”
#import “Destination.h”
#import “PointOfInterest.h”
#import “Annotation.h”
#import “SharedPointOfInterest.h”
typedef void (^addLocationCompletionHandler)
                 (Annotation *annotation, NSError*
error);
@interface RTModel () {  

--- Page 202 ---
  NSDictionary *destinationData;
  Destination* destination;
  NSMutableArray *events;
  NSMutableArray *pointsOfInterest;
  NSMutableArray *itinerary;
  NSMutableArray *itineraryData;
  NSMutableArray *pointsOfInterestData;
  addLocationCompletionHandler
addFindLocationCompletionHandler;
  CLLocation *foundLocation;
  NSFetchRequest *sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest;
}
@end
Now what you have is a situation where Core Data is managing the
SharedPointOfInterest objects in your itinerary. But what that really
means is that, once you have created your SharedPointOfInterest
objects, you never have to worry about them again — even when the
application is terminated. When the user re-launches RoadTrip, Core
Data will re-instantiate the SharedPointOfInterest objects, instead of
you reading in the file and doing it yourself. And that’s what a persistent
object store is all about.
What’s more, as you’ll see in Chapter 5, Core Data will also manage to
keep your itinerary and SharedPointOfInterest objects synchronized
across devices.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 203 ---
Chapter 5
Adding iCloud Support
In This Chapter
 Seeing how iCloud works
 Using Core Data to implement iCloud support
 Managing iCloud provisioning and entitlements
 Testing your iCloud implementation
The fact that the iPhone and the iPad are mobile isn’t what makes them
so beloved — hey, there are lots of mobile devices available after all.
What people really like is the fact that the iPhone and iPad make it
easier for them to be mobile.
One thing that increases mobility is the ability to share your data among
devices without having to manually sync them. Of course, the
applications built into the iPhone and iPad (Contacts and Calendars, for
example) or built by Apple (Keynote and Pages, for example) already do
the sharing thing using iCloud. But while that works great for the Apple
apps, what about data sharing for all the non-Apple apps — apps such as
RoadTrip?
Well, just as the Apple apps are built on top of iCloud, you can also build
your apps on top of iCloud. In this chapter, you get introduced to the
features in Core Data that let you do precisely that.
Of course, you have another alternative — you can build the
infrastructure to do all the data sharing work. All you would have to do
is take these steps:
1. Set up and configure servers.

--- Page 204 ---
2. Create a protocol.
3. Write a lot of code to make it efficient.
4. Implement push notifications.
5. Add replication for high availability and disaster recovery.
6. Pay for the storage and bandwidth.
7. Be on call 24/7.
The choice is yours. But having done it on my own, before iCloud was
available, I want to tell you that this task isn’t for the faint of heart — or
for anyone who wants a life for that matter. Unless you have lots of
money to hire people to do it for you, iCloud is the way to go.
iCloud
iCloud is an Apple technology that provides a way for you to share data
among instances of your app running on different devices. Your app
(usually) will continue to store its data on the device it’s currently
running on, but a copy of your data will also reside on iCloud (except for
SQLite files in Core Data, where transaction files are stored instead).
When your app makes a change to its data on one device, the changes
are seamlessly sent to iCloud, where iCloud then updates its copy (or its
transaction files) and then sends updates to all other instances of your
app on different devices. If the app isn’t currently running, those changes
are made available when it’s launched. While all this is going on, your
app continues to operate on the file as if it’s simply sitting there and not
being sent hither and yon.
iCloud is free to all users (along with 5GB of storage) and is part of the
iOS setup. If you need to use more than that amount of storage, you can
(of course) buy more storage or choose to delete some of the files being
stored there.

--- Page 205 ---
Figure 5-1:
iCloud and
your
application.
 Apple has worked hard at optimizing iCloud’s performance. For
example, if both devices are on the same wireless network, data
transfer will go peer-to-peer rather than through the Apple servers.
In RoadTrip, I show you how to use iCloud to share your itinerary
among devices. To see what that would like, check out Figure 5-1.
Figure 5-1 makes the advantages of iCloud clear: no more explicit user
synchronization features or having to use a computer as a hub.
 You have two flavors of iCloud storage:
 Document storage: You can share documents as well as app
data. Document storage is the way to go if you want to
coordinate your app’s user-oriented data files, but it can be used
to synchronize any files your app uses internally.
 Key-value data storage: As the name implies, key-value data
storage lets you share small amounts of relatively stable (key)
data among instances of your app — things such as preferences
come to mind here.

--- Page 206 ---
Putting iCloud to work for you
Implementing iCloud can require a bit of work on your part, but as you
see in the upcoming “Enter Core Data” section, you can have Core Data
do most of that work for you. The following step list gives you an
overview of the task ahead:
1. Determine whether iCloud is enabled by sending the NSFileManager
the URLForUbiquityContainerIdentifier: message.
2. Add file presenters, which manage the files stored in iCloud. A file
presenter must adopt the NSFilePresenter protocol and make all
changes through an NSFileCoordinator object that locks the file to
keep it from being changed by the iCloud daemons — programs that
run in the background under control of the system as opposed to being
controlled by the end user.
The easiest way to do all that is to use the UIDocument class, which
implements the NSFilePresenter protocol methods to handle file

--- Page 207 ---
management and leaves you to read and write the data when
required.
3. Explicitly move your files to iCloud. After you create your file (or
directory) in your app’s sandbox, you’ll use the NSFileManager
URLForUbiquityContainerIdentifier: method to get a URL for the
iCloud container directory that you want to use in order to store a file,
build a new URL that specifies the iCloud path, and then send the
NSFileManager the
setUbiquitous:itemAtURL:destinationURL:error: message to
move the files. (This process will have to be done on a separate
thread.) You then manage files and directories in iCloud the same way
you’d manage your local files and directories — the only difference is
the URLs you use to access them are relative to the iCloud container
directory rather than being relative to your app’s sandbox.
4. Handle version conflicts for a file — conflicts that arise when two
instances of an app change their copy of the file and transfer both to
iCloud. When this happens, both versions of the file are stored and
iCloud tells your app’s file presenters that they need to resolve the
issue.
5. Use running NSMetadataQuery objects to receive notifications as
files are added or removed from other devices.
6. Handle cases where files are in iCloud but not fully downloaded to
the local device. Files aren’t fully downloaded until your app either A)
attempts to open or access the file or B) sends the NSFileManager the
startDownloadingUbiquitousItemAtURL:error: message to
download the changes explicitly. So, be sure to check the download
status of a file before trying to open it (and if it’s a large file, let the
user know this may take some time). Although the user should not
have to care whether his or her file is in the cloud (or even that there is
such a thing as a file), if something is going to impact the user
experience, it behooves you to keep the user informed of what’s going
on.

--- Page 208 ---
Figure 5-2:
Core Data
and iCloud.
Enter Core Data
I realize this whole Putting iCloud to Work for You thing must seem
pretty daunting. In fact, I know from personal experience how daunting
it can actually be because I went through all those steps listed in the
preceding section when I started working with iCloud. You do have an
alternative, however, and that is to use Core Data. In fact, if you’ve
worked through the Core Data discussion back in Chapters 3 and 4,
adding iCloud support is pretty easy.
So, even though it’s true that the UIDocument class does support iCloud
and you can thus put it to use for your iCloud file management needs,
what you really want to do is use Core Data even for document storage
— and that means you want to use the new NSManagedDocument class
instead of the UIDocument class. (In any event, NSManagedDocument has
all the functionality of UIDocument and then some.)
And because RoadTrip already uses Core Data, adding iCloud support is
remarkably easy.
 You do need to understand that when you use Core Data with an
SQLite store (which is what you have been doing), the actual
database file is never transferred to the iCloud server. Each device
has its own copy of the SQLite store and synchronizes changes by
writing them to a transaction file. The transaction files are what
then get transferred to and from iCloud from each device. Core
Data uses the transaction files to update its local database. The
result is that each local database ends up with the exact same set of
changes. This situation is illustrated in Figure 5-2.

--- Page 209 ---
Before you can move your transaction file into the cloud, the first thing
your app needs to do is get a URL that points to the iCloud storage
container — called the ubiquity container by Apple. You need the URL
because you must tell Core Data where to store the transaction logs
associated with changes to the store. This URL will look something like
the following:
/private/var/mobile/Library/Mobile
    Documents/N42E42A42L.com.nealgoldstein.RoadTrip/
                        RoadTripSharedPointsOfInterest
 I’ll be referring to this as the iCloud Container Directory URL.
The key here is the N42E42A42L.com.nealgoldstein.RoadTrip
business, where the N42E42A42L is my Developer program Team ID
(assigned by Apple and part of your provisioning profile) and the
com.nealgoldstein.RoadTrip part is my application’s (RoadTrip)
Bundle ID — the two together make up the path to my app’s
ubiquity container in iCloud. (Note that the RoadTripShared

--- Page 210 ---
PointsOfInterest part refers to a subdirectory I have specified in
that container — this will come from something called an
Entitlements file that I explain in the “Configuring Your App’s
iCloud Entitlements” section, later in this chapter.)
Setting up Core Data for iCloud
You need to do two things to set up iCloud:
1. Provide a value for the
NSPersistentStoreUbiquitousContentNameKey. This key is used to
identify your persistent store and needs to be used by all the devices
that want to use that file (in this case, the transaction logs for the local
SQLite database).
2. Provide a value for the NSPersistentStoreUbiquitous
ContentURLKey. This key identifies the directory in the ubiquity
container where the transaction logs will be stored. (This is the
N42E42A42L.com.nealgoldstein.RoadTrip/
RoadTripSharedPointsOfInterest that I showed you in the “Enter
Core Data” section, earlier in this chapter.)
As far as you’re concerned, while this step has to be done, you may
not be the one having to do it. If you don’t provide a value for the
NSPersistentStoreUbiquitousContentURLKey, Core Data will
create a default value by using your Bundle ID — the ID listed in the
RoadTrip-Info.plist as the Bundle Identifier Key. Core Data takes
the Bundle ID and then slaps on your team ID — a unique 10-
character string generated by Apple, also known as the Bundle Seed
ID — in front of it. These two pieces put together are known as your
App ID. (You can read more on App IDs in the “Provisioning Your
App for iCloud” section, later in this chapter.)
Using the default Bundle ID is fine for iOS devices for the simple
reason that your app will stick with the same Bundle ID across all
devices. However, if you also want to access your files and container
on non-iOS devices (such as the Mac), you may run into trouble

--- Page 211 ---
because it’s unlikely that such a device will have this same Bundle
ID. In Listing 5-1, I have you create a value yourself using your
Team ID, Bundle ID, and a subdirectory just to show you how it’s
done, and later — in the “Configuring Your App’s iCloud
Entitlements” section, later in this chapter, to be specific — I explain
how you can specify that this is the ID you want to use on another
device with a different Bundle ID.
 Oh, and by the way, sometimes your Bundle ID is case
sensitive and sometimes not, so treat it always as case sensitive.
Both of these things are really easy to do. In fact, all you have to do is
add the code in bold to the persistentStoreCoordinator in RTModel.m,
as shown in Listing 5-1.
Listing 5-1: Updating persistentStoreCoordinator
- (NSPersistentStoreCoordinator *)
                              persistentStoreCoordinator
{
  if (_persistentStoreCoordinator != nil) {
    return _persistentStoreCoordinator;
  }
  
  _persistentStoreCoordinator =
   [[NSPersistentStoreCoordinator alloc]
    initWithManagedObjectModel:[self
managedObjectModel]];
  
  RTAppDelegate *appDelegate =
            [[UIApplication sharedApplication]
delegate];
  NSString *storePathComponent =
     [NSString stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”,@”Model”,

--- Page 212 ---
          appDelegate.destinationPreference,
@”.sqlite”];
  NSString *storePath =
                   [RTModel
filePath:storePathComponent];
  dispatch_async(dispatch_get_global_queue(
                   DISPATCH_QUEUE_PRIORITY_DEFAULT, 0),
^{
    NSURL *storeUrl = [NSURL fileURLWithPath:storePath];
    NSDictionary* options = nil;
#if !TARGET_IPHONE_SIMULATOR
    NSFileManager *fileManager =
                         [NSFileManager defaultManager];
    NSURL *persistentStoreUbiquitousContentURL =
     [fileManager
URLForUbiquityContainerIdentifier:nil];
    
    NSString *ubiquityContainerIdentifierPath =
[[persistentStoreUbiquitousContentURL path]
stringByAppendingPathComponent:
                       @”RoadTripSharedPointsOfInterest”
];
    persistentStoreUbiquitousContentURL =
      [NSURL fileURLWithPath:
                        ubiquityContainerIdentifierPath]
;
    options = [NSDictionary
dictionaryWithObjectsAndKeys:
      [NSString stringWithFormat:  
        @”%@%@”,@”com.nealgoldstein.coredata.
        itineraryR01.”,appDelegate.destinationPreference
],
         NSPersistentStoreUbiquitousContentNameKey,
       persistentStoreUbiquitousContentURL,
         NSPersistentStoreUbiquitousContentURLKey,
       [NSNumber numberWithBool:YES],

--- Page 213 ---
         NSMigratePersistentStoresAutomaticallyOption,
       [NSNumber numberWithBool:YES],
         NSInferMappingModelAutomaticallyOption,nil];
#endif
…
}
The bolded part starts with you using the following preprocessor
directive:
#if !TARGET_IPHONE_SIMULATOR
This directive tells the compiler to check to see whether you’re building
for the actual device or just the simulator — and if you’re building for
the device to include the statements up to the #endif.
I go to the trouble of doing this because, if you’re using iCloud, you of
course need to be running on the device, but it’s also handy to be able to
run on the simulator so you can work on other parts of your app using a
non-shared Core Data store.
Looking at the statements that get included, you start by setting up the
value for the NSPersistentStoreUbiquitousContentURLKey — the
iCloud Container Directory URL. To do that, you first get the
URLForUbiquity ContainerIdentifier from the file manager — this is
the URL for your app’s iCloud Container Directory. (Refer to Step 3 in
the section “Putting iCloud to work for you,” earlier in this chapter.)
NSFileManager *fileManager =
                           [NSFileManager
defaultManager];
NSURL *persistentStoreUbiquitousContentURL =
      [fileManager
URLForUbiquityContainerIdentifier:nil];  
By specifying nil for the URLForUbiquityContainerIdentifier,
you’re telling this method to use the first container listed in the

--- Page 214 ---
com.apple.developer.ubiquity-container-identifiers entitlement
— explained in due course in the “Configuring Your App’s iCloud
Entitlements” section, later in this chapter. This first container
corresponds to N42E42A42L.com.nealgoldstein.RoadTrip.
You then create the path to the container directory:
NSString *ubiquityContainerIdentifierPath =
  [[persistentStoreUbiquitousContentURL path]
stringByAppendingPathComponent:
                       @”RoadTripSharedPointsOfInterest”
];
Then comes the NSPersistentStoreUbiquitousContentURLKey value
— the NSURL that contains the path you just created. (This is the
second of two things you need to do in order to set up iCloud, as spelled
out at the beginning of this section.)
persistentStoreUbiquitousContentURL =
      [NSURL fileURLWithPath:
                        ubiquityContainerIdentifierPath]
;
Now all the pieces are in place for you to set up iCloud. You do that by
creating and passing in an Options directory to the
addPersistentStoreWithType:configuration:URL:options:error:
message, which adds the persistent store. When you weren’t using
iCloud, that message looked like the following:
[_persistentStoreCoordinator
   addPersistentStoreWithType:NSSQLiteStoreType
     configuration:nil URL:storeUrl options:options
                                           error:&error]
In that iCloud-less world, what you were doing was setting up an SQLite
store. With iCloud in the picture, you’ll be still doing that, but passing in
an Options dictionary (previously it was nil) means you can now
specify the values and keys needed by Core Data to implement iCloud

--- Page 215 ---
support (and some additional non-iCloud support as well). I’ve bolded
the keys to make them easier to see:
options =
  [NSDictionary dictionaryWithObjectsAndKeys:
    [NSString stringWithFormat:@”%@%@”,
        @”com.nealgoldstein.coredata.itineraryR01.”,
                 appDelegate.destinationPreference],
      NSPersistentStoreUbiquitousContentNameKey,
    persistentStoreUbiquitousContentURL,
      NSPersistentStoreUbiquitousContentURLKey,
    [NSNumber numberWithBool:YES],
      NSMigratePersistentStoresAutomaticallyOption,
    [NSNumber numberWithBool:YES],
      NSInferMappingModelAutomaticallyOption,nil];
The first bolded bit — NSPersistentStoreUbiquitousContentName
Key — is the name of the persistent store. (Providing a value for
NSPersistent StoreUbiquitousContentNameKey is the first of two
things you need to do in order to set up iCloud, as spelled out in the
beginning of this section.) Here, you’re naming it
com.nealgoldstein.coredata.itineraryR01, followed by the
destination identifier (0 for New York for example, 1 for San Francisco,
and so on). As I explain in Chapter 3, I’m adding a separate store for
each destination and do the same for the transaction files.
The second bolded bit — NSPersistentStoreUbiquitousContent
URLKey — was just explained and is what you have just constructed.
The last bolded bits — NSMigratePersistentStoresAutomatically
Option and NSInferMappingModelAutomaticallyOption — work
together. As you might have found out already (if not, I find it out for
you in Chapter 3), you can’t just change your managed object model and
then run the app. I’ve been having you delete the model, but as you go
through development, that may not be convenient. The alternative is to
migrate the model. You can do that by specifying a mapping model, but

--- Page 216 ---
if you’re just making simple changes to your model (such as adding a
new attribute to an entity), Core Data can perform automatic data
migration, referred to as lightweight migration, for you. In lightweight
migration, Core Data infers a mapping model from differences between
the old and new models. If the boolValue of the number in the
NSMigratePersistentStores AutomaticallyOption key is YES, Core
Data will perform the migration, and if the boolValue of the number in
the NSInferMappingModel AutomaticallyOption is YES, Core Data will
infer the mapping model from the perceived differences — that is, it will
perform a lightweight migration.
I leave this to you to explore on your own, but be aware of this fact: If
you’re using iCloud, lightweight migration is the only game in town.
Handling changes
Although Core Data will do its job by keeping your data up to date, you
need to do your part as far as the user interface is concerned. At this
point, the notifications you have in place will work fine — just be sure
to use them! For example, you have to post a notification in situations
where your app is running on one device and the data is changed on
another and Core Data has updated your store accordingly.
To get the notifications process started, you need to register for one
particular notification: NSPersistentStoreDidImportUbiquitous
ContentChangesNotification. You get this notification for each
Persistent Store coordinator whose store has been modified by the
import. To register, update managedObjectContext in RTModel.m with
the bolded code in Listing 5-2.
Listing 5-2: Registering for the
NSPersistentStoreDidImportUbiquitous
ContentChangesNotification
- (NSManagedObjectContext *)managedObjectContext

--- Page 217 ---
{
  if (_managedObjectContext != nil) {
    return _managedObjectContext;
  }
  
  NSPersistentStoreCoordinator *coordinator =
                       [self
persistentStoreCoordinator];
  
  if (coordinator != nil) {
    NSManagedObjectContext* managedObjectContext =
     [[NSManagedObjectContext alloc]
      initWithConcurrencyType:NSMainQueueConcurrencyType
];
    
    [managedObjectContext performBlockAndWait:^{
       [managedObjectContext
              setPersistentStoreCoordinator:coordinator]
;
#if !TARGET_IPHONE_SIMULATOR
      [[NSNotificationCenter
defaultCenter]addObserver:self
selector:@selector(iCloudChangesReceived:)
name:NSPersistentStoreDidImportUbiquitous
                                ContentChangesNotificati
on
          object:coordinator];
#endif
    }];
    _managedObjectContext = managedObjectContext;
  }
  return _managedObjectContext;
}

--- Page 218 ---
 Although it doesn’t fit on one line in the code on the printed
page here,
NSPersistentStoreDidImportUbiquitousContentChanges
Notification is one word.
After registering, you also need to add the selector you specified when
you added yourself as an observer — in this case, the
iCloudChangesReceived: selector. Add the code in Listing 5-3 to
RTModel.m.
Listing 5-3: Adding iCloudChangesReceived:
- (void)iCloudChangesReceived:(NSNotification *)
                                            notification
{
  NSManagedObjectContext* context =
                              self.managedObjectContext;
  
  [context performBlock:^{
    [self persistentStoreChanged:notification
                                      forContext:context
];
  }];
}
Because notifications are posted on the callers’ thread, you need to make
sure that they’re sent to the main thread, where the view controllers and
your model live. (If this talk of different threads doesn’t ring a bell, take
a look at Chapter 3, where you can find a handy concurrency
discussion.) To implement what you need to do as a result of the
notification, you add a new method, persistentStoreChanged:, to the
mix (you’ll be getting a compiler error until you do that). Start by adding
the method declaration to RTModel.h with the help of the bolded code in
Listing 5-4.

--- Page 219 ---
Listing 5-4: Updating RTModel.h
@interface RTModel : NSObject
+ (RTModel *)model;
- (id)initWithDestinationIndex:
                             (NSUInteger)destinationInde
x;
- (void)loadItinerary;
- (void)addToItinerary:(PointOfInterest
*)pointOfInterest;
- (void)removeFromItinerary:(SharedPointOfInterest *)
                                          pointOfInteres
t;
- (void)loadPointsOfInterest;
- (NSArray *)returnPointsOfInterest;
- (void)addPointOfInterest:(NSMutableDictionary *)
                                      pointOfInterestDat
a;
- (UIImage *)destinationImage;
- (NSString *)destinationName;
- (CLLocationCoordinate2D)destinationCoordinate;
- (NSString *)weather;
- (void)loadEvents;
- (NSUInteger)numberOfEvents;
- (NSString *)getEvent:(NSUInteger)index;
- (NSString *)mapTitle;
- (NSArray *)createAnnotations;
- (void)addLocation:(NSString *)findLocation
completionHandler:(void (^)(Annotation *annotation,
NSError* error)) completion;
- (CLLocation *)foundLocation;
+ (NSString *)filePath:(NSString *)fileComponent;
- (void)persistentStoreChanged:
     (NSNotification*)notification forContext:
(NSManagedObjectContext*)context;

--- Page 220 ---
@property (readonly, strong, nonatomic)
NSManagedObjectContext *managedObjectContext;
@property (readonly, strong, nonatomic)
              NSManagedObjectModel *managedObjectModel;
@property (readonly, strong, nonatomic)
NSPersistentStoreCoordinator  
                           *persistentStoreCoordinator;
@end
With the method declaration in place, you can now add the method itself
by adding the code in Listing 5-5 to RTModel.m.
Listing 5-5: Add persistentStoreChanged:
- (void)persistentStoreChanged:
      (NSNotification*)notification forContext:
(NSManagedObjectContext*)context {
  
  [context mergeChangesFromContextDidSaveNotification:
                                          notification];
  
  [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
     postNotificationName:@”PersistentStoreChanged”
          object:self userInfo:[notification userInfo]];
}
mergeChangesFromContextDidSaveNotification: is a managed object
context method that will merge the changes you get from the
iCloudChangesReceived notification. The notification you get includes
a dictionary that contains the object IDs of the objects that have been
changed, added, or deleted. You then post a notification to let your other
objects know that the persistent store has changed. The userInfo
method used here simply returns the dictionary associated with that
notification, which is then used in the userInfo parameter of the
postNotificationName:object:userInfo: method.

--- Page 221 ---
Finally, you have to actually respond to the notification. To do that,
update initWithDestinationIndex: with the bolded code in Listing 5-
6.
Listing 5-6: Updating initWithDestinationIndex:
- (id)initWithDestinationIndex:
                            (NSUInteger)destinationIndex
{
  
  if ((self = [super init])) {
    
    NSURL *destinationsURL = [[NSBundle mainBundle]
       URLForResource:@”Destinations”
                                  withExtension:@”plist”
];
    NSDictionary *destinations =
       [NSDictionary dictionaryWithContentsOfURL:
                                         destinationsURL
];
    NSArray *destinationsArray =
           [destinations
objectForKey:@”DestinationData”];
    destinationData =
       [destinationsArray
objectAtIndex:destinationIndex];
    destination = [[Destination alloc]
initWithDestinationIndex:destinationIndex];
    [self loadEvents];
    NSManagedObjectContext *context =
                                self.managedObjectContex
t;
    NSError *error = nil;
    itinerary = [NSMutableArray arrayWithArray:
        [context executeFetchRequest:
            self.sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest

--- Page 222 ---
                                          error:&error]]
;
    if (error)
      NSLog(@”Core Data Failure! Error code: %u,
description: %@, and reason: %@”, error.code, [error
localizedDescription], [error
localizedFailureReason]);
    
    __block weak RTModel *weakSelf = self;
    [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
addObserverForName:@”PersistentStoreAdded” object:self
queue:nil usingBlock:^(NSNotification *notif) {
      [weakSelf loadItinerary];
      [weakSelf loadPointsOfInterest];
      [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
postNotificationName:@”DestinationChanged”
object:weakSelf userInfo:nil];
    }];
#if !TARGET_IPHONE_SIMULATOR
    [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
addObserver:self
selector:@selector(persistentStoreChanged:)
name:@”PersistentStoreChanged” object:nil];
#endif
  }
  return self;
}
Then add the selector you specified in the
addObserver:selector:name:object: message —
persistentStoreChanged: — by adding the code in Listing 5-7 to
RTModel.m.
Listing 5-7: Adding persistentStoreChanged
#if !TARGET_IPHONE_SIMULATOR

--- Page 223 ---
- (void)persistentStoreChanged:(NSNotification *)notif {
  
  NSManagedObjectContext *context =
                                self.managedObjectContex
t;
  NSError *error = nil;
  
  itinerary = [NSMutableArray arrayWithArray:
     [context executeFetchRequest:self.
         sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest
error:&error]];
  NSString *destinationName =
    [[destinationData
objectForKey:@”DestinationLocation”]
                                    objectForKey:@”Name”
];
  SharedPointOfInterest
                  *destinationSharedPointOfInterest =
nil;
  for (SharedPointOfInterest* sharedPointOfInterest in
                                              itinerary)
{
    if (([sharedPointOfInterest.name
      isEqualToString:destinationName]) &&
        ([sharedPointOfInterest.displayOrder intValue]
==
                                                    0 ))
{
      if (destinationSharedPointOfInterest) {
        [self.managedObjectContext  
                      deleteObject:sharedPointOfInterest
];
        if (![context save:&error]) {
          NSString *errorMessage =
                             [error
localizedDescription];

--- Page 224 ---
          UIAlertView *alertView = [[UIAlertView alloc]
            initWithTitle:@”Error in accessing your
              itinerary. Restart Road Trip and contact
              customer support if the error continues.”
             message:errorMessage delegate:nil
             cancelButtonTitle:@”OK”
             otherButtonTitles:nil];
          [alertView show];
          NSLog(@”Core Data Failure! Error code: %u,
            description: %@, and reason: %@”,
error.code,
            [error localizedDescription],
            [error localizedFailureReason]);
          return;
        }
      }
      destinationSharedPointOfInterest =
                                   sharedPointOfInterest
;
    }
  }
  [self loadPointsOfInterest];
  [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
      postNotificationName:@”PointsOfInterestChanged”
      object:self userInfo:nil];
  [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
      postNotificationName:@”ItineraryChanged”
      object:self userInfo:nil];
}
#endif
persistentStoreChanged: is an interesting method because it makes
explicit some things about working with iCloud that may be a bit subtle
at this point.

--- Page 225 ---
Note that a network is involved here — which means that, as with all
things network-related, there’s a chance that it may take some time for
any changes to the store to be downloaded. This is normally not a
problem (aside from user annoyance) except for the very first time you
launch the app on a device. That’s because we’ve set it up so that you
add a SharedPointOfInterest managed object to represent the
destination in the loadItinerary method, as spelled out in the following
excerpt from Listing 5-6. If the app has already been launched on
another device, when the timing is right your store will already have
been updated with that SharedPointOfInterest before you load your
itinerary. When you then check to see whether any objects are in your
itinerary, there will be one courtesy of the other device, and you won’t
have to create one on your own.
itinerary = [NSMutableArray arrayWithArray:
   [context executeFetchRequest:
    self.sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest
error:&error]];
  if (error)
    NSLog(@”Core Data Failure! Error code: %u,
description: %@, and reason: %@”,
error.code,          [error localizedDescription],
          [error localizedFailureReason]);
  if (![itinerary count]) {
But, if your slow-as-molasses network does bring about a lag, you’ll end
up with nothing in the fetch, which means you’ll add the object only to
later have that very same object sent to you as an update (as will the
other device).
So, in your code what you want to do is check to see whether there are
two destination SharedPointOfInterest objects (by definition, the
destination SharedPointOfInterest displayOrder is 0); if there are,
you delete any others. There is, of course, a statistical possibility (albeit
small) that if two people are working on two devices simultaneously,
both objects will be deleted — you can take that into account in your

--- Page 226 ---
code, but I leave that to you to figure out. In that case, the user will have
to add the destination SharedPointOfInterest object back.
This is by no means a problem unique to Core Data. It has to do with the
fact that I wanted to go with asynchronous processing and that I chose to
add an object to the store outside of the normal flow. I could have done
this differently by creating a unique object to represent the destination
outside of Core Data, or I could have even created a separate managed
object context, but I leave it to you to work that out on your own.
Configuring Your App’s iCloud
Entitlements
You probably know all about those provisioning profiles Apple makes
you do if you want to actually run your app on a device. I talk about
some of those provisioning requirements in a bit, but it turns out that, in
order to use iCloud, you also need to sign your app with iCloud-specific
entitlements. This section shows you how to deal with that.
In the “Setting up Core Data for iCloud” section, earlier in this chapter,
you had the URLForUbiquityContainerIdentifier: method use the
first container listed in the com.apple.developer.ubiquity-
container-identifiers entitlement (by specifying nil).
NSFileManager *fileManager =
                           [NSFileManager
defaultManager];
NSURL *persistentStoreUbiquitousContentURL =
      [fileManager
URLForUbiquityContainerIdentifier:nil];  
The thing is, you could have specified a different container if you
wanted to, but to do that you would have to add the container to your
app’s entitlements.

--- Page 227 ---
Figure 5-3:
See what
happens
when you
mess up
your
entitlements
.
All fine and dandy, but what exactly are these things called entitlements?
In general, entitlements enable your app to do certain things. In iOS and
on the Mac, you have entitlements designed to enable iCloud storage and
push notification, whereas on the Mac alone you have an additional
entitlement for sandboxing. In the RoadTrip app, you’re going to take
advantage of the Enabling iCloud Storage and Push Notifications aspects
of entitlements.
You’re going to keep all your iCloud entitlements in a file named
RoadTrip.entitlements, which I’ll have you add to your app shortly.
The RoadTrip.entitlements file is a property list file like the
RoadTrip-info.plist file, and includes the keys and values for your
application’s entitlements. When you’re building for the device, Xcode
checks to make sure that your entitlements are consistent with your
Provisioning Profile (more on that in the “Provisioning Your App for
iCloud” section, later in this chapter) and your app will be able to run on
the device. If everything isn’t consistent, you’ll get the dreaded “The
executable was signed with invalid entitlements” message, shown in
Figure 5-3.

--- Page 228 ---
With definitions of iCloud entitlements now dancing in your head, it’s
time to talk about iCloud storage.
There are two keys in your RoadTrip.entitlements file that have to do
with iCloud storage:
 com.apple.developer.ubiquity-container-identifiers
 com.apple.developer.ubiquity-kvstore-identifier
There’s also another key that comes along for the ride when you create
an entitlements file, and that is keychain-access-groups, which is a list
of the keychain access groups to which the app belongs. (You — and any
other application that needed to share keychain data — would use this
list to determine the keychain items the app has access to, which is nice
in and of itself but is not relevant to iCloud.)
Way back in the “iCloud” section at the beginning of this chapter, I
mention that iCloud storage has two flavors: document storage and key-
value data storage. iCloud Key-Value Store is the unique identifier for
the key-value store in iCloud. As I said, you won’t use it here, but it can

--- Page 229 ---
be useful, and it’s easy to figure out — it works just like
NSUserDefaults on the device.
The iCloud Containers section represents directories in the cloud your
application can use to read and write documents. In fact, the first
com.apple.developer.ubiquity-container-identifier for RoadTrip
is your Apple team identifier followed by your Bundle ID. So, if my
team identifier were N42E42A42L, my
com.apple.developer.ubiquity-container-identifier would be that
ID combined with my Bundle ID (com.nealgoldstein.RoadTrip, if
you’re curious), which would be
N42E42A42L.com.nealgoldstein.RoadTrip. When you get around to
generating your entitlement files, you’ll see a value that looks more or
less like that in the Value field (actually the Value field array) for the
com.apple.developer.ubiquity-container-identifiers key. And if
you recall, when you created
NSPersistentStoreUbiquitousContentURLKey back in the “Setting Up
Core Data for iCloud” section, earlier in this chapter, you used the
com.apple.developer.ubiquity-container-identifier as the first
part of the iCloud container directory URL you created.
Another piece of the puzzle in place.
 Although you can use a different value than your Bundle ID for
the key (which is what you’d have to do to get to access your
iCloud container from a Mac), you have to maintain the Team ID in
place or you’ll get a repeat of the dreaded “The executable was
signed with invalid entitlements” message. (Refer to Figure 5-3.) If
that fate does befall you, for this or any other reason, you need to
examine all the working parts, including the provisioning profile I
explain in “Provisioning Your App for iCloud.”
Now that you have an idea about what entitlements are all about, all you
need to do is enable iCloud entitlements in your app. Start by selecting

--- Page 230 ---
Figure 5-4:
Enabling
entitlements
.
your project in the Project Navigator and then select the RoadTrip target.
Select the Summary tab, scroll down to the Entitlements section, and
then check the Enable Entitlements check box, as I have in Figure 5-4.
Also select the iCloud Key-Value Store check box and click the + button
in the iCloud Containers section. (When you do that, the name initially
looks truncated, but just press Return and you see what’s shown in
Figure 5-4 — com.nealgoldstein.RoadTrip.)
If you take a close look at Figure 5-4, you can see that the RoadTrip.
entitlements file has added to the project as well.
When you enable entitlements for your app target, Xcode automatically
configures both the Document Storage and Key-Value Data Storage
entitlements for your app using the Team ID and Bundle ID combination
I just explained — and which you can change, as I also just explained.
 You can always find your Team ID in the Member Center on the
Apple Developer website
(http://developer.apple.com/membercenter). When you get to

--- Page 231 ---
the main page, select the Your Account tab, and if you’re an
individual, you see your Team ID in Your Account Summary. If
you’re part of a company, select Organization Profile from the
column on the left of that tab, and you find your Team ID in the
Company/Organization ID field.
This Team ID is also the first part of a Provisioning Profile name, which
I explain next.
Provisioning Your App for iCloud
If you have any history with Apple in creating provisioning profiles to
enable your app to run on a device, you know that it can easily turn into
a nightmare — even though, to be fair, the whole process has gotten
much better.
After jumping through the hoops for what seems like hundreds of
thousands of times, it finally does make sense to me and actually is
rather simple. So let me take you through it. The key to provisioning
bliss is to understand that your provisioning profile, your App ID, your
Bundle ID, and the value of the com.apple.developer.ubiquity-
container-identifiers key in your Entitlements file are inexorably
tied together, and one little mistake in referring to any one piece can cost
you hours of frustration.
One way Apple has made provisioning simple is through the use of its
Development Provisioning Assistant. Although you can’t use it if you
want to use an existing App ID with a custom Bundle Identifier, doing it
on your own is actually pretty simple, and I take you through the process
here.
From the iOS Dev Center at
https://developer.apple.com/devcenter/ios, select the iOS
Provisioning Portal under the iOS Developer Program. (Note that you

--- Page 232 ---
only see the iOS Provisioning Portal if you’re a member of the
Developer Program, which is required if you want to run your app on a
device.)
I assume that you already have your iOS Development Certificate. If
not, you need to take care of that first. Just follow the instructions in the
Certificates section of the iOS Provisioning Portal.
To start the provisioning process proper, go ahead and create an App ID
for your application. To do that, do the following:
1. Select App IDs under the Provisioning Portal section of the iOS
Provisioning Portal.
The home page of the iOS Provisioning Portal site appears.
2. Select the Manage tab and then select the New App ID button.
The page refreshes to show the Create App ID section of the Manage
tab.
3. In the tab’s Description subsection, enter a name for your ID in
the name field.
Try to come up with a name that makes sense to you, rather than just
some random word. (I used Universal RoadTrip, as shown in Figure
5-5.)
4. In the Bundle Seed ID section of the tab, select the Use Team ID
option from the Bundle ID drop-down list.
5. In the Bundle Identifier section of the tab, enter what you find
in the Value field of the com.apple.developer.ubiquity-
container-identifiers key in your Entitlements file.
The Value field should contain something like
$(TeamIdentifierPrefix)com.nealgoldstein.RoadTrip), leaving
off the $(TeamIdentifierPrefix) bit, which is your Team ID and
which you already specified in Bundle Seed ID.
If you look at Figure 5-5, you see that my Bundle Identifier is
com.nealgoldstein.RoadTrip. This is also what you find as the
value for the Bundle Identifier Key in RoadTrip-Info.plist, but

--- Page 233 ---
with the app name (product name) acting as a variable there.
(com.nealgoldstein.${PRODUCT_NAME:rfc1034identifier})
6. Click Submit.
If you filled in all your fields correctly, you’re now the proud owner
of an App ID.
 Be sure that your entries match precisely. Spelling and case are
important. Minor mismatches are the main cause of most
provisioning problems.
After creating a new App ID, you still need to configure it. Here’s how
you do it:
1. Find the newly created App ID in the App ID list in the Manage
tab and select its Configure link in the Action column.
Doing that brings up what you see Figure 5-6.
2. Select the Enable for iCloud check box, read the nice Warning
message that appears as shown in Figure 5-7, and then click OK.
The warning applies to you if you are enabling iCloud for an existing
App ID you’re already using in existing Provisioning Profiles.
Clicking OK should mean that your App ID is now enabled for
iCloud. To double-check, look for the Enabled message, as shown in
Figure 5-8.
Next, you need to create a Provisioning Profile using the App ID you
just created:
1. From the menu on the left in the iOS Provisioning Portal, choose
Provisioning.
2. Make sure the Development tab is selected in the new page that
appears, and then click the New Profile button.
Doing so brings up what you see in Figure 5-9.

--- Page 234 ---
Figure 5-5:
Create the
App ID.
Figure 5-6:
You need to
enable
iCloud.
3. In the Create iOS Development Provisioning Profile section,
enter a name for your Provisioning Profile in the Profile Name
field.
Be sure to use a descriptive name — something like Universal
RoadTrip,


--- Page 235 ---
Figure 5-7:
Read the
warning.
Figure 5-8:
Enabled for
iCloud.


--- Page 236 ---
Figure 5-9:
Your new
profile.
4. Still in the Create iOS Development Provisioning Profile section,
select the Certificates check box, select the App ID you just created
from the App ID drop-down list, and then select the devices you
want the app to run on.
5. Click Submit.
After creating the profile, keep refreshing the page until it’s ready for
download (see Figure 5-10) and then click the Download button to
download it to your computer.
After the profile downloads, drag it into Xcode (or simply double-click
it) and verify that it’s visible in the Xcode Organizer, as you see in
Figure 5-11.

--- Page 237 ---
Figure 5-
10: Ready
for
download.


--- Page 238 ---
Figure 5-
11: Yes, it’s
there.
Testing
With all the various IDs and Provisioning Profiles out of the way, you
can now build and run your app.
You need two devices to make sure that the iCloud support you enabled
actually works.
First, delete all existing copies of the app on both devices. If you have an
existing persistent store, it won’t be shared.
On Device 1:
1. Build and run your app.
2. Tap the Home button.
3. Select the Stop button in the Xcode toolbar.
4. Delete the app from the multitasking bar.
5. Tap the app on the Home screen to re-launch it.

--- Page 239 ---
Do the same thing for Device 2. There are no shortcuts here.
If you add a point of interest to your itinerary on one device, it should
eventually show up on the second device. The amount of time it can take
can run from seconds to many minutes. Have patience!
If you made any mistakes and want to restart the whole thing, take these
steps:
1. Delete the apps from both devices.
2. Delete the iCloud store for your app.
You can do that on the Mac by selecting iCloud in System
Preferences and selecting the Manage button. In the screen that
appears, select the storage you want to delete (it will be named
Unknown until your app is live in the store), and then select Delete.
On either device, use the Settings app, tap iCloud, tap Storage and
Backup, tap Manage Storage, select the storage you want to delete (it
will be named Unknown until your app is live in the store), tap the
Edit button, and then tap the big red Delete All button.
3. If you’re as paranoid as I am, change the name of your iCloud
file.
Although Step 2 will delete your iCloud container, if you run the app
again right away, the deletion may not have propagated through all
the servers. If you’re concerned about that (as I am), simply change
the name of your store (transactions) file in iCloud in the
persistent StoreCoordinator method in RTModel.m. I’ve
highlighted the changes you need to make in bold for you in Listing
5-8.
Listing 5-8: Updating persistentStoreCoordinator
- (NSPersistentStoreCoordinator *)
                              persistentStoreCoordinator
{
…
#if !TARGET_IPHONE_SIMULATOR

--- Page 240 ---
    NSFileManager *fileManager =
                         [NSFileManager defaultManager];
    NSURL *persistentStoreUbiquitousContentURL =
     [fileManager
URLForUbiquityContainerIdentifier:nil];
    
    NSString *ubiquityContainerIdentifierPath =
[[persistentStoreUbiquitousContentURL path]
stringByAppendingPathComponent:
                       @”RoadTripSharedPointsOfInterest”
];
    persistentStoreUbiquitousContentURL =
      [NSURL fileURLWithPath:
                        ubiquityContainerIdentifierPath]
;
    options = [NSDictionary
dictionaryWithObjectsAndKeys:
      [NSString stringWithFormat:  
        @”%@%@”,@”com.nealgoldstein.coredata.
        itineraryR01.”,appDelegate.destinationPreference
],
       NSPersistentStoreUbiquitousContentNameKey,
      persistentStoreUbiquitousContentURL,
       NSPersistentStoreUbiquitousContentURLKey,
      [NSNumber numberWithBool:YES],
       NSMigratePersistentStoresAutomaticallyOption,
      [NSNumber numberWithBool:YES],
       NSInferMappingModelAutomaticallyOption,nil];
#endif
…
}
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 241 ---
Part III
Web Services
In this part . . .
Now that you’re able to share data among devices, it’s probably a good
idea to figure out where that data is going to come from.

--- Page 242 ---
In this part, you find out all about consuming web services (yum yum).
You discover how to use the Google Geocoding web service, and along
the way you build yourself a couple of classes that you’ll be able to take
home with you — to the envy of all your friends. Not only will these
classes be able to construct your web services requests for you, but they
will then make the request and then download the response
asynchronously.
You’ll also find out all you need to know about XML and JSON, which
will make you multilingual in the blink of an eye.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 243 ---
Chapter 6
Living in the Cloud
In This Chapter
 Getting familiar with how web services work
 Understanding the nuts and bolts of network access
 Taking a look at web service architectures
 Deploying web services to a server
Being able to share data among all your devices is only half the battle.
You also need to look at where your data comes from.
Take RoadTrip, for example. In the old-school version of RoadTrip, the
points of interest are bundled with the RoadTrip app in the Destinations
plist. The problem here is that as you, the developer, discover more and
more points of interest that your users might enjoy, the only way you
could pass that on to your devoted users would be by sending out a new
version of the app — a time-consuming and often painful process.
Instead, I have you create web services that allow RoadTrip to download
the points of interest from a server. I also show you how to create web
services that allow you as the developer to add and delete those server-
based points of interest.
But for you to really understand how to create those web services, you
need to understand the entire enchilada — the Internet, the web, and
networks. For you to be successful and go off and add web services to
your apps, you need to understand not only how to develop a web
service, but also why you’re doing what you’re doing.

--- Page 244 ---
I know that most people are at least familiar with things like the web, the
Internet, and maybe even the HTTP protocol. But because these things
are the foundation upon which you’ll build your web services, I want to
spend some time taking you past familiarity to real understanding.
The place to start is with the very basics — networks. I start with some
very elementary stuff, but by the time you’re done here, you’ll have the
in-depth knowledge you need to take what you learned in this book and
apply it any number of ways to your own apps.
Understanding How Networks
Work
A computer network is simply a bunch of computers and other devices
interconnected by communications channels. The network is the way
computers can send messages to one another. Of course, computers can
ask a lot of things of one another, but here I focus on requests to get (or
upload) some data.
One network we’re all familiar with is the Internet, and you’ll be using
the Internet to access and deliver web services. But before we continue, I
want to make sure you understand the difference between the Internet
and the World Wide Web.
 Although the terms Internet and World Wide Web are often used
synonymously, they are not one and the same. The Internet is a
global system of interconnected governmental, academic,
corporate, public, and private computer networks, whereas the web
is a system of interlinked hypertext documents that people can
access via the Internet. The web is really an application running on
the Internet — the Internet being the communications backbone

--- Page 245 ---
underlying the World Wide Web. I get back to the web after
explaining the Internet.
The Internet
The Internet is a network of networks — millions of individual networks
(private, public, academic, business, and government) of local to global
scope, which are linked by a broad array of electronic, wireless, and
optical networking technologies that use the standard Internet Protocol
Suite (TCP/IP) to communicate with each other. Not only is the Internet
home to the World Wide Web (WWW), but it’s also the infrastructure
that supports electronic mail and voice over IP (VoIP).
The Internet Protocol Suite is the set of communications protocols used
for the Internet and other similar networks. “What exactly,” you may
ask, “is a communications protocol?” Well, thanks for asking. A
communications protocol is a formal description of message formats and
the rules for exchanging those messages in or between computing
systems and in telecommunications. This is where the term TCP/IP
comes in — what the standard Internet Protocol Suite is commonly
called. The Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and the Internet
Protocol (IP) are two of the suite’s most important protocols.
The Internet Protocol Suite consists of four layers (starting at the
bottom), as shown in Figure 6-1:
 The Link layer: Here you can find the connectivity functions at
the networking hardware level of the computer. This is home to
Ethernet and its cohorts.
 The Internet layer: Look here for the communication methods
between multiple computers that create a network (and multiple
networks) — this layer establishes the Internet. Here’s where
you find IP, which defines the fundamental addressing
namespaces — Internet Protocol version 4 [IPv4] and Internet
Protocol version 6 [IPv6], used to identify and locate hosts on

--- Page 246 ---
Figure 6-1:
The Internet
Protocol
Suite.
the network — and that thing called the IP address, which looks
like xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx.
 The Transport layer: Home to a general framework for
transmitting data between hosts. Here you can find TCP.
 The Application layer: Look no further for the protocols for
application-based interaction on a process-to-process level
between communicating Internet hosts. This is where HTTP
lives. It’s the HTTP protocol, running in the application layer of
the Internet Protocol Suite, which you use to request and receive
data from a web service.
The origins of the Internet reach back to the 1960s, when the United
States government collaborated with private commercial interests to
build robust and fault-tolerant distributed computer networks. If you’re
interested in the history, you can explore it on your own. What’s
important about this structure is that no one is in charge of the Internet as
a whole. There is, however, oversight (someone is in charge) in two
areas:
 The Domain Name System is directed by the Internet
Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN).

--- Page 247 ---
 The standardization of the core protocols (IPv4 and IPv6) is
directed by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).
The work of these two groups is critical for doing something people take
for granted — the mundane task of finding a computer on the Internet
that you want to interact with. You need to understand that “finding” in
this case has two aspects to it. First, you need to know the name of the
computer, and second, you need to know how to access it on the
network. Think of a name and phone number — for example, the
domain name example.com translates to the addresses 192.0.32.10
(IPv4) and 2620:0:2d0:200::10 (IPv6). This is where the Domain Name
System (DNS) comes in, which is simply a distributed database that
links together the domain name and how to access it.
For your development purposes, the Internet itself consists of four types
of components:
 Clients: A client is an application or system that accesses a
remote service on another computer system, known as a server,
by way of a network. Hello client-server (again).
Web browsers, for example, are clients that connect to web
servers and retrieve web pages for display. Most people use e-
mail clients to retrieve their e-mail from their Internet service
provider’s mail servers. Online games run as clients on each
user’s computer.
 Hosts (aka servers): A host may offer information resources,
services, and applications to users or other nodes on the
network. A host is what serves up your web page or web service.
Hosts can provide services to clients or other hosts. One of the
important things about a host is that it can provide, as you’ll see,
a generic services interface to its resources. This is the familiar
structure of the URL (actually URI and I’ll get to that distinction
shortly) with a base address and all those slashes after the .com.
For example, to download the source code for this book, you can
go to my website:

--- Page 248 ---
www.nealgoldstein.com/support/downloads
What’s more, the host can hide all the implementation details
from the user behind this simple interface.
 You won’t be using the next two components, but you
may want to know what they do because you’ve probably heard
somebody somewhere refer to them. They’re both intermediary
components that act as both a client and a server.
 Gateways (also known as a reverse proxy): A gateway is a
network node that interfaces one network with another —
they’re imposed by the network or origin server.
 Proxies (more accurately, proxy servers): Proxy servers are
client facing nodes that act as an intermediary for requests from
clients seeking resources from other servers. Most proxies are
web proxies, mediating access to content on the World Wide
Web, and they provide services such as data translation, security,
and caching to improve performance.
The World Wide Web
The World Wide Web (as big and important as it appears) is only one of
the services that run on the Internet. The World Wide Web, abbreviated
as WWW and commonly known as the web, is a system of interlinked
hypertext documents accessed via the Internet. With a web browser,
people can view web pages that may contain text, images, videos, and
other multimedia, and they can navigate among them via hyperlinks. The
history is interesting, and if you look into it, you’ll hear a lot about Sir
Tim Berners-Lee and Robert Cailliau. I leave you to explore that on your
own, though.
What “made” the web was using hypertext on the Internet. URLs and the
HyperText Markup Language (HTML) form a system of interlinked

--- Page 249 ---
resources, called hypertext documents.
Hypertext is text (okay, sometimes images) with references (hyperlinks)
to other text (or images) that the reader can immediately access, usually
by a mouse click or key sequence. For most folks, hypertext is what
makes the web the web — it’s an easy-to-use and flexible way you can
share and access information over the Internet.
This particular form of linking is accomplished through the use of a
URL (really the URI as you’ll see later). Viewing a web page on the
World Wide Web usually follows the pattern spelled out here:
1. You either type the URL of the page into a web browser or follow a
hyperlink to the page or resource that has the URL embedded.
2. The web browser submits an HTTP request message to the server
for a particular page. (Note that this is the way a web service works as
well.)
3. The server-name portion of the URL (shown in bold here) is
resolved into an IP address using the Domain Name System (DNS).
This IP address is necessary to contact the web server.
http://www.nealgoldstein.com/support/downloa
ds/
4. The browser then makes a request by sending an HTTP request (I
explain that in detail shortly) to the web server at that particular IP
address. In the case of a typical web page, the HTML text of the page
is requested first and parsed immediately by the web browser, which
then makes additional requests for images and any other files that
complete the page image.
5. While receiving these files from the web server, browsers may
progressively render the page onto the screen as specified by its
HTML, Cascading Style Sheets (CSS), or other page composition
languages. Any images and other resources are incorporated to
produce the onscreen web page that the user sees.

--- Page 250 ---
Web pages usually also have hyperlinks to other pages or even
downloadable files, documents, and other web resources. This creates
the web of information that users almost take for granted.
 This pattern illustrates (pretty much) how a web service works
as well, which will become abundantly clear in the next sections.
What Exactly Is a Web Service?
A web service is a way for one device to request of another device (over
a network) that it do something for the first device — for example,
return some data or do a computation and return the result. To put it
another way, a web service is a method of communication between two
electronic devices.
The W3C (the World Wide Web Consortium that develops web
standards) defines a web service as “a software system designed to
support interoperable machine-to-machine interaction over a network.”
The W3C also states,
“We can identify two major classes of Web services, REST-
compliant Web services, in which the primary purpose of the service
is to manipulate XML representations of Web resources using a
uniform set of ‘stateless’ operations; and arbitrary Web services, in
which the service may expose an arbitrary set of operations.”
Perfectly clear, right? Okay, maybe not. I need to both translate their
gibberish for you and expand on their somewhat out-of-date definitions.
To reduce it to its essences, a web service is simply the server end of a
client-server interaction.

--- Page 251 ---
With all due respect to the W3C, it’s not that there two are different
kinds of web services; it’s easier to understand if you look at it as two
different styles of implementation. The first is message-oriented (the
W3C arbitrary), and the second is resource based (the W3C REST-
compliant).
Message-oriented web services
Message-oriented web services (also referred to as Big web services)
generally follow a set of standards, such as these:
 UDDI (Universal Description Discovery and Integration): A
directory service which tells you what services are available
 WSDL (Web Services Description Language): Describes its
interface in a way that can be processed by a computer
 SOAP: Defines the messages and used to stand for Simple
Object Access Protocol but now stands for nothing
This kind of web service is often used to expose the services available in
an enterprise-level architecture to remote clients not part of the local
network. It allows an enterprise to communicate with other enterprises
and clients while encapsulating the details of their IT systems behind a
firewall. Listing 6-1 shows you an example of a SOAP request for
Apple’s stock price. (Notice the XML.)
Listing 6-1: A SOAP Request for a Stock Price
POST /StockQuote HTTP/1.1
Host: www.stockquoteserver.com
Content-Type: text/xml; charset=”utf-8”
Content-Length: nnnn
SOAPAction: “Some-URI”
<SOAP-ENV:Envelope
  xmlns:SOAP-
ENV=”http://schemas.xmlsoap.org/soap/envelope/”

--- Page 252 ---
  SOAP-
ENV:encodingStyle=”http://schemas.xmlsoap.org/soap/enc
oding/”>
   <SOAP-ENV:Body>
       <m:GetLastTradePrice xmlns:m=”Some-URI”>
           <symbol>APPL</symbol>
       </m:GetLastTradePrice>
   </SOAP-ENV:Body>
</SOAP-ENV:Envelope>
I mention the big web services here only because you may have heard
the term somewhere, but I don’t explain them any further because you
aren’t going to use them.
Resource-based web services
So how does a web API differ from your run-of-the-mill web
interaction? Well, when you visit a website, the web server returns a web
page. A web page is essentially HTML, CSS, and JavaScript. And the
browser renders the page text into a nice-looking page.
However, this HTML data format would never be another program’s first
choice when it comes to processing or consuming information. This is
where web services come in. Because web services have a well-defined
API — what parameters they accept and the response you can expect,
usually in program-friendly XML or JSON format — other programs
can make better use of them because such programs can be set up to
process the responses programmatically.
A resource-based web service (also called a web API) is typically a set
of HTTP request messages along with a set of response messages,
typically in eXtensible Markup Language (XML) or JavaScript Object
Notation (JSON) format with the request defined in a URI. (I explain
JSON in detail in Chapter 10.)

--- Page 253 ---
 The resource-based web service moves away from the message-
oriented approach (all that SOAP/WSDL/UDDI stuff from the
previous section) to what is often referred to as Representational
State Transfer (REST) based communications. Although resource-
based web services have become synonymous with
Representational State Transfer (REST), as I explain in the section
“Representational State Transfer (REST),” it isn’t really the same
thing!
Curious how a resource-based (HTTP API) web service would tackle
that Apple stock price request I highlighted in the previous section?
Check out Listing 6-2.
Listing 6-2: A Resource-Based (HTTP API) Web
Service
http://stockquoteserver.example/query?symbol=APPL
As Listing 6-2 makes clear, even though some people swear by the
SOAP/WSDL/UDDI approach to web services, for your purposes the
resource-based (HTTP API) web service is a better solution, so that’s
what you’ll work with.
A Web Service Request
The best place to start learning about web services is by making an
actual web service request. For example, enter the following URL into
your web browser of choice:
http://maps.googleapis.com/maps/api/geocode/json?sensor=false&address=1
Infinite Drive, Cupertino, CA
You’re rewarded with what you see in Figure 6-2.

--- Page 254 ---
Figure 6-2:
A web
service in
the browser.
Figure 6-3:
A web
What you just did was make a request to the geocode web service to
return you the latitude and longitude coordinates for 1 Infinite Drive,
Cupertino, CA in JSON format. (I explain JSON and how to use it in
Chapter 10.) The service obliged you with a response, which was even
more kindly displayed for you by your browser.
Since the response is in an application-friendly format, you can see it’s
not too much of a leap to imagine using this in RoadTrip. Figure 6-3
gives you an idea what that may look like. Think of Figure 6-3 as a
foretaste of what you’ll actually be doing in Chapters 7-10 when you
change from using the iOS SDK geocoder class to using a Google
Geocoder web service.

--- Page 255 ---
service on
the iPad.
So what actually happened when you typed that http:// stuff in your
web browser and pressed Enter?
Figure 6-4 gives you the (schematic) overview:
1. A request is sent from your browser to a URL address — the same
kind you normally enter into a browser with a few more parameters. (I
explain that shortly.)
2. The URL request gets routed to a web server running in the cloud.
The web server processes the request and sends it to the right program.
3. In that program (which can be written in any one of a number of
languages), a handler processes the request, interacts with its model,
and packages a response.
4. That response is then returned back to your browser.
That’s all there is to it. Basically, this whole interaction takes place
within the framework of that long-established workhorse of the Internet,
the client-server architecture.

--- Page 256 ---
Figure 6-4:
How it all
works.
It’s about client-server
The client-server model of computing distributes the tasks of an
application between the providers of a resource or service, called
servers, and service requesters, called clients. It has been around for
quite a while — since the 1980s, to be (a bit more) precise — where it
was used in reference to personal computers on a network (usually a
LAN). From its humble beginnings, it has evolved over time to where it
is now recognized as one of the central ideas of network computing. In
fact, the Internet’s main application protocols — HTTP, SMTP, Telnet,
and DNS — proudly use client-server. Web browsers and web servers
function as part of a client-server relationship, and many of the apps you
use every day follow a client-server model — e-mail and banking
services, to name just two. The client-server model has become one of
the central ideas of network computing.
I talk even more about client-server when I explain web service design
in Chapter 11.
The client-server model is, of course, at the heart of the Model
Application Controller Architecture that I describe in Chapter 1. And, if
it’s not clear by now, it’s also exactly what you’ll end up doing with a
web service — offloading computation or data storage from your iPhone

--- Page 257 ---
Figure 6-5:
The URL.
to a server in the cloud (and getting all the other benefits I explain in
Chapter 1). Think about the reverse geocoding you just did in the last
section (using your browser to turn a GPS coordinate address into an
address). It’s almost impossible to store all those addresses and
coordinates on the phone. So the phone sends the GPS location, and the
server returns a location.
In short, client-server is about the relationship of cooperating programs
in an application with the server providing a service to one or many
clients making requests for such services.
And it’s about the URL
At the beginning of this section — a section labeled appropriately
enough “A Web Service Request” — you entered a URL to request a
web service. The URL (Uniform Resource Locator) is central to the kind
of web services you’ll be using because it’s the tool you use to specify
where something is and how to access it.
Every URL consists of some of the following: the scheme name
(commonly called protocol) followed by a colon; then, depending on the
scheme, a domain name (alternatively, IP address); a port number; the
path to the service requested; and an optional query string. (There’s also
an optional fragment identifier which you won’t be using in RoadTrip.)
Put them all together and it looks like the following:
scheme://domain:port/path?query_string#fragment_id
You can see a more user-friendly version in Figure 6-5.


--- Page 258 ---
A bit off-putting isn’t it? Let me deconstruct it for you.
The scheme name defines what you need to know in order to process the
rest of the URL. It is the communication protocol you want to use.
You’ve seen things like http:, https:, and ftp: in the URL in your
browser? Those are scheme names.
http://example.org:80
Next comes the domain. Here you can use a domain name (such as
Apple.com) or its IP address of 17.251.200.70 (which is paired with
Apple.com by the Domain Name System eventually anyway) to reach
Apple’s domain.
The domain name portion of a URL is not case sensitive because DNS
ignores case: http://example.org/ and HTTP://EXAMPLE.ORG/ both
open the same page. (Try it — you may be surprised by what you find
there.)
The domain you just used in your browser to request a web service was
maps.googleapis.com.
Next in line comes the port number, a term you may not be familiar
with. Port numbers work like telephone extensions. A computer has a
main address and a set of port numbers to handle incoming and outgoing
connections. In the following example, localhost refers to the domain
name and 8080 represents the port number:
http://localhost:8080/pointsofinterest?destination=0
The port number is optional; if omitted, the default for the scheme is
used. For example, http://example.com:80 connects to port 80 of
example.com. This also happens to be the default for an http: URL,
with the default port for an https: request being 443. (You get some
practical experience using port numbers when you start testing your
Google App Engine Application in Chapter 12.) Regardless, the

--- Page 259 ---
specified or default port number has to match the port that the web
server is listening to.
The path is used to specify (and perhaps find) the resource requested.
It’s all that stuff with the slashes after the domain name. (Remember, the
port number is optional, so you usually won’t see it.) Treat the path as
case-sensitive, even though some servers — some based on Microsoft
Windows, for example — treat it as case-insensitive.
For example, in the following URL
http://maps.googleapis.com/maps/api/geocode/json
    ?sensor=false&address=1 Infinite Drive, Cupertino,
CA
maps/api/geocode/ is the path to the JSON geocode web service you
just used in your web service request.
The query string contains data to be passed to the software running on
the server. It may contain name/value pairs separated by ampersands.
The query string you entered in your web service request was:
?sensor=false&address=1 Infinite Drive, Cupertino, CA
The fragment identifier, if present, specifies a part or a position within
the overall resource or document. When used with HTTP, it usually
specifies a section or location within the page, and the browser may
scroll to display that part of the page.
I began this section with the scheme — the communication protocol you
want to use. In an upcoming section, I give you a look at the scheme
you’ll be using — HTTP.
But first, it’s time to clean up the URI versus URL confusion.
URI or URL?

--- Page 260 ---
URI stands for Uniform Resource Identifier as opposed to URL which
stands for Uniform Resource Locator.
Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) is a compact string of characters used
to identify or name a resource. The main purpose of this identification is
to enable interaction with representations of the resource over a network
(typically the World Wide Web) using specific protocols. URIs are
defined in schemes that call for a specific syntax and associated
protocols.
URIs can be classified as a Uniform Resource Locator (URL) or a
Uniform Resource Name (URN) or both.
A Uniform Resource Locator (URL) is a URI that, in addition to
identifying a resource, provides a way to access that resource by
describing its network ”location.” For example, the URL
http://www.nealgoldstein.com/ is a URI that identifies a resource
(my home page) and implies that you can get a representation of that
resource (such as my home page’s HTML code) via HTTP from a
network host named www.nealgoldstein.com.
A Uniform Resource Name (URN) is a URI that identifies a resource by
name in a particular namespace, but it does not imply its location or how
to access it. For example, the URN urn:isbn:0-395-36341-1 is a URI
that, like an International Standard Book Number (ISBN), allows one to
talk about an identifiably specific book, but doesn’t suggest where and
how to obtain an actual copy of it.
In this naming universe, http: is a URI scheme, but urn: is also a URI
scheme. It defines subspaces — called namespaces. For example, the set
of URNs of the form urn:isbn:n-nn-nnnnnn-n is a URN namespace.
(isbn is a URN namespace identifier — it is neither a URN scheme nor
a URI scheme.)
Over time, the importance of this additional level of hierarchy seemed to
lessen; the view became that an individual scheme (http or urn) doesn’t

--- Page 261 ---
need to become a URI type such as URL, URN, or any other type people
may come up with.
Furthermore, according to what has become the contemporary view, the
term URL doesn’t refer to a formal partition of URI space; it is merely a
useful but informal concept. In this brave new world, a URL is merely a
type of URI that identifies a resource via a representation of its primary
access mechanism (that is, its network ‘location’), rather than by other
attributes it may have. In this context, http: is best referred to as a URI
scheme and an http URI is a URL. The phrase “URL scheme” is now
used infrequently, usually to refer to some subclass of URI schemes
which exclude URNs.
So according to the cognoscenti, URI is the correct term to use when
referring to the location of resources on the WWW.
The only problem with that is that most people are unaware of the
distinction and doggedly continue to use URL. And, in that spirit, I also
(mostly) use URL in this book when explaining things in less technical
terms.
HTTP
Accordingly to both written and unwritten rules, the first part of any URI
specifies the scheme. A word to the wise: The schemes you really want
to pay attention to — at least for the purpose of this book — are http://
(primarily) and https:// — the HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP)
and HTTP Secure, respectively. URIs with this scheme are called URLs.
The scheme is the networking protocol used by your browser (mostly) to
access information on the web. Back in “The Internet” section, earlier in
this chapter, I point out that HTTP is an application layer protocol
designed within the framework of the Internet Protocol Suite and is a

--- Page 262 ---
formal description of message formats and the rules for exchanging
those messages.
In this context, HTTP is the request-response protocol in the client-
server computing model on the web. A web browser acts as a client,
submitting an HTTP request message to the server. Somewhere on the
server is an application that provides a service or hosts a website that
also has content or resources. This application returns a response
message to the client. A response contains the content requested by the
client in its message body as well as request status information.
HTTP is the network protocol used to deliver most of the HTML files,
image files, query results, or anything else (collectively called resources)
on the web. A resource is defined as information that can be identified by
a URL. (It’s the R in URL.) The most common kind of resource is a file,
but a dynamically generated query result is also considered a resource.
But whereas a URL’s roots are in web pages, a web service can also be
considered a resource.
 https is syntactically identical to the http scheme, but it tells
the browser to use an added encryption layer of SSL/TLS to protect
the traffic. Transport Layer Security (TLS) and its predecessor,
Secure Sockets Layer (SSL), are security protocols that provide
communications security over the Internet. If you’re interested in
Internet security, I leave you to investigate that on your own, but I
discuss it further in Chapter 15.
The HTTP session
Your web page is downloaded (or your web service is used) in an HTTP
session — a sequence of network request-response transactions.

--- Page 263 ---
An HTTP client opens a connection and sends a request message to an
HTTP server; the server then returns a response message, usually
containing the resource that was requested. Keep in mind that the request
URI isn’t necessarily a resource to download; it can also be a program to
handle the data you’re sending. The response message may contain a
static file (such as a web page) or program output.
After delivering the response, the server closes the connection making
HTTP a stateless protocol — one that does not maintain any connection
information between transactions. The current version of HTTP is
HTTP/1.1 and it does provide persistent connections. That means a
connection between a browser and the hosting server is kept open for
multiple requests. This is done to improve the page loading speed.
Establishing the connection is expensive in processing terms, so once a
connection is open, you want to keep it open for the successive requests.
Be that as it may, there is no state maintained between each request,
which makes HTTP a stateless protocol.
When an HTTP client initiates a request, it establishes a Transmission
Control Protocol (TCP) connection to a particular port on a server. An
HTTP server listening on that port waits for a client’s request message.
Upon receiving the request, the server sends back a status line, such as
“HTTP/1.1 200 OK”, and a message of its own, the body of which is
perhaps the requested resource, an error message, or some other
information.
The formats of the request and response messages are similar and
oriented to the languages humans speak, as opposed to being in
hexadecimal or some binary format. Both kinds of messages consist of
the following:
1. <initial line, different for request versus response>
2. Header1: value1
. . .
Headern: valuen

--- Page 264 ---
3. <optional message body>
Although I am going to explain the structure of the message in the next
few sections, it’s not something you particularly have to worry about.
Both the web service and iOS frameworks take care of constructing the
messages for you (NSURLRequest and NSURLResponse, in the case of
iOS), and all you’ll have to do is provide the right content.
Initial line — Request
The initial line is different for the request than for the response (which I
cover in the next section). A request line has three parts, separated by
spaces: a method name, the local path of the requested resource, and the
version of HTTP being used. Here’s a typical request line:
GET /images/neal.png HTTP/1.1
It requests a resource (GET), called /images/neal.png from the domain
you specified in the URL using HTTP/1.1.
Method name
HTTP defines nine methods (sometimes referred to as verbs) indicating
the desired action to be performed on the identified resource. These
method names are always uppercase. The most common ones are shown
in Table 6-1.

--- Page 265 ---
Of those nine methods, you really have to care about only these four:
 GET, which is the most common HTTP method; it says “give me
this resource.” You use GET in Chapters 3–5 to make a web
service request of an existing web server.
 POST, which submits data to be processed that is included in the
body of the request. You use POST in Part IV when you add a
new point of interest.
 PUT, which creates or updates a resource.
 DELETE, which deletes the specified resource.
 You should also know a few characteristics of methods. Some
methods (for example, GET) are defined as safe, which means they
should not change the state of the server other than logging,
caching, and so on. Because they’re safe, they’re also considered to
be idempotent — multiple identical requests should have the same
effect as a single request.

--- Page 266 ---
Other methods (POST and DELETE) are not safe because they’re intended
to make changes to the server — updating a user’s location, for example,
or changing a username. These methods are also not necessarily
idempotent, and therefore sending an identical POST request multiple
times may further affect the state or cause further side effects. This can
turn into a major issue when, for example, a user doesn’t get feedback
from an action and then tries it again (and again).
The local path of the requested resource
The path is the part of the URL after the host name, also called the
request URI.
The HTTP version
The HTTP version always takes the form HTTP/x.x, uppercase.
Initial line — Response (Status line)
The initial response line, called the status line, also has three parts
separated by spaces: the HTTP version, a response status code that gives
the result of the request, and an English phrase describing the status
code. Typical status lines are
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
and
HTTP/1.0 404 Not Found
Headers
Header lines provide information either about the request/response or
about the object sent in the message body. HTTP 1.1 defines 46 headers,

--- Page 267 ---
and only one (Host:) is required in requests, although to be polite, the
following are also included:
 The From header gives the e-mail address of whoever’s making
the request or running the program making the request.
 The User-Agent header identifies the program that’s making the
request.
On the server side:
 The Server header is analogous to the User-Agent: header.
 The Last-Modified header gives the modification date of the
resource that’s being returned.
 The ETag (entity tag) header is used to determine whether a
cached version of the requested resource is identical to the
current version of the resource on the server.
If an HTTP message includes a body, you can usually find header lines
in the message that describe the body. In particular,
 The Content-Type: header gives the Internet media type of the
data in the body. (The Internet media type was originally called
a MIME type. MIME, or Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions,
is a two-part identifier for file formats on the Internet.) You use
the Content-Type: header in the Bonus Chapter, “Adding and
Deleting Points of Interest,” available for download from this
book’s website.
 The Content-Length: header gives the number of bytes in the
body. You use this one in the Bonus Chapter as well.
An optional message body

--- Page 268 ---
The message body, if included, comes after the header lines. In a
response, it contains either the data the client requested or information if
there’s an error. In a request, the message body is where user-entered
data or uploaded files are sent to the server.
You don’t need to be concerned about the message body in the GET
request, but you have to be aware of it in the response. Fortunately, it
gets handled by the NSURLConnection class you’re using, which will
deconstruct the response for you. You do, however, use the message
body in a POST request in the Bonus Chapter when you add and delete
points of interest.
A POST request is used to send data to the server to be processed in some
way — that data is included in the message body of the request. A POST
request usually has extra headers to describe this message body, like
Content-Type: and Content-Length:.
Next I want to wade into the swamp known as RESTful web services.
The RESTful Web Service
Architecture
A web service is essentially a way for one device to request of another
device (over a network) that it do something for the first device — for
example, return some data or do a computation and return the result. As
you may expect, you can accomplish that goal a number of different
ways.
As I mention earlier in this chapter, the web service world is divided into
two major camps: message-oriented web services, which follow a
particular set of standards (such as SOAP, WSDL, or UDDI, as
described earlier); and resource-based web services, which came to life
along with Web 2.0 and moved away from SOAP/WSDL/UDDI to a

--- Page 269 ---
variant of Representational State Transfer (REST) based
communications. (You use the resource-based approach in this book.)
You may have heard a lot about RESTful web services, but note that I’m
talking about a variant on REST. I stress that fact because most people
refer to any web service that uses HTTP request messages and JSON or
XML response messages as REST.
In fact, there’s much more to REST than that.
REST is a style of web service architecture for distributed resources such
as the World Wide Web — an architecture style for networked systems,
in other words. It also happens to be the underlying architectural model
of the web. (Fun Fact: A Ph.D. student named Roy Fielding coined the
term REST in his Ph.D. dissertation,
www.ics.uci.edu/~fielding/pubs/dissertation/top.htm, which —
wonder of wonders — is available online.)
That’s all fine and dandy, but the crucial thing you need to understand
about REST is that it was created in order to meet the web’s
requirements — the requirements for an Internet-scale distributed
hypermedia system.
Although there are nuances to what the web is about, the web is
primarily about delivering lots of information to lots of users; it has to
work in a rapidly growing and evolving heterogeneous environment
where you can’t count on the client or the server to do anything more
than meet some very minimal requirements. There are intentionally very
low barriers to entry — information is transferred in a standardized form
rather than one which is specific to an application’s needs, text-based
protocols, and hypermedia as the user interface.
Although an architecture capable of accomplishing those goals will
obviously have a lot of moving parts to it, and even though I would love
to linger over every aspect of its awesomeness, I’m not going to dive too
deeply into REST in this book, just because there’s really no need to. I’m

--- Page 270 ---
going to limit myself to highlighting three aspects of REST that I think
warrant your attention:
 Optimization: Because the web is an Internet-scale distributed
hypermedia system, any web architecture you come up with
must be optimized for large-grain hypermedia data transfer. That
is what the web is really all about after all — large amounts of
data (in different formats, including hyperlinks to even more
data) displayed in a browser.
 Flexibility: Because of the heterogeneous nature of the clients
and faced with the reality that both the client and server side are
rapidly evolving, the architecture must build in maximum
flexibility to allow for the independent evolution of client and
server components.
 Scalability: And finally, since the web is growing rapidly and
you really have no idea what the demands will be on servers
down the road, components must be scalable.
REST, as you’ll soon see, is optimized for the common case of the web
(i.e., browsers and downloading of data) but results in an interface that
isn’t optimal for other forms of architectural interaction (like
applications that use web services). That’s why you don’t usually find
applications that are truly RESTful. (I explain more about this state of
affairs in the next section.)
REST requirements
Requirements for being a fully compliant RESTful web service are
detailed in the Roy Fielding dissertation I mention in the previous
section. (Again, it’s there for the reading at
www.ics.uci.edu/~fielding/pubs/dissertation/top.htm.)
Requirements like optimizing large-grain hypermedia data transfer,
allowing independent evolution of client and server components, and
enabling scalable components should ring a bell. His additional

--- Page 271 ---
requirements — some useful to us and some not — are summarized
here:
 Client-server: In REST, clients are consumers that request
representations using a well-defined interface. Clients are not
concerned with mechanics such as how something is done or
how it’s stored, which allows you to isolate the client code from
those kinds of changes. Servers, on the other hand, are not
concerned with the user interface or user state, so servers can be
simpler and less concerned with implementation side effects.
(There won’t be any as far as user interface or user state are
concerned.) Servers and clients may also be replaced and
developed independently, as long as the interface is not altered.
 Stateless: No client context is stored on the server between
requests. (That does not mean that clients cannot send data to
update the server.) Each request from any client contains all the
information necessary to service the request, and any session
state is held in the client.
 Cacheable: Responses must implicitly or explicitly define
themselves as cacheable or not to prevent clients from reusing
stale or inappropriate data in response to further requests. (This
is really about reducing the amount of data that needs to be
downloaded.)
 Layered: Although intermediaries (such as proxy servers, cache
servers, gateways, and so on) can be inserted between clients
and resources, a client shouldn’t ordinarily be able to tell
whether it’s connected directly to the end server or to an
intermediary along the way.
 Code On Demand: Code On Demand is the only optional
constraint of REST. If a client component has access to a set of
resources but not the know-how on how to process them, it
sends a request to a remote server for the code representing that
know-how, receives that code, and executes it locally. Code On

--- Page 272 ---
Demand can be used to provide the code to render a content type
as needed.
 Uniform Interface (between Components): As Roy Fielding
says, “The central feature that distinguishes the REST
architectural style from other network-based styles is its
emphasis on a uniform interface between components.” This is
the major characteristic of REST and the one that most RESTful
applications are lacking.
The uniform interface is what implements the requirements for
the independent evolution of servers and clients by imposing
four requirements. I explain each in more detail in their
respective sections, but the basics are as follows:
• Identification of resources: The resource is the key
abstraction of information in REST — any information
that can be named can be a resource.
• Manipulation of resources through representations: Each
resource has one or more representations — resources
themselves are conceptually separate from the
representations that are returned to the client.
• Self-descriptive messages: A message includes enough
information necessary for the receiver to process the
message.
• Hypermedia as the engine of application state: A RESTful
application moves from one state to the next by using the
alternatives (hyperlinks) embedded in the content (or
representation).
Those are the basics. Read on for a bit more detail.
Identification of resources
The resource is the key abstraction of information in REST — and any
information that can be named can be a resource. In fact, a resource can

--- Page 273 ---
be defined pretty broadly — in essence, it is simply a concept based on
whatever is needed to meet the needs of a client.
The web is made up of resources, which are named using a logical URL
— there doesn’t have to be an HTML page associated with every URL.
Using a logical URL enables you to hide the implementation behind the
concept. This means, for example, that I can deliver you that resource in
one of any number of ways, based upon negotiations. It also means I can
change the way I implement that resource without any impact on the
clients — think encapsulation.
Manipulation of resources through representations
Each resource has one or more representations — resources themselves
are conceptually separate from the representations that are returned to
the client. For example, the server doesn’t send its database, but rather,
perhaps, some HTML, XML, or JSON that represents some database
records.
In more technical terms, a representation consists of data, metadata
describing the data, and, on occasion, metadata to describe the metadata.
This means that a client can request a representation (view) of a resource
that the client knows how to process and is appropriate to the way it will
be used. The following, for example, requests a particular representation
— geocoded location information with the response in JSON format:
http://maps.googleapis.com/maps/api/geocode/json
You may also want to know the last time the points of interest for the
RoadTrip was updated (you’ll get to that in Part IV), or you may want to
get all the points of interest for a destination, or even all the points of
interest for all destinations. Using representations makes this possible.
The data format of a representation is known as a media type, and as
you’ll see, the ability to return self-describing messages (as I explain in
the next section) is what makes REST so powerful. The client needs to

--- Page 274 ---
know nothing about how the user will use the content or even about the
content itself — it just needs to be able to render (work with) the media
type it is represented in. The app is merely a vehicle for accessing and
displaying information.
In addition, providing the same data using an assortment of media types
makes it possible to support lots of different clients. As you recall, this is
one of the requirements for the web architecture that Fielding was trying
to develop.
The request for a representation of a resource is what is being called a
web service. This is similar, but not the same as a class’s method in an
Objective-C application.
Self-describing messages
If you want to support clients that are merely vehicles for delivering and
requesting information, the message itself must contain information
about how to “display” its content — that is, a message has to include
the information necessary to process the message.
What self-describing messages really do is reduce the amount of
coupling between components throughout the system and facilitate
independent evolution of client and server components.
For example, an HTTP request for a web service (resource) is self-
describing since it contains all the information a server needs to process
the request in the request line (such as the version, HTTP method, and so
on) and its header (as is also the case with the response). The particulars
are as follows:
 The available methods are limited to the HTTP Methods with
neither the client nor the server (resource) free to redefine what
an HTTP GET means for example.
 HTTP messages contain information about the message in the
headers and the body.

--- Page 275 ---
 The client can specify the set of resource representations it can
handle using HTTP Accept header(s).
 The server describes the format of the message body using
HTTP Content-type header(s).
The self-describing messages requirement is why most web services are
not truly RESTful. An XML or JSON response, for example, is not self-
describing. The client needs to know the JSON or XML schema in order
to make sense of the representation being returned.
Hypermedia as the engine of application state
A RESTful application moves from one state to the next by choosing
from among the alternative state transitions embedded in the content
(representation). Again, the client need know nothing about the
application because it merely acts as a vehicle to display information and
take the user’s response — in the form of clicking a link — to display
the next step in the application.
So, if you can get past the self-describing messages business,
hypermedia as the engine of application state become your next
formidable hurdle to RESTfulness, and this one, too, is a challenge for
most applications.
 For an application to be truly RESTful, it would need to be only
about rendering the response, but in reality, most applications are
about operating on, or using, the data rather than just rendering it.
The rationale behind the requirements
Although some of Roy Fielding’s requirements serve multiple purposes,
it’s a lot easier to think about them by categorizing them in accordance
with three broad principles:

--- Page 276 ---
 For you to have scalability, you can’t link together a resource
and a server. A series of requests for the same resource needs to
be able to be responded to by any available server, which is why
servers have to be stateless.
 To be able to support large scale hypermedia transfer, you
have to minimize the amount of data that’s being transferred. (I
know that spends like an oxymoron, but network transfers are
expensive, so paring things down is a good thing.) Caching data
minimizes the number of times you have to download the same
data.
 For clients and servers to be able to evolve independently
(and limit the requirements for clients and servers), there has
to be as little coupling as possible between clients and servers.
This requirement of course is not only a web or network
requirement; it is the basis of all good software engineering and
one of the basic principles of object-oriented programming.
Client-server, layering, identification of resources, and
manipulation of resources through representations all result in
loose coupling, and you can apply those principles (or some
variation on them) as you design your web services.
Admittedly, the requirements Roy Fielding came up with are applicable
(in broad terms) to almost any kind of software system you could come
up with and are ones you can and should use when you design your web
services. But because of some unique aspects of the Internet, Fielding is
able to go beyond the “normal” approach to reducing coupling.
On the web, the ultimate consumer of the information is not the client; it
is the user — the user is the information (content) processor. That means
that you can remove from the client any dependency or behavior based
on content and reduce the coupling any further. And Fielding (and
REST) do that superbly with his last two constraints: The (dual)
insistence on self- descriptive messages and hypermedia as the engine of
application state.

--- Page 277 ---
Having these two constraints on board means that the client can simply
act as a conduit to the end user. You can change the content at will
because all you need to be able to do is make sure that the client can
display that content in the way described by the message. That’s where
HTTP comes in because it gives the client and server the ability to
negotiate on what each is capable of doing (the content negotiation
mechanism). For example, although a client may not be capable of
displaying a particular media type (and this is where Code on Demand
comes in), that fact does not break the client in the sense that the client
may still be able display other media types. (If you were looking for the
reason why plain vanilla versions of JSON or XML aren’t going to fly in
these circumstances, here’s your answer.) This business about things not
“breaking” is also true of the server when it comes to delivering
resources. And because the state transitions are built into the content, the
client is blissfully unaware of them. A client simply has to be able to
process the “standard” request.
This is where REST and the needs of the web begin to diverge from
what you’re going to be doing (most of the time) with web services. In
most service scenarios, the consumer of the information is the client —
and the client is the information (content) processor. This means that, for
the majority of the time, messages aren’t going to be self-descriptive —
the web service provider takes over the task of message description by
publishing some kind of schema to tell you how to interpret the message
— and the content of the message (or some processing of it, or some
user action other than clicking on a link) determines state rather than
hypermedia.
This is why most applications are not RESTful, nor should they be —
their purpose in life is not the same as the (web browser-like) RESTful
client.
But don’t let that fact distract you from the main point: You can still be
guided by the rest of the architectural requirements of REST because it
is simply good design. Taking a (more or less) RESTful approach to
things like HTTP, resources, and resource representations actually does

--- Page 278 ---
eliminate some of the complexity and overhead found in message-based
services.
It doesn’t matter that most web services
aren’t really RESTful
I’ll admit it: Most of the web services that bill themselves as RESTful
are fibbing just a tad; they usually break down when it comes to self-
describing messages and hypermedia as an engine of the application
state. And yet, it is precisely those last two requirements that enable the
independent evolution of client and server components, which (as I’ve
mentioned before) would seem to be a pretty big deal.
But then again, that doesn’t really matter.
All those other requirements for REST are basically sound software
engineering and work well to create web services that are scalable and
extensible, and furthermore, easy to develop and use.
So even though I personally have a problem calling all those web
services (the ones you will develop here included) RESTful, go ahead
and call them whatever you’d like. At the end of the day, it’s the value
that this approach delivers that’s important, not the label, and the basic
REST architecture (which is not unique to REST) does deliver a lot of
value and will be the basis of the web services in this book.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 279 ---
Chapter 7
Exploring an Existing Web
Service
In This Chapter
 Seeing how web services work
 Having Google Geocoding do the heavy lifting for you
 Creating a class to make web service requests
Although my ultimate goal in this book is to teach you how to build your
own web service — a goal I tackle with a vengeance in Part IV — the
best place to start is by having you use an existing web service. In doing
that, you create a program infrastructure that will enable you to add any
web service to RoadTrip — which in turn will make it easy to use the
web service that you’ll create in Part IV. That web service will provide
the user with the new and up-to-date points of interest instead of using
the current list that came prepackaged with RoadTrip in the Destinations
plist.
So, which existing web service should you go with? How about the
Google Geocoding API that is part of Google Maps API Web Services?
Yes, I know, RoadTrip already does geocoding quite well, thanks to the
CLGeocoder that’s part of the iOS SDK, and after this bit of business is
taken care, you will continue to use it. But I’m having you use the
Google Geocoding API for this brief space of time for several reasons:
 Because you’re already having RoadTrip do geocoding, you
don’t have to do anything to the basic structure of the app;
you’re just replacing one implementation with another. The idea
here is to make things as easy as possible allowing you to focus

--- Page 280 ---
Figure 7-1:
The Google
Geocoding
API.
on the web service access piece without having to complicate
things by also extending the app functionality.
 The Google Geocoding API Response is both in JSON and XML
(more on both of those technologies in just a bit), allowing me to
explain how to work with both. Even though JSON is becoming
more popular, XML is still a major player, and you should know
how to process an XML response.
 The response is sufficiently complex to give a real introduction
to using web services.
 The way the Google Geocoding API works is pretty standard for
a web service.
The Google Geocoding API
The Google Geocoding API web service is part of the Google Maps API
Web Services. You can find out all about it at
http://code.google.com/apis/maps/documentation/geocoding.
Figure 7-1 shows this particular corner of the web.

--- Page 281 ---
Although painfully boring, the place to start is with the usage limits and
terms of service.
If you were to click the Usage Limits link on the Google Maps API Web
Services page (shown in Figure 7-1), you would find that use of the
Google Geocoding API is subject to a query limit of 2,500 geolocation
requests per day. (Not bad, right?)
Still in the Usage Limits section, you’d see a nice little Note highlighted
with a touch of red that lets you know that the Geocoding API can be
used only in conjunction with a Google map; you’d also see a nice link
to the Maps API Terms of Service License Restrictions.
If you were to click that link, you’d be taken to another page outlining
all the other Google rules you have to follow. For your purposes, neither
the usage limits nor the terms of service present a problem, because
you’re not planning to use this in production, but it is something you
need to pay attention to if you’re planning to use APIs (web services)
provided by third parties. You’ll also need to publish your own terms of
service if you’re creating a web service for others to use, so it wouldn’t
hurt to see what the big boys came up with.

--- Page 282 ---
The request
I want you to start by getting your head around a couple aspects of
request requirements:
 A resource-based (HTTP API) web service is a defined set of
HTTP request messages with response messages that have a
defined structure. (For more on resource-based (HTTP API) web
services, see Chapter 6.)
 The request for a resource-based (HTTP API) web service is
defined in a URI (Uniform Resource Identifier).
 The response to a request is typically in Extensible Markup
Language (XML) or JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) form.
 In Chapter 6, I introduced you to the URI (Uniform Resource
Identifier), which is used to specify where something is and how to
access it; it’s central to the kind of web services you’ll be using. I
also explain that URI is generally preferred to URL (Uniform
Resource Locators). Unfortunately, URI usage hasn’t been adopted
by Apple, and you can see URL throughout the iOS frameworks. So
as not to confuse you, I refer to the URI as URL as well.
Every URL consists of at least some of the following: the scheme name
(commonly called the protocol) followed by a colon, then, depending on
the scheme, (HTTP for example)
 A domain name (alternatively, an IP address)
 A port number
 The path to the service requested
 An optional query string

--- Page 283 ---
Figure 7-2:
The URL
structure.
(There is also an optional fragment identifier which you won’t be using.)
What you end up with is something like the following:
scheme://domain:port/path?query_string#fragment_id
The various pieces are shown in Figure 7-2.
If you were to click the Geocoding Requests link on the Google Maps
API Web Services page (refer to Figure 7-1), you’d see the detailed
information, including the tidbit that a Geocoding API request must have
the following form
http://
    maps.googleapis.com/maps/api/geocode/output?
parameters
where output may be either of the following values:
 json (recommended) indicates output in JavaScript Object
Notation (JSON)
 xml indicates output as XML
In the Geocoding Requests section of the page (see Figure 7-3) you’d
also find an explanation of the “output?parameters” business.
Parameters are separated using the ampersand character (&), and as you
may have guessed, some parameters are required, whereas some are
optional.
The required parameters are:
 address: The address that you want to geocode.
or

--- Page 284 ---
Figure 7-3:
The
Geocoding
Requests
section of
the
Geocoding
API.
latlng: The textual latitude/longitude value for which you wish
to obtain the closest, human-readable address.
 sensor: Indicates whether or not the geocoding request comes
from a device with a location sensor. This value must be either
true or false.
In this case, you can pass either an address or a latlng to lookup. (If
you pass a latlng, the geocoder performs what is known as a reverse
geocode. I leave that to you to explore.)
You can look through this section of the documentation to see the other
parameters.
You can also access the Geocoding API over HTTPS, by using this:
https:
  //maps.googleapis.com/maps/api/geocode/output?
parameters
As I explain in Chapter 6, you should use HTTPS if you’re including
sensitive data in your request — for example, if you were sending the

--- Page 285 ---
user’s current location.
The response
Send out a request and you get a response, right? Looking at your trusty
Google Maps API Web Services page, you see a Geocoding Responses
— XML Output Formats link. (Refer to Figure 7-1.) If you were to click
that link, you’d discover that the documentation explains that the
following request
http://maps.googleapis.com/maps/api/geocode/xml
address=1600+Amphitheatre+Parkway,+Mountain+View,+CA&
sensor=true_or_false
would get the XML response shown in Listing 7-1. Of course, you’ll
need to replace true_or_false with either true or false. (I’ll explain
which is which in a bit.) I don’t spend a lot of time on XML, because the
web service you create in Part IV will have a JSON response, but along
the way I explain enough so that what you’re doing makes sense.
Listing 7-1: The Documented Response from the
Geocoding Web Service
<GeocodeResponse>
<status>OK</status>
<result>
  <type>street_address</type>
  <formatted_address>
      1600 Amphitheatre Pkwy, Mountain View, CA 94043,
USA
  </formatted_address>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>1600</long_name>
   <short_name>1600</short_name>
   <type>street_number</type>
  </address_component>

--- Page 286 ---
  <address_component>
   <long_name>Amphitheatre Pkwy</long_name>
   <short_name>Amphitheatre Pkwy</short_name>
   <type>route</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>Mountain View</long_name>
   <short_name>Mountain View</short_name>
   <type>locality</type>
   <type>political</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>San Jose</long_name>
   <short_name>San Jose</short_name>
   <type>administrative_area_level_3</type>
   <type>political</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>Santa Clara</long_name>
   <short_name>Santa Clara</short_name>
   <type>administrative_area_level_2</type>
   <type>political</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>California</long_name>
   <short_name>CA</short_name>
   <type>administrative_area_level_1</type>
   <type>political</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>United States</long_name>
   <short_name>US</short_name>
   <type>country</type>
   <type>political</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>

--- Page 287 ---
   <long_name>94043</long_name>
   <short_name>94043</short_name>
   <type>postal_code</type>
  </address_component>
  <geometry>
   <location>
    <lat>37.4217550</lat>
    <lng>-122.0846330</lng>
   </location>
   <location_type>ROOFTOP</location_type>
   <viewport>
    <southwest>
     <lat>37.4188514</lat>
     <lng>-122.0874526</lng>
    </southwest>
    <northeast>
     <lat>37.4251466</lat>
     <lng>-122.0811574</lng>
    </northeast>
   </viewport>
  </geometry>
</result>
</GeocodeResponse>
Now, just for fun, try entering the following request in your browser.
Notice that I’ve changed the sensor=true_or_false to sensor=true. (If
you don’t pick true or false, you’ll get an error, which I illustrate in the
“Status codes” section, later in this chapter.) I also, for now, explain
things in terms of the XML response. I explain the JSON response in
Chapter 10.
http://maps.googleapis.com/maps/api/geocode/xml?
address=1600+Amphitheatre+Parkway,+Mountain+View,+CA&
sensor=true

--- Page 288 ---
 I use Google Chrome when I explore web service requests and
responses because I like the JSON output formatting in the browser
window better.
When you enter the preceding request in your browser, you can see that
the actual response you get (see Listing 7-2) is a little different than the
documented response (shown in Listing 7-1). This discrepancy (which I
won’t get into because you won’t be using it) brings up a point. In “free”
web services, things may change, and because they’re free, the
documentation may take a little while to catch up. The only way to really
see what the response is going to be is to look at the actual response
using the documented response as a guide.
Listing 7-2: The Actual Response
<GeocodeResponse>
<status>OK</status>
<result>
  <type>street_address</type>
  <formatted_address>
      1600 Amphitheatre Pkwy, Mountain View, CA 94043,
USA
  </formatted_address>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>1600</long_name>
   <short_name>1600</short_name>
   <type>street_number</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>Amphitheatre Pkwy</long_name>
   <short_name>Amphitheatre Pkwy</short_name>
   <type>route</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>Mountain View</long_name>

--- Page 289 ---
      <short_name>Mountain View</short_name>
   <type>locality</type>
   <type>political</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>Santa Clara</long_name>
   <short_name>Santa Clara</short_name>
   <type>administrative_area_level_2</type>
   <type>political</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>California</long_name>
   <short_name>CA</short_name>
   <type>administrative_area_level_1</type>
   <type>political</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>United States</long_name>
   <short_name>US</short_name>
   <type>country</type>
   <type>political</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>94043</long_name>
   <short_name>94043</short_name>
   <type>postal_code</type>
   </address_component>
  <geometry>
   <location>
    <lat>37.4229181</lat>
    <lng>-122.0854212</lng>
   </location>
   <location_type>ROOFTOP</location_type>
   <viewport>
    <southwest>
     <lat>37.4215691</lat>

--- Page 290 ---
     <lng>-122.0867702</lng>
    </southwest>
    <northeast>
     <lat>37.4242671</lat>
     <lng>-122.0840722</lng>
    </northeast>
   </viewport>
  </geometry>
</result>
</GeocodeResponse>
Oh, and by the way, by the time you read this book, the code underlying
both Listings 7-1 and 7-2 may have changed as well.
The documentation for the Google Geocoding web service explains that
the XML response consists of a single <GeocodeResponse> (refer to
Listing 7-1) and two top-level elements:
 <status>, which contains metadata on the request. (Again refer
to Listing 7-1.) I explain the status codes next.
 <result> elements (zero or more), which each contain a single
set of geocoded address information and geometry information.
The documentation also points out that the XML response is much
longer than the JSON response and that Google recommends you use
JSON as the preferred output flag unless your service requires XML for
some reason. For good measure, it also lets you know that processing the
XML “requires some care.” No wonder, then, that I eventually nudge
you to JSON, which I explain in Chapter 10.
Interestingly enough, when I first started working with the Google
Geocoding web service, XML was the preferred response. This gives
you at least a small indication of where things seem to be going.

--- Page 291 ---
 I’ll have you work only with a very small part of the response;
as for the rest — what’s a location_type or viewport, for example
— you can find that out in the Google Geocoding API Geocoding
Responses documentation.
Status codes
Most web services return some sort of status code to let you know about
your request. I mention in “The response” section, earlier in this chapter,
that if you don’t change sensor=true_or_false to either sensor=true
or sensor=false, you’re sure to get an error. Try entering the following
in your browser. (I’ve left out the sensor parameter entirely.)
http://maps.googleapis.com/maps/api/geocode/xml
     address=1600+Amphitheatre+Parkway,+Mountain+View,+C
A
In Listing 7-3, you can see the response.
Listing 7-3: You Can’t Do This
<GeocodeResponse>
<status>REQUEST_DENIED</status>
</GeocodeResponse>
In the case of the Google Geocoding web service, status can have the
following values:
 OK indicates that no errors occurred; the address was
successfully parsed, and at least one geocode was returned.
 ZERO_RESULTS indicates that the geocode was successful but
returned no results. This situation may occur if the geocode was
passed a non-existent address or a latlng in a remote location.

--- Page 292 ---
 OVER_QUERY_LIMIT indicates that you’re over your quota.
 REQUEST_DENIED indicates that your request was denied,
generally because of lack of a required sensor parameter (as you
can see in Listing 7-3).
 INVALID_REQUEST generally indicates that the query (address or
latlng) is missing.
With all this information, you now have what it takes — conceptually, at
least — to use the Google Geocoding API web service in RoadTrip.
I do want to point out that when you’re working with a web service’s
GET requests you often can test the response by using your browser. You
take advantage of that in Part IV. (In case you’re unclear regarding what
GET requests are all about, I explain them in Chapter 12.)
How RoadTrip Currently Does
Geocoding
Before you tackle grafting web services into RoadTrip, take a look at
how RoadTrip currently does geocoding. Now, geocoding actually
happens in more than one place in RoadTrip, but the most convenient
corner to scrutinize it in action is RTModel, which eventually does the
geocoding at the behest of the FindController when you enter a place
to find in the Find row of the Main view.
The idea is that it’s pretty useful when traveling to be able to enter a
location and have that location display on a map. Although you can do
that in many of the map applications currently available, having to use a
different application does take you out of the app you’re using. What’s
more, you can’t just take that point displayed on the other application’s

--- Page 293 ---
map and then do something with it in your own app, such as display it
with all your other annotations.
Forward geocoding, which is the most popular type of geocoding — in
fact, whoever just says geocoding means forward geocoding — allows
you to take an address and turn it into a map coordinate. Being able to
take an address and turn it into a map coordinate enables the feature in
RoadTrip that allows the user to enter an address, or even just the name
of a well-known landmark, and display it on the map. (Reverse
geocoding allows you to take a map coordinate — your current location,
for example — and turn it into an address.)
I don’t drill down too deeply into the mechanics of how the user
interface works other than to say that when a user taps in an enabled
UITextField, it becomes the first responder and the keyboard
automatically rises to allow the user to enter text — you don’t have to do
a thing to make that happen. (Although normally you’re responsible for
scrolling the view if the keyboard will cover the Text field — which in
this case will only happen when running the app on the iPhone; because
the Text field is in a Table View cell, scrolling the view is done by the
Table view.)
When the user is done entering text (which will be sent to the geocoder),
he taps the Return key (which has been relabeled Go).
When the user taps the Go key, the Text field determines whether it has a
delegate and whether the delegate has implemented a
textFieldShouldReturn: method — one of the optional
UITextFieldDelegate protocol methods. If the delegate has done so, it
sends the delegate the textFieldShouldReturn: message. In
textFieldShouldReturn: the text is captured and the FindController
is instantiated and launched.
In its viewDidLoad method, the FindController sends a message to the
RTModel to create an annotation to display on the map, as you can see in
Listing 7-4. (I’ve bolded the message for you.)

--- Page 294 ---
Listing 7-4: Sending a Message to the RTModel
- (void)viewDidLoad
{
  [super viewDidLoad];
  self.title = self.findLocation;
  
  void (^addFindLocationCompletionHandler)(Annotation *,
   NSError *) = ^(Annotation *annotation, NSError
*error){
    if (error!= nil || annotation == nil) {
      NSLog(@”Geocoder Failure! Error code: %u,
description: %@, and reason: %@”, error.code,[error
localizedDescription],
                         [error
localizedFailureReason]);
    }
    else {
      MKCoordinateRegion region;    
      region.center.latitude =  
                          annotation.coordinate.latitude
;
      region.center.longitude =        
                         annotation.coordinate.longitude
;
      region.span.latitudeDelta = .05;
      region.span.longitudeDelta = .05;
      [self.mapView setRegion:region animated:NO];  
      [self.mapView addAnnotation:annotation];
    }
  };
  [[RTModel model] addLocation:self.findLocation
      completionHandler:addFindLocationCompletionHandler
];
  }
}

--- Page 295 ---
The message includes a completion block, which I don’t need to explain
here, but it’s in the RTModel addLocation:completionHandler: method
where the actual geocoding occurs, as you can see bolded in Listing 7-5.
Listing 7-5: The Geocoding Request
- (void)addLocation: (NSString *)findLocation
    completionHandler:(void (^)
(Annotation  *annotation,   
                            NSError* error)) completion
{
  
  void (^clGeocodeCompletionHandler)(NSArray *, NSError
*) = ^(NSArray *placemarks, NSError *error){
    CLPlacemark *placemark = [placemarks
objectAtIndex:0];
    Annotation *foundAnnotation;
    if (error!= nil || placemark == nil) {
      NSLog(@”Geocoder Failure! Error code: %u,
description: %@, and reason: %@”, error.code, [error
localizedDescription], [error
localizedFailureReason]);
    }
    else {
      foundAnnotation = [[Annotation alloc]init];
      foundAnnotation.coordinate =
placemark.location.coordinate;
      foundAnnotation.subtitle = [NSString
stringWithFormat:@”Lat:%f Lon:%f”,
placemark.location.coordinate.latitude,
placemark.location.coordinate.longitude];
      foundAnnotation.title = findLocation;
    }
    foundLocation = [[CLLocation alloc]
      initWithLatitude:foundAnnotation.coordinate.latitu
de

--- Page 296 ---
          longitude:foundAnnotation.coordinate.longitude
];
    addFindLocationCompletionHandler(
                                  foundAnnotation,
error);
  };
  addFindLocationCompletionHandler = completion;
  CLGeocoder* geocoder = [[CLGeocoder alloc] init];
  [geocoder geocodeAddressString:findLocation
completionHandler:clGeocodeCompletionHandler];
}
The way it works now — and the way it will work again when you’re
done with this part — is that a CLGeocoder, which is part of the
CoreLocation.framework, is instantiated,
CLGeocoder* geocoder = [[CLGeocoder alloc] init];
and the geocoding request is made, again passing in a completion block,
like so:
[geocoder geocodeAddressString:findLocation
completionHandler:clGeocodeCompletionHandler];
Interesting as it is, I’m neither going to explain iOS geocoding further
nor say any more about using blocks. If either or both interest you, check
out my iPhone Application Development For Dummies and iPad
Application Development For Dummies books, where you can find an
extensive explanation of both topics. For now, though, simply comment
out the iOS geocoding request and the completion block (comment out,
not delete; you’ll want to restore it later) and add a new method to the
RTModel that makes a Google Geocoding web service request instead.
But before you do that, I have you add a new class with the apt name of
WSManager — an infrastructure class which will construct and manage
not only the Google Geocoding web service request and response, but

--- Page 297 ---
also any resource-based (HTTP API) web service, including the one you
will build in Part IV. This class is very handy.
If you want to use this web service in an app you’re creating, you’re in
luck because most of the work you’re about to do will transfer, with the
exception of the actual creation of the Annotation object unique to
RoadTrip. In fact, the WSManager that you’re about to add will be the
basis of Part IV, where you create your own web service, and it’s pretty
similar to the general web service manager I use in my apps.
Creating the Plumbing: The
WSManager
On the long road to web services nirvana, you start by adding the
WSManager.m and .h files:
1. Create a new group to contain your model classes by going to
the Project navigator, selecting the RoadTrip group (not the
RoadTrip project, which is at the top), right-clicking, and then
choosing New Group from the menu that appears.
Alternatively, you can select the RoadTrip group and then choose
File ⇒ New ⇒ New Group from the main menu.
Whichever method you choice, you see a new group (it looks like a
folder) under the RoadTrip group heading.
2. Name your new group Web Service Classes.
To change a file’s group, select the file and drag it to the group you
want it to occupy. The same goes for groups as well. (After all, they
can go into other groups.)
3. In the Project navigator, select the (newly created) Web Service
Classes group, right-click the selection, and then choose New File
from the menu that appears to open the New File dialog.

--- Page 298 ---
Or you can select the Model Classes group and choose
File ⇒ New ⇒ New File from the main menu (or press 
+N).
You see a dialog that enables you to select a file type.
4. In the left column of the dialog, select Cocoa Touch under the
iOS heading, select the Objective-C class template in the top-right
pane, and then click Next.
5. In the Class field, enter WSManager, choose NSObject from the
Subclass Of pop-up menu, and then click Next.
A Save sheet appears.
6. In the Save sheet, click Create.
You start with a single method in this class —
geocodeSynchronouslyXML:. It will create and manage a Google
Geocoding web services request set up to work with an XML response.
As you can see from the name, the request will be made synchronously. I
explain that and how to make the request asynchronously in Chapter 9.
Add the bolded code in Listing 7-6 to WSManager.h.
Listing 7-6: Updating the WSManager.h Interface
#import <Foundation/Foundation.h>
@interface WSManager : NSObject
- (void)geocodeSynchronouslyXML:(NSMutableDictionary *)
                                               userParam
s
    successBlock:(void (^)(NSDictionary *))success
    failureBlock:(void (^)())failure;
@end
You also need some instance variables, and you need to declare a few
methods private to the class’s implementation. To do that, add the bolded
code in Listing 7-7 to WSManager.m.
Listing 7-7: Updating the WSManager Interface in
the WSManager.m Implementation File

--- Page 299 ---
#import “WSManager.h”
@interface WSManager () {
  
  void (^returnSuccess)(NSDictionary *);
  void (^returnFail)();
  NSString *webService;
  NSMutableDictionary *params;
}
- (void)setupGeocodingWebService;
- (NSMutableURLRequest *)createGETRequest:
                   (NSString *)baseURL withParams:
                               (NSDictionary
*)userParams;
- (void)requestSynchronousWebService:
                          (NSMutableURLRequest
*)request;
@end
The first method I have you add is setupGeocodingWebService. This
method creates a dictionary with the required sensor parameter and its
associated value (true here, because you’ll be using a mobile device that
does have a location sensor). The dictionary is used by the
createGETRequest:withParams: method as it constructs the URL you’ll
need for the Geocoding web service.
To do all that, add the code in Listing 7-8 to WSManager.m.
Listing 7-8: Adding setupGeocodingWebService
to WSManager.m
- (void)setupGeocodingWebService {
  
  params = [[NSMutableDictionary alloc] init];
  [params setValue:@”true” forKey:@”sensor”];
}

--- Page 300 ---
The dictionary key here — sensor — corresponds to the required
parameter in the request. As you’ll soon see in Listing 7-10, having the
keys correspond to the required parameters will enable you to use the
NSDictionary’s for…in enumerator, which in turn makes it a lot easier
to add the key and its value to the web service request (string).
Next, you set up the actual web service request. Although this one is
specific to the Google Geocoding web service in its XML Response
mode, as you’ll see, it uses a set of methods applicable to any web
service request. Add the
geocodeSynchronouslyXML:successBlock:failureBlock in Listing 7-9
to WSManager.m.
Listing 7-9: Adding
geocodeSynchronouslyXML:successBlock:failur
eBlock to WSManager.m
- (void)geocodeSynchronouslyXML:(NSMutableDictionary *)
    userParams successBlock:(void (^)(NSDictionary *))
               success failureBlock:(void (^)())failure
{
  
  
  returnSuccess = success;
  returnFail = failure;
  [self setupGeocodingWebService];
  webService =
      @”http://maps.googleapis.com/maps/api/geocode/xml?
”;   
  [params addEntriesFromDictionary:userParams];
  NSMutableURLRequest *request =
     [self createGETRequest:webService
withParams:params];
  [self requestSynchronousWebService:request];
}

--- Page 301 ---
In Listing 7-9, you start by saving the success and failure blocks that
you’ll use later (see Listing 7-11) and then sending the
setupGeocodingWebService message to set up the required sensor
parameter. This is saved in the params instance variable:
  returnSuccess = success;
  returnFail = failure;
  [self setupGeocodingWebService];
You then create the first part of the Google Geocoding web service
request string:
webService =
      @”http://maps.googleapis.com/maps/api/geocode/xml?
”;
You add any caller-specified parameters (in this case, you’ll pass in the
address or point of interest from the RTModel method) to the params
dictionary you just created in setupGeocodingWebService.
[params addEntriesFromDictionary:userParams];
You then send the createGETRequest:withParams: message, which will
construct the request:
NSMutableURLRequest *request =
     [self createGETRequest:webService
withParams:params];
Finally, you send the requestSynchronousWebService: message to
actually make the request. (Not bad for a few minutes’ work.)
Next, I explain the inner workings of the
createGETRequest:withParams: method that constructs the request. (I
get to requestSynchronousWebService: in a bit.)
Start by adding the code in Listing 7-10 to WSManager.m.

--- Page 302 ---
Listing 7-10: Adding
createGETRequest:withParams: in WSManager.m
- (NSMutableURLRequest *)createGETRequest:(NSString *)
          baseURL withParams:(NSDictionary *)userParams
{
  
  NSMutableString *queryString = [NSMutableString
string];
  if (userParams != nil) {
    for (id key in userParams) {
      id value = [userParams valueForKey:key];
      NSString *paramString =
        [NSString stringWithFormat:@”%@=%@&”, key,
value];
      paramString = [paramString
stringByAddingPercentEscapesUsingEncoding:
                                   NSASCIIStringEncoding
];
      [queryString appendString:paramString];
    }
  }
  NSString *urlString = [NSString stringWithFormat:
                          @”%@%@”, baseURL,
queryString];
  NSURL *url = [NSURL URLWithString:urlString];
  NSMutableURLRequest *request  =
                 [NSMutableURLRequest
requestWithURL:url];
  [request setHTTPMethod:@”GET”];
  return request;
}
This method shows you all you need to do in order to create a web
service request. As I explain in Chapter 6, all you really have to do is
create a URL that includes a GET “verb” and the necessary parameters

--- Page 303 ---
needed by the web service. createGETRequest:withParams: does that
for you quite nicely.
I take you through Listing 7-10 slowly.
You start here by creating an empty string that you’ll use to create the
URL:
NSMutableString *queryString = [NSMutableString string];
The Geocoding web service is a resource-based (HTTP API) web
service. (If you’re not sure what that means, refer back to Chapter 6.)
 To access the Geocoding web service, you call HTTP GET on the
base URL, specifying the input location with one or more URL
parameters. The response from the Geocoder contains geographic
data, including latitude and longitude, as well as address
information such as street, state, and country. The sensor parameter
and at least one location parameter are required for all requests.
So what is HTTP GET? To refresh your memory, a GET request refers to
sending information to the server using parameters tacked on to the web
service’s URL. This task can be done by directly adding more info to the
URL. Luckily for you, you don’t actually have to create the GET request
yourself; that’s done when you create the NSURL (which you’ll do next).
What you do have to do now, however, is provide a string with the base
URL and the query (the parameters, in other words).
You started this process back in Listing 7-9 by creating the base URL in
geocodeSynchronouslyXML:successBlock:failureBlock:.
webService =
      @”http://maps.googleapis.com/maps/api/geocode/xml?
”;   

--- Page 304 ---
The question mark at the end is a separator and specifies that what
follows is a query string. The query string is composed of a series of
name-value pairs, each separated by an equals sign. The query allows
you to pass data (the URL parameters) from you (the client) to the web
service.
Next, you extract the parameters using the for…in construct I spoke of at
the beginning of this section. In this construct, you are returned each key
in a dictionary. You then get the value for that key and then format and
add both to a string, which is then concatenated with the base URL
string:
if (userParams != nil) {
    for (id key in userParams) {
      id value = [userParams valueForKey:key];
      NSString *paramString =
        [NSString stringWithFormat:@”%@=%@&”, key,
value];
      paramString = [paramString
stringByAddingPercentEscapesUsingEncoding:
                                   NSASCIIStringEncoding
];
      [queryString appendString:paramString];
    }
  }
When you read the documentation for the Geocoding web service, it tells
you that certain parameters are required and some are optional and that
parameters are separated using the ampersand (&) character.
As you see when you finally get to Listing 7-14, you’ll send the
geocodeSynchronouslyXML:successBlock:failureBlock: message,
passing that method a dictionary that you create with a key of address
and the location you want to geocode as the key’s corresponding value.

--- Page 305 ---
Because you’re using the address parameter, the Geocoding web service
will do a forward geocoding. (Using a latlng key would result in a
reverse geocode.)
stringByAddingPercentEscapesUsingEncoding: takes the string and
turns it into a legal URL string with the required escapes — instructions
that say “ignore this character.” This step is necessary because the
specification for URLs limits the use of allowed characters in URLs to a
subset of the US-ASCII character set. This means ASCII Control
characters, non-ASCII characters, and characters that might be
misunderstood (such as space) need to be “escaped.” Fortunately, this
escaping is done for you by the method so you don’t have to think about
it.
You construct the string by starting with the base URL (the webService
string created in
geocodeSynchronouslyXML:successBlock:failureBlock) and then you
add the query string
  NSString *urlString = [NSString stringWithFormat:
                          @”%@%@”, baseURL,
queryString];
  NSURL *url = [NSURL URLWithString:urlString];
Actually, what you’re doing is creating an NSURL object. The NSURL class
provides a way to manipulate URLs and the resources they reference.
NSURL objects can be used to refer to files; in fact, they are the preferred
way to do so. (I talk about this more in Chapter 4 when I explain the
URL loading system.)
NSURLRequest *request = [NSURLRequest
requestWithURL:url];
Finally, you take the NSURL object and use it to create an
NSMutableURLRequest. (An NSURLMutableRequest object is a URL load
request.)

--- Page 306 ---
NSMutableURLRequest *request  =
                 [NSMutableURLRequest
requestWithURL:url];
One of the methods in the NSMutableURLRequest is setHTTPMethod:.
The default method is GET, so it isn’t necessary to set that property, but I
want to show you how to explicitly set it, which you’ll have to do when
you do a POST in Part IV:
[request setHTTPMethod:@”GET”];
And then you return the request:
return request;
The request is used by
geocodeSynchronouslyXML:successBlock:failureBlock: to send the
service request:
  [self requestSynchronousWebService:request];
You need to implement requestSynchronousWebService: next. To do
so, add the code in Listing 7-11 to WSManager.m.
Listing 7-11: Adding
requestSynchronousWebService: to
WSManager.m
- (void)requestSynchronousWebService:
                          (NSMutableURLRequest *)request
{
  NSURLResponse *response = nil;
  NSError *error = nil;
  NSData *synchronousData = [NSURLConnection
sendSynchronousRequest:request
returningResponse:&response error:&error];
  
  if (error != nil) {

--- Page 307 ---
    UIAlertView *alert = [[UIAlertView alloc]
       initWithTitle:@”Error getting response from
server”
       message:[error localizedDescription] delegate:nil
       cancelButtonTitle:@”OK” otherButtonTitles:nil];
    [alert show];
    returnFail (nil);
  }
  else {
    if (!synchronousData) {
      UIAlertView *alert = [[UIAlertView alloc]
           initWithTitle:
                  @”Your request could not be carried
out”
           message:
                 @”There is a problem on the cloud
server”
           delegate:nil
           cancelButtonTitle:@”OK”
otherButtonTitles:nil];
      [alert show];
      returnFail (nil);
    }
    
    else {
      NSDictionary *responseDict =
        [NSDictionary
dictionaryWithObject:synchronousData
                      forKey:@”response”];
      returnSuccess (responseDict);
    }
  }
}
Walking through the code, you see that the first thing you do is initialize
a couple of variables used by the request:

--- Page 308 ---
NSURLResponse *response = nil;
NSError *error = nil;
Then you make the actual request by sending the sendSynchronous
Request:returningResponse:error: message:
NSData *data =
[NSURLConnection sendSynchronousRequest:request
returningResponse:&response error:&error];
response will point to the URL response returned by the server and
error will point to error information if an error occurs while processing
the request. data will point to the data that is returned.
In this case, you’re using the NSURLConnection to perform a
synchronous load of the specified URL request
(sendSynchronousRequest:returningResponse:error:), which means
everything grinds to a halt while you wait for a response. And if the
server is on coffee break or something like that, well, you know how it
is. (This delay is, as you’d expect, unacceptable in a robust application,
which means you’ll have to move to asynchronous loads as you further
develop the app — in Chapter 8, to be precise.)
With the request out of the way, you then check for errors:
if (error != nil) {
  UIAlert *alertView = [[UIAlertView alloc]
    initWithTitle:@”Error getting response from server”
    message:[error localizedDescription] delegate:nil
    cancelButtonTitle:@”OK” otherButtonTitles:nil];
  [alert show];
  returnFail (nil);
}
When everything works out, you still check for errors — you want to
make sure that there is actually some data returned.
if (!synchronousData) {

--- Page 309 ---
  UIAlertView *alert = [[UIAlertView alloc]
    initWithTitle:@”Your request could not be carried
out”
    message: @”There is a problem on the cloud server”
    delegate:nil
    cancelButtonTitle:@”OK” otherButtonTitles:nil];
    [alert show];
    returnFail (nil);
}
And then, if everything really has worked out, you simply create a
dictionary, add the response to it with a key of data, and then call the
success block you saved earlier, passing in the newly created dictionary.
(I use a dictionary because that’s the way the JSON data is usually
returned, and I can show you how to work with data returned that way.)
NSDictionary *responseDict = [NSDictionary
dictionaryWithObject:synchronousData
forKey:@”response”];
                                 
returnSuccess (responseDict);
Having the Model Use the
Geocoding Web Service
With the plumbing in place, you’re ready to update RoadTrip’s RTModel
to use the Geocoding web service. Start by adding the necessary headers,
instance variables, and method declaration — the bolded code in Listing
7-12 — to RTModel.m.
Listing 7-12: Updating the RTModel Interface in
the RTModel.m Implementation
#import “RTModel.h”

--- Page 310 ---
#import “RTAppDelegate.h”
#import “Destination.h”
#import “PointOfInterest.h”
#import “Annotation.h”
#import “SharedPointOfInterest.h”
#import “WSManager.h”
typedef void (^addLocationCompletionHandler)(Annotation
*annotation, NSError* error);
@interface RTModel () {  
  NSDictionary *destinationData;
  Destination* destination;
  NSMutableArray *events;
  NSMutableArray *pointsOfInterest;
  NSMutableArray *itinerary;
  NSMutableArray *pointsOfInterestData;
  addLocationCompletionHandler
addFindLocationCompletionHandler;
  CLLocation *foundLocation;
  NSMutableData *data;
  NSString *latitude;
  NSString *longitude;
  NSString *responseStr;
  NSUInteger errorCode;
  NSString *responseErrorMessage;
  NSString *address;
}
@property (readonly, strong, nonatomic) NSFetchRequest
*sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest;
- (void)geocodeSynchronouslyXML:(NSString
*)findLocation;
@end
Next, add the bolded code in Listing 7-13 to RTModel.m to have RTModel
use the Geocoding web service.

--- Page 311 ---
Listing 7-13: Updating
addLocation:completionHandler: in RTModel.m
- (void)addLocation:(NSString *)findLocation
completionHandler:(void (^)(Annotation *annotation,
NSError* error)) completion {
  /*
  void (^clGeocodeCompletionHandler)(NSArray *, NSError
*) = ^(NSArray *placemarks, NSError *error){
    CLPlacemark *placemark = [placemarks
objectAtIndex:0];
    Annotation *foundAnnotation;
    if (error!= nil || placemark == nil) {
      NSLog(@”Geocoder Failure! Error code: %u,
description: %@, and reason: %@”, error.code, [error
localizedDescription], [error
localizedFailureReason]);
    }
    else {
      foundAnnotation = [[Annotation alloc]init];
      foundAnnotation.coordinate =
placemark.location.coordinate;
      foundAnnotation.subtitle = [NSString
stringWithFormat:@”Lat:%f Lon:%f”,
placemark.location.coordinate.,
placemark.location.coordinate.longitude];
      foundAnnotation.title = findLocation;
    }
    foundLocation = [[CLLocation alloc]
     initWithLatitude:foundAnnotation.coordinate.latitud
e
         longitude:foundAnnotation.coordinate.longitude]
;
    addFindLocationCompletionHandler
                                (foundAnnotation,
error);

--- Page 312 ---
  };
   */
  addFindLocationCompletionHandler = completion;
//CLGeocoder* geocoder = [[CLGeocoder alloc] init];
//[geocoder geocodeAddressString:findLocation
completionHandler:clGeocodeCompletionHandler];
  [self geocodeSynchronouslyXML:findLocation];
}
 I’m having you comment out the existing code here so that it’s
easy to return to it when you’re done with this section.
Now you need to add the code in Listing 7-14 to RTModel.m. (This code
does what addLocation:completionHandler did, except it does so using
the Geocoding web service instead of the CLGeocoder.)
Listing 7-14: Add
geocodeSynchronouslyXML:completionHandler:
in RTModel.m
- (void)geocodeSynchronouslyXML:(NSString *)findLocation
{
  
  void (^success) (NSDictionary *) =
                               ^(NSDictionary *response)
{
    
    data = [response objectForKey:@”response”];
    responseStr = [[NSString alloc] initWithData:data
                         encoding:
NSUTF8StringEncoding];
    NSLog(@”XML response:\n%@\n”, responseStr);
    CLLocationCoordinate2D coordinate;
    coordinate.latitude = [latitude doubleValue];

--- Page 313 ---
    coordinate.longitude = [longitude doubleValue];
    
    Annotation *foundAnnotation =
                               [[Annotation alloc]
init];
    foundAnnotation.coordinate = coordinate;
    foundAnnotation.subtitle =
      [NSString stringWithFormat:@”Lat:%f Lon:%f”,
         [latitude doubleValue], [longitude
doubleValue]];
    foundAnnotation.title = findLocation;
    
    foundLocation = [[CLLocation alloc]
      initWithLatitude:foundAnnotation.coordinate.latitu
de
          longitude:foundAnnotation.coordinate.longitude
];
    responseStr = [[NSString alloc]
        initWithData:data
encoding:NSUTF8StringEncoding];
    addFindLocationCompletionHandler
                                  (foundAnnotation,
nil);
  };
  
  void (^failure) (NSError *) = ^(NSError *error ){
    NSString *errorMessage = [error
localizedDescription];
    UIAlertView *alertView = [[UIAlertView alloc]
      initWithTitle:@”Error getting response from
server”
         message:errorMessage delegate:nil
         cancelButtonTitle:@”OK” otherButtonTitles:nil];
    [alertView show];
    return;
  };

--- Page 314 ---
  latitude = @”n/a”;
  longitude = @”n/a”;
  errorCode = 0;
  responseErrorMessage = @””;
  NSMutableDictionary *params =
                       [[NSMutableDictionary alloc]
init];
  [params setObject:findLocation forKey:@”address”];
  WSManager *wsManager = [[WSManager alloc] init];
  [wsManager geocodeSynchronouslyXML:params  
               successBlock:success
failureBlock:failure];  
}
With this code — after taking the time to initialize a few variables —
you create the parameter dictionary with the key name (address) and
value that will become part of the URL query that you send to
geocodeSynchronouslyXML:successBlock:failureBlock:failure.
  NSMutableDictionary *params =
                       [[NSMutableDictionary alloc]
init];
  [params setObject:findLocation forKey:@”address”];
You then allocate a new WSManager to handle the request and send the
geocodeSynchronouslyXML:successBlock:failureBlock:failure
message.
  WSManager *wsManager = [[WSManager alloc] init];
  [wsManager geocodeSynchronouslyXML:params  
               successBlock:success
failureBlock:failure];  
In the success block, you get the data from the dictionary returned to
you, which you then log to the console.
data = [response objectForKey:@”response”];

--- Page 315 ---
Figure 7-4:
No, this isn’t
really the
location of
the Empire
State
Building.
responseStr = [[NSString alloc] initWithData:data
                         encoding:
NSUTF8StringEncoding];
NSLog(@”XML response:\n%@\n”, responseStr);
The idea here is that documentation is like many things in life — you
can trust but you also need to verify.
In the rest of the block, you actually do what you had done in the
completion block for a successful geocode request in the RTModel
addLocation:completionHandler:. I’m not going to go into it here
because it stays the same, and you even can copy and paste it to save
some typing. The same thing is true of the failure block and the failure
handling code in the addLocation:completionHandler: block. I’m
using separate failure and success blocks here because two blocks
separate out your response to the response and make it easier to follow.
Now build and run the app, select Travel, and then enter Empire State
Building in Find.
In Figure 7-4, you can see a new annotation in the Atlantic Ocean with a
latitude and longitude of 0.0 and 0.0 respectively. That’s because you
haven’t done anything with the response except log it, so the longitude
and latitude both end up 0.0, their initialized values. (You’ll fix that next
chapter.)

--- Page 316 ---
If you look in the Debug area console pane (courtesy of the NSLog
statement you added in Listing 7-14), you should see something like
what’s shown in Listing 7-15.
Listing 7-15: The XML Response
<?xml version=”1.0” encoding=”UTF-8”?>
<GeocodeResponse>
<status>OK</status>
<result>
  <type>point_of_interest</type>

--- Page 317 ---
  <type>courthouse</type>
  <type>establishment</type>
  <formatted_address>Empire State, 350 5th Avenue Suite
300, New York, NY 10118, USA</formatted_address>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>Empire State</long_name>
   <short_name>Empire State</short_name>
   <type>point_of_interest</type>
   <type>establishment</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>350</long_name>
   <short_name>350</short_name>
   <type>street_number</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>5th Avenue Suite 300</long_name>
   <short_name>5th Avenue Suite 300</short_name>
   <type>route</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>Midtown</long_name>
   <short_name>Midtown</short_name>
   <type>neighborhood</type>
   <type>political</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>Manhattan</long_name>
   <short_name>Manhattan</short_name>
   <type>sublocality</type>
   <type>political</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>New York</long_name>
   <short_name>New York</short_name>
   <type>locality</type>

--- Page 318 ---
   <type>political</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>New York</long_name>
   <short_name>New York</short_name>
   <type>administrative_area_level_2</type>
   <type>political</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>New York</long_name>
   <short_name>NY</short_name>
   <type>administrative_area_level_1</type>
   <type>political</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>United States</long_name>
   <short_name>US</short_name>
   <type>country</type>
   <type>political</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>10118</long_name>
   <short_name>10118</short_name>
   <type>postal_code</type>
  </address_component>
  <geometry>
   <location>
    <lat>40.7485584</lat>
    <lng>-73.9857465</lng>
   </location>
   <location_type>APPROXIMATE</location_type>
   <viewport>
    <southwest>
     <lat>40.7401048</lat>
     <lng>-74.0017539</lng>
    </southwest>

--- Page 319 ---
    <northeast>
     <lat>40.7570109</lat>
     <lng>-73.9697391</lng>
    </northeast>
   </viewport>
  </geometry>
</result>
</GeocodeResponse>
Lot’s of information here, most of which you won’t be using. But to
actually make what you will be using useful to your app, you’ll need to
parse the XML. You’ll do that in the next chapter.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 320 ---
Chapter 8
Working With XML
In This Chapter
 Seeing how the XML parser works
 Using the XML parser delegates
 Processing the XML response
The state of play at the end of Chapter 7 had the Empire State Building
floating in the mid-Atlantic. This of course will never do, especially if
you’re in New York and want to visit it. In this chapter, I show you how
to take the XML data returned from the Geocoding web service request
and use the XML parser that’s part of the SDK to extract the data you
need to place it where it really belongs on the map.
Parsing the XML Response
The whole point of using the Geocoding web service in RoadTrip is to
be able to quickly get accurate (and usable) location information
whenever you request it. You send the request in the form of an address
or point of interest. What you get back from the request is a response,
which is a lot of data in XML format. For you to be able to use the data
you get back, you are going to have to parse the XML response to
extract the data (latitude and longitude) you are interested in.
The key factor here is the XML parser — being able to download XML
from a web service is pointless unless you can access the data within it.

--- Page 321 ---
To do that, you’ll use the NSXMLParser class. (Note that, as is the case
with most of these kinds of framework classes, you also have to
implement delegate methods, so start by making the RTModel an
NSXMLParserDelegate by adding the bolded code in Listing 8-1 to
RTModel.h.
Listing 8-1: Updating the RTModel.h Interface
@interface RTModel : NSObject <NSXMLParserDelegate>
+ (RTModel *)model;
- (id)initWithDestinationIndex:
                            (NSUInteger)destinationIndex
;
- (void)loadItinerary;
- (void)addToItinerary:(PointOfInterest
*)pointOfInterest;
- (void)removeFromItinerary:(SharedPointOfInterest *)
                                          pointOfInteres
t;
- (void)loadPointsOfInterest;
- (NSArray *)returnPointsOfInterest;
- (void)addPointOfInterest:(NSMutableDictionary *)
                                      pointOfInterestDat
a;
- (UIImage *)destinationImage;
- (NSString *)destinationName;
- (CLLocationCoordinate2D)destinationCoordinate;
- (NSString *)weather;
- (void)loadEvents;
- (NSUInteger)numberOfEvents;
- (NSString *)getEvent:(NSUInteger)index;
- (NSString *)mapTitle;
- (NSArray *)createAnnotations;
- (void)addLocation:(NSString *)findLocation
    completionHandler:(void (^)(Annotation *annotation,

--- Page 322 ---
                              NSError* error))
completion;
- (CLLocation *)foundLocation;
+ (NSString *)filePath:(NSString *)fileComponent;
#if !TARGET_IPHONE_SIMULATOR
- (void)persistentStoreChanged:
     (NSNotification*)notification forContext:
(NSManagedObjectContext*)context;
#endif
@property (readonly, strong, nonatomic)
NSManagedObjectContext *managedObjectContext;
@property (readonly, strong, nonatomic)
NSManagedObjectModel *managedObjectModel;
@property (readonly, strong, nonatomic)
NSPersistentStoreCoordinator
*persistentStoreCoordinator;
@end
You also need to add instance variables you’ll be using in the
NSXMLParserDelegate delegate methods. Add the bolded code in Listing
8-2 to GeocoderViewController.m.
Listing 8-2: Updating the RTModel Interface in the
RTModel.m Implementation
#import “RTModel.h”
#import “RTAppDelegate.h”
#import “Destination.h”
#import “PointOfInterest.h”
#import “Annotation.h”
#import “SharedPointOfInterest.h”
#import “WSManager.h”
typedef void (^addLocationCompletionHandler)(Annotation
*annotation, NSError* error);
@interface RTModel () {  
  NSDictionary *destinationData;

--- Page 323 ---
  Destination* destination;
  NSMutableArray *events;
  NSMutableArray *pointsOfInterest;
  NSMutableArray *itinerary;
  NSMutableArray *pointsOfInterestData;
  addLocationCompletionHandler       
                         addFindLocationCompletionHandle
r;
  CLLocation *foundLocation;
  NSMutableData *data;
  NSString *latitude;
  NSString *longitude;
  NSString *responseStr;
  NSUInteger errorCode;
  NSString *responseErrorMessage;
  NSString *address;
  
  BOOL inLocation;
  BOOL foundFirstLocation;
  BOOL accumulatingParsedCharacterData;
  NSMutableString *currentParsedCharacterData;
}
@property (readonly, strong, nonatomic)
       NSFetchRequest
*sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest;
- (void)geocodeSynchronouslyXML:(NSString
*)findLocation;
@end
Looking at the bolded bit, the currentParsedCharacterData property is
there to assemble the data as it is returned from the parser. (I explain that
and the BOOL instance variable when I explain how the parser works.)
Now that that’s all set up, you can set up the XML parser, get it started,
and then display the result.

--- Page 324 ---
Putting the parser through its paces
To use the parser to parse the response, add the bolded code in Listing 8-
3 to geocodeSynchronouslyXML: in RTModel.m.
Listing 8-3: Updating
geocodeSynchronouslyXML:
- (void)geocodeSynchronouslyXML:(NSString *)findLocation
{
  
  void (^success) (NSDictionary *) =
                               ^(NSDictionary *response)
{
    
    data = [response objectForKey:@”response”];
    responseStr = [[NSString alloc]
       initWithData:data encoding:
NSUTF8StringEncoding];
    NSLog(@”XML response:\n%@\n”, responseStr);
    inLocation = NO;
    foundFirstLocation = NO;
    accumulatingParsedCharacterData = NO;
    NSXMLParser *xmlParser =
                  [[NSXMLParser alloc]
initWithData:data];
    [xmlParser setDelegate:self];
    [xmlParser parse];
    
    CLLocationCoordinate2D coordinate;
    coordinate.latitude = [latitude doubleValue];
    coordinate.longitude = [longitude doubleValue];
    
    Annotation *foundAnnotation =
                               [[Annotation alloc]
init];

--- Page 325 ---
    foundAnnotation.coordinate = coordinate;
    foundAnnotation.subtitle =
      [NSString stringWithFormat:@”Lat:%f Lon:%f”,
         [latitude doubleValue], [longitude
doubleValue]];
    foundAnnotation.title = findLocation;
    
    foundLocation = [[CLLocation alloc]
     initWithLatitude:foundAnnotation.coordinate.latitud
e
          longitude:foundAnnotation.coordinate.longitude
];
    responseStr =  [[NSString alloc] initWithData:data  
                           encoding:NSUTF8StringEncoding
];
    addFindLocationCompletionHandler
    (foundAnnotation, nil);
  };
  
  void (^failure) (NSError *) = ^(NSError *error ){
    NSString *errorMessage = [error
localizedDescription];
    UIAlertView *alertView = [[UIAlertView alloc]
       initWithTitle:@”Error getting response from
server”
       message:errorMessage delegate:nil
       cancelButtonTitle:@”OK” otherButtonTitles:nil];
    [alertView show];
    return;
  };
  
  latitude = @”n/a”;
  longitude = @”n/a”;
  errorCode = 0;
  responseErrorMessage = @””;
  NSMutableDictionary *params =

--- Page 326 ---
                       [[NSMutableDictionary alloc]
init];
  [params setObject:findLocation forKey:@”address”];
  WSManager *wsManager = [[WSManager alloc] init];
  [wsManager geocodeSynchronouslyXML:params  
               successBlock:success
failureBlock:failure];  
}
With the bolded code here, you start by initializing a few of the variables
and then create an NSXMLParser and tell it to start parsing
    inLocation = NO;
    foundFirstLocation = NO;
    accumulatingParsedCharacterData = NO:
    NSXMLParser *xmlParser =
                  [[NSXMLParser alloc]
initWithData:data];
    [xmlParser setDelegate:self];
    [xmlParser parse];
The geocodeSynchronouslyXML: method creates an NSXMLParser
(thoughtfully supplied by the iOS SDK) and sets the RTModel as the
delegate. The parser, as you’ll soon see, uses delegate methods as it
parses the data. You’ll use the BOOL instance variables to control whether
to parse a particular tag of the data.
When the parser completes its job, the parsed data will be found in the
latitude and longitude instance variables. You’ll use that data to
create the annotation you place on your RoadTrip map.
Next, you add the delegate methods used by the parser. The next section
deals with that.
The NSXMLParser delegate methods

--- Page 327 ---
There are four NSXMLParser delegate methods you will be implementing
to parse the XML response you get back from a Geocoding web service
request
parser:didStartElement:namespaceURI:qualifiedName:
                                               attribute
s:
parser:foundCharacters:
parser:didEndElement:namespaceURI:qualifiedName:
parser:parseErrorOccurred:
To remind you, the XML response you’ll need to parse is going to look
like Listing 7-15 in the last chapter and what you see in the Debug area
console pane when you run the program.
XML is a well-defined language and can be pretty complex. Because
you won’t actually be using XML for your web service, I don’t go very
deeply into the messy details. For our purposes, all you really need to
know is that XML is made up of elements that have start and end tags.
For example, you are interested in the latitude element which has a start
(also called opening) tag of <lat>, and a corresponding end (also called
closing) tag of </lat>. Between the tags you have the content. You find
similar tags for each data element in the XML document. You may have
tags within tags, like <lat> within <location> or <location> within
<geometry>, as shown below. But what you are interested in is the
content — 40.7485584 for example — between the start tag, <lat> and
its corresponding end tag, </lat> in the following:
<geometry>
   <location>
    <lat>40.7485584</lat>
    <lng>-73.9857465</lng>
   </location>
   <location_type>APPROXIMATE</location_type>
   <viewport>
    <southwest>

--- Page 328 ---
     <lat>40.7401048</lat>
     <lng>-74.0017539</lng>
    </southwest>
    <northeast>
     <lat>40.7570109</lat>
     <lng>-73.9697391</lng>
    </northeast>
   </viewport>
  </geometry>
When the XML parser recognizes a start tag, you’ll want it to send you
the
parser:didStartElement:namespaceURI:qualifiedName:attributes:
message. To make sure that happens, add the code in Listing 8-4 to
RTModel.m.
Listing 8-4: Adding
parser:didStartElement:namespaceURI:qualifiedN
ame:
#pragma mark - Parsing methods
- (void)parser:(NSXMLParser *)parser didStartElement:
(NSString *)elementName namespaceURI:(NSString
*)namespaceURI qualifiedName:(NSString *)qName      
               attributes:(NSDictionary *)attributeDict
{
  
  if ([elementName isEqualToString:@”status”]) {
    accumulatingParsedCharacterData = YES;
    currentParsedCharacterData =
                          [[NSMutableString alloc]
init];
  }
  if ([elementName isEqualToString:@”location”] &&
                                     !foundFirstLocation
)

--- Page 329 ---
    inLocation = YES;
  if (inLocation) {
    if ([elementName isEqualToString:@”lat”] ||
                   [elementName isEqualToString:@”lng”])
{
      accumulatingParsedCharacterData = YES;
      currentParsedCharacterData =
                           [[NSMutableString alloc]
init];
    }
  }
}
In this method, you’re looking for one of four tags. The status tag
contains (surprise, surprise) the status of your request, whereas location
acts as the container tag that houses the separate lat and lon tags that
correspond to the latitude and longitude of the address or point of
interest the user entered.
If the tag the XML parser comes across is status, you want to start
accumulating the parsed data, so you set
accumulatingParsedCharacterData to YES and create a string to
accumulate the data. (You’ll use the accumulated data in the next
method.)
If the tag the parser came up with is location and the
foundFirstLocation is NO, you set inLocation to YES and you let loose
the hounds to start looking for the lat and lon tags. The reason you
generally want to do that is the fact that the Geocoding web service can
return multiple results (try entering Springfield here). Admittedly, in this
working example, you’re going to settle for the very first result you get,
but if you were doing this in a production environment, you’d need to be
a bit more discerning.
I found this out the hard way by reading the documentation (after the
fact, as it were), which clearly states:

--- Page 330 ---
Generally, only one entry in the “results” array is returned for
address lookups, though the Geocoder may return several results
when address queries are ambiguous.
The next method you need to implement is parser:foundCharacters:.
To do that, add the code in Listing 8-5 to RTModel.m.
Listing 8-5: parser:foundCharacters:
- (void)parser:(NSXMLParser *)parser
                     foundCharacters:(NSString *)string
{
  
  if (accumulatingParsedCharacterData) {
    [currentParsedCharacterData appendString:string];
  }
}
After the parser finishes with the tag, the parser then sends the delegate
the parser:foundCharacters: message to let it know whether or not the
parser has found parsed character data in an element. Keep in mind that
the parser is not guaranteed to deliver all the parsed character data for an
element all at once, so it’s necessary to accumulate character data until
the end of the element is reached. (That’s why you created a mutable
string.) Check to see whether this is something you wanted to
accumulate (accumulatingParsedCharacterData is set to YES), and if it
is, you add it to the string
if (accumulatingParsedCharacterData) {
         [currentParsedCharacterData
appendString:string];
Finally, when the XML parser finds the end tag for an element, it sends
the delegate the parser:didEndElement: message. Add the code in
Listing 8-6 to RTModel.m to implement that method.

--- Page 331 ---
Listing 8-6:
parser:didEndElement:namespaceURI:qualifiedN
ame:
- (void)parser:(NSXMLParser *)parser didEndElement:
(NSString *)elementName namespaceURI:(NSString
*)namespaceURI qualifiedName:(NSString *)qName {
  
  if ([elementName isEqualToString:@”status”]) {
    if ([currentParsedCharacterData
         caseInsensitiveCompare:@”ok”] != NSOrderedSame)
{
      UIAlertView *alertView = [[UIAlertView alloc]
        initWithTitle:@”Error when invoking web service”
        message:elementName delegate:nil
        cancelButtonTitle:@”OK” otherButtonTitles:nil];
      [alertView show];
    }
    accumulatingParsedCharacterData = NO;
  }
  if ([elementName isEqualToString:@”lat”] &&
                                            inLocation)
{
    latitude = [[NSString alloc]
initWithString:currentParsedCharacterData];
    accumulatingParsedCharacterData = NO;
  }
  else if ([elementName isEqualToString:@”lng”] &&
                                             inLocation)
{
    longitude = [[NSString alloc]
initWithString:currentParsedCharacterData];
    accumulatingParsedCharacterData = NO;
  }
  if ([elementName isEqualToString:@”location”])  {
    inLocation = NO;

--- Page 332 ---
    foundFirstLocation = YES;
  }
}
When you get this message, you check to see whether it was the end tag
for something you’re interested in.
If it happens to be the end tag associated with the status tag, you check
to see if the status was ok. If not, you post an alert and then set
accumulatingParsedCharacterData to NO.
If inLocation is YES and the end tag is a lat or lon, you initialize the
corresponding instance variable (latitude or longitude) with the
resulting data and then set accumulatingParsedCharacterData to NO.
if ([elementName isEqualToString:@”lat”] &&
                                            inLocation)
{
    latitude = [[NSString alloc]
initWithString:currentParsedCharacterData];
    accumulatingParsedCharacterData = NO;
  }
  else if ([elementName isEqualToString:@”lng”] &&
                                             inLocation)
{
    longitude = [[NSString alloc]
initWithString:currentParsedCharacterData];
    accumulatingParsedCharacterData = NO;
If the end tag is location, you set inLocation to NO and
foundFirstLocation to YES and you’re done.
When the parser finds another tag, it sends the
didStartElement:namespaceURI:qualifiedName:attributes:
message again for the next tag until it runs out of tags.

--- Page 333 ---
Figure 8-1:
An Empire
State of
mind.
Dealing with errors
For an error condition, the delegate (in this case the RTModel) is sent the
parseErrorOccurred:parseError::, message and all you will do is
post an alert — so do that by adding the code in Listing 8-7 to
RTModel.m. (In a production environment however, you might want to do
more or even try some sort of error recovery.)
Listing 8-7: parser:parseErrorOccurred:
- (void)parser:(NSXMLParser *)parser parseErrorOccurred:
(NSError *)parseError {
  
  NSString *errorMessage = [parseError
localizedDescription];
  UIAlertView *alertView = [[UIAlertView alloc]
         initWithTitle:@”Geocode error”
         message:errorMessage delegate:nil
         cancelButtonTitle:@”OK” otherButtonTitles:nil];
  [alertView show];
}
Time to take RoadTrip for another spin. Now build and run the app and
in the Find: text field enter Empire State Building.
You should see an annotation in the correct place on the New York City
Map, as shown in Figure 8-1.

--- Page 334 ---
Good, But Not Good Enough
Although the use of the Geocoding web service I came up with here
works, and works well, it really isn’t the kind of implementation you
would want to go forward with.
First, as I mention back in Chapter 7, the web service request is being
done synchronously. That means from the time you make the request to
the time you receive the response, your application just sits there

--- Page 335 ---
waiting. I wouldn’t normally do it this way myself, but as a learning
exercise it makes it much easier for you if you have to concentrate on
only the basics of using a web service.
In the case of my ongoing example, the fact that the web service request
is being done synchronously wouldn’t tend to pose a problem, but if you
were to employ a more complex web service, your users might get really
annoyed about having to wait for it to finish, especially if they could be
doing other things with your app in the meantime. You can imagine,
then, how annoyed the users will be when you start downloading lots of
images and text in a “real” application. Users may even have to get
themselves another iPhone to keep themselves amused while waiting for
the data to finish downloading.
The solution to that is to make the request asynchronously, and in the
next chapter, you do precisely that by using the URL Loading system to
handle load requests.
Plus you’re not doing a heck of a lot of error checking, either. You’re
just assuming that every little thing goes well and that you will naturally
get latitude and longitude. In real applications, not only do you need to
expect errors, but you also need to handle them gracefully when they
inevitably do arrive.
 But before you get introduced to the URL Loading system, I
want to close out this chapter by addressing one more issue. One of
the easiest ways to get your app rejected by Apple is to fail to make
sure that you have an Internet connection when your app needs it,
and therefore fail to notify the user that the functionality that
requires the connection will be unavailable (or even worse, have
your app just hang there).
To check for network availability, I have included the Reachability
sample code from Apple in RoadTrip (which I cover in iPad Application

--- Page 336 ---
Development For Dummies and iPhone Application Development For
Dummies).
But while this code does check at application launch for an Internet
connection it does not do anything if the status of the connection
changes. Doing that in the Reachability sample code is straightforward,
and I leave it as an exercise for the reader.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 337 ---
Chapter 9
Asynchronous URL Loading
In This Chapter
 Understanding synchronous and asynchronous processing
 Working with the URL loading system
 Adding a class to manage asynchronous loading
In the grand scheme of things, downloading only a small bit of data from
the Internet has no impact on your app’s performance, but when the
amount that you download begins to increase, you’re going to run into
trouble. That’s because right now — the way our RoadTrip app is
working — when the downloading is taking place, you can’t really do
anything else in the app.
Again, this isn’t an issue in small, simple apps, but it’s something you
must address if you’re creating industrial-strength applications. By this I
mean not just business applications, but anything that uses web services
that respond with a significant amount of content.
When it comes to solving your problem, you have three choices: a) take
advantage of the asynchronous capabilities of the URL loading system,
b) do your downloading in another thread, or c) do both.
Reviewing Your Choices
In Chapter 7, you sent your data request to a web service (and received
the response) by using the following:

--- Page 338 ---
NSData *data = [NSURLConnection
sendSynchronousRequest:request
returningResponse:&response error:&error];
This snippet of code makes the request and waits for the response to be
downloaded synchronously — which means that the main thread (the
one driving the user interface) waits until the network request completes.
During that time, no other main thread activity can take place. So, the
screen is essentially frozen. If the network request takes a while to
complete (a fair chance, because network delays are just a fact of life),
the user experience will suffer.
Clearly, you need to address this. You can do one of two things:
 Use NSURLConnection’s asynchronous loading functionality.
 Continue using the synchronous request response, but do it in a
background thread.
The first approach has clear pluses and minuses. The URL loading
system requires you as a developer to adopt a protocol and implement
certain delegate methods just like you did for the XMLParser
(didStartElement, for example, or foundCharacters, didEndElement,
and parseError Occurred). Asynchronous URL loading works exactly
(well, almost exactly) the same way as the XML parser worked. Using
delegate methods adds a bit more complexity to the app and makes it a
little harder to follow, but that’s pretty much the (small) price you have
to pay whenever asynchronous processing is done on a single thread.
Going this route also allows you to work with partial downloads
(although you won’t do that here). That’s all good, but a definite
downside comes with the fact that when you’re doing all your
asynchronous processing, you’re going to be using valuable main thread
processing resources.
Looking at the second option, it’s clear that using a background thread
doesn’t impose any protocol implementation on the developer and
consumes little in the way of main thread processing resources.

--- Page 339 ---
However, you still have to create a structure to manage the asynchronous
response, switch threads to post alerts, or do anything that accesses the
user interface, because no user interface access is allowed from the
background thread. In addition, if you’re downloading synchronously,
you won’t be able to work with partial downloads.
So, the bottom line is that one approach is not better than the other . . .
they’re just two distinct options with their own set of pluses and
minuses.
 In the RoadTrip scenario (the one where you’re geocoding a
location the user wants to display on a map), asynchronous
processing really doesn’t buy you much. The user still has to wait
for the data to finish downloading to see the location they had
specified, no matter what. But at least if you’re doing it
asynchronously, they’ll see a map to keep them amused — a map
that will eventually center on the found location and display the
annotation.
In this chapter, I explain the URL loading system which — besides all
the asynchronous processing stuff — includes quite a bit of additional
functionality and control that are tailored for the kinds of things you’ll
want to do when you use web services. I have to keep the explanations
of all the Big Picture items relatively brief, given the page constraints
my editors impose on me, but that means I have more room to show you
(in detail) how to implement the URL loading system’s asynchronous
processing capabilities.
 You used background threads when you set up Core Data back
in Chapters 3 and 4 — a relatively uncomplicated task.

--- Page 340 ---
URL Loading System Overview
The URL loading system is a set of classes and protocols that provide
the underlying capability for an application to access the data pointed to
by a URL.
The most commonly used classes in the URL loading system allow an
application to create a request for the contents of that URL and then
download it from there.
 A request for the contents of a URL is represented by an
NSURLRequest object — something you’re already using as part of
RoadTrip. The NSURLRequest class encapsulates a URL and any
protocol properties in a way that is independent of the protocol
itself.
An NSURLRequest contains two basic data elements of a load request: the
URL to load and instructions on what to do with any cached data. It also
enables you to set the timeout for a connection.
Because you’re already using an NSURLRequest, all I have to do now is
show you how to include some additional functionality provided by the
URL loading system to make the downloads asynchronous — in other
words, setting things up so that the downloads can keep chugging along
while the user continues to use the application.
To do that, I show you how to use the NSURLConnection class to make
the connection to the server needed by an NSURLRequest object and
download the contents.
NSURLDownload
Although the NSURLConnection (the class you’ll be using to add
asynchronicity to the mix) provides data to the delegate as the

--- Page 341 ---
data is downloaded, another class is also part of the URL loading
system — NSURLDownload, which writes the request data directly to
disk. I leave you to explore NSURLDownload on your own. There are
some significant differences between the two classes. For
example, the NSURLConnection class provides a delegate method
that allows an application to control the caching — although you
won’t be doing that here — whereas NSURLDownload downloads
aren’t cached.
Authentication and credentials
When I first started programming on the iPhone, I was concerned about
how to access them — how the heck do you get your app to jump
through all those hoops? Although I don’t use it in the example, working
with servers or websites that require a password is available to you in the
URL loading system as well.
The URL loading system provides classes that you can use for
credentials as well as providing secure credential persistence — storage
of the credentials, in other words. Credentials can be specified to persist
for a single request, for the duration of an application’s launch, or
permanently in the user’s keychain.
Cookie storage
Cookies — those ubiquitous pieces of data that websites have browsers
store for them as a way of keeping track of you, the user — are often
used to provide storage of data across URL requests. The URL loading
system provides interfaces to create and manage cookies as well as
sending and receiving cookies from web servers.

--- Page 342 ---
Protocol support
A protocol is a convention that defines a set of rules that computers
follow to communicate with each other across a network. It includes
rules for connection, communication, and data transfer between two
computers. The URL loading system natively supports http://,
https://, file://, and ftp:// protocols, and it also allows you to
extend the protocols that are supported for transferring data.
Downloading data synchronously
revisited
Many of the methods used in RoadTrip (and many other apps) to
load files are blocking (synchronous) calls — array
WithContentsOfURL: is one obvious example. When working with
data over networks, it’s (sometimes) best to do things
asynchronously, as I’ve made clear a number of times already.
Although this is true, synchronous downloading is not an evil to be
avoided at all costs — it does have its uses. Luckily for you and
me, it turns out that the URL loading system is accommodating in
that respect. As you saw in Chapter 8, it provides simple and
convenient support for the synchronous downloading of the
contents of a URL (which you have been doing) using the class
method sendSynchronousRequest:returningResponse:error:. Even
though using this method is simple and convenient, it does have
some limitations, including the following:
 Your application is blocked until the data has been completely
downloaded, an error occurs, or the request times out. (Sorry to
sound like a broken record on this point, but it really needs to be
said.)
 There isn’t much support for authentication. If the request
requires authentication in order to make the connection, valid

--- Page 343 ---
Figure 9-1:
NSURL
credentials must already be available in the
NSURLCredentialStorage or must be provided as part of the
requested URL.
 There is no means of modifying the default behavior of
response caching or accepting server redirects.
Using NSURLConnection —
Downloading data asynchronously
NSURLConnection provides the most flexible method of downloading the
contents of a URL, so of course you’ll be using it. (Only the best for my
readers.) It provides a simple interface for creating and canceling a
connection, and it does that by using delegate methods to control what
happens during the process.
Although working with NSURLConnection may appear daunting at first,
it actually is very similar to what you did to parse the XML data in
Chapter 8. In fact, all you need to do is create the connection and then
implement a few delegate methods, such as
 connection:didReceiveResponse:
 connection:didReceiveData:
 connection:didFailWithError:
 connectionDidFinishLoading:
Figure 9-1 gives you a sense of how these methods work with NSURL
Connection to get the job done.

--- Page 344 ---
asynchrono
us loading.
There are also some additional methods you can choose (on your own)
to implement:
 connection:willCacheResponse:
 connection:willSendRequest:redirectResponse:
 connection:didReceiveAuthenticationChallenge:
 connection:didCancelAuthenticationChallenge:
Using Web Services
Asynchronously
In Chapter 7, you added code to WSManager to create the synchronous
NSURLConnection.
Although this technique is acceptable for that limited functionality, a
full-blown implementation of the asynchronous URL loading system
deserves a class of its own — the WSLoader. In the following sections, I
have you start by adding the WSLoader class to RoadTrip.

--- Page 345 ---
The WSLoader class is yet another example of code that is reusable in
your own applications. (Hey, I use one very similar to it all the time in
my own apps.) If you were starting an app from scratch, you’d simply
add this class (and the WSManager class you added in Chapter 7) and
you’d be ready to use web services in your app.
Adding the WSLoaderClass
Ready? Go!
1. In the Project navigator, select the Web Service Classes group,
right-click the selection, and then choose New File from the menu
that appears to open the New File dialog.
Alternatively, you can select the Model Classes group and choose
File ⇒ New ⇒ New File from the main menu (or press 
+N).
You see a dialog that enables you to select a file type.
2. In the left column of the dialog, select Cocoa Touch under the
iOS heading; next, select the Objective-C class template in the top-
right pane; then click Next.
3. In the Class field, enter WSLoader, select NSOBject from the
Subclass Of drop-down menu, and Then click Next.
A save sheet appears.
4. In the Save sheet, click Create.
Add the bolded code in Listing 9-1 to WSLoader.h to have WSLoader
adopt the NSURLConnectionDelegate protocol as well as declare its two
methods — initWithRequest:successBlock:failureBlock: and
startLoading.
Listing 9-1: Updating the WSLoader.h Interface
@interface WSLoader : NSObject <NSURLConnectionDelegate>
- (id)initWithRequest:(NSURLRequest *)aRequest
successBlock:(void (^)(NSDictionary *))success

--- Page 346 ---
failureBlock:(void (^)(NSDictionary *))failure;
- (BOOL)startLoading;
@end
Add the bolded code in Listing 9-2 to WSLoader.m to add the instance
variables you’ll use.
Listing 9-2: Adding a WSLoader Class Extension
to WSLoader.m
#import “WSLoader.h”
@interface WSLoader () {
  
  NSURL *url;
  NSURLRequest *request;
  NSURLConnection *nsurlConnection;
  void (^didFinish)(NSDictionary *);
  void (^didFail)(NSDictionary *);
  NSMutableData *data;
}
@end
@implementation WSLoader
In the initialization method, you initialize the instance variables, save a
reference to the success and failure blocks, and create the mutable data
object. (Just as with the XML parser, all the data may not come in at
once, so you set it up so that you’ll add to the data as it arrives.) Add the
code in Listing 9-3 to WSLoader.m to add the
initWithRequest:successBlock: failureBlock: method.
Listing 9-3: Adding
initWithRequest:successBlock:failureBlock: to
WSLoader.m
- (id)initWithRequest:(NSURLRequest *)aRequest
          successBlock:(void (^)(NSDictionary *))success

--- Page 347 ---
          failureBlock:(void (^)(NSDictionary *))failure
{
  
  if ((self = [super init])) {
    didFinish = success;
    didFail = failure;
    request = aRequest;
    url = request.URL;
    data = [NSMutableData dataWithLength:0];
  }
  return self;
}
After the WSLoader is initialized, it will be sent the startLoading
message. To set that up, add the code in Listing 9-4 to WSLoader.m.
Listing 9-4: Adding startLoading to WSLoader.m
- (BOOL)startLoading {
  
  nsurlConnection = [[NSURLConnection alloc]
initWithRequest:request delegate:self
startImmediately:YES];
  if (nsurlConnection == nil) {
    return NO;
  }
  return YES;
}
This creates and the initiates a connection for a URL, the first step in the
downloading process. This connection links you to the web service (or
website you want to download data from).
You create an NSURLConnection instance by using the NSURLRequest and
specifying the delegate.
NSURLConnection * connection = [[NSURLConnection alloc]

--- Page 348 ---
    initWithRequest:request delegate:self
                                    startImmediately:YES
];
Because you specified startImmediately:YES the connection should
begin loading data immediately. If you specified NO, you must schedule
the connection in a run loop before starting it. (You’re on your own
there, buddy.)
You should be aware that after you send this message, the request will
have been copied, and any changes you make to it won’t affect this
download.
Well, that’s that. You’ve finished the setup — not very exciting, I know,
but necessary. At this point, you’ll add the following
NSURLConnectionDelegate methods to WSLoader:
* connection:didReceiveResponse:
* connection:didReceiveData:
* connectionDidFinishLoading:
* connection:didFailWithError:
connection:didReceiveResponse:
After the connection has been established and the server has determined
that it has enough information to create response, the delegate receives
the connection:didReceiveResponse: message. This message lets you
know that the server is out there and that it is ready to roll!
 You need to know that your delegate may receive the
connection:did ReceiveResponse: message more than once for a
connection. This could happen as a result of a server redirect or for
a couple other obscure reasons. This means that each time a

--- Page 349 ---
delegate receives the connection:didReceiveResponse: message,
it will need to reset any progress indication and discard all
previously received data. To have the delegate do that, add the code
in Listing 9-5 to WSLoader.m.
Listing 9-5: Adding
connection:didReceiveResponse: to WSLoader.m
- (void)connection:(NSURLConnection *)connection
didReceiveResponse:(NSURLResponse *)response {
  
  [data setLength:0];
}
The code simply resets the length of the received data to 0 each time it’s
called.
connection:didReceiveData:
When the connection is established (and you’ve been informed that the
remote computer has made the connection via
connection:didReceiveResponse:), the delegate is sent the
connection:didReceiveData: message as the data is received. (This
whole process is similar to the XML parser process I discuss in Chapter
8.)
 Because you may not get all the data at once, you need to
append the data as you receive it to any already received data in the
NSMutableData object (conveniently labeled data) you created
back in Listing 9-3.
This appending business is handled by the code in Listing 9-6, which
you should add to URLLoader.m.

--- Page 350 ---
Listing 9-6: Adding connection:didReceiveData:
to WSLoader.m
- (void)connection:(NSURLConnection *)connection
                  didReceiveData:(NSData *)receivedData
{
  
  [data appendData:receivedData];
}
You just continue to add the data to the data object as you get it. (You
can also use the connection:didReceiveData: method to provide an
indication of the connection’s progress to the user.)
Unless an NSURLConnection receives a cancel message, the delegate will
receive either the connectionDidFinishLoading: or the
connection:didFailWithError: message, but never both.
connectionDidFinishLoading:
When the connection succeeds in downloading the request, the delegate
receives the connectionDidFinishLoading: message, and it’s all over.
Your delegate will receive no further messages from the connection, and
you can release the NSURLConnection object.
Enter the code in Listing 9-7 to URLLoader.m to take the cake out of the
oven and put the icing on it.
Listing 9-7: Adding connectionDidFinishLoading:
to WSLoader.m
- (void)connectionDidFinishLoading:
                           (NSURLConnection *)connection
{
  
  NSDictionary *response = [NSDictionary

--- Page 351 ---
            dictionaryWithObject:data
forKey:@”response”];
  didFinish(response);
  nsurlConnection = nil;
}
This method takes the data that has been downloaded, packages it up
nicely in a dictionary with a key of response, and sends it back to the
success block that was passed in when the WSLoader was initialized. You
also set the connection (nsurlConnection) to nil to release it.
connection:didFailWithError:
If an error crops up during the download, your delegate receives a
connection:didFailWithError: message. You get an NSError object
passed in as a parameter that specifies the details of the error. It also
provides the URL of the request that failed in the user info dictionary
with the key of NSErrorFailingURLStringKey.
After your delegate receives a message
connection:didFailWithError:, it’s all over, and your delegate won’t
get any more messages for that connection.
Enter the code in Listing 9-8 into URLLoader.m to get this bit to work for
you.
Listing 9-8: Adding connection:didFailWithError:
to WSLoader.m
- (void)connection:(NSURLConnection *)connection
                         didFailWithError:(NSError *)err
{
  
  NSDictionary *responseError = [NSDictionary
                dictionaryWithObject:err
forKey:@”error”];

--- Page 352 ---
  didFail(responseError);
  nsurlConnection = nil;
}
If you fail, you wrap up your failure all nice and tidy in a dictionary with
a key of error and call the failure block and let the caller deal with it.
(You can find more on that in the next section.) You also set the
connection to nil to release it.
That’s a lot of listings to deal with, but the bottom line here isn’t that big
a deal. To make an asynchronous request, you have to do only three
things:
 Create a WSLoader object with an NSURLRequest and send it a
message to startLoading.
 If the connection is successful, you’ll receive the
connectionDid Finish: message, you’ll return the data by
calling the success block, and the WSManager will then process it.
 If the connection failed, you’ll get a connectionDidFail:
message, you’ll return the error by calling the failure block, and
the WSManager will then handle it.
Using the WSLoader
With the WSLoader in place, you now need to modify the WSManager to
use it to make a request for an asynchronous load.
Add the bolded code in Listing 9-9 to WSManager.h to add the geocode
AsynchronouslyXML: successBlock:failureBlock: method to
(surprise, surprise) make an asynchronous request for XML data of the
Geocoder web service.
Listing 9-9: Updating the WSManager.h Interface

--- Page 353 ---
#import <Foundation/Foundation.h>
@interface WSManager : NSObject
- (void)geocodeSynchronouslyXML:
         (NSMutableDictionary *)userParams
         successBlock:(void (^)(NSDictionary *))success
         failureBlock:(void (^)())failure;
- (void)geocodeAsynchronouslyXML:
         (NSMutableDictionary *)userParams
         successBlock:(void (^)(NSDictionary *))success
         failureBlock:(void (^)())failure;
@end
The geocodeAsynchronouslyXML: successBlock:failureBlock
method will send the requestAsynchronousWebService: message
declaration to do the asynchronous load of the Geocoder web service’s
XML data. Add the bolded code in Listing 9-10 to WSManager.m to
declare geocodeAsynchronouslyXML: successBlock:failureBlock.
Listing 9-10: Updating the WSManager Class
Extension in WSManager.m
#import “WSManager.h”
#import “WSLoader.h”
@interface WSManager () {
  
  void (^returnSuccess)(NSDictionary *);
  void (^returnFail)();
  NSString *webService;
  NSMutableDictionary *params;
}
- (void)setupGeocodingWebService;
- (NSMutableURLRequest *)createGETRequest:
     (NSString *)baseURL
                    withParams:(NSDictionary
*)userParams;
- (void)requestSynchronousWebService:

--- Page 354 ---
                          (NSMutableURLRequest
*)request;
- (void)requestAsynchronousWebService:
                           (NSMutableURLRequest
*)request;
@end
To put the geocodeAsynchronouslyXML: successBlock:failure Block
method in place, add the code in Listing 9-11 to WSManager.m.
Listing 9-11: Add
geocodeAsynchronouslyXML:successBlock:failu
re Block: to WSManager.m
- (void)geocodeAsynchronouslyXML:(NSMutableDictionary *)
                                                userPara
ms
        successBlock:(void (^)(NSDictionary *))success
        failureBlock:(void (^)())failure {
  
  [self setupGeocodingWebService];
  returnSuccess = success;
  returnFail = failure;
  webService =
      @”http://maps.googleapis.com/maps/api/geocode/xml?
”;   
  [params addEntriesFromDictionary:userParams];
  NSMutableURLRequest *request = [self
createGETRequest:webService withParams:params];
  [request setCachePolicy:
                NSURLRequestReloadIgnoringLocalCacheData
];
  [request setTimeoutInterval:60];
  [self requestAsynchronousWebService:request];
}

--- Page 355 ---
The geocodeAsynchronouslyXML: successBlock:failureBlock
method illustrates the general form for adding a new web service request
to the WSManager. You’ll be adding a method like this again in Chapter
10 when you want the response to be in JSON format, and then again in
Part IV when you add the code necessary to use your own web services
to RoadTrip.
 The
geocodeAsynchronouslyXML:successBlock:failureBlock:
message is similar to the
geocodeSynchronouslyXMLsuccessBlock: failureBlock:
message you implemented in Chapter 7. A few differences do exist,
however.
First, geocodeAsynchronouslyXML:successBlock:failureBlock: sets a
cache policy:
[request setCachePolicy:
                NSURLRequestReloadIgnoringLocalCacheData
];
You’ll use NSURLRequestReloadIgnoringLocalAndRemoteCacheData,
which specifies that not only should the local cache data be ignored, but
that everyone else who might have been doing any data caching (proxies
and other intermediates) should ignore their caches so far as the protocol
allows. You do have a few other choices:
NSURLRequestUseProtocolCachePolicy
NSURLRequestReloadIgnoringLocalCacheData
NSURLRequestReturnCacheDataElseLoad
NSURLRequestReturnCacheDataDontLoad
NSURLRequestReloadRevalidatingCacheData
I leave you to explore these choices on your own.

--- Page 356 ---
Second, geocodeAsynchronouslyXML:successBlock:failureBlock:
sets a timeout interval for the connection — in this case, a timeout of 60
seconds.
Finally, it sends the requestAsynchronousWebService: message.
Take a closer look at requestAsynchronousWebService: — the method
that will do the heavy lifting for you when it comes to asynchronous
loading. Adding requestAsynchronousWebService: message effectively
finishes your prep work with the WSManager so that it will be in a
position to use the URL loading system to do an asynchronous load.
Start by implementing requestAsynchronousWebService:. To do that,
add the code in Listing 9-12 to WSManager.m.
Listing 9-12: Adding
requestAsynchronousWebService: to
WSManager.m
- (void)requestAsynchronousWebService:(NSURLRequest *)
                                                 request
{
  
  void (^success) (NSDictionary *) =
                               ^(NSDictionary *response
){
    NSData *data = [response objectForKey:@”response”];
    
    NSString *responseStr =
      [[NSString alloc] initWithData:data encoding:  
                                    NSUTF8StringEncoding
];
    NSLog(@”XML response:\n%@\n”, responseStr);
    
    if (!data) {
      UIAlertView *alert = [[UIAlertView alloc]

--- Page 357 ---
        initWithTitle:
                  @”Your request could not be carried
out”
        message:@”There is a problem on the cloud
server”
        delegate:nil
        cancelButtonTitle:@”OK” otherButtonTitles:nil];
      [alert show];
      returnFail (nil);
    }
    else {
      returnSuccess (response);
    }
  };
  
  void (^failure) (NSDictionary * ) =
                               ^(NSDictionary *response
){
    NSError *error = [response objectForKey:@”error”];
    
    UIAlertView *alert = [[UIAlertView alloc]
      initWithTitle:
                  @”Your request could not be carried
out”
      message:[error localizedDescription]
      delegate:nil
      cancelButtonTitle:@”OK” otherButtonTitles:nil];
    [alert show];
    returnFail (nil);
  };
  
  WSLoader *wsLoader = [[WSLoader alloc]
initWithRequest:request successBlock:success
failureBlock:failure];
  if (![wsLoader startLoading]) {
    UIAlertView *alert = [[UIAlertView alloc]

--- Page 358 ---
      initWithTitle:
                  @”Your request could not be carried
out”
      message:
           @”The nsurlConnection could not be
initialized”
      delegate:nil
      cancelButtonTitle:@”OK” otherButtonTitles:nil];
    [alert show];
    returnFail (nil);
  }
}
requestAsynchronousWebService: is similar to a method you
implemented previously in Chapter 7,
requestSynchronousWebService:. This time, however, instead of
sending the sendSynchronousRequest:returning Response:error:
message (the message the requestSynchronousWeb Service: method
sends to the NSURLConnection), the request
AsynchronousWebService: method sends the
initWithRequest:success Block:failureBlock: message to the
WSLoader.
In addition, requestAsynchronousWebService: implements two blocks,
but the code in each is virtually identical to the code in
requestSynchronous WebService:.
As you can see in requestAsynchronousWebService: the code in the
success block gets the response in the form of a dictionary from the
WSLoader (I’ve bolded that bit), and either posts an alert if there is no
data and calls returnFail or, if there is data, calls returnSucess
returning the response dictionary.
void (^success) (NSDictionary *) =
                               ^(NSDictionary *response)
{

--- Page 359 ---
  NSData *data = [response objectForKey:@”response”];
    
  NSString *responseStr =
  [[NSString alloc] initWithData:data encoding:
                                  NSUTF8StringEncoding];
  NSLog(@”XML response:\n%@\n”, responseStr);
    
  if (!data) {
    UIAlertView *alert = [[UIAlertView alloc]
      initWithTitle:@”Your request could not be carried
                                                      ou
t”
      message:@”There is a problem on the cloud server”
      delegate:nil
      cancelButtonTitle:@”OK” otherButtonTitles:nil];
    [alert show];
    returnFail (nil);
  }
  else {
    returnSuccess (response);
  }
};
In requestSynchronousWebService: you do the same thing, but since
you don’t get the response in a dictionary, you create one (I’ve bolded
that):
NSData *synchronousData =
    [NSURLConnection sendSynchronousRequest:request  
                returningResponse:&response
error:&error];
if (!synchronousData) {
  UIAlertView *alert = [[UIAlertView alloc]
    initWithTitle:@”Your request could not be carried
out”
    message: @”There is a problem on the cloud server”

--- Page 360 ---
    delegate:nil
    cancelButtonTitle:@”OK” otherButtonTitles:nil];
    [alert show];
    returnFail (nil);
}
else {
  NSDictionary *responseDict =
    [NSDictionary dictionaryWithObject:synchronousData
                                          forKey:@”respo
nse”];
  returnSuccess (responseDict);
}
The code used in the case of a failure is also virtually the same. (You can
examine that on your own.)
You’re in the home stretch now. To cross the finish line, you first need to
add a new method to request the asynchronous load. To do that, add the
bolded declaration in Listing 9-13 for geocodeAsynchronouslyXML: to
RTModel.m.
Listing 9-13: Updating the RTModel Interface in
the RTModel.m Implementation
@interface RTModel () {  
…
}
@property (readonly, strong, nonatomic)
        NSFetchRequest
*sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest;
- (void)geocodeSynchronouslyXML:(NSString
*)findLocation;
- (void)geocodeAsynchronouslyXML:(NSString
*)findLocation;
@end

--- Page 361 ---
With that out of the way, add the new
geocodeAsynchronouslyXM:findLocation: method in Listing 9-14 to
RTModel.m.
The geocodeAsynchronouslyXM:findLocation: method is another
(highly reusable) general form that you could plug in to any app you
came up with that needed to have a model class send a message to the
WSManager to make a web service request and then process the result. As
you’ll see in Part IV, this is the way you’ll make requests of the web
services you’ll implement to return the latest points of interest.
Speaking of reusing code, in order to add
geocodeAsynchronouslyXM:findLocation:, all you really need to do is
take these steps:
1. Copy and paste the old
geocodeSynchronouslyXML:findLocation: method into RTModel.m.
2. Change the name.
3. Delete the bolded-underlined-italicized code in Listing 9-14.
4. Add the code in bold in Listing 9-14.
Listing 9-14: Adding
geocodeAsynchronouslyXML: in RTModel.m
- (void)geocodeAsynchronouslyXML:
                                (NSString *)findLocation
{
  
  void (^success) (NSDictionary *) =
                               ^(NSDictionary *response)
{
    
    data = [response objectForKey:@”response”];
    responseStr = [[NSString alloc] initWithData:data
                         encoding:
NSUTF8StringEncoding];

--- Page 362 ---
    NSLog(@”XML response:\n%@\n”, responseStr);
    CLLocationCoordinate2D coordinate;
    coordinate.latitude = [latitude doubleValue];
    coordinate.longitude = [longitude doubleValue];
    
    Annotation *foundAnnotation =
                               [[Annotation alloc]
init];
    foundAnnotation.coordinate = coordinate;
    foundAnnotation.subtitle =
      [NSString stringWithFormat:@”Lat:%f Lon:%f”,
         [latitude doubleValue], [longitude
doubleValue]];
    foundAnnotation.title = findLocation;
    
    foundLocation = [[CLLocation alloc]
      initWithLatitude:foundAnnotation.coordinate.latitu
de
          longitude:foundAnnotation.coordinate.longitude
];
    responseStr = [[NSString alloc]
        initWithData:data
encoding:NSUTF8StringEncoding];
    addFindLocationCompletionHandler
                                  (foundAnnotation,
nil);
  };
  
  void (^failure) (NSError *) = ^(NSError *error ){
    NSString *errorMessage = [error
localizedDescription];
    UIAlertView *alertView = [[UIAlertView alloc]
      initWithTitle:@”Error getting response from
server”
         message:errorMessage delegate:nil
         cancelButtonTitle:@”OK” otherButtonTitles:nil];

--- Page 363 ---
    [alertView show];
    return;
  };
  latitude = @”n/a”;
  longitude = @”n/a”;
  errorCode = 0;
  responseErrorMessage = @””;
  NSMutableDictionary *params =
                       [[NSMutableDictionary alloc]
init];
  [params setObject:findLocation forKey:@”address”];
  WSManager *wsManager = [[WSManager alloc] init];
  [wsManager geocodeSynchronouslyXML:params  
               successBlock:success
failureBlock:failure];
  [wsManager geocodeAsynchronouslyXML:params  
              successBlock:success
failureBlock:failure];
}
 Of course, if I were doing all this “for real” and I wanted to
actually choose between a synchronous and an asynchronous
process, I’d create a third method that implements the overlapping
code of geocodeSynchronouslyXML:findLocation: and
geocodeAsynchronouslyXML:completionHandler:. But in this
case, you’ll go back to using the CLGeocoder at the end of this Part
of the book, and even if you didn’t, there aren’t too many reasons
why you would want to keep the synchronous method.
Finally, update addLocation:completionHandler: in RTModel.m by
adding the bolded code in Listing 9-15. (Don’t forget to comment out the
geocodeSynchronouslyXML: request.)

--- Page 364 ---
Listing 9-15: Update
addLocation:completionHandler: in RTModel.m
- (void)addLocation:(NSString *)findLocation
    completionHandler:(void (^)(Annotation
*annotation,  
                             NSError* error)) completion
{
  /*
…
   */
  addFindLocationCompletionHandler = completion;
//CLGeocoder* geocoder = [[CLGeocoder alloc] init];
//[geocoder geocodeAddressString:findLocation
completionHandler:clGeocodeCompletionHandler];
//  [self geocodeSynchronouslyXML:findLocation];
    [self geocodeAsynchronouslyXML:findLocation];
}
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 365 ---
Chapter 10
Adding the JSON Response
In This Chapter
 Seeing how JSON is structured
 Using the JSON deserializer that comes with iOS
JSON is a lot like XML, but different, as you can see in Listings 10-1
and 10-2. Currently, JSON is winning favor over XML when it comes to
serializing and transmitting structured data over a network connection
(such as from a server and an application). I don’t get into which one is
better — I know better than to get in the middle of a civil war — but the
way JSON is structured makes it more desirable for the kinds of web
services you’ll be working on. I could, of course, be all even-handed and
point out that many folks believe you should use XML, but I won’t get
into that here because, frankly, I have trouble being so darned even-
handed all the time. Pick the one you like and go with it, but it seems to
me that JSON is the freight train these days, and XML has been
regulated to the milk run.
Working with JSON
JSON (an acronym for JavaScript Object Notation; often — but not
always — pronounced like the name Jason) is derived from the
JavaScript programming language and does a great job of representing
simple data structures and associative arrays, called objects. Even
though it has JavaScript in its name, it is language-independent, and
there are parsers available for most programming languages. It uses

--- Page 366 ---
conventions that are familiar to developers that use, among many others,
Objective-C and Python, as well as the other C based languages.
Most folks agree that JSON is faster to process and — what’s better —
that it’s easier to write programs that process JSON. It has few optional
features, it’s human-legible and reasonably clear, its design is formal and
concise, JSON documents are easy to create, and (for good measure) it
uses Unicode. And because it’s more concise, it takes less time to
download when it’s doing its thing (possibly improving the user
experience) and is happy with less bandwidth (similarly improving the
developer experience).
After all that, it’s probably a bit clearer why I’m firmly in the JSON
camp. But if you need more convincing, take a few moments and
compare the XML output in Listing 10-1 with the JSON output in
Listing 10-2.
Listing 10-1: The XML Output
<?xml version=”1.0” encoding=”UTF-8”?>
<GeocodeResponse>
<status>OK</status>
<result>
  <type>point_of_interest</type>
  <type>courthouse</type>
  <type>establishment</type>
  <formatted_address>Empire State, 350 5th Avenue Suite
300, New York, NY 10118, USA</formatted_address>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>Empire State</long_name>
   <short_name>Empire State</short_name>
   <type>point_of_interest</type>
   <type>establishment</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>350</long_name>
   <short_name>350</short_name>

--- Page 367 ---
   <type>street_number</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>5th Avenue Suite 300</long_name>
   <short_name>5th Avenue Suite 300</short_name>
   <type>route</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>Midtown</long_name>
   <short_name>Midtown</short_name>
   <type>neighborhood</type>
   <type>political</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>Manhattan</long_name>
   <short_name>Manhattan</short_name>
   <type>sublocality</type>
   <type>political</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>New York</long_name>
   <short_name>New York</short_name>
   <type>locality</type>
   <type>political</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>New York</long_name>
   <short_name>New York</short_name>
   <type>administrative_area_level_2</type>
   <type>political</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>New York</long_name>
   <short_name>NY</short_name>
   <type>administrative_area_level_1</type>

--- Page 368 ---
   <type>political</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>United States</long_name>
   <short_name>US</short_name>
   <type>country</type>
   <type>political</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>10118</long_name>
   <short_name>10118</short_name>
   <type>postal_code</type>
  </address_component>
  <geometry>
   <location>
    <lat>40.7485584</lat>
    <lng>-73.9857465</lng>
   </location>
   <location_type>APPROXIMATE</location_type>
   <viewport>
    <southwest>
     <lat>40.7401048</lat>
     <lng>-74.0017539</lng>
    </southwest>
    <northeast>
     <lat>40.7570109</lat>
     <lng>-73.9697391</lng>
    </northeast>
   </viewport>
  </geometry>
</result>
</GeocodeResponse>
Listing 10-2: The Same Data Output as JSON
{

--- Page 369 ---
   “results” : [
      {
         “address_components” : [
            {
               “long_name” : “Empire State”,
               “short_name” : “Empire State”,
               “types” : [
“point_of_interest”,           
                                         “establishment”
]
            },
            {
               “long_name” : “350”,
               “short_name” : “350”,
               “types” : [ “street_number” ]
            },
            {
               “long_name” : “5th Avenue Suite 300”,
               “short_name” : “5th Avenue Suite 300”,
               “types” : [ “route” ]
            },
            {
               “long_name” : “Midtown”,
               “short_name” : “Midtown”,
               “types” : [ “neighborhood”, “political” ]
            },
            {
               “long_name” : “Manhattan”,
               “short_name” : “Manhattan”,
               “types” : [ “sublocality”, “political” ]
            },
            {
               “long_name” : “New York”,
               “short_name” : “New York”,
               “types” : [ “locality”, “political” ]
            },

--- Page 370 ---
            {
               “long_name” : “New York”,
               “short_name” : “New York”,
               “types” : [
“administrative_area_level_2”,
                                               “politica
l” ]
            },
            {
               “long_name” : “New York”,
               “short_name” : “NY”,
               “types” : [
“administrative_area_level_1”,
                                             “political”
]
            },
            {
               “long_name” : “United States”,
               “short_name” : “US”,
               “types” : [ “country”, “political” ]
            },
            {
               “long_name” : “10118”,
               “short_name” : “10118”,
               “types” : [ “postal_code” ]
            }
         ],
         “formatted_address” : “Empire State, 350 5th  
               Avenue Suite 300, New York, NY 10118,
USA”,
         “geometry” : {
            “location” : {
               “lat” : 40.74855840,
               “lng” : -73.98574649999999
            },
            “location_type” : “APPROXIMATE”,

--- Page 371 ---
            “viewport” : {
               “northeast” : {
                  “lat” : 40.75701090,
                  “lng” : -73.96973910
               },
               “southwest” : {
                  “lat” : 40.74010480,
                  “lng” : -74.00175390
               }
            }
         },
         “types” : [ “point_of_interest”, “courthouse”,
                                         “establishment”
]
      }
   ],
   “status” : “OK”
}
As I explain in Chapter 9, XML is built up with the help of a series of
tags. There is a start tag (also called an opening tag) and a
corresponding end tag (or closing tag) for each data element in the XML
document. In this case, <latitude> is the start tag, and </latitude> is
the end tag. XML is also self-describing in the sense that, if you know
what the tags are, you can extract the information you want.
JSON, as you can see in Listing 10-2, is a bit different. It’s built upon
two structures that are, as you might expect given its origins, more in
tune with the programming world:
 A collection of name/value pairs: In various languages, this is
realized as an object, record, struct, dictionary, hash table, keyed
list, or associative array.
 An ordered list of values: In most languages, this is realized as
an array, vector, list, or sequence.

--- Page 372 ---
JSON uses key-value pairs to represent data. The key and value are
separated by a colon (:), whereas pairs are separated by a comma (,). In
the following JSON snippet, for example, the pair latitude/longitude
(“lat” and “lng”) is separated by a comma, and the latitude key (“lat”)
is separated from its associated value (40.75701090) by a colon:
“lat” : 40.75701090,
“lng” : -73.96973910
You can use several different data types to represent the value in the key-
value pair:
 Number (double precision floating-point format):
“lat” : 40.75701090,
“lng” : -73.96973910
 String (double-quoted Unicode with backslash escaping):
“long_name” : “Empire State”,
 Boolean (true or false):
Sorry, but there’s no neat example in the Google Geocoder
output, but you can imagine something appropriate, I’m sure.
 Array (an ordered sequence of values, comma-separated and
enclosed in square brackets):
“address_components” : [
  {
      “long_name” : “Empire State”,
      “short_name” : “Empire State”,
       “types” : [ “point_of_interest”,
                                     “establishmen
t” ]
  },
...
],

--- Page 373 ---
 Object (a collection of key-value pairs, comma-separated
and enclosed in curly braces):
  {
      “long_name” : “Empire State”,
      “short_name” : “Empire State”,
       “types” : [ “point_of_interest”,
                                     “establishmen
t” ]
  },
The keys must be strings, and each key/string (as well as the
associated string values) must be enclosed in double quotes.
“long_name” : “Empire State”,
 null:
Can be set on any type of data, including arrays, objects, number
and Boolean types
As you can see, these key-value pairs are in fact what you may know as
property list objects — a serializable object that can convert itself into a
stream of bits so that it can be stored in a file, and which can then
reconstitute itself into the object it once was in an earlier life when it is
read back in.
Parsing the JSON Response
Within the context of the RoadTrip app, you’re going to be using JSON
to handle requests made of the Google Geocoding API web service.
Google, in its infinite wisdom, has its own little tutorial about the ins and
outs of geocoding requests — including a section on JSON formatting
— which you can access by going to
http://code.google.com/apis/maps/documentation/geocoding.
(Figure 10-1 shows the opening sections of that tutorial.)

--- Page 374 ---
Figure 10-
1: The
Google
Geocoding
API.
If you were to follow the JSON Output Formats link, you’d find another
example of how to get the JSON output as well as an example of the
output itself.
Taking a closer look at Google’s sample JSON output, you can see that
there’s an output flag within the URL request’s path:
http://maps.googleapis.com/maps/api/geocode/
   address=1600+Amphitheatre+Parkway,+Mountain+View,+CA
                                     &sensor=true_or_fal
se
(You’ll need to replace true_or_false with true or false)
The following is the response to a json (the request is case sensitive)
response on a Geocoder request to forward geocode “1600 Amphitheatre
Parkway, Mountain View, CA,” as detailed here:
{
  “status”: “OK”,
  “results”: [ {
    “types”: street_address,

--- Page 375 ---
    “formatted_address”: “1600 Amphitheatre Pkwy,
Mountain
                                     View, CA 94043,
USA”,
    “address_components”: [ {
      “long_name”: “1600”,
      “short_name”: “1600”,
      “types”: street_number
    }, {
      “long_name”: “Amphitheatre Pkwy”,
      “short_name”: “Amphitheatre Pkwy”,
      “types”: route
    }, {
      “long_name”: “Mountain View”,
      “short_name”: “Mountain View”,
      “types”: [ “locality”, “political” ]
    }, {
      “long_name”: “California”,
      “short_name”: “CA”,
      “types”: [ “administrative_area_level_1”,        
                                            “political”
]
    }, {
      “long_name”: “United States”,
      “short_name”: “US”,
      “types”: [ “country”, “political” ]
    }, {
      “long_name”: “94043”,
      “short_name”: “94043”,
      “types”: postal_code
    } ],
    “geometry”: {
      “location”: {
        “lat”: 37.4219720,
        “lng”: -122.0841430
      },

--- Page 376 ---
      “location_type”: “ROOFTOP”,
      “viewport”: {
        “southwest”: {
          “lat”: 37.4188244,
          “lng”: -122.0872906
        },
        “northeast”: {
          “lat”: 37.4251196,
          “lng”: -122.0809954
        }
      }
    }
  } ]
}
As you can see, the JSON response has two root elements:
{
  “status”: “OK”,
  “results”: [ {
  } ]
}
The “status” part contains metadata on the request — the status codes
that I explain in Chapter 7. They are the same for both XML and JSON.
The “results” part contains an array of geocoded address information.
To be honest, it’s not that different from the XML response, but it’s
different enough to require some work to get it right. Google notes that
the output is much smaller (which is helpful when downloading across a
network) and is now the preferred output format. (Putting its code where
its mouth is, the Google documentation — except for the XML output
explanation — uses the JSON syntax.)
There are a few differences in the response that the documentation also
notes:

--- Page 377 ---
 XML results are wrapped in a root <GeocodeResponse>
element.
<?xml version=”1.0” encoding=”UTF-8”?>
<GeocodeResponse>
<status>OK</status>
<result>
...
</result>
</GeocodeResponse>
 JSON denotes entries with multiple elements by plural arrays
(types).
“address_components”: [ {
      “long_name”: “1600”,
      “short_name”: “1600”,
      “types”: street_number
    }, {
      “long_name”: “Amphitheatre Pkwy”,
      “short_name”: “Amphitheatre Pkwy”,
      “types”: route
    }, {
...
} ],
 XML denotes such entries using multiple singular elements
(<type>).
  <type>street_address</type>
  <formatted_address>1600 Amphitheatre Pkwy,
Mountain View, CA 94043, USA</formatted_address>
  <address_component>
   <long_name>1600</long_name>
   <short_name>1600</short_name>
   <type>street_number</type>
  </address_component>
  <address_component>

--- Page 378 ---
   <long_name>Amphitheatre Pkwy</long_name>
   <short_name>Amphitheatre Pkwy</short_name>
   <type>route</type>
 If an element is blank, it represented by an empty array in JSON;
in XML, it is simply not there.
Processing a JSON Response
Just as with the XML response, you are going to have to parse the JSON
response
Start by adding the JSON version of the geocodeAsynchronously…
method. You’ll also need to use the RTDefines file and I have you
import that as well. To do that, add the bolded code in Listing 10-3 to
RTModel.m.
Listing 10-3: Updating the RTModel Class
Extension in RTModel.m
#import “RTModel.h”
#import “RTAppDelegate.h”
#import “Destination.h”
#import “PointOfInterest.h”
#import “Annotation.h”
#import “SharedPointOfInterest.h”
#import “WSManager.h”
#import “RTDefines.h”
typedef void (^addLocationCompletionHandler)(Annotation
*annotation, NSError* error);
@interface RTModel () {  
  NSDictionary *destinationData;
  Destination* destination;
  NSMutableArray *events;
  NSMutableArray *pointsOfInterest;

--- Page 379 ---
  NSMutableArray *itinerary;
  NSMutableArray *pointsOfInterestData;
  addLocationCompletionHandler    
                        addFindLocationCompletionHandler
;
  CLLocation *foundLocation;
  NSMutableData *data;
  NSString *latitude;
  NSString *longitude;
  NSString *responseStr;
  NSUInteger errorCode;
  NSString *responseErrorMessage;
  NSString *address;
  
  BOOL inLocation;
  BOOL foundFirstLocation;
  
  BOOL accumulatingParsedCharacterData;
  NSMutableString *currentParsedCharacterData;
}
@property (readonly, strong, nonatomic)
        NSFetchRequest
*sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest;
- (void)geocodeSynchronouslyXML:(NSString
*)findLocation;
- (void)geocodeAsynchronouslyXML:(NSString
*)findLocation;
- (void)geocodeAsynchronouslyJSON:
                                 (NSString
*)findLocation;
@end
Next, you update the addLocation:completionHandler: method so that
it knows now to send the message to Geocode with a JSON response.
You comment out the

--- Page 380 ---
[self geocodeAsynchronouslyXML:findLocation];
statement and add the
[self geocodeAsynchronouslyJSON:findLocation]; statement
in bold in Listing 10-4 in RTModel.m.
Listing 10-4: Updating
addLocation:completionHandler: in RTModel.m
- (void)addLocation: (NSString *)findLocation
    completionHandler:(void (^)(
     Annotation *annotation, NSError* error)) completion
{
  /*
…
   */
  addFindLocationCompletionHandler = completion;
//CLGeocoder* geocoder = [[CLGeocoder alloc] init];
//[geocoder geocodeAddressString:findLocation
completionHandler:clGeocodeCompletionHandler];
//[self geocodeSynchronouslyXML:findLocation];
//[self geocodeAsynchronouslyXML:findLocation];
  [self geocodeAsynchronouslyJSON:findLocation];
}
Next, you declare a WSManager method to construct a Geocoder web
service request with a JSON response by adding the bolded code in
Listing 10-5 to WSManager.h.
Listing 10-5: Updating the WSManager.h Interface
@interface WSManager : NSObject
- (void)geocodeSynchronouslyXML:(NSMutableDictionary
*)userParams successBlock:(void (^)(NSDictionary
*))success failureBlock:(void (^)())failure;

--- Page 381 ---
- (void)geocodeAsynchronouslyXML:(NSMutableDictionary
*)userParams successBlock:(void (^)(NSDictionary
*))success failureBlock:(void (^)())failure;
- (void)geocodeAsynchronouslyJSON:
                         (NSMutableDictionary
*)userParams
          successBlock:(void (^)(NSDictionary *))success
          failureBlock:(void (^)())failure;
@end
With all the prep work out of the way, you can now add the geocode
AsynchronouslyJSON: successBlock:failureBlock method itself by
adding the code in Listing 10-6. Much of this is identical to the
geocodeAsynchronouslyXML:successBlock:failureBlock: method
you added in Chapter 9, and as I said then, this method illustrates the
general form for adding a new web service request to the WSManager.
If you’d like, here’s an opportunity to use copy and paste. You can copy
geocodeAsynchronouslyXML:successBlock:failureBlock: and then
take the name, the webService bit, and the message to request the web
service and change it to what I have bolded in Listing 10-6.
I leave it up to you to generalize it at your leisure.
The geocodeAsynchronouslyJSON: successBlock:failureBlock
method will also send the requestAsynchronousWebService:request
message declaration to do the asynchronous load of the Geocoder web
service’s JSON data. But you already added that in Chapter 9, which all
goes to show how easy it is to add a new web service request to the
WSManager class. (See, I told you so.)
Listing 10-6: Adding
geocodeAsynchronouslyJSON:successBlock:fail
ureBlock: to WSManager.m

--- Page 382 ---
- (void)geocodeAsynchronouslyJSON:(NSMutableDictionary
*)
                                                userPara
ms successBlock:(void (^)(NSDictionary *))success
failureBlock:(void (^)())failure {
  
  [self setupGeocodingWebService];
  returnSuccess = success;
  returnFail = failure;
  webService =
     @”http://maps.googleapis.com/maps/api/geocode/json?
”;   
  [params addEntriesFromDictionary:userParams];
  NSMutableURLRequest *request = [self
createGETRequest:webService withParams:params];
  [request setCachePolicy:
   NSURLRequestReloadIgnoringLocalCacheData];
  [request setTimeoutInterval:60];
  [self requestAsynchronousWebService:request];
}
Next, you need to add the method to RTModel.m that actually makes the
web service request to the WSManager — geocodeAsynchronouslyJSON:.
To do that, add the bolded declaration for this method,
geocodeAsynchronouslyXML: in Listing 10-7 to RTModel.m.
Listing 10-7: Updating the RTModel Interface in
the RTModel.m Implementation
#import “RTModel.h”
#import “RTAppDelegate.h”
#import “Destination.h”
#import “PointOfInterest.h”
#import “Annotation.h”
#import “SharedPointOfInterest.h”

--- Page 383 ---
#import “WSManager.h”
typedef void (^addLocationCompletionHandler)(Annotation
*annotation, NSError* error);
@interface RTModel () {  
  NSDictionary *destinationData;
  Destination* destination;
  NSMutableArray *events;
  NSMutableArray *pointsOfInterest;
  NSMutableArray *itinerary;
  NSMutableArray *pointsOfInterestData;
  addLocationCompletionHandler
                        addFindLocationCompletionHandler
;
  CLLocation *foundLocation;
  NSMutableData *data;
  NSString *latitude;
  NSString *longitude;
  NSString *responseStr;
  NSUInteger errorCode;
  NSString *responseErrorMessage;
  NSString *address;
  
  BOOL inLocation;
  BOOL foundFirstLocation;
  
  BOOL accumulatingParsedCharacterData;
  NSMutableString *currentParsedCharacterData;
}
@property (readonly, strong, nonatomic) NSFetchRequest
*sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest;
- (void)geocodeSynchronouslyXML:(NSString
*)findLocation;
- (void)geocodeAsynchronouslyXML:(NSString
*)findLocation;
- (void)geocodeAsynchronouslyJSON:

--- Page 384 ---
                                 (NSString
*)findLocation;
@end
To keep things rolling along, you need to add some new constants to
RTDefines.h — the bolded code in Listing 10-8, to be more precise.
You’ll be using these constants to process the JSON response.
Listing: 10-8: Adding Some New Constants
#define kDestinationPreferenceKey  
                               @”DestinationPreferenceKe
y”
#define kTrackLocationPreference
                                @”trackLocationPreferenc
e”
#define kDestinationCell @”DestinationCell”
#define kItineraryCell @”ItineraryCell”
#define kPointOfInterestCell @”PointOfInterestCell”
#define kAccelerometerFrequency 25
#define kFilteringFactor .1
#define kAccelerationThreshold 2.0
#define kMetersToMiles 1609.344
#define kMetersToMiles 1609.344
#define RESPONSE_STATUS  @”status”
#define RESPONSE_STATUS_TEXT  @”status_text”
#define RESPONSE_STATUS_OK  @”ok”
These may look a little different from the constants you’re used to
because I’m thinking ahead here and trying to save you some work;
you’ll use them in Part IV, where you’ll use Python to create your own
web services. The naming convention for a Python constant is all capital
letters with underscores separating words.
Time now to add the new geocodeAsynchronouslyJSON: method in
Listing 10-9 to RTModel.m.

--- Page 385 ---
This method is identical in form — and even has some of the same code
— as the geocodeAsynchronouslyXML: you added in Chapter 9.
As I explain Chapter 9, this is an example of a general form that you
would use in your app — how to have a model class send a message to
the WSManager, have the WSManager then make a web service request,
and then process the result. In this case, the only difference is in how
you process the response — JSON as opposed to XML.
And, because the differences are so slight, this is a great opportunity to
save yourself some work by doing the ol’ copy-and-paste thing one more
time. To make the modifications, you need to follow these steps:
1. Copy geocodeAsynchronouslyXML: in RTModel.m and paste it
back into RTModel.m.
2. Change the method name from geocodeAsynchronouslyXML to
geocodeAsynchronouslyJSON.
3. Delete the success block:
void (^success) (NSDictionary *) =
                           ^(NSDictionary
*response) {
…
    
addFindLocationCompletionHandler
                               (foundAnnotation,
nil);
};
4. Add the new success block in Listing 10-9 to the geocodeAsyn
chronouslyJSON: method — put it where the old success block
was.
I’ll explain this code after the next step
5. Delete the
geocodeAsynchronouslyXML:successBlock:failureBlock: message to
WSManager and replace it with the geocodeAsynchronously

--- Page 386 ---
JSON:successBlock:failureBlock: message in the
geocodeAsynchronously JSON: method you just added to
RTModel.m by deleting the bolded-underlined-italicized code in
Listing 10-10, and replacing it with the bolded code in Listing 10-
10.
Listing 10-9: The success block for
geocodeAsynchronouslyJSON:
void (^success) (NSDictionary *) =
                              ^(NSDictionary *response)
{
    
  data = [response objectForKey:@”response”];
  responseStr = [[NSString alloc] initWithData:data
                          encoding:
NSUTF8StringEncoding];
  NSLog(@”JSON response:\n%@\n”, responseStr);
    
  NSError *error = nil;
  NSDictionary *responseDict =
       [NSJSONSerialization JSONObjectWithData:data  
                                  options:0
error:&error];
    
  if (error != nil) {
    UIAlertView *alert = [[UIAlertView alloc]
      initWithTitle:
                  @”Your request could not be carried
out”
      message:@”There is a problem with the data
returned
                                          from the
server”
      delegate:nil
      cancelButtonTitle:@”OK” otherButtonTitles:nil];

--- Page 387 ---
    [alert show];
    return;
  }
  else {
    NSString *statusCode =
               [responseDict
valueForKey:RESPONSE_STATUS];
    if (![RESPONSE_STATUS_OK
caseInsensitiveCompare:statusCode] ==   
                                          NSOrderedSame)
{
      NSString* errorMessage;
      NSString *error =
          [responseDict
valueForKey:RESPONSE_STATUS_TEXT];
      NSString *trimmedError =
        [error stringByTrimmingCharactersInSet:
             [NSCharacterSet
                       whitespaceAndNewlineCharacterSet]
];
      if ((error == nil) ||
           ((id) error == [NSNull null]) ||
           ([error length] == 0) || (trimmedError == 0))
          
        errorMessage =  @”An error occurred while
communicating with the server.  We will look  
                                               into
this”;
      else
        errorMessage = error;
        UIAlertView *alert = [[UIAlertView alloc]
          initWithTitle:@”Your request could not be
carried out - the server responded
                                            with an
error”
           message:errorMessage

--- Page 388 ---
           delegate:nil
           cancelButtonTitle:@”OK”
otherButtonTitles:nil];
        [alert show];
        return;
      }
    }
    
  NSArray *results =
                   [responseDict
objectForKey:@”results”];
  if ([results count]  > 0) {
    Annotation *foundAnnotation =
                                [[Annotation alloc]
init];
    NSDictionary *result = [results objectAtIndex:0];
    NSDictionary *geometry =
                        [result
objectForKey:@”geometry”];
    NSDictionary *location =
                      [geometry
objectForKey:@”location”];
    latitude = [location valueForKey:@”lat”];
    longitude  = [location valueForKey:@”lng”];
      
    CLLocationCoordinate2D coordinate;
    coordinate.latitude = [latitude doubleValue];
    coordinate.longitude = [longitude doubleValue];
      
    foundAnnotation.coordinate = coordinate;
    foundAnnotation.subtitle =
    [NSString stringWithFormat:@”Lat:%f Lon:%f”,
        [latitude doubleValue], [longitude
doubleValue]];
    foundAnnotation.title = findLocation;
      

--- Page 389 ---
    addFindLocationCompletionHandler(foundAnnotation,
                                                     nil
);
  }
};
Listing 10-10: Send the
geocodeAsynchronouslyJSON:success
Block:failureBlock: message instead
- (void)geocodeAsynchronouslyJSON:
                               (NSString *)findLocation
{
void (^success) (NSDictionary *) =
                              ^(NSDictionary *response)
{
    
   …
  };
  void (^failure) (NSError *) = ^(NSError *error ){
   …
  };
  
  latitude = @”n/a”;
  longitude = @”n/a”;
  errorCode = 0;
  responseErrorMessage = @””;
  NSMutableDictionary *params =
                       [[NSMutableDictionary alloc]
init];
  [params setObject:findLocation forKey:@”address”];
  WSManager *wsManager = [[WSManager alloc] init];
  [wsManager geocodeAsynchronouslyXML:params      
               successBlock:success
failureBlock:failure];
  [wsManager geocodeAsynchronouslyJSON:params   

--- Page 390 ---
               successBlock:success
failureBlock:failure];  
  }
When you’re done, geocodeAsynchronouslyJSON: should look like
Listing 10-11.
Listing 10-11: Adding
geocodeAsynchronouslyJSON: to RTModel.m
- (void)geocodeAsynchronouslyJSON:
                               (NSString *)findLocation
{
  void (^success) (NSDictionary *) =
                              ^(NSDictionary *response)
{
    
    data = [response objectForKey:@”response”];
    responseStr = [[NSString alloc] initWithData:data
                          encoding:
NSUTF8StringEncoding];
    NSLog(@”JSON response:\n%@\n”, responseStr);
    
    NSError *error = nil;
    NSDictionary *responseDict =
       [NSJSONSerialization JSONObjectWithData:data  
                                  options:0
error:&error];
    
    if (error != nil) {
      UIAlertView *alert = [[UIAlertView alloc]
        initWithTitle:@”Your request could not be
carried out”
        message:@”There is a problem with the data
returned from the server”
        delegate:nil

--- Page 391 ---
        cancelButtonTitle:@”OK” otherButtonTitles:nil];
      [alert show];
      return;
    }
    else {
      NSString *statusCode =
               [responseDict
valueForKey:RESPONSE_STATUS];
      if (![RESPONSE_STATUS_OK
caseInsensitiveCompare:statusCode] ==   
                                          NSOrderedSame)
{
        NSString* errorMessage;
        NSString *error =
          [responseDict
valueForKey:RESPONSE_STATUS_TEXT];
        NSString *trimmedError =
          [error stringByTrimmingCharactersInSet:
            [NSCharacterSet
                       whitespaceAndNewlineCharacterSet]
];
        if ((error == nil) ||
           ((id) error == [NSNull null]) ||
           ([error length] == 0) || (trimmedError == 0))
          
          errorMessage =  @”An error occurred while
communicating with the server.  We will look into
this”;
        else
          errorMessage = error;
          UIAlertView *alert = [[UIAlertView alloc]
            initWithTitle:@”Your request could not be  
                    carried out - the server responded
                    with an error”
            message:errorMessage
            delegate:nil

--- Page 392 ---
            cancelButtonTitle:@”OK”
otherButtonTitles:nil];
        [alert show];
        return;
      }
    }
    
    NSArray *results =
                   [responseDict
objectForKey:@”results”];
    if ([results count]  > 0) {
      Annotation *foundAnnotation =
                                [[Annotation alloc]
init];
      NSDictionary *result = [results objectAtIndex:0];
      NSDictionary *geometry =
                        [result
objectForKey:@”geometry”];
      NSDictionary *location =
                      [geometry
objectForKey:@”location”];
      latitude = [location valueForKey:@”lat”];
      longitude  = [location valueForKey:@”lng”];
      
      CLLocationCoordinate2D coordinate;
      coordinate.latitude = [latitude doubleValue];
      coordinate.longitude = [longitude doubleValue];
      
      foundAnnotation.coordinate = coordinate;
      foundAnnotation.subtitle =
        [NSString stringWithFormat:@”Lat:%f Lon:%f”,
        [latitude doubleValue], [longitude
doubleValue]];
      foundAnnotation.title = findLocation;
      
      addFindLocationCompletionHandler(foundAnnotation,

--- Page 393 ---
                                                     nil
);
    }
  };
  void (^failure) (NSError *) = ^(NSError *error ){
    NSString *errorMessage = [error
localizedDescription];
    UIAlertView *alertView = [[UIAlertView alloc]
                              initWithTitle:@”Error
getting response from server”
           message:errorMessage delegate:nil
           cancelButtonTitle:@”OK”
otherButtonTitles:nil];
    [alertView show];
    return;
  };
  
  latitude = @”n/a”;
  longitude = @”n/a”;
  errorCode = 0;
  responseErrorMessage = @””;
  NSMutableDictionary *params =
                       [[NSMutableDictionary alloc]
init];
  [params setObject:findLocation forKey:@”address”];
  WSManager *wsManager = [[WSManager alloc] init];
  [wsManager geocodeAsynchronouslyXML:params    
               successBlock:success
failureBlock:failure];    
  [wsManager geocodeAsynchronouslyJSON:params   
               successBlock:success
failureBlock:failure];  
  }
Although this code does the same thing as its XML counterpart as far as
creating all the appropriate annotations, the response processing is

--- Page 394 ---
actually quite different. First and foremost, you have no delegates to deal
with; you simply send the JSONObjectWithData:options:error: class
message to the NSJSONSerialization, and it will serialize (notice that
because of the property list objects, it’s really [de]serialization rather
than parsing) the response and return it in a dictionary, with the response
keys as the dictionary keys. This technique makes getting the data out of
the response much easier than having to figure out the parsing logic.
(Although, to be fair, there are XML parsers out there that will do
similar things — they just aren’t found in the iOS SDK.)
NSDictionary *responseDict =
       [NSJSONSerialization JSONObjectWithData:data  
                                  options:0
error:&error];
Because you’re working over a network and using a server to execute
your request, there is lots of room for errors. You’ll have the WSLoader
class manage all the out-and-out network errors, but in this particular
success block, you’ll also handle errors that arise with the actual content
of the response.
The first thing you check for is an error from the NSJSONSerialization
object.
if (error != nil) {
  UIAlertView *alert = [[UIAlertView alloc]
    initWithTitle:@”Your request could not be carried
out”
    message:@”There is a problem with the data returned
                                          from the
server”
    delegate:nil
    cancelButtonTitle:@”OK” otherButtonTitles:nil];
  [alert show];
  return;
}

--- Page 395 ---
If there’s an error, you post an alert. (Okay, that’s the least you have to
do; at this stage of the game, this is all just really developer-oriented —
when you enter the production stage, you’ll need to do more than just
post a measly alert).
Assuming the deserializer did its job correctly, the next thing you do is
check the dictionary for the entry corresponding to the status key.
if (![RESPONSE_STATUS_OK
caseInsensitiveCompare:statusCode] ==   
                                          NSOrderedSame)
{
As I mention earlier, the JSON response has two root elements —
status and results — and they will be the two entries in the dictionary.
 Most web services will return some sort of status code to let you
know about your request. The Google Geocoding web service is no
exception. Its status code can have the following values:
 “OK” indicates that no errors occurred; the address was
successfully parsed and at least one geocode was returned.
 “ZERO_RESULTS” indicates that the geocode was successful but
returned no results. This may occur if the geocode was passed a
non-existent address or a lat/lng in a remote location.
 “OVER_QUERY_LIMIT” indicates that you are over your quota.
 “REQUEST_DENIED” indicates that your request was denied,
generally because of the lack of a sensor parameter.
 “INVALID_REQUEST” generally indicates that the query (address
or lat/lng) is missing.

--- Page 396 ---
If the status code is not OK, you start checking for various kinds of
errors. The first thing you look for is whether the error returned is blank:
NSString* errorMessage;
NSString *error =
          [responseDict
valueForKey:RESPONSE_STATUS_TEXT];
NSString *trimmedError =
             [error stringByTrimmingCharactersInSet:
      [NSCharacterSet
whitespaceAndNewlineCharacterSet]];
if ((error == nil) ||  ((id) error == [NSNull null]) ||
           ([error length] == 0) || (trimmedError == 0))
Most of what you see in the above if statement is straightforward.
You’re checking to make sure there is no error object in the
RESPONSE_STATUS_TEXT, or if there is an error object returned, it is an
NSNull object, or the length is 0. (The last two aren’t going to happen
here, but I did want to show you some responses you might see with
other web services.) The trimmed Error is something you may not be
familiar with however, so let me explain it.
stringByTrimmingCharactersInSet: removes the characters contained
in a given character set. What you’re doing here is making sure that if
there is an error string returned, it does have something in it. In other
words, I want to see if it has more than a space, tab, newline, or nextline
character. The whitespaceAndNewlineCharacterSet is a character set
containing space, tab, newline, and nextline characters and the
stringByTrimming CharactersInSet: method will remove all of those
characters and enable you to see if there is any real content there. (This
ain’t gonna happen in our example, but hey,
stringByTrimmingCharactersInSet: is a handy method to know about
regardless.)

--- Page 397 ---
 I’m delving a bit deeper into the weeds here than I did with my
explanation of XML processing simply because you’ll be doing the
same thing you do in geocodeAsynchronouslyJSON: when you
create and use your own web service in Part IV. So, I figure that it’s
better to explain these details now rather than later.
So if the status key is not OK and there is no error entry
error == nil
or the entry is a null object
((id) error == [NSNull null]
or if the error length is zero
([error length] == 0)
or if the error just constrains space, tab, newline, and nextline characters
(trimmedError == 0)
the alert message will be
errorMessage = @”An error occurred while communicating
                with the server.  We will look into
this”;
If you do get back an error object when the status key is not OK, you set
the errorMessage to the error and post the alert:
errorMessage = error;
UIAlertView *alert = [[UIAlertView alloc]
  initWithTitle:@”Your request could not be  
         carried out - the server responded with an
error”
  message:errorMessage
  delegate:nil

--- Page 398 ---
  cancelButtonTitle:@”OK” otherButtonTitles:nil];
  [alert show];
  return;
  }
}
If in fact you don’t get any errors at all, you retrieve the array in the
results key:
NSArray *results = [responseDict
objectForKey:@”results”];
As you saw way back in Listing 10-2, this is an array that has a
dictionary consisting of four entries (the one I have bolded below —
geometry — is the entry you are interest in):
“results” : [
      {
         “address_components” : [
            …
         ],
         “formatted_address” : “…”,
         “geometry” : {
            …
         },
         “types” : [
            ...
         ]
      }
],
 The braces [] indicate the begin and end of an array, and curly
braces {} indicate the begin and end of a dictionary.

--- Page 399 ---
You check to make sure there are values in the results arrays, and if there
are, you go ahead and get the values you need to format the annotation.
if ([results count]  > 0) {
  Annotation *foundAnnotation = [[Annotation alloc]
init];
You’re looking for the latitude and longitude. To do that, you get the
single array entry — the dictionary:
NSDictionary *result = [results objectAtIndex:0];
In the result dictionary you get the value for the geometry key, which is
also a dictionary:
NSDictionary *geometry =
                        [result
objectForKey:@”geometry”];
If you take another look at Listing 10-2, you can see that the geometry
dictionary has three entries
“geometry” : {
   “location” : {
      “lat” : 40.74855840,
      “lng” : -73.98574649999999
   },
   “location_type” : “APPROXIMATE”,
   “viewport” : {
      “northeast” : {
         “lat” : 40.75701090,
         “lng” : -73.96973910
      },
      “southwest” : {
         “lat” : 40.74010480,
         “lng” : -74.00175390
      }
   }

--- Page 400 ---
Location_type gives some additional data about the location and
viewport is a bounding box used to frame a result when displaying it —
interesting perhaps, but not what you’re looking for. (For our purposes,
neither of these entries is important.) You need to zero in on location.
The value of the location key is also a dictionary:
NSDictionary *location =
                      [geometry
objectForKey:@”location”];
The location dictionary has two entries — the latitude and longitude
you’re looking for:
“location” : {
   “lat” : 40.74855840,
   “lng” : -73.98574649999999
},
You then grab those values and format the annotation:
latitude = [location valueForKey:@”lat”];
longitude  = [location valueForKey:@”lng”];
CLLocationCoordinate2D coordinate;
coordinate.latitude = [latitude doubleValue];
coordinate.longitude = [longitude doubleValue];
      
foundAnnotation.coordinate = coordinate;
foundAnnotation.subtitle =
  [NSString stringWithFormat:@”Lat:%f Lon:%f”,
        [latitude doubleValue], [longitude
doubleValue]];
foundAnnotation.title = findLocation;
      
addFindLocationCompletionHandler(foundAnnotation, nil);
After all this work you’ll see the annotation (the red pin with the callout)
that you see in Chapter 8, Figure 1.

--- Page 401 ---
There’s a Pattern to Using Web
Services
One of my goals for this book is to give you some patterns that you can
reuse in your own apps. In that regard, WSLoader and WSManager can
function as a framework for making web service requests and processing
the response. To support a set of web services using a given resource,
you would do the following:
1. Add a method to WSManager that makes the request for a given
HTTP method (GET, DELETE, POST, etc.)
2. Add a method to WSManager to set up the request if there are
parameters common to a set of web services.
3. Add a method to WSManager to create the NSURLRequest for a given
HTTP method (GET, DELETE, POST, etc)
4. Add a method to YourModel to make the request to the WSManager
for the web service.
5. Add a method to YourModel that processes the JSON response
(returning it in a dictionary) and checks for errors.
In the next few sections I’ll explain each one of these steps and — when
I can — give you a template for the method. In the remainder of this
book, you’ll be using these templates as you enhance RoadTrip to use
the web services you’ll be creating.
Add a method to WSManager that
makes the request
For a new web service, start by adding a method to WSManager that
makes the web service request. You’ll need a version of this method for

--- Page 402 ---
each type of HTTP request (GET, DELETE, POST, and so on). You can see a
template for the method in Listing 10-12.
Listing 10-12: The WSManager Request
- (void) webServiceHTTPMethodWebService:
(NSString*)service userParams:(NSMutableDictionary
*)userParams successBlock:(void (^)(NSDictionary
*))success failureBlock:(void (^)())failure {
  [self setupWebServiceWebService];
  returnSuccess = success;
  returnFail = failure;
  webService = [NSString stringWithFormat:@”%@%@?”,    
                                       BASE_URL,
service];   
  [params addEntriesFromDictionary:userParams];
  NSMutableURLRequest *request = [self
      createHTTPMethodRequest:webService
                                       withParams:params
];
  [request setCachePolicy:
                NSURLRequestReloadIgnoringLocalCacheData
];
  [request setTimeoutInterval:60];
  [self requestAsynchronousWebService:request];
}
This a generic web service request — the service parameter allows you
to specify which web service you want.
You’ll create a request using the appropriate HTTP method (GET, PUT,
DELETE, and so on) based on what you want to do.
Add a method to WSManager to set up
the request

--- Page 403 ---
You’ll want to add a method to set up the web service if there are
parameters common to the set of web services. (In Part IV, I explain
about key, which is one of those kinds of parameters.) A template for
that kind of method is shown in Listing 10-13
Listing 10-13: Doing Your Web Service Setup
- (void)setupWebServiceWebService {
params = [[NSMutableDictionary alloc] init];
//add your parameters here
}
Add a method to WSManager to create
the NSURLRequest
You actually already created a method that will create a NSURLRequest
for a web service that uses a GET method and the necessary parameters
needed by the web service back in Chapter 7 —
createGETRequest:withParams:. You’ll be able to use that method for
any web service that use the GET method, but you’ll have to add new
methods to support other HTTP methods such as POST and DELETE,
which you will do in the Bonus Chapter, “Adding and Deleting Points of
Interest,” available for download from this book’s website
A template for that kind of method is shown in Listing 10-14.
Listing 10-14: Creating the NSURL Request
- (NSMutableURLRequest *)createHTTPMethodRequest:
      (NSString *)baseURL
                   withParams:(NSDictionary *)userParams
{
  
  NSMutableString *queryString = [NSMutableString
string];

--- Page 404 ---
  if (userParams != nil) {
    for (id key in userParams) {
      id value = [userParams valueForKey:key];
      NSString *paramString =
        [NSString stringWithFormat:@”%@=%@&”, key,
value];
      paramString = [paramString
stringByAddingPercentEscapesUsingEncoding:
                                   NSASCIIStringEncoding
];
      [queryString appendString:paramString];
    }
  }
//add method specific code here
  return request;
}
Add a method to YourModel to make the
request to the WSManager
Turning to your model class, you’ll need to add a method there to make
the request and process the result. You’ll (probably) need one of these
methods for each web service request
A template for that kind of method is shown in Listing 10-15.
Listing 10-15: Requesting a Web Service
- (void)requestWebService {
void (^success) (NSDictionary *) =
                              ^(NSDictionary *response)
{
    
  NSDictionary *responseDict =

--- Page 405 ---
       [self
createWebServiceResponseDictionary:response];
    if (!responseDict)
      return;
  //Your unique processing here
  };
  void (^failure) (NSError *) = ^(NSError *error ){
    NSString *errorMessage = [error
localizedDescription];
    UIAlertView *alertView = [[UIAlertView alloc]
       initWithTitle:@”Error getting response from
server”
       message:errorMessage delegate:nil
       cancelButtonTitle:@”OK” otherButtonTitles:nil];
    [alertView show];
    return;
  };
  
  NSMutableDictionary *params =
                       [[NSMutableDictionary alloc]
init];
  [params requiredObjectsAndKeys];
  WSManager *wsManager = [[WSManager alloc] init];
  [wsManager
webServiceHTTPMethodWebService:@”webservice”
userParams:params successBlock:success  
                                   failureBlock:failure]
;
  }
createWebServiceResponseDictionary: is a method that takes
advantage of the code that will stay the same across any model method
— the code that processes the response and checks for errors.

--- Page 406 ---
Adding a method to YourModel that
processes the JSON response
Finally, still in your model class, add the method that processes a JSON
response and checks for errors.
A template for that kind of method is shown in Listing 10-16.
Listing 10-16: Process JSON response
- (NSDictionary *)
    createWebServiceResponseDictionary:
                                (NSDictionary *)response
{
  
  data = [response objectForKey:@”response”];
  
  NSError *error = nil;
  NSDictionary *responseDict =
    [NSJSONSerialization JSONObjectWithData:data
options:    
             NSJSONReadingMutableContainers
error:&error];
  
  if (error != nil) {
    UIAlertView *alert = [[UIAlertView alloc]
    initWithTitle:@”Your request could not be carried
                                                      ou
t”
      message:@”There is a problem with the data
returned
                                          from the
server”
      delegate:nil cancelButtonTitle:@”OK”
      otherButtonTitles:nil];

--- Page 407 ---
    [alert show];
    return nil;
  }
  else {
    NSString *statusCode =
               [responseDict
valueForKey:RESPONSE_STATUS];
    if (![RESPONSE_STATUS_OK
caseInsensitiveCompare:statusCode] ==   
                                          NSOrderedSame)
{
      NSString* errorMessage;    
      NSString *error =
          [responseDict
valueForKey:RESPONSE_STATUS_TEXT];
      NSString *trimmedError =
        [error stringByTrimmingCharactersInSet:
           [NSCharacterSet
                       whitespaceAndNewlineCharacterSet]
];
      if ((error == nil) ||
          ((id) error == [NSNull null]) ||
          ([error length] == 0) || (trimmedError == 0))
        
        errorMessage =  @”An error occurred while
communicating with the server.  We will look
                                               into
this”;
      else
        errorMessage = error;
      UIAlertView *alert = [[UIAlertView alloc]
         initWithTitle:@”Your request could not be  
         carried out - the server responded with an
error”
        message:errorMessage delegate:nil
        cancelButtonTitle:@”OK” otherButtonTitles:nil];

--- Page 408 ---
      [alert show];
      return nil;
    }
  }
  return responseDict;
You implemented a similar logic in the success block of the
geocodeAsynchronouslyJSON: method in Listing 10-9. The difference
there was that instead of
NSDictionary *responseDict =
       [NSJSONSerialization JSONObjectWithData:data  
                                  options:0
error:&error];
I am using
    NSDictionary *responseDict =
       [NSJSONSerialization JSONObjectWithData:data
options:NSJSONReadingMutableContainers error:&error];
(I bolded the differences to make them more obvious)
options:0 serialized the JSON response into non-mutable arrays and
dictionaries. options: NSJSONReadingMutableContainers serializes
the response into mutable arrays and dictionaries that you can later add
and remove entries from.
And you’re done — at least in terms of the broad strokes. In Part IV,
you’ll use these prototypes to make calls to the web services you’ll
develop and get a chance to fill in the details.
Putting It All Back Together
Now that I’ve put you through your paces in terms of the mechanics of
web services consumption, in preparation for Part IV I’d like you to roll

--- Page 409 ---
back to how you did geocoding before. You’ll continue using WSManager
and WSLoader, but I’ll have you return to using the CLGeocoder in the
iOS SDK. Don’t worry; you can leave all the code you’ve added. To
return to using the CLGeocoder, just uncomment out the code in the
addLocation:completionHandler: method by deleting the bolded-
underlined-italicized comment identifier (//) and the comment start (/*)
and end (*/) sequence identifiers, and then comment out the bolded code
in Listing 10-17.
Listing 10-17: Back to Where You Were
- (void)addLocation: (NSString *)findLocation
completionHandler:(void (^)
    (Annotation *annotation, NSError* error)) completion
{
/*
  void (^clGeocodeCompletionHandler)(NSArray *, NSError
*) = ^(NSArray *placemarks, NSError *error){
    CLPlacemark *placemark = [placemarks
objectAtIndex:0];
    Annotation *foundAnnotation;
    if (error!= nil || placemark == nil) {
      NSLog(@”Geocoder Failure! Error code: %u,
description: %@, and reason: %@”, error.code, [error
localizedDescription], [error
localizedFailureReason]);
    }
    else {
      foundAnnotation = [[Annotation alloc]init];
      foundAnnotation.coordinate =
                            placemark.location.coordinat
e;
      foundAnnotation.subtitle =
        [NSString stringWithFormat:@”Lat:%f Lon:%f”,
placemark.location.coordinate.latitude,
placemark.location.coordinate.longitude];

--- Page 410 ---
      foundAnnotation.title = findLocation;
    }
    foundLocation = [[CLLocation alloc]
      initWithLatitude:foundAnnotation.coordinate.latitu
de
          longitude:foundAnnotation.coordinate.longitude
];
    addFindLocationCompletionHandler
                                 (foundAnnotation,
error);
  };
*/
  addFindLocationCompletionHandler = completion;
//CLGeocoder* geocoder = [[CLGeocoder alloc] init];
//[geocoder geocodeAddressString:findLocation
completionHandler:clGeocodeCompletionHandler];
//[self geocodeSynchronouslyXML:findLocation];
//[self geocodeAsynchronouslyXML:findLocation];
//[self geocodeAsynchronouslyJSON:findLocation];
}
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 411 ---
Part IV
Building Your Own Web
Service
In this part . . .

--- Page 412 ---
Here’s where you use Python (I show you how) to create your own web
services and upload them to Google App Engine, where they’ll be
available to anyone with an Internet connection (and your super-special
secret API key).
After that, it’s “Up In The Air, Junior Birdman” — doing the whole
thing again, but this time for your own app.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 413 ---
Chapter 11
The RoadTrip Web Services
In This Chapter
 Designing a web service
 Understanding the web service specifications
As things now stand in the RoadTrip app, the points of interest available
to a user to add to his or her itinerary come bundled with the app in the
Destinations.plist. This, of course, does tend to make updating the
points of interest a bit cumbersome because to do so you would have to
send out a new version of the app.
In this part, you get to change that.
First, you’ll have the app download the points of interest using a web
service. In broad terms, this ends up being very similar to how you used
the Google Geocoding API, as spelled out in Chapter 7. In this case,
however, you actually use your own web services — ones that you
create — instead of ones commonly available. What’s more, because
you want to save network bandwidth and create the best possible user
experience, you’ll create a web service that the RoadTrip app can use to
determine whether it has the latest set of points of interest and then
download only the latest set if an update is actually required.
You’ll also, as the developer, need to be able to add and delete points of
interest from the web service’s database.
Over the next few chapters, you’ll be implementing these various web
services using Google’s App Engine as the host.

--- Page 414 ---
Designing Web Services
Although a web service is a web service is a web service, you could be
designing them in two very different contexts.
The first context is application-oriented. In this case, you have an
application and you want to use web services to create an Application
Ecosystem and reap the benefits that they provide, such as the ability to
do the following:
 Offload processing and data to a larger more powerful
computer, allowing you to create applications that would
normally tax the device’s capability.
 Deliver the most up-to-date information.
 Allow multiple applications, even multiple instances of the same
application, to share data.
 Have a greater control over data and business rules, enabling a
way to create authoritative data and business rules.
 Deliver a seamless and consistent user experience across
multiple applications that share data and business rules.
The second context in which you can design web services is resource-
oriented. You have access to a number of existing resources that you
want to be able to exploit in applications to deliver the same kind of
benefits in the preceding list. In this case, you’ll need to design the web
services to be sure that you don’t create a hodgepodge of one-off web
services that are difficult and expensive to maintain and develop.
Instead, you’ll want to create a (web) service-oriented architecture
driven by both the available resources and enterprise level requirements.
 Although a resource-oriented approach is interesting and capable
of providing a very high return on time and effort invested, I’m

--- Page 415 ---
showing you the application-oriented approach in this chapter.
Regardless of which direction you take, you need to follow some
fundamental principles when designing your web services. I explain
them next. (Admittedly, the web services needed to support RoadTrip are
pretty simple, but the fundamental principles of web services design
apply to them nonetheless.)
The Point of a Web Services
Architecture
When you’re designing the web services you need, you need think in
terms of a service-oriented architecture. And just as I explain in Chapter
6 that the REST (Representational State Transfer) architecture was
developed to meet certain requirements, a service-oriented architecture
also needs to meet certain requirements. Although there are lots of
variations and extensions on the theme, at the end of the day your design
really comes down to two requirements:
 Services have to be extensible and easy to change.
 Services have to optimize network performance.
Design for extensibility (and change)
Extensibility is really the whole point behind not only web service
design, but object-oriented programming as well — the “and change”
part of this section’s title is, honestly speaking, pretty redundant. What
you want is an application that you can extend as requirements broaden,
enhance, as requirements deepen, and modify as requirements change.
It would also be nice to be able to reuse web services in other contexts,
but with the exception of frameworks, re-usability has been an elusive

--- Page 416 ---
Figure 11-
1: The Multi-
Application
Ecosystem.
goal for object-oriented programming and web services.
But what does work is taking advantage of a set of common services
when you’re developing an application in either an Application
Ecosystem or a Multi-Application Ecosystem. For example, you may
have several applications that need to have access to customer
information, as illustrated in Figure 11-1. There you can see several
applications accessing the same web services.
Optimizing network performance
The overall design goals for a service-oriented architecture are generally
similar to what you’d put together for an object-oriented one. There is,
however, one added wrinkle in designing a service-oriented architecture
that is not normally taken into account when designing an object-
oriented architecture — network performance.
Whenever services are provided over a network, time gets introduced as
an important factor. The simple fact of the matter is that the connection
setup as well as the routing of both the request and response take time.

--- Page 417 ---
That means you’ll need to design services that try to reduce the total
time spent in network setup and routing.
Optimizing network performance is important to do right from the start.
If your web service application takes 5 seconds to process a request
because of network latency, you’ll have unhappy users (and pretty soon
no users).
There’s another issue here as well.
The less time you spend in network overhead processing,
authentication/authorization, and serialization, the more your existing
hardware can handle, But you need to be sure that additional processing
power can be added transparently when necessary. This is what the term
scalable means. That is, as demands on your servers increase, you need
to be able to simply add more hardware that does more of the same
thing.
The Basic Model — Stateless Client
Server
I’m not saying anything drastically new when I tell you that web
services are really all about client-server.
The client-server model of computing distributes the tasks of an
application between the providers of a resource or service (called
servers) and service requesters (called clients). The client-server model
has been around for quite a while — since the 1980s, which of course is
ancient history. Back in the day, it was used in reference to personal
computers on a network (usually a LAN). It has evolved over time and is
recognized now as the one of the central ideas of network computing. As
I explain back in Chapter 6, the Internet’s main application protocols,

--- Page 418 ---
such as HTTP, SMTP, Telnet, and DNS, use client-server. Web browsers
and web servers have a client-server relationship as well.
Although in the case of web services, clients and servers communicate
over a network and run on separate hardware, the approach actually
includes the possibility that the client and server may reside in the same
system (as it does when you are testing using localhost). A server has
one or more “programs” (web services) which share their resources with
clients. A client doesn’t share any of its resources, but it gets most of its
resources — and often much of its functionality — from the server.
In short, client-server is about the relationship of cooperating programs
in an application with the server proving a service to one or many
clients, which make requests for such services.
I pointed out some of the advantages to this approach in the “Designing
Web Services” section, earlier in the chapter, but I want to stress another
advantage as well: Because clients are consumers that request
representations using a well-defined interface, they aren’t concerned
with the mechanics of how something actually gets done or how it gets
stored. (For more on my use of the term representations here, see
Chapter 6.) This lack of interest means that it’s much easier to isolate the
client code from those kinds of changes. Servers, on the other hand,
aren’t concerned with the user interface or user state, so servers can be
simpler and less concerned with changes in implementation side effects.
Servers and clients may also be replaced and developed independently,
as long as the interface is not altered.
Score 1 point for extensibility.
But client server is not always the same client server. In the case of
service-oriented architectures, the clients need to be stateless. That
means no client context is stored on the server between requests. (That
doesn’t mean that clients can’t send data to update the server.) Each
request from any client contains all the information necessary to service
the request, and any session state is held in the client. As I explain in

--- Page 419 ---
Chapter 6 in my coverage of REST, this allows for scalability of servers,
since a request can always be routed to any available server.
And so score 1 point for scalability.
Making Services Extensible
Although you can apply many, many principles of software engineering
when creating extensible software, there are two principles that seem
fundamental to both object-oriented programming and service-oriented
architectures: encapsulation (at the individual service level) and loose
coupling (at the architectural level).The next two sections take a stab at
explaining these principles.
Keep things private with encapsulation
A good object-oriented program limits its exposure to the outside world,
and a good web service should do the same. Implementation details
shouldn’t be visible outside of a service boundary. If they are, you run
the risk of creating a dependency on the service implementation by the
service’s clients and limits your options in changing or modifying the
service.
When it comes to data, the REST architecture that I explain in Chapter 6
provides real guidance here. Thinking in terms of resource
representations keeps the implementation details of the data well hidden
from the client.
In addition, you need to limit the services you make public because there
will be services you create that will be used within a web service, but not
meant to be used by clients.

--- Page 420 ---
Loose coupling
Although there have been millions of words spoken about how to design
services, the two most important words are
Loose coupling
Loose coupling allows you to make changes without breaking clients
(including other services) that use the service under consideration.
So what exactly is loose coupling?
A loosely coupled system is one where each of its components has little
or no knowledge (or makes no use of the knowledge it may have) of
other components. It had its start in object-oriented programming, where
it referred to the degree of direct knowledge that one class has of
another. Loose coupling was not about encapsulation or about one
class’s knowledge (or lack thereof) of another class’s attributes or
implementation, but rather it was about knowledge (or lack thereof) of
that other class itself.
Applying loose coupling to services in the aggregate means presenting a
minimum interface to the clients. The client deals with as few services as
possible. So, even though you may want to break down a service into
smaller pieces (for example, using a technique known as composition),
you never want the client to know that fact. The client is happy dealing
with one service, even if that service then turns around and redistributes
that work to other services.
Making services cohesive, complete, and
non-overlapping
When you first start working with services, you might have a tendency
to develop a service for every occasion. This tendency can create a real
mess at the enterprise level if you’re exposing resources to be used by

--- Page 421 ---
mobile devices that replicate (or even extend) existing functionality
available on other platforms (as web applications, for example).
Without a well-planned architecture, you’ll risk finding yourself with a
mess of services that become a maintenance and evolvability nightmare.
Your service-oriented architecture needs to be complete (meet all the
requirements) in specifying the required services at the enterprise level.
For example, a trade service allows you to create, modify, cancel, and
track a trade. Services are then linked together — say, a service that
creates a trade request together with another that reports the results — to
support the business process.
Finally, services need to be functionally cohesive, a set of operations that
belong together because of their function. A trade service does not also
make coffee for you, as nice as that would be.
Well-Formed Services
Before I let you loose so you can tackle all the services you’ll need to
support RoadTrip, I want you to understand what services are not. If you
have any programming experience at all, you probably have some ideas
about how to do program design, and I want to make sure you don’t let
those notions — as admirable as they may be in another context — get
in your way.
Services are not functions
In the early days of service-oriented architectures, there was a tendency
to implement services as something called Remote Procedure Calls —
RPC, for short. RPC web services presented a distributed function (or
method) call interface to users. If you’ve done any development work,
you’re sure to have stumbled across an RPC web service at some point

--- Page 422 ---
in your professional life. The trouble with the whole RPC concept,
though, is that it insists on micromanaging every step in the process.
Putting it succinctly, services should be about teleportation to your
destination, not turn-by-turn navigation. You want to tell services what
you need, not be required to send detailed instructions in the form of
method calls to a service on how to do that. Services should not be
recipes that need to be slaved over; rather, they should be finished
products served to the user on a silver platter.
Not that I’m piling on or anything, but aside from the tight coupling
between the client and the server (bad dog!) and the lack of
encapsulation (very bad dog!), RPC-type services could, under certain
circumstances leave the underlying data in an inconsistent state (truly
evil dog!). So, my advice to you: Banish all thought of RPCs.
Services are not methods
Although anyone with object-oriented programming experience is hip to
the Services-Are-Not-Functions manifesto, there’s a risk that budding
developers could still think about services in terms of remote objects.
In Chapter 6, I explain that even though REST is not the appropriate
architecture for our services, the REST architecture nevertheless
embodies a set of basic principles that you can use.
The two principles I want to examine here are a) identification of
resources and b) manipulation of resources through representations.
Let’s start with resources. The resource is the key abstraction of
information in REST, where any information that can be named can be a
resource. As far as RoadTrip is concerned, points of interest are a
resource.
Now let’s look at manipulation of resources through representation.

--- Page 423 ---
A resource has one or more representations that are conceptually
separate from the resource itself. As you will soon discover, there are
several representations of the points of interest resource you’ll be
needing.
One of these representations can be thought of as all the points of
interest for a destination. Another representation would illustrate the last
time the resource was updated to let you know if you should download a
new set, There are also a few more you’ll discover later in this chapter.
These representations correspond to the web services you will be
creating.
So what does this have to do with object-oriented programming?
There is a temptation to think about resources as objects (not a problem)
and web services as methods (a potential problem).
The real problem with thinking about services as methods is that
methods may be at a level of granularity that is too detailed for services.
Think about a service as a bakery. As a customer, you don’t enter the
bakery and provide the recipe for the lemon meringue pie and tell the
people involved what to do to turn out that pie. (That would be the RPC
route, and we’re not going there.) You don’t even tell each participant in
the scenario what to do. (Delivery person, you deliver those ingredients;
baker, you make and bake the pie; floor person, you carry the finished
pie out to the front — the object-oriented approach, in other words).
Instead, you walk in and get the pie; it’s as simple as that.
Both the RPC and Services-as-Objects approaches produce what is
known as chatty interfaces, where you send lots of messages with
(relatively) small amounts of data transferred. Although sometimes that
is appropriate (sending the date and time a resource was last updated for
example) often it’s not. Network round trips to and from a web service
are costly enough, and the cost goes up when clients need to issue
multiple requests to a web service to complete a single logical operation.
The more trips you make to the server, the more overhead you get in

--- Page 424 ---
processing, authentication and authorization, and serialization, which of
course means more network latency.
Face it: When you want that pie, you want to be able to just get it and
not get involved in issuing any other instructions. Yet even though your
interface to a service should offer data in Big Gulp dimensions, that
doesn’t mean that the service implementation itself is not made up of
objects; in fact, it should be, with the service acting as a wrapper for
those objects (just as Trip does for the other model objects in RoadTrip).
A service should encapsulate all the complexity of the business logic
(which is now in the service and not the client) and expose a simple
“method” that allow clients to perform single logical operations and that
is designed to minimize round trips.
The Resource
As I explain, a web service is all about accessing a resource. In the case
of the RoadTrip application, the resource will be the points of interest.
The resource you come up with will be implemented as an application
hosted on the trusty Google App Engine and will be named (drumroll,
please) rtpointsofinterest.
 Although rtpointsofinterest is the name of my resource as it
applies to RoadTrip, you’ll have to come up with your own name
for the resource you create in your own app (Google won’t let you
use the same name). In the next chapter, you’ll have the opportunity
to create a name for your resource, and you’ll have to substitute
your name for rtpointsofinterest. The web services that you’ll
define here can (and should) be named the same, however, so keep
that in mind as you go through this chapter.

--- Page 425 ---
In this chapter, you specify the web services that will be used by your
application. Now, the Google Geocoding web service starts this process
off by specifying the base URL, as follows:
https://maps.googleapis.com/maps/api/geocode
For the points-of-interest resource, you’ll need to specify a base URL as
well. In fact you’ll specify two. When you deploy rtpointsofinterest
to the cloud it will look like:
https://rtpointsofinterest.appspot.com/
 During the development process however, you’ll use a simulator,
and that base URL will be slightly different, and I explain that in
Chapter 12.
The Response
Ask and ye shall receive. In the world of web services, a request for a
representation of a resource is meant to elicit a response. For RoadTrip,
it makes sense to have this response be a dictionary in JSON format.
(For the whole JSON versus XML discussion, see Chapter 7.)
To be more precise, the response will be a dictionary with a single entry
with a key of response (this is created for you automatically in your
App Engine Python application) which will contain the response itself.
Since responses need to let the caller know about the success of the
request, you’ll always include an entry with the key of status in the
response dictionary. The value here will be either
ok
or
error

--- Page 426 ---
For a successful GET request, you’ll create a dictionary entry in the
response dictionary with the key of results, which will contain an
array of dictionaries of Point of Interest data, much like the current
Destination plist. (I’ll specify the keys for the dictionary in each of the
applicable web service descriptions.) For all other successful requests,
instead of a results key whose value is a dictionary, you’ll return a
status_text key whose value is text that indicates the success of the
request.(Again, I’ll specify the specific string when I specify the web
services that will create that response.)
For unsuccessful requests (the value of the status key is error), a
status_text entry will contain the information about the error. (I
explain those as they come up.)
Limiting Unauthorized Web
Service Use
When you create web services and make them available on the Internet,
you want to make sure only clients that are authorized to use the service
can do so.
You can easily make sure of that by implementing a simple API key. The
idea is that all clients would need to send their secret key to the server
for each web service call. On the server side, you check to make sure
that this key is valid and allows access to the API.
An API key can also be used for access control: You can limit the
number of accesses per day for a particular API key.
The API key will be a required parameter for all the
rtpointsofinterest web services (If you recall the Geocoding web
service also had a required parameter, albeit for a different reason).
When you actually dig down into the code needed to create your web

--- Page 427 ---
service — see the next section — I’ll point out where you’ll be adding
the API key parameter.
Designing a Web Service
As I explained, you have two paths you can choose from when it comes
to designing web services: You can either base them on existing
resources or design the web service from scratch to meet the
requirements of your application. Right now, you’re going to take a look
at how to design a web service from scratch.
First things first: What services exactly do you need to enable in order to
have RoadTrip manage its points of interest?
Obviously, the first one that comes to mind is a service capable of
returning all points of interest for a destination — which is what the
RTModel method loadPointsOfInterest does now.
- (void) loadPointsOfInterest {
  
  RTAppDelegate *appDelegate =
            [[UIApplication sharedApplication]
delegate];
  NSString *fileComponent =
    [NSString stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”, @”POI”,     
             appDelegate.destinationPreference,
@”.poi”];
  NSString *filePath = [RTModel filePath:fileComponent];
  NSURL *pointsOfInterestDataURL =
                         [NSURL
fileURLWithPath:filePath];
  pointsOfInterestData = [NSMutableArray
         arrayWithContentsOfURL:pointsOfInterestDataURL]
;
...

--- Page 428 ---
}
Start by figuring out what data the resource requires in order to be able
to return the representation required by the client — the representation
of the resource, to use the terminology from Chapter 6.
The obvious place to start is the data requirements for the
SharedPointOfInterest class. The following lines of code show the
properties that manifest those data requirements:
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * name;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * address;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * comment;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSNumber * displayOrder;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * latitude;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * location;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * longitude;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * subtitle;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * title;
That was fine for Chapter 3, but you don’t need to include all that data in
the resource. The title and subtitle, for example, are used when the
PointOfInterest object is playing its role as a map annotation, so I
don’t need them in the resource. I also don’t need to bother with
displayOrder, because that’s there only for the sake of the view
controller.
Keep in mind, though, that because the data comes from a web resource,
you have to deal with some additional pieces of the puzzle. When your
app owns all the data — meaning it doesn’t have to venture out on the
web to track something down — it’s pretty easy to identify a point of
interest. In RoadTrip, for example, the itinerary is set up in such a way
that you have an object associated with each point of interest that you
can then use to track that point of interest.
When the data is on a web server, however, you need a mechanism in
place that allows you to connect that downloaded data with the data in

--- Page 429 ---
the web service, and to do that you need to add id as a data element.
Finally, you may be interested in the freshness of a point of interest, or
you may want to determine the last time it was updated. Although you
won’t need it in this book, you’ll definitely want to include an updated
field for future enhancements.
So, with all the puzzle pieces in place, the data that makes up the
resource should look like the following:
class PointOfInterest(db.Model):
    name = db.StringProperty(required=True)
    description = db.StringProperty()
    location = db.StringProperty()
    address = db.StringProperty()
    destination = db.StringProperty(required=True)
    coordinate = db.GeoPtProperty(required=True)
    updated = db.DateTimeProperty(required=True,
                                      auto_now_add =
True)
Of course, other than the names listed, you’re probably not familiar with
what all of that code means. Don’t worry; I explain it all in Chapter 13.
For now, all you’ll need to concentrate on is the data itself.
Now let’s look at the representations needed by RoadTrip. You need the
following web services to start with:
 pointsofinterest: Returns the points of interest for a
destination. This is what the application currently constructs
from the Point of Interest data in the plist and what the user
can also add to.
 lastupdate: Returns the date and time the resource itself last
updated. You’ll check that before you download the Points of
Interest representation using the pointsofinterest web service.

--- Page 430 ---
If it hasn’t updated since the last time you downloaded it, you’ll
continue to use the current (cached) data.
Of course, you also want to be able to add and delete points of interest
from the resource, so you need some web services to do that:
 allpointsofinterest: Returns a representation of all the points
of interest, regardless of destination.
 addpointofinterest: Adds a point of interest.
 deletepointofinterest: Deletes a point of interest with a
record id.
To define each of these web services, you need to specify
 The request and its parameters
 The response and its format
Now I take you through specifying a request message and the response
for each of those services, based on RoadTrip’s requirements for points
of interest. I’m not going to take you through the logic of how I derived
these — that would take an entire book on its own. Instead, I’ll have you
learn by example.
I start with pointsofinterest because that is the raison d’être for the
web service.
The pointsofinterest Web Service
Here’s what you need to return the points of interest for a destination.
The request

--- Page 431 ---
To access the pointsofinterest service over HTTP, use the following:
http://rtpointsofinterest.appspot.com/pointsofinterest
                       key=yourKey&destination=destinati
on
Parameters
All parameters are required.
 key (required): the API key. (See the “Limiting Unauthorized
Web Service Use” section, earlier in the chapter, for more on the
API key.)
 destination (required)
The response
Successful response
The value for the results key will contain an array of dictionaries each
of which has the following keys and value types:
Key               Value   
updated           string
description       string or null
destination       string
longitude         string
location          string or null
address:          string or null
latitude          string
id                string
The updated (date) format is yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm:ss.SSSSSS and follows
the Unicode Technical Standard #35 as specified at
http://unicode.org/reports/tr35/.

--- Page 432 ---
Error Response
The status_text key value can contain the following:
exception: missing key
exception: invalid key: key
exception: missing destination
The lastupdate Web Service
Here’s how you return the last time the resource was updated.
The request
To access the lastupdate service over HTTP, use the following:
http://rtpointsofinterest.appspot.com
                       key=yourKey&destination=destinati
on
Parameters
All parameters are required.
 key (required): The API key. (See the “Limiting Unauthorized
Web Service Use” section, earlier in the chapter, for more on the
API key.)
 destination (required)
The response
Successful Response

--- Page 433 ---
The value for the results key will contain an array of dictionaries each
of which has the following keys and value types:
Key               Value   
datetime          string
The datetime format is yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm:ss.SSSSSS and follows the
Unicode Technical Standard #35 as specified at
http://unicode.org/reports/tr35/.
Error Response
The status_text key value can contain the following:
exception: missing key
exception: invalid key: key
exception: missing destination
exception: no points of interest
The allpointsofinterest Web Service
Here’s how you return all the points of interest.
The request
To access the allpointsofinterest service over HTTP, use the
following:
http://rtpointsofinterest.appspot.com/allpointsofinteres
t
                                               key=yourK
ey
Parameters

--- Page 434 ---
All parameters are required.
 key (required): the API key. (See the “Limiting Unauthorized
Web Service Use” section, earlier in the chapter, for more on the
API key.)
The response
Successful response
The value for the results key will contain an array of dictionaries each
of which has the following keys and value types:
Key               Value   
updated           string
description       string or null
destination       string
longitude         string
location          string or null
address:          string or null
latitude          string
id                string
The date format is yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm:ss.SSSSSS and follows the
Unicode Technical Standard #35 as specified at
http://unicode.org/reports/tr35/.
Error Response
The status_text key value can contain the following:
exception: missing key
exception: invalid key: key

--- Page 435 ---
The addpointofinterest Web
Service
Here’s how you add a point of interest to the resource.
The request
This is a POST request.
To access the allpointsofinterest service over HTTP, use the
following:
http://rtpointsofinterest.appspot.com/addpointofinterest
                                               key=yourK
ey
Parameters
 key (required): the API key. (See the “Limiting Unauthorized
Web Service Use” section, earlier in the chapter, for more on the
API key.)
The message body should include the following keys with string values:
Key
name (required)           
description (optional)    
destination (required)      
longitude (required)
latitude(required)
location  (optional)   
address (optional)

--- Page 436 ---
The response
Successful response
The value for the status_text key will be
added
Error response
The status_text key value can contain the following:
exception: missing key
exception: invalid key: key
exception: Property name is required
exception: Property destination is required
The deletepointofinterest Web
Service
Here’s how you delete a point of interest from the resource.
The request
This is a DELETE request.
To access the deletepointofinterest service over HTTP, use the
following:
Example
http://rtpointsofinterest.appspot.com/

--- Page 437 ---
         deletepointofinterest?key=yourKey&id=recordid
Parameters
 key (required): The API. (See the “Limiting Unauthorized Web
Service Use” section, earlier in the chapter, for more on the API
key.)
 id (required): The record id of the point of interest to be deleted.
The response
Successful Response
The value for the status_text key will be
deleted
Error Response
The status_text key value can contain the following:
exception: missing key
exception: invalid key: key
exception: invalid id: id
exception: missing id
Additional Error Considerations
Although I’ve had you specify the possible error responses originating
from your web service, server errors can occur as well. For example,
omitting longitude or latitude — or inputting an invalid longitude or
latitude — result in a BadValueError: on the server and an empty
response array. You’ll deal with such errors in the same way you did

--- Page 438 ---
with the possibility of server errors when you used the Geocoder web
service. (More on that in later chapters.)
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 439 ---
Chapter 12
The App Engine Implementation
In This Chapter
 Figuring out what Google App Engine actually is
 Seeing how App Engine works
 Creating your App Engine application
I’m going to make it easy for you: Go ahead and use Google App Engine
to implement the web services required by RoadTrip. Just trust me on
this one. With Google App Engine, you have a stress-free way of
building an application (what they call a group of related web services)
that will run in the cloud. And by “stress-free,” I have to say, yes, this
strategy is really stress-free in terms of both building your web service
as well as maintaining it.
Google App Engine
Google App Engine lets you run your web applications on Google’s
infrastructure. It’s actually pretty easy to build and deploy applications
using App Engine. What’s more, you don’t have to worry at all about
servers, databases, database size, load, or scalability. App Engine does
all of that for you. Admittedly, you do pay a small price for such
convenience — you have limited control over the software that runs on
the server, other than your application — but I’m here to tell you that the
price is worth it.

--- Page 440 ---
 You can serve your application using your own domain name
(such as www.rtpointsofinterest.com), but that method has a few
limitations, so I’m going to have you serve your application using a
free name on the http://appspot.com domain.
The application environment
Except for the obvious stuff you’ll be doing with your own application
(remember an App Engine application is a bundle of web services),
you’ll work with the software (features) that App Engine has to offer,
which are considerable. They include the following:
 Web serving
 Data storage with queries, sorting, and transactions
 Automatic scaling and load balancing
 APIs for authenticating users and sending e-mail using Google
Accounts
 A fully featured local development environment that simulates
Google App Engine on your computer
 Access to web services or other data on the Internet, using App
Engine’s URL fetch service
 Several others that I leave you to explore as you need them
An App Engine account is free with up to 1GB of storage and up to 5
million page views a month. You’ll have to pay for anything above that.
You can register up to ten applications per developer account.
App Engine provides three runtime environments for you to develop for
— Python, Java, and Go. For the purposes of this book, you’ll be using

--- Page 441 ---
Figure 12-
1: The
Google
Maps
request
processing.
the Python environment. Don’t worry if you don’t know Python. (I
didn’t know it until I started working with App Engine.) Although you
won’t be a certified Python rock star when you’re done, I talk you
through the Python code, and who knows, maybe you’ll fall in love with
Python and explore it on your own.
How App Engine works
As I explain in Chapter 6 — and as you saw in action in Chapters 7–9 —
a Resource-Based (HTTP API) Web Service is a defined set of HTTP
request messages coupled with well-defined structure for all response
messages. Here, the request is defined in a URI (Universal Resource
Identifier), which most people refer to as a URL (Universal Resource
Locator).
In Chapter 7, you put the Google Geocoding web service to use by
creating a geocoding request that looked like the following:
http://maps.googleapis.com/maps/api/geocode/xml
address=1600+Amphitheatre+Parkway,+Mountain+View,+CA&
sensor=true_or_false
When you sent that request, a Google Maps web server processed the
request and sent it to the right program. The whole process is shown in
Figure 12-1.

--- Page 442 ---
Figure 12-
2: How it all
works.
You’re going to take over this process whole cloth from the Google
Geocoding web service and put it to use for your own web service, as
shown in Figure 12-2.
The beauty of it all is that when you’re running your web service on App
Engine, App Engine handles all the stuff you see in Figure 12-2 for you.

--- Page 443 ---
When a user makes a request, the request is routed to the frontend
servers. The frontend determines the application for which the request is
intended and then uses the applications configuration to determine the
next step.
The configuration you came up with for your application and hardwired
into it describes how requests should be routed based on their URL
paths. For example, in Listing 12-1, you see the app.yaml
(configuration) file for the rtpointsofinterest application. If you look
at what I’ve set in bolded text, you can guess that all requests to
rtpointsofinterest should be routed to a script called main.
Listing 12-1: An App-Routing Specification
application: rtpointsofinterest
version: 1
runtime: python27
api_version: 1
threadsafe: yes
handlers:
- url: /favicon\.ico
  static_files: favicon.ico
  upload: favicon\.ico
- url: .*
  script: main.app
libraries:
- name: webapp2
  version: “2.5.1”
As you’ll soon see, you’ll also specify the routing in your main script —
that is, you’ll answer the question, “What script should handle the web
services I specified in Chapter 11?” Eventually, a URL path will map to
a request handler — and, yes, you will eventually have to create a
request handler for each of your web services that you have mapped to a
URL. (You can also map URLs to a static file such as an image or a file
of JavaScript code — but you won’t be doing that here.)

--- Page 444 ---
In your case, because the URL path of the request gets mapped to one of
the application’s request handlers, the application server pool is either
going to start up an instance of your application or reuse an existing
instance if one is already running from a previous request. The server
invokes the application by calling the request handler that corresponds
with the URL path of the request and waits for its response.
The request handler prepares the response, then returns it and terminates.
Be aware that the app server won’t send any data to the client until the
request handler has terminated, so you cannot stream data or keep a
connection open for a long time. When the handler terminates, the app
server returns the response, and the request is complete.
The server manages the local resources available to the application,
including CPU cycles, memory, and execution time, and ensures that
apps do not consume system resources in a way that interferes with other
apps.
 You can also configure the frontend to authenticate the user with
Google Accounts, which will handle user account creation and sign-
in. Using Google Accounts lets the user start using your application
faster because the user may not need to create a new account. It also
saves you the effort of implementing a user account system just for
your application.
The frontend can restrict access to URL paths with several levels of
authorization: All users, users who have signed in, and users who are
application administrators. With a Google Apps domain, you can also set
your application to allow only users on the domain to access URLs.
Now, in terms of your own application code, remember that it executes
in its own little sandbox, like in iOS, that isolates your application in a
secure, reliable environment that is independent of the hardware,
operating system, and even the physical location of the server.

--- Page 445 ---
Just as with the iOS sandboxed environment, your application can’t
write data to the local file system or make arbitrary network connections.
Instead, apps must use the services provided by App Engine to store data
and communicate over the Internet — the URL fetch service, for
example, or e-mail service. In addition, other computers can connect to
your application only by making HTTP (or HTTPS) requests on the
standard ports — not a problem in this case, but something you need to
be aware of.
On the other hand, the sandbox does make it possible for App Engine to
distribute web requests for your application across multiple servers, and
to start and stop servers to meet traffic demands. Of course, for your
application to be able to run across multiple servers, there needs to be a
datastore capable of supporting that.
Apps can use the App Engine datastore for reliable, scalable persistent
storage of data that is replicable across datacenters. App Engine offers a
bunch of data modeling tools, and the API supports two interfaces for
performing datastore queries. The first is GQL, a SQL-like query
language, which won’t concern us here.
The second is Google Cloud SQL, which provides a relational SQL
database service for your App Engine application. Google Cloud Storage
provides storage for objects and files up to terabytes in size.
 Keep in mind that you’re responsible for deploying new versions
of your application software, configuration as well as for updating
the version served on App Engine. Updates to an application
propagate quickly, but be aware that if you update your application,
all requests that started before the switch are allowed to complete
using their version of the application. (An application that makes an
HTTP request to itself might find itself in a pickle, but you can
manage that situation in your own code if you really need to.)

--- Page 446 ---
App Engine SDKs
App Engine comes with software development kits (SDKs) for its three
supported runtime environments: Java, Python, and Go. Each SDK
includes a web server application that emulates all the App Engine
services on your local computer. What the Xcode Simulator does for the
iPhone and iPad, GoogleAppEngineLauncher does for App Engine.
Each SDK includes all the APIs and libraries available on App Engine.
The web server also simulates the secure sandbox environment,
including checks for attempts to access system resources disallowed in
the App Engine runtime environment.
The Administration Console is the web-based interface for managing
your applications running on App Engine. You can use it to create new
applications, configure domain names, change which version of your
application is live, examine access and error logs, and even browse an
application’s datastore. I show you how to do all that in Chapter 13.
To make it easy to get started, App Engine includes a simple web
framework — similar in spirit to the iOS frameworks — that goes by the
name of webapp2. It’s a lightweight Python web framework compatible
with Google App Engine’s webapp framework. The Python environment
supports a number of other frameworks — Django, for example — but
for what I’m showing you, it’s best to just stick with webapp2.
 Not every Python web application framework works completely
with the App Engine Python runtime environment. Constraints
imposed by App Engine’s sandboxing logic, especially the
restriction on modules that use compiled C code, limit which
frameworks work out of the box. Django (www.django
project.com) is known to work well, and others have been adapted
with additional software.

--- Page 447 ---
Using Python with App Engine
The dedicated Python runtime environment you’ll be using for your web
service includes an optimized Python interpreter and the Python standard
library. As I explained earlier in the chapter, the runtime environment is
sandboxed to make sure your application is secure and isolated from
other apps on the system.
“Why Python?” you may ask. Part of Python’s appeal as a programming
language is that it allows you to program in any style you want, from
object-oriented programming and structured programming to functional
programming and aspect-oriented programming. It’s also quite similar to
languages such as Objective C, C, and Java, so if you’ve done any
programming in those languages, you should be able to pick it up rather
quickly. In any event, I explain the language and its libraries as I go
along.
The Python SDK you’ll be using includes GoogleAppEngineLauncher, a
tool you can use to simulate the App Engine environment, including a
local version of the datastore, Google Accounts, and the ability to fetch
URLs and send e-mail directly from your computer using the App
Engine APIs. The SDK also features a data modeling API and the
webapp2 application framework, as well as tools for testing your
application, uploading your application files, managing datastore
indexes, downloading log data, and uploading large amounts of data to
the datastore.
GoogleAppEngineLauncher runs on your computer (similar to the
Xcode simulator) and provides a graphical interface for many common
App Engine development tasks. This makes it much easier to develop
Python applications that run on App Engine.
 Application code written for the Python environment must be
written exclusively in Python. The Python environment includes the

--- Page 448 ---
Figure 12-
3: App
Engine
home.
Python standard library, and because not all of the library’s features
can run in the sandbox environment, several modules in the
standard library whose core features are not supported by the
runtime environment have been disabled. That means any code that
tries to import them will raise an error.
Extensions written in the C language are not supported. You can upload
other third-party libraries with your application, as long as they are
implemented in pure Python.
The Python runtime environment uses Python version 2.7.
What You Need to Develop for App
Engine
Ready for the Great Adventure? Follow these steps to create your
application:
1. Point your browser to
http://developers.google.com/appengine.
You’re greeted by what you see in Figure 12-3.

--- Page 449 ---
Figure 12-
4: Sign up.
2. Click the big red Sign Up button shown in Figure 12-3.
Hard to miss, isn’t it?
3. In the new page that appears (see Figure 12-4), enter your
Google account information — or create a Google account if you
don’t already have one.
Doing so brings you to the Welcome to Google App Engine page, as
shown in Figure 12-5.
4. Click the page’s Create Application button.
You’re brought to a page (see Figure 12-6) where you’re asked to
verify your account using SMS.
5. Give Google your mobile phone number and then click Send.

--- Page 450 ---
Figure 12-
5: Create an
application.
Figure 12-
6: Enter
your mobile
number.
Clicking Send brings up the page you see in Figure 12-7, which
informs you that an authorization code has been sent to your mobile
number. In no time, you’ll get a text message with an authentication
code.

--- Page 451 ---
Figure 12-
7: Enter the
authenticati
on code and
click the
Send
button.
6. After receiving your authentication code, enter it into the field
labeled Enter Account Code and click the Send button.
If everything works as it should, Figure 12-8 magically appears, and
you’re then asked to create your application identifier.
7. Feel free to enter whatever name strikes your fancy into the
Application Identifier field.
I’m naming mine rtpointsofinterest (which means you can’t use
that one because it’s already taken), and that’s what I’ll be referring
to in this book. You’ll have to substitute your own application name
when necessary. Lowercase letters, digits, and hyphens are
acceptable characters.
8. Enter an appropriate name into the Application Title field.
This is the name that users will see when they access the application.
9. Read through the Terms of Service, select the I Accept These
Terms check box, and then click the Create Application button.
The Terms of Service are pretty boilerplate. Keep in mind that you
can have only ten applications per account in this free version.
(Naturally, you have the option of a paid version with more
flexibility, but if you’re careful you can get by with the freebie
version.) And, oh yes, you can’t sign up for multiple accounts
because Google will send an account verification code to a given
cellphone number only once.
Again, if everything goes right (and there’s no reason it shouldn’t as
long as you follow the directions — something I personally have a
problem with on occasion), you see the Application Registered
Successfully page, as shown in Figure 12-9. Here you can find a few

--- Page 452 ---
Figure 12-
8: Create
your
application.
Figure 12-
9:
Application
created
successfully
!
links to pages that are chock-full of information about how you can
put Google App Engine to work.


--- Page 453 ---
 Although you don’t need to create your App Engine application
first in order to get started on your own (real) application, I suggest
you do so. When you create your application using the SDK on
your computer, you’ll need to name it, and this will be the name
you’ll need to use to upload it. If it turns out that that name isn’t
available when you create your App Engine application, you’ll have
to change your application’s name. This is not a big deal unless
you, like I did, wrote a few chapters of a book with screenshots
using a name that was not available and had to go back and change
the application name and all the screenshots.
At this point, take the time explore a bit more and get a feel of the lay of
the land. If you click the View the Dashboard link on the Application
Registered Successfully page, you end up at the Dashboard page, where
you find a plethora of informational links that — at this point, at least —
won’t make much sense. (See Figure 12-10.) I explain some of it as you
build your application, but because this isn’t a book on Google App
Engine, I give you the Goldilocks tour — not too big, not too little, but
just enough so that you can understand what you need to do to create a
web service.
After successfully registering your application, your next step is to go
ahead and download GoogleAppEngineLauncher to your desktop:
1. On the Dashboard page, scroll down until you see the
Downloads link on the left side of the page under Resources, then
click that link.
You can also go back to the Google App Engine home page at
https://developers.google.com/appengine, scroll down the page
to the Getting Started steps, and click the link in Step 3, Download
the App Engine SDK.
Either path takes you to the Downloads page you see in Figure 12-
11.

--- Page 454 ---
Figure 12-
10: The app
engine
dashboard.
Figure 12-
11:
Download
the Google
AppEngine
Launcher.
2. Click the GoogleAppEngineLauncher-1.6.4.dmg link (or the
latest non-beta OS X version) to download it.
3. After the file package downloads to your machine, drag it to
your desktop, and double-click it to open it.
You’ll see the GoogleAppEngineLauncher. You may be tempted to
double-click it. If you do (as I have more than once), you get a

--- Page 455 ---
Figure 12-
12: Do what
it says.
Figure 12-
13: The
Google
AppEngine
Launcher.
message that says GoogleAppEngineLauncher is an application
downloaded from the Internet. Are you sure you want to
open it? If you click Open, you get another message (see Figure 12-
12) that explains that what you really need to do is drag
GoogleAppEngineLauncher to your desktop (or Applications folder),
and that if you don’t, dire things could happen.
Here’s another case of needing to follow the directions.
4. Drag GoogleAppEngineLauncher into your Applications folder,
launch it, and then pin it to the Dock.
5. When you do launch GoogleAppEngineLauncher, you see a few
messages about Command Symlinks — if you’re okay with
creating the links (or have no idea what they are) click OK and
enter your password when asked.
At long last, GoogleAppEngineLauncher makes its appearance, as
shown in Figure 12-13.
As I mention in the “App Engine SDKs” section, earlier in this chapter,
App Engine includes a simple web application framework known as
webapp2. The whole idea behind such a framework is to make it easy to
get started — a concept I fully support, which is why I have you use it.
For larger applications, third-party frameworks such as Django work
well with App Engine.

--- Page 456 ---
To create an application that includes the webapp2 framework, do the
following:
1. In GoogleAppEngineLauncher, choose File⇒New Application,
or press 
+N, or simply click the plus sign at the bottom of the
GoogleAppEngineLauncher window.
Doing so brings up the New Application Settings dialog box, as
shown in Figure 12-14.
2. Using the appropriate fields in the New Application Settings
dialog box, name your new application whatever you named it —
the application identifier — when you created your App Engine
application. Then select the directory where you want to place
your application folder.
As you can see from Figure 12-14, I have placed the application
folder on my desktop.
Notice the Port field. GoogleAppEngineLauncher assigns your
application a port number when you add it to the launcher, starting
with 8080. As you add more applications, the number is increased so
your number may not be 8080.
The idea here is that a URL request gets routed to a web server
running in the cloud. A web server processes the request by sending
it to the right program. When you’re running your application out
there in the real world, App Engine handles all of that for you. But

--- Page 457 ---
Figure 12-
14: Create
your
application.
Figure 12-
15: Ready
to run.
when you’re using GoogleAppEngineLauncher in order to launch a
trial run of your application, you’ll be using something called
localhost — IP address 127.0.0.1, to be precise — and every
computer has one.
 Localhost (meaning this computer) is the standard hostname
given to the address of the loopback network interface — which is
simply a way to route requests directly back to the source (your
computer) so you can test stuff without having to go out on to a
network.
3. Click the Create button.
Your application gets added to the GoogleAppEngineLauncher, as
shown in Figure 12-15.

--- Page 458 ---
 If you need to reload your application into
GoogleAppEngineLauncher for any reason, you don’t want to click
the + button. That creates a new application. Instead, choose
File ⇒ Add Existing Application or press 
+Shift+N.
Time to let GoogleAppEngineLauncher put the rtpointsofinterest
application (or whatever your application name is) through its paces:
1. In GoogleAppEngineLauncher, click the green Run button on
the far-left side of the toolbar.
After a short pause, the icon to the left of your application in the
listing turns a nice shade of green as well, as you can see in Figure
12-16. (Okay, I know this book is in black and white, but trust me —
it really is green.)
2. Click the Stop button.
As you might expect, clicking Stop stops the application execution.
3. Click the Red button again to restart your application.
4. Click the Browse button (you have to click in the toolbar first to
enable the button).
Not what you expected, right? Click the Browse button, and you’re
connected to the current project in the browser, as you can see in

--- Page 459 ---
Figure 12-
16: It really
is running!
Figure 12-
17: Running
in the
browser.
Figure 12-17.
This is the equivalent of entering
http://localhost:8080/
in your browser.
Long story short: If you click the Browse button, you see the results
in the browser — a real Hello World application, as shown in Figure
12-17. (Be still my beating heart.) The only thing the default
application you just created can do at this point is display something
in a browser window.
5. Click the Logs button.
You get what you see in Figure 12-18. At this stage of the game,
none of the warnings you see here are particularly pertinent (thank
goodness), but as your work progresses, the info found in the Log
Console could become more helpful.

--- Page 460 ---
Figure 12-
18: The Log
Console.
Figure 12-
19: Getting
Text
Wrangler.
Now, of course you may be asking yourself, how can I change Hello
World into something cleverer, like “Welcome to the Wild Wacky World
of Web Services”? In order to do that, you’re going to need a text editor
that includes syntax coloring and function navigation for Python.
You can actually use any text editor you want, including TextEdit. (You
can even be quite clever and use Xcode, but that would involve quite a
bit of work — I let you figure that one out on your own.) But because
TextWrangler includes syntax-coloring and function-navigation for
Python, and is free to boot, I say go with TextWrangler.
To grab TextWrangler from the web, just point your browser to
www.text wrangler.com/products as I have in Figure 12-19. Click the
Download link, install it, and then launch it. Now you’re ready to rock
’n’ roll.

--- Page 461 ---
The webapp2 Starter Kit
It’s time to take look inside the folder GoogleAppEngineLauncher came
up with when it first created your application. There you can find three
application files (app.yaml, index.yaml, and main.py) as well as one
icon file — favicon.ico.
Open the three application files. If you’re using TextWrangler, as I am,
to open the .yaml files in the Open dialog you’ll first have to select the
Everything option from the Enable pop-up menu, as I have in Figure 12-
20.
The app.yaml is a configuration file required by your Python App
Engine application. It specifies request handler and static files URL
paths and also includes code information such as the application ID and
the version identifier, as you can see in Listing 12-2.

--- Page 462 ---
Figure 12-
20: Enable
everything.
Listing 12-2: app.yaml
application: rtpointsofinterest
version: 1
runtime: python27
api_version: 1
threadsafe: yes
handlers:
- url: /favicon\.ico
  static_files: favicon.ico
  upload: favicon\.ico
- url: .*
  script: main.app
libraries:
- name: webapp2
  version: “2.5.1”
The app.yaml file is in a format called YAML, an open format for
configuration files and network messages. You don’t need to know much

--- Page 463 ---
about the format beyond what you see here.
In this example, the configuration file tells App Engine that this is
version 1 of an application called rtpointsofinterest:
application: rtpointsofinterest
version: 1
App Engine keeps a copy of your application for each version used, and
an administrator can change the version in the Administration Console,
test versions, and so on.
The configuration file also tells App Engine that this application uses
version 1 of the Python runtime environment (the API version) using
Python 2.7 and that it is threadsafe, which means that App Engine will
send requests concurrently:
runtime: python27
api_version: 1
threadsafe: yes
 If Google releases a new version of your runtime environment’s
API, your application will continue to use the one specified here. To
use a new environment, you’ll need to change this value and upload
the changed code.
Currently there is only one version of the Python runtime environment.
There are two kinds of handlers: static file handlers and script handlers.
A static file handler returns the contents of a file — an image, for
example — as the response.
- url: /favicon\.ico
  static_files: favicon.ico
  upload: favicon\.ico

--- Page 464 ---
I’m not going to spend time on static file handlers, but for your
information, a user’s browser requests a favicon.ico file when it loads
the page — it’s your website’s icon that is typically displayed in the
user’s browser URL bar, next to the web address of your site.
A script handler runs a Python script in your application to determine the
response for the given URL.
- url: .*
  script: main.app
App Engine uses this specification to route requests for your application;
it informs App Engine that every request for this application (every URL
that matches the regular expression /.*) is to be handled by a Python
script named main.app.
 You always code a handler to handle a request that matches a
URL pattern. The mapping defines a URL pattern to match as well
as the script to be executed. You’re going to map web service
requests to handlers, to use Python terminology. (Handlers here
correspond to the controllers you’d see in the Model Application
Controller architecture.)
In this case, all URls use the main.app script, where you’ll then map the
URL on to the right handler.
Finally, you specify the webapp2 framework:
libraries:
- name: webapp2
  version: “2.5.1”
And that’s it for the app.yaml file. Next on the list: the index.yaml file,
as shown in Listing 12-3.
Listing 12-3: index.yaml

--- Page 465 ---
indexes:
# AUTOGENERATED
# This index.yaml is automatically updated whenever the
dev_appserver
# detects that a new type of query is run.  If you want
to manage the
# index.yaml file manually, remove the above marker line
(the line
# saying “# AUTOGENERATED”).  If you want to manage some
indexes
# manually, move them above the marker line.  The
index.yaml file is
# automatically uploaded to the admin console when you
next deploy
# your application using appcfg.py.
The App Engine datastore uses indexes for every query your application
makes; the indexes are specified in this file. Fortunately, you don’t have
to do much in terms of your index.yaml file since the development
system will take care of it for you. When your application tries to do a
query that needs an index not found in this file, the development server
will create the index and add it to the file.
So, if during testing the application does every possible query it could
ever make (as one would expect, right?), then this file should be
complete. You’ll need to work with this file only to delete indexes that
you’re no longer using or to define ones that were not created during
development.
Right now, this file is empty, and since you won’t be generating any
indexes here it will continue to look the same. But if you did do a query
— for example, filtering the points of interest by destination and
ordering them by the last time they were updated with the last update
first — you’d see the following:
- kind: PointOfInterest
  properties:

--- Page 466 ---
  - name: destination
  - name: updated
    direction: desc
properties is a list, one element per column in the index, where each
column has a name and an optional direction that is either asc
(ascending order, the default) or desc (descending order). The order of
the Properties list is significant: The index is sorted by the first column
first, then by the second column, and so on.
The webapp Framework
The great thing about frameworks is that they make web application
development easier, faster, and less error prone. To get a sense of how
easy it can be, this section looks at how the webapp framework deals
with the four major pieces of the puzzle involved in getting a request,
handling it, and sending back the response — done by the
WSGIApplication, the RequestHandler, and the Request and Response
classes used by a request handler, respectively.
To start, take a look at main.py, the default handler for all URLs. (You
can see main.py in all its glory in Listing 12-4.)
I want you to pay attention to two particular pieces in main.py — the
two components that make up the application.
WSGIApplication: An instance that routes incoming requests to
handlers based on the URL (this implements the main.app script
specified in app.yaml).
MainHandler: A RequestHandler class that processes requests
and builds responses. You’ll create several of these in your
application, including one to handle each web service request.
Listing 12-4: main.py

--- Page 467 ---
import webapp2
class MainHandler(webapp2.RequestHandler):
    def get(self):
        self.response.out.write(‘Hello world!’)
app = webapp2.WSGIApplication([(‘/’, MainHandler)],
                              debug=True)
The first statement you see here is
import webapp2
import webapp2 imports the webapp2 module and creates a reference to
the module in the current namespace. Or, in other words, after you’ve
run this statement, you can use webapp2.name to refer to things defined
in webapp2 — webapp2.WSGIApplication, for example.
Now skip to this line:
app = webapp2.WSGIApplication([(‘/’, MainHandler)],
                              debug=True)
Here you start things off by creating an instance of the application.
(webapp2.WSGIApplication is a class — in Python, class instantiation
uses function notation.)
app = webapp2.WSGIApplication(...)
You then assign the instance to the variable app.
The first parameter
[(‘/’, MainHandler)],
defines a route — the request handler, MainHandler, gets mapped to the
root URL (/). The [] is a Python array or list, which means there can be
more than one specified. (In fact, you’ll create routes for each service
you implement; I explain more about that shortly.)

--- Page 468 ---
 This is similar to what you’d do to create an iOS app. main.m in
RoadTrip, for example, has a similar structure, as shown below:
int main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
  @autoreleasepool {
      return UIApplicationMain(argc, argv, nil,
NSStringFromClass([RTAppDelegate class]));
  }
}
The application itself is represented by an instance of the class
webapp2.WSGIApplication. The WSGIApplication class implements the
WSGI interface, a standard interface between web application
frameworks and web servers. (WSGI is short for Web Server Gateway
Interface, if you’re interested.)
Much like UIApplication in the iOS framework, the WSGI application
provides the plumbing for your application. All you need to do is
provide the code to deliver the application content.
WSGIApplication receives a request and dispatches the appropriate
handler, just as the UIApplication object does for an event in its main
event loop. It also returns the response to the client. It is also responsible
for handling uncaught exceptions.
Now a little about Python
If you look very closely at Listing 12-5, you’ll notice that the variable
name app is not declared and has no type associated with it. You may ask
yourself “What’s up with that?”
Python has local and global variables like most other languages, but it
has no explicit variable declarations. Variables spring into existence by

--- Page 469 ---
being assigned a value, and they’re automatically destroyed when they
go out of scope.
Python has typed objects but untyped variable names. Untyped means
that the type is not checked at compile time. Instead, a method call may
fail. This provides polymorphism without inheritance.
In Objective-C, for example, the compiler will give you an error if you
try to send a message to an object that doesn’t declare those methods. In
Python, you can send any message to any object as long as it has those
methods. Whether or not a method is actually there is determined at
runtime.
 Python is object-oriented, and in that sense it looks a lot like
Objective-C with its methods and classes. Admittedly, the methods
and classes are not identical, but they are in most ways similar.
Where there are major differences, I’ll walk you through them.
And more on routing
The WSGIApplication instance is initialized with a list of mappings of
URLs to handler classes. App Engine is all about request handlers; when
webapp receives a request, it creates an instance of the RequestHandler
class associated with the URL path in the request.
[(‘/’, MainHandler)],
This snippet of code, for example, defines one request handler,
MainHandler, mapped to the root URL (/).
webapp then calls a method that corresponds with the HTTP action of the
request, such as the get() method for a HTTP GET request. The method
processes the request, prepares a response, and then returns. Finally, the
application sends the response to the client.

--- Page 470 ---
Figure 12-
21: How it’s
all
connected.
So, when webapp receives an HTTP GET request to the URL /, it
instantiates the MainHandler class and calls the instance’s get method,
as shown in Figure 12-21. (If it were a POST, you’d expect to find a post
method.)
The way you’d set things up, you’d told App Engine — via the app.yaml
file — to send all requests to the main script (which is in the main.py
file as you saw earlier).
handlers:
- url: .*
  script: main.app
That means the URL you saw in your browser when you clicked the
Browse button — http://localhost:8080/ — was routed to the
MainHandler class.
Eventually, when the application is all done, you’ll see the following in
main.py:
(‘/testdata’, TestDataHandler),
(‘/pointsofinterest’, PointsOfInterestHandler),
(‘/lastupdate’, LastUpdateHandler),
(‘/allpointsofinterest’, AllPointsOfInterestHandler),
(‘/addpointofinterest’, AddPointOfInterestHandler),
(’/deletepointofinterest’,
DeletePointOfInterestHandler)],
The last five request handers map onto the web services you defined in
Chapter 11. You’ll use the first one to generate some test data, which

--- Page 471 ---
means it won’t be part of your production application.
Handling handlers
I want you to look a bit more closely at handlers.
When webapp receives an HTTP GET request to the URL /, it instantiates
the MainHandler class and calls the instance’s get() method. (Refer to
Figure 12-21.)
class MainHandler(webapp.RequestHandler):
    def get(self):
A class in Python is a lot like an Objective-C class, even down to the
self variable. It has what you’d call variables and methods in
Objective-C which are accessed by the dot notation. In Python, a method
is a function that “belongs to” an object.
So that means that MainHandler(webapp.RequestHandler): defines a
class, MainHandler, that inherits from the webapp RequestHandler
class.
The class defines methods for each HTTP method supported by the
handler — in this case, one method for HTTP GET called get(). This
method name, of course, corresponds to the verb in the HTTP request.
For example, in Chapter 7, you created a GET request and I had you set
the method to GET. (If you can’t remember, see whether Listing 12-5
refreshes your memory.)
Listing 12-5: createGETRequest:withParams: in
WSManager.m
- (NSMutableURLRequest *)createGETRequest:(NSString *)
          baseURL withParams:(NSDictionary *)userParams
{
  

--- Page 472 ---
  NSMutableString *queryString = [NSMutableString
string];
  // add user params
  if (userParams != nil) {
    for (id key in userParams) {
      id value = [userParams valueForKey:key];
      NSString *paramString =
        [NSString stringWithFormat:@”%@=%@&”, key,
value];
      paramString = [paramString
stringByAddingPercentEscapesUsingEncoding:
                                   NSASCIIStringEncoding
];
      [queryString appendString:paramString];
    }
  }
  NSString *urlString = [NSString stringWithFormat:
                          @”%@%@”, baseURL,
queryString];
  NSURL *url = [NSURL URLWithString:urlString];
  NSMutableURLRequest *request  =
                 [NSMutableURLRequest
requestWithURL:url];
  [request setHTTPMethod:@”GET”];
  return request;
This GET request will correspond to the get() method in the
MainHandler class (or whatever class is called based on the URL). In
Chapter 7, you created the necessary URL. (See whether Listing 12-6
jogs your memory.)
Listing 12-6: Adding
geocodeSynchronouslyXML:successBlock:failur
e Block to WSManager.m
- (void)geocodeSynchronouslyXML:(NSMutableDictionary *)

--- Page 473 ---
    userParams successBlock:(void (^)(NSDictionary *))
               success failureBlock:(void (^)())failure
{
  
  
  returnSuccess = success;
  returnFail = failure;
  [self setupGeocodingWebService];
  webService =
      @”http://maps.googleapis.com/maps/api/geocode/xml?
”;   
  [params addEntriesFromDictionary:userParams];
  NSMutableURLRequest *request =
     [self createGETRequest:webService
withParams:params];
  [self requestSynchronousWebService:request];
}
If App Engine were handling that request instead of, say, Google’s
Geocoding web service, you would see something like the following:
(‘/maps/api/geocode/xml’, XML_Handler),
When the handler get() method is called, webapp makes available
Request and Response objects that are used by a request handler —
self.request and self.response, respectively — that the handler
method can in turn access and modify:
class MainHandler(webapp2.RequestHandler):
    def get(self):
        self.response.out.write(‘Hello world!’)
Inside the method, information about the request is available by
accessing self.request — the instance of the Request class that
contains the request.
The Request class contains instance methods such as

--- Page 474 ---
get()
get_all()
arguments()
get_range()
and instance variables (also called data attributes) such as
body
body_file
remote_addr
url
path
query_string
headers
cookies
Although you don’t use any of those methods or instance variables here,
you’ll be using get() to extract the parameters for the query string you
create with the GET (or any other) request. (Don’t confuse the response
get() method with the GET request.)
When the webapp2 framework calls a request handler method, the
handler instance’s response variable is also initialized with an empty
Response instance. The response is “filled out” by the handler method
— for example, by writing body data to the out instance variable or
setting headers on the headers instance variable.
The Response class contains class methods such as
Response.http_status_message()
Instance variables such as
out
headers
and instance methods such as

--- Page 475 ---
set_status()
clear()
wsgi_write()
Typically, the method sets properties on self.response to prepare the
response, and then it exits.
self.response.out.write(‘Hello world!’)
And as I said, the response gets sent only when the handler exits.
As I said, a class in Python is a lot like an Objective-C class, although
methods and instance variables are accessed by the dot notation
So
MainHandler(webapp.RequestHandler):
Defines a class MainHandler that inherits from the webapp
RequestHandler class
And
self.response.out.write(‘Hello world!’)
self.response is an instance variable that points to a Response class.
The Response class has an instance variable out, which is an instance of
the class that reads and writes a string buffer. The contents of this object
are sent as the body of the response when the request handler method
returns. write is a StringIO instance method that actually does the
write. As I said, you can think of a method as being a function that
“belongs to” an object.
When the handler method exits, the application uses the value of
self.response as the HTTP response.

--- Page 476 ---
A little more Python
Python uses whitespace indentation (known as the off-side rule), rather
than curly braces or keywords to delimit blocks. An increase in
indentation comes after certain statements; a decrease in indentation
signifies the end of the current block.
The def get(): defines the start of a method (function) — the def
keyword plus the method name and any arguments).
def get(self):
To include code as part of the function, you indent it as follows:
    self.response.out.write(‘Hello world!’)
To end the function, you decrease the indentation:
app = webapp2.WSGIApplication([(‘/’, MainHandler)],
                                             debug=True)
 It is important that you pay attention to the indentation. Spaces,
not tabs are preferred. In addition, because of the width of this
book’s printed page, I sometimes have to have functions on two
lines. Python does have implicit joining inside parentheses, brackets
and braces, as you can see above (there are some style rules you
may want to explore on your own). You may also see a string literal
(zero or more characters enclosed in matching single (‘), double
quotes (“), or matching groups of three single or double quotes) on
more than one line. While I have to do it because of the width of the
printed page, in your code you can’t have a string literal on more
than one line unless you use an escape sequence (\) as the last
character of the line.
The WSGIApplication instance is also initialized with a debug parameter
that tells the application to print error messages to the browser window

--- Page 477 ---
Figure 12-
22: Hello
Mr. Bill!
when a handler returns an exception if the application is running under
the development web server.
debug=True)
webapp detects whether it is running under the development server or
running as a live App Engine application and will not print errors to the
browser when running live — even if debug is True. You can set it to
False to have the development server emulate the live server when
errors occur.
Just for fun, change “Hello world” to “Hello Mr. Bill!”
To do that, replace self.response.out.write(‘Hello World!’) in
main.py with the following:
#self.response.out.write(‘Hello World!’)
self.response.out.write(‘<html><body>’)
self.response.out.write(‘<p>Hello Mr Bill!</p>’)
self.response.out.write(‘</body></html>’)
You can also replace it with any other HTML. (# denotes a comment in
Python — here you just commented out the ‘Hello World’ response.)
Save the file.
Because Python is a scripted language, when you save the file, the
application is updated. That also means that, if you don’t save the file,
the application is not updated. Logical, right?
In the GoogleAppEngineLauncher window, click the Browse button.
You now see what’s shown in Figure 12-22.

--- Page 478 ---
Click the Logs button in the GoogleAppEngineLauncher window. You
now see the contents of Listing 12-7 in the Logs window.
Listing 12-7: What Should Appear in the Log
Window
INFO     2012-04-05 14:52:41,362 dev_appserver.py:2884]
                                    “GET / HTTP/1.1” 200
-
This describes exactly what just went on — a GET request using HTTP
1.1 with a status code of 200 that tells you that request was successfully
received, understood, and accepted.
If everything didn’t work out as expected (you got no response in your
browser window, for example) look in the Logs window. You’ll see a lot
of stuff, but the most important information is going to be at the bottom.
Imagine, for example, that you formatted your code so it looks
something like the following:
class MainHandler(webapp2.RequestHandler):
    def get(self):
        #self.response.out.write(‘Hello World!’)
        self.response.out.write(‘<html><body>’)
         self.response.out.write(‘<p>Hello Mr Bill!
</p>’)
        self.response.out.write(‘</body></html>’)
The Log window would rap you on the knuckles by displaying what you
see in Listing 12-8. (I’ve bolded the important lines.)
Listing 12-8: What May Be on the Log File

--- Page 479 ---
Figure 12-
23: The
ERROR    2012-04-13 21:07:29,154 wsgi.py:189]
Traceback (most recent call last):
….
File “/Users/neal/Desktop/rtpointsofinterest/main.py”,
                                                   line
25
    self.response.out.write(“<p>Hello Mr Bill!</p>”)
   ^
IndentationError: unexpected indent
INFO     2012-04-13 21:07:29,218 dev_appserver.py:2884]
“GET / HTTP/1.1” 500 -
Python, because it uses indentation to determine scope, is obviously very
sensitive about it. You’ll need to be careful. Because you’re an
Objective-C programmer, the lack of curly braces will most likely seem
alien to you, but just like the Objective-C’s square braces ([]) for
messages and the colon (:) in the method signature may have seemed
weird when you first learned Objective-C, after a while you’ll get used
to it.
Okay, enough fun for now. It’s time to do some serious work.
The Model Application Controller
Architecture in App Engine
In Chapter 1, I introduce you to the Model Application Controller
architecture.
This particular architecture maps well onto webapp2, as you can see in
Figure 12-23.

--- Page 480 ---
webapp
Model
Application
Controller
architecture.
In this implementation of the Model Application Controller architecture,
the Google Engine frontend and the main script do the routing to the
right web service — a handler, in this case.
You can also see that this implementation works equally well for a
website.
The entire process of accessing the application will work something like
this:
1. In the case of a web service request from the phone, webapp gets a
request from the client (the iPhone app).
The phone is sending a web service request — pointsofinterest
— to the webapp for all of the points of interest for the destination of
0 (and with an API key).
http://localhost:8080/pointsofinterest?
                             destination
=0&key=test123

--- Page 481 ---
2. webapp instantiates the right Handler class (pointsofinterest, for
example) and calls the instance’s get method.
But this also extends to websites, and you can (and should, for the
purposes of this book) think of a web browser as actually doing the
same thing — making a web service request. When a web browser
sends a request to the server for a URL, such as
http://localhost:8080/pointsofinterest?
                             destination
=0&key=test123
you can think of this as a web service request as well. This means the
web browser is sending a user web service request for the points of
interest for destination 0.
In both cases, the code that interacts with the model (the data) is
virtually identical.
Although I also talk about web and Mac apps in the Model Application
Controller architecture, you won’t be doing either here. I don’t have you
implement a Mac application or a website in this book, but just like in a
universal app, the code base — in this case handlers rather than view
controllers — is the same across mobile, web, and Mac apps.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 482 ---
Chapter 13
The Model’s Model
In This Chapter
 Examining the App Engine datastore
 Seeing how models work
 Creating the rtpointsofinterest model
 Generating test data
 Testing web services in a browser
The whole point behind web services is that they allow you to access
resources and either return representations of those resources or allow
you to operate on them. In the case of rtpointsofinterest, that
resource is — wait for it — Points of Interest and you’ll need a way to
create and manage those Points of Interest.
As I explain in Chapter 11, you’ll use the App Engine datastore to store
your data. The entities are created from Python objects, with the object’s
attributes becoming properties for the entity.
In the Python API, a (data) model is used to describe an entity, and in
this chapter, you create the data model for rtpointsofinterest.
What’s in the Model?
Start by thinking about what kind of data model you need for the
rtpointsofinterest resource (also known as the Google App Engine

--- Page 483 ---
Figure 13-
1: The Core
Data model.
application). This model will be derived from the web services you
defined in Chapter 11.
Because this is a pretty simple web service and it just happens to focus
on points of interest, it should probably come as no surprise that you
really only need one model class here — PointsOfInterest.
It makes sense to start with the existing SharedPointOfInterest class
in RoadTrip. I’ll use the SharedPointOfInterest class rather than the
PointOfInterest class because it has an associated data model of the
kind you’ll need to specify in App Engine. You can see the class in
Listing 13-1.
Listing 13-1: The SharedPointOfInterest
@interface SharedPointOfInterest : NSManagedObject
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * name;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * address;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * comment;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSNumber * displayOrder;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * latitude;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * location;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * longitude;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * subtitle;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * title;
@property (nonatomic, readwrite) CLLocationCoordinate2D
coordinate;
- (void)loadData:(NSDictionary *)data;
@end
Figure 13-1 shows the Core Data model that you created in Chapter 4 to
implement SharedPointOfInterest.

--- Page 484 ---
In this case, you’re really interested in only this part:
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * name;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * address;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * comment;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSNumber * displayOrder;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * latitude;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * location;
@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString * longitude;
subtitle and title are there in the Core Data model only to meet the
requirements of the MKAnnotation protocol to display an annotation on a
map.
This pared-down version of the model shown in Figure 13-1 contains the
data and logic to keep track of all points of interest, so it would make
sense to create a similar data model in your web service, and that’s what
you do next.
But first a little bit more about the App Engine datastore.

--- Page 485 ---
The App Engine Datastore
The App Engine datastore was designed to provide the kind of scalable
high performance storage required by a web service.
It is in no way, shape, or form a traditional relational database, just as
Core Data is not a traditional relational database. The idea here is that an
application creates entities (such as the managed object in Core Data)
with data values stored as properties of an entity. Each entity in the
datastore has a key that uniquely identifies the entity across all entities of
the same kind. Property values can be any of the supported property
value types. (More on those in a minute.)
 Just to make things interesting, there is now a Google Cloud
SQL web service — currently in limited preview — that provides
the capabilities of a MySQL database. I invite you to explore it on
your own.
You use the Datastore API to define data models and create instances of
those models to be stored as entities. You can also define rules for
validating property values.
In your app, you can perform queries over entities that are filtered and
sorted by the values of the properties. The queries are pre-indexed and
stored in the index.yaml file. (Check out Chapter 12 for more on
indexing and the index.yaml file.) Whenever the development app
server detects that a new type of query is being run, it automatically adds
that query to the index.yaml file.
 Transactions such as creating, updating, or deleting are the basic
context for operations on an entity, and a single transaction can
include any number of such operations. The transaction takes care

--- Page 486 ---
of data consistency by ensuring that all of the operations it contains
are applied to the datastore as a unit or, if any of the operations
fails, that none of them are applied. A single transaction can apply
to multiple entities, so long as the entities are descended from a
common ancestor, i.e. belong to the same entity group. For
example, all points of interest could have an ancestor named
location. For you database wonks out there, entity groups are not at
all like tables in SQL.
Datastore entities are schema-less. A schema describes the structure of a
database system in a formal language supported by the database
management system. For example, in a relational database, the schema
defines the tables, the fields in each table, and the relationships between
fields and tables.
This schema is really your statement of how you think about the data in
your application. The problem is that, in a rapidly changing
environment, your ideas about the data may change often — and
significantly — and a schema-less data model is much easier to adapt to
changes than highly structured, rigidly enforced schema.
Core Data, on the other hand, does have a schema. But because the Core
Data model is so simple, the App Engine and Core Data models will
look pretty much the same.
To create the data model, you need to translate the data requirements of
your resource into entities and properties. So even though your app will
(and RoadTrip currently does) deal with points of interest that have
names and locations and so forth, the datastore only knows from entities
keys, properties, and indexes.
The model you’ll use to describe your data you use is going to be a
Python class — one that just happens to inherit from the Model class.
The Model class defines a datastore entity and its properties. Properties
are instances of a Property class — named values of one of several data
types. Supported data types include integers, floating point values,

--- Page 487 ---
strings, dates, binary data, and others. A Property class can have one or
more values, and a property with multiple values can have values of
mixed types.
You add an entity in Python by calling the constructor of the class and
then storing the instance by calling the put() method. (In many ways,
this is quite similar to how you create an object in Python, even if some
aspects of it venture closer to C++ territory.)
An entity is updated by getting the entity’s object — by using a query,
for example — then modifying its properties, and then finally saving the
entity with its new properties.
The webapp Model classes
So now it’s time to create the Model classes you’ll need. You’ll start with
the SharedPointOfInterest managed object class in RoadTrip as a
base, in accordance with the reasoning I put forward in the “What’s in
the Model” section, earlier in the chapter. This task is pretty similar to
what you’d do when creating a Core Data model, but you’ll have to do
all the typing on your own. (Hey, this is Python — no drop-down menus
here.)
Start by adding a new file to your application.
In TextWrangler, choose File ⇒ New ⇒ Text Document or press 
+N.
Save this new file as datamodel.py in the rtpointsofinterest folder.
Saving it as a .py file results in TextWrangler knowing it’s a Python file.
(TextWrangler will also apply text coloring and enable function
navigation.)
 If you forget the .py, App Engine won’t see it as a script.

--- Page 488 ---
You can find a number of style guides for writing Python code. The PEP
8 — Style Guide for Python Code suggests that you use spaces, not tabs
(and I follow that advice), and you should use four spaces for an
indentation (and I do that, too). You should limit all lines to a maximum
of 79 characters. Python has implied line continuation inside
parentheses, brackets, and braces, and that is the preferred way of
wrapping long lines — just make sure to indent the continued line.
Ready to wrestle with a Python? Go ahead and add the code in listing
12-2 to datamodel.py.
Listing 12-2: The Model Class
“””The PointOfInterest class and to_dict method”””
from google.appengine.ext import db
class PointOfInterest(db.Model):
    name = db.StringProperty(required=True)
    description = db.StringProperty()
    location = db.StringProperty()
    address = db.StringProperty()
    destination = db.StringProperty(required=True)
    coordinate = db.GeoPtProperty(required=True)
    updated = db.DateTimeProperty(required=True,
                                  auto_now_add=True)
  
    def to_dict(self):
        “””Return PointOfInterest data in a
dictionary”””
        a = {}
        a[‘id’] = str(self.key().id())
        a[‘name’] = self.name
        a[‘description’] = self.description
        a[‘location’] = self.location
        a[‘address’] = self.address
        a[‘destination’] = self.destination
        a[‘latitude’] = self.coordinate.lat

--- Page 489 ---
        a[‘longitude’] = self.coordinate.lon
        a[‘updated’] = str(self.updated)
        return a
The first line in the module — a string literal enclosed by triple quotes
— is known as a docstring. A docstring is a string literal that occurs
as the first statement in a module, function, class, or method definition.
This docstring simply summarizes the purpose and usage of a Python
module. By convention, docstrings are enclosed in triple double quotes.
(You can also get the object’s docstring using the __doc__ attribute.)
You import the google.appengine.ext.db module, which will provide
you with the Model class that you’ll use to derive your own model:
from google.appengine.ext import db
Next you define your model class,
class PointOfInterest(db.Model):
which, as you can see, is a subclass of the Model class.
 Be sure to save the files after you make any change or add new
code — then and only then will you have updated the
rtpointsofinterest app.
Model properties are defined by adding class attributes to the model
class — kind of like what happens with instance variables in Objective-
C. Each class attribute is an instance of a subclass of the Property class.
A property instance has the property configuration — such as whether or
not the property is required for the instance to be valid or a default value
to use for the instance if none is provided. Listing 13-3 shows the model
you just created.
Listing 13-3: The Model

--- Page 490 ---
class PointOfInterest(db.Model):
    name = db.StringProperty(required=True)
    description = db.StringProperty()
    location = db.StringProperty()
    address = db.StringProperty()
    destination = db.StringProperty(required=True)
    coordinate = db.GeoPtProperty(required=True)
    updated = db.DateTimeProperty(required=True,
                                  auto_now_add=True)
PointOfInterest inherits from db.Model. This defines a
PointOfInterest model with 7 properties. The name, description,
location, address, and destination are StringPropertys, whereas
coordinate is a geoPtProperty, and updated is a DateTimeProperty.
You declare a property for a model by assigning a property declaration
object to an attribute of the Model class — think property in Objective-C.
The name of the attribute — name for example — is the name of the
datastore property. The db.StringProperty object assigned to the name
attribute says that the name property can only be a string. This is more or
less equivalent to @property (nonatomic, retain) NSString *name;
in the SharedPointOfInterest managed object.
Some property constructors take parameters to further configure them.
For example, required=True says that this property is required for a
new entity. So, for example, if I tried to create PointOfInterest without
a name, you would see the following in the browser window if you were
testing it there:
The server has either erred or is incapable of
performing the requested operation.
Traceback (most recent call last):
…
BadValueError: Property name is required
The last line (the bolded one) is the line that really matters.

--- Page 491 ---
Every PointOfInterest needs to have at least a name, destination,
coordinate, and updated (timestamp) property because you’ve decided
that all of those are needed to make a valid PointOfInterest. Granted,
this is somewhat arbitrary, but without a coordinate, for example, you
can’t display the PointOfInterest on the map. Because the datastore is
schema-less, you need to enforce this in the code, and the coordinate
constructor with its required parameter enables you to do that.
The datastore properties, though similar, are not exactly the same as
Objective-C properties. Datastore properties can ensure that only values
that meet certain criteria are assigned to properties (although you could
do something similar in a getter). They can assign default values when
constructing an object and can even convert values between a data type
used by the application and one of the datastore’s native value types, or
otherwise customize how values are stored.
If someone tries to assign a value of the wrong type to one of these
properties, the assignment raises a db.BadValueError. For example, if I
tried to assign 6 to a name, I’d see the following:
BadValueError: Property name must be a str or unicode  
                                       instance, not a
int
As you can see, coordinate is a GeoPtProperty,
coordinate = db.GeoPtProperty(required=True)
represented by the GeoPt class:
class GeoPt(lat, lon=None)
It’s a geographical point represented by floating-point latitude and
longitude coordinates, and (fortunately) it validates the input for you.
For example, if I tried to use at latitude of 91, I’d see this:
geo = db.GeoPt(lat=91, lon=-179)

--- Page 492 ---
BadValueError: Latitude must be between -90 and 90;
                                        received
91.000000
Similarly, if I entered a longitude of -181, I’d see the following:
geo = db.GeoPt(lat=89, lon=-181)
BadValueError: Longitude must be between -180 and 180;
                                      received
-181.000000
 All of the error messages you see here were generated by
making changes to some test data that you’ll create later in a
TestDataHandler class. (See “The TestData Class” section, later in
this chapter.)
updated is a DateTimeProperty. I use this field to determine when the
last update was made to this point of interest, and although you won’t be
using it in RoadTrip, I’ll have it here for future expansion.
  updated = db.DateTimeProperty(required=True,
                                auto_now_add=True)
If auto_now_add is True, the property value is set to the current time the
first time the entity is stored in the datastore, unless the property has
already been assigned a value. This is useful for storing a “created” date
and time for a model instance. (Hey, have you noticed yet that, in
Python, variable names are lowercase with underscore, not camel case?
Just saying.)
 You can also use auto_now. If auto_now is True, the property
value is set to the current time whenever the model instance is
stored in the datastore, overwriting the property’s previous value.
This is useful for tracking a last-modified date and time for a model

--- Page 493 ---
instance. You’ll take advantage of this when you create the model
to keep track of the last update
Date-time values are stored (and returned) in the UTC time zone.
 In your code, you can dynamically add attributes to an entity,
ones that are not defined in your model. But when it comes time to
save that object, all attributes that aren’t declared as properties
when it comes time to save the entity to the datastore are ignored.
Adding a method to the model
Listing 13-4 takes things a step further by adding a method to the model.
(Notice that, in Python, everything is in a single file — no .h and .m, in
other words.)
Listing 13-4: The to_dict Method
def to_dict(self):
        
    a = {}
    a[‘id’] = str(self.key().id())
    a[‘name’] = self.name
    a[‘description’] = self.description
    a[‘location’] = self.location
    a[‘address’] = self.address
    a[‘destination’] = self.destination
    a[‘latitude’] = self.coordinate.lat
    a[‘longitude’] = self.coordinate.lon
    a[‘updated’] = str(self.updated)
    return a
The to_dict method returns a point of interest’s data as a dictionary.
This is similar to a method in PointOfInterest in RoadTrip.

--- Page 494 ---
- (NSDictionary *)returnPointOfInterestData {
  
  NSDictionary* pointOfInterestData =
    [NSDictionary dictionaryWithObjectsAndKeys:
    self.title, @”Name”,
    self.address, @”Address”,
    self.location, @”Location”,
    self.comment, @”Description”,
    [NSNumber
numberWithDouble:self.coordinate.latitude],
                                              @”Latitude
”,
    [NSNumber
numberWithDouble:self.coordinate.longitude],  
                                             @”Longitude
”,
    nil];
  
  return pointOfInterestData;
}
In RoadTrip, this method was used to get the data for a
PointOfInterest (and save it to the file system pre-Core Data) and in
fact it serves the same purpose here. When you want to send the
PointOfInterest data to RoadTrip, you’ll use the method for each
PointOfInterest in the datastore and create an array of these
dictionaries.
Using methods such as these means you’re creating a representation of
the resource (data) to send back to the client.
You start with the method definition:
  def to_dict(self):

--- Page 495 ---
Methods are defined using the keyword def followed by the method
name. Method parameters are specified between parentheses following
the method name. In Python, you declare self as a first parameter of all
your methods (there are some nuances here I’m not going to get into)
and it works just like self in Objective-C — it’s a pointer to the object.
The method body is enclosed by this method definition on the top.
Remember, though, that Python uses whitespace indentation, rather than
curly braces or keywords, to delimit blocks (a feature also known as the
off-side rule). An increase in indentation comes after certain statements;
a decrease in indentation signifies the end of the current block.
Methods that are preceded by @classmethod are class (rather than
instance) methods. This is similar to the class methods you see in
Objective-C or static methods in C++.
Class methods are used when a method isn’t specific to any particular
instance, but still involves the class in some way. A class method
receives the class as an implicit first argument.
In Chapter 6, I explain that when you send out data from your web
services, you don’t want to blindly send out every single attribute of a
model to the client — you send out a representation of the resource. You
want to think of the data you’re sending as a response to a service
request, not the exposure of a table in a data base that you send to a
client and have them do what they want with it. You need to design the
service so it delivers the information a client needs — information that
may be in the database, or information that you may compute, or even
information you compute from aggregated information from other
services.
The to_dict method is an example of being able to limit the data you
return.
Before you start, take a look at an example of the data you’d return if
this method were called

--- Page 496 ---
{
  status: “ok”,
  results: [
    {
      updated: “2013-04-09 15:44:32.987245”,
      description: “The Grande Dame of museums”,
      destination: “0”,
      longitude: -73.962383,
      location: “New York City”,
      address: “”,
      latitude: 40.779012,
      id: “34”,
      name: “The Metropolitan Museum of Art”
    }
  ]
}
Notice that the address has been left blank — it is not required.
You take this data and create a dictionary that you return with the
PointOfInterest data. This dictionary would include the record id (so
you can identify a particular point of interest/record and use that id later
to update or delete it), name, description, location, address,
latitude and longitude (which you get from the coordinate),
destination, and the time it was last updated.
This creates an empty dictionary with the identifier of a
a = {}
You then add the record id (added by App Engine and part of the key),
like so:
a[‘id’] = str(self.key().id())
This creates dictionary entry with the key of id and a value of key. Each
datastore entity has its own key, which uniquely identifies it. The key

--- Page 497 ---
consists of the entity’s type, an identifier (either a key name string or an
integer ID), and an optional ancestor path (beyond the scope of this
book).
The identifier is assigned when the entity is created. Because it’s part of
the entity’s key, it’s associated permanently with the entity and can’t be
changed. The datastore will automatically assign the entity an integer
numeric ID (you’ll let that happen here), or you can specify its own key
name string for the entity.
You then add the name, description, location, address, and
destination by accessing those attributes in the record and using the
attribute name as the key.
a[‘name’] = self.name
a[‘description’] = self.description
a[‘location’] = self.location
a[‘address’] = self.address
a[‘destination’] = self.destination
When you add the latitude and longitude, you get those values from
the coordinate (which is a GeoPtProperty).
a[‘latitude’] = self.coordinate.lat
a[‘longitude’] = self.coordinate.lon
Finally, you add the following:
a[‘updated’] = str(self.updated)
And then you return the dictionary
return pointOfInterestData;
You defined updated as a DateTimeProperty. str() will convert that
value to a string.

--- Page 498 ---
 Eventually, you’re going to return this to a caller (RoadTrip),
and because the NSJSONSerialization class in the iOS SDK
requires everything to be a property list object, you’ll be able to
include only the following in your response dictionary: dictionaries,
arrays, strings, numbers (integer and float), dates, binary data, and
Boolean values (with dictionaries and arrays as special types
because they are collections and can contain one or multiple data
types, including other dictionaries and arrays). Table 13-1 shows
the relationship between the Python types and the iOS Foundation
framework classes.
Table 13-1 Property List Objects
Abstract Type Foundation Framework Class
Array NSArray
Dictionary NSDictionary
String NSString
Data NSData
Date NSDate
Integer NSNumber (intValue 32-bit), NSNumber (integerValue 64-bit)
Floating-pointNSNumber (floatValue 32-bit), NSNumber (doubleValue 64-bit)
Boolean NSNumber (boolValue)
Mutable versions of the Foundation classes are also supported.
 If you’re using TextWrangler, you can always check your syntax
by choosing #! ⇒ Check Syntax from the main menu.
Single, double, or triple quotes

--- Page 499 ---
In Python, you can use single, double, or triple (triple single or
triple double) quotes to identify a string literal. Many Python
programmers use double quotes around strings that will be
displayed (in a browser for example) and single quotes for
program-centric strings, such as a dictionary key. And as I said
earlier, triple double quotes are used for docstrings.
The TestData Class
Even though I know you can’t wait to start adding points of interest to
the rtpointsofinterest web service, you’ll have to do just that — wait
until the Bonus Chapter, available for download from this book’s
website. But it still would be nice (well, quite necessary, in fact) to be
able to have data to test with.
In this section, you create a handler that implements a web service that
adds data to the database — one you can use from a browser. This is not
the same kind of web service as specified back in Chapter 1 — it’s a
“developer-only” service that will not only make it possible for you to
test your web services, but it also gives me a chance to explain a little
more about the datastore and show how web services that use GET
methods can be tested in the browser.
 Although the Test Hander will implement a GET method, this
should not be a GET request at all, because it updates the database.
But given what you’re using it for and that it’s really only a
development tool, you can let it slide. It should also be a heads up
that you, and only you, decide what a method does, and that I’m
leaving it up to you to be disciplined in adopting conventions.
You start by adding a new file to your application.

--- Page 500 ---
Figure 13-
2: Look, Ma,
no data!
In TextWrangler, choose File ⇒ New ⇒ Text Document from the main
menu or press 
+N
Save your new file as testdata_handler.py in the
rtpointsofinterest folder. Saving it as a .py file, you’ll remember,
results in TextWrangler knowing it’s a Python file, which means
TextWrangler will apply text coloring and enable function navigation. It
also means App Engine will recognize the file as a script. Not saving it
as a .py file results in the following bit of unpleasantness:
ERROR    2013-04-09 21:06:58,202 wsgi.py:189]
Traceback (most recent call last):
…
  File “/Users/neal/Desktop/Cloud Book Final
Projects/rtpointsofinterest/main.py”, line 18, in
<module>
    from testdata_handler import *
ImportError: No module named testdata_handler
Before you add any test data, I want you run your app in
GoogleAppEngine  Launcher and then click the SDK Console button in
the GoogleAppEngine Launcher window toolbar. Doing so gives you
quite a bit of information, including the fact that there is no data there, as
you can see in Figure 13-2.
So next you add some test data, and along the way I show you how to
add a new handler, add records to your datastore, and write out to the
web page.
Start by adding the code in Listing 13-5 to testdata_handler.py.

--- Page 501 ---
Listing 13-5: The Test Data Handler
“””TestDataHandler class creates test data”””
from google.appengine.ext import webapp
from datamodel import *
import json
class TestDataHandler(webapp.RequestHandler):
    def get(self):
        “””Create test data - GET used as a convenience
                                               for
test”””
        db.delete(PointOfInterest.all())
        pointofinterest = PointOfInterest(name=’The
Statue
                                              of
Liberty’,
            description=”Pro democracy and anti-
monarchy    
                                       symbol of
freedom”,
            location=’New York City’,

--- Page 502 ---
            address=’’,
            destination=’0’,
            coordinate=db.GeoPt(lat=40.689244,
                                         lon=-74.044514)
)
        pointofinterest.put()
        pointofinterest = PointOfInterest(name=’Whitney
Museum of American Art’,
            description=’American modern and
                                            contemporary
’,
            location=’New York City’,
            address=’’,
            destination=’0’,
            coordinate=db.GeoPt(lat=40.773508,
                                          lon=-73.964454
))
        pointofinterest.put()
        pointofinterest = PointOfInterest(name=’Tenement
                                                 Museum’
,
            description=’History comes alive’,
            location=’New York City’,
            address=’’,
            destination=’0’,
            coordinate=db.GeoPt(lat=40.719114,
                                          lon=-73.989988
))
        pointofinterest.put()
        pointofinterest = PointOfInterest(name=’MOMA’,
            description=’Modern Art’,
            location=’New York City’,
            address=’’,
            destination=’0’,
            coordinate=db.GeoPt(lat=40.760669,

--- Page 503 ---
                                          lon=-73.976269
))
        pointofinterest.put()
        pointofinterest = PointOfInterest(name=’Solomon
R.
                                       Guggenheim
Museum’,
            description=’A Frank Lloyd Wright building’,
            location=’New York City’,
            address=’’,
            destination=’0’,
            coordinate=db.GeoPt(lat=40.782946,
                                           lon=-73.95891
))
        pointofinterest.put()
        pointofinterest = PointOfInterest(name=’The
                              Metropolitan Museum of
Art’,
            description=’The Grande Dame of museums’,
            location=’New York City’,
            address=’’,
            destination=’0’,
            coordinate=db.GeoPt(lat=40.779012,
                                        lon=-73.962383))
        pointofinterest.put()
        pointofinterest = PointOfInterest(name=’Golden
                                             Gate
Bridge’,
            description=’San Francisco landmark’,
            location=’San Francisco’,
            address=’’,
            destination=’1’,
            coordinate=db.GeoPt(lat=37.819722,
                                        lon=-122.478611)
)
        pointofinterest.put()

--- Page 504 ---
        pointofinterest = PointOfInterest(name=’San
Francisco Museum of Modern Art’,
            description=’Modern Art’,
            location=’San Francisco’,
            address=’’,
            destination=’1’,
            coordinate=db.GeoPt(lat=37.785679,
                                         lon=-122.401157
))
        pointofinterest.put()
        pointofinterest = PointOfInterest(name=’deYoung
                                                  Museum
’,
            description=’Interesting varied collection’,
            location=’San Francisco’,
            address=’’,
            destination=’1’,
            coordinate=db.GeoPt(lat=37.771325,
                                          lon=-122.46885
))
        pointofinterest.put()
        pointofinterest = PointOfInterest(name=’Legion
of
                                                   Honor
’,
            description=’Interesting varied collection’,
            location=’San Francisco’,
            address=’’,
            destination=’1’,
            coordinate=db.GeoPt(lat=37.784773,
                                         lon=-122.500324
))
        pointofinterest.put()
        
        self.response.out.write(‘<pre>’)
        self.response.out.write(“Test data, with %d

--- Page 505 ---
            points of interest:” %       
                          (PointOfInterest.all().count()
))
        self.response.out.write(“\n”)
        for pointofinterest in PointOfInterest.all():
            self.response.out.write(pointofinterest.name
+
               “ Added: “ + str(pointofinterest.updated)
+
               “ id = “ +
str(pointofinterest.key().id())
                                                    +’\n
’)
        self.response.out.write(‘</pre>’)
The import statements here are similar in result to the #import in
Objective-C. from datamodel import * imports the datamodel, and
you can then refer to things defined in the datamodel (such as the
PointOfInterest class and its attributes).
Moving a bit further down Listing 13-5, you see the following:
db.delete(PointOfInterest.all())
db.delete is a Model class instance method that deletes an entity from
the datastore. all() is a Model class class method that returns a Query
object that represents all of the entities for this model in the datastore —
all the points of interest, in other words. (You want to start out with a
clean slate here.)
Next, you create a PointOfInterest instance by using a Model class
constructor specifying the initial values for the instance’s properties as
keyword arguments.
pointofinterest = PointOfInterest(name=
                  ‘The Statue of Liberty’,
                  description=’Pro democracy and anti-

--- Page 506 ---
                              monarchy symbol of
freedom’,
                  location=’New York City’,
                  address=’’,
                  destination=’0’,
                  coordinate=db.GeoPt(
                    lat=40.689244, lon=-74.044514))
Each keyword corresponds to an attribute defined in the Model class. If
the value is required (name, for example), and you don’t supply it, you’ll
get an error like the one you saw in “The webapp model classes” section,
earlier in the chapter.
 Be aware that, because indentation is so important in Python, I
do my best within the confines of the book page width to make
things clear. Just be aware that if a string literal spreads out over to
two lines, for example:
description=’Pro democracy and anti-
                              monarchy symbol of
freedom’,
you should keep them on one line.
Next you add the instance to the datastore:
pointofinterest.put()
put() is a Model instance method that adds the Model instance to the
datastore as an entity. If you’re creating the instance (as you are here),
this method creates a new data entity in the datastore. Otherwise, it
updates the data entity with the current property values.
Finally, you write out the response:
self.response.out.write(‘<pre>’)

--- Page 507 ---
self.response.out.write(“Test data, with %d points of \
  interest:” % (PointOfInterest.all().count()))
self.response.out.write(“\n”)
for pointofinterest in PointOfInterest.all():
    self.response.out.write(pointofinterest.name +    
              “ Added: “ + str(pointofinterest.updated)
+
              “ id = “ + str(pointofinterest.key().id())
              +’\n’)
<pre> is an HTML opening tag of the pre element that defines
preformatted text — text which is usually displayed in fixed-width font
(Courier is the standard) and preserves both spaces and line breaks. It’s
generally used for computer code.
As I say in Chapter 12, the handler is initialized with both a Request and
a Response object. The Response class object has an instance variable
out which is an instance of the StringIO class that that reads and writes
a string buffer. The following lines of code allow you to write to a
browser:
self.response.out.write(“Test data, with %d points of \
  interest:” % (PointOfInterest.all().count()))
String objects have one unique built-in operation: The % operator
(modulo), which is also known as the string formatting or interpolation
operator. The conversion specifier — in this case, %d for signed integer
decimal — is replaced with the value(s) that follow the string formatting
operator. It works similarly to the way string formatting in NSString and
NSLog does in iOS.
Remember that all() is a Model class class method and that it returns a
Query object that represents all of the entities for this model in the
datastore — every stinking one. The contents of this object are sent as
the body of the response when the request handler method returns. write
is an instance method that actually does the write.

--- Page 508 ---
When the handler method exits, the application uses the value of
self.response as the HTTP response.
count() is a Query method that returns the number of results in this
query. It is somewhat faster than retrieving all of the data, but the
amount of time still grows with the size of the result set.
The for-in statement in Python iterates over the items of any sequence
(a list or a string) in the order that they appear in the sequence.
 It is not safe to modify the sequence being iterated over in the
loop. If you need to modify the list, you must iterate over a copy.
Finally, to be able to request this service from rtpointsofinterest, add
the bolded code in Listing 13-6 to main.py.
Listing 13-6: Updating main.py
import webapp2
from testdata_handler import *
class MainHandler(webapp2.RequestHandler):
  def get(self):
    #self.response.out.write(‘Hello world!’)
    self.response.out.write(“<html><body>”)
    self.response.out.write(“<p>Hello Mr Bill!</p>”)
    self.response.out.write(“</body></html>”)
app = webapp2.WSGIApplication([(‘/’, MainHandler),
           (‘/testdata’, TestDataHandler)],
           debug=True)
As I explain in Chapter 11, when your webapp application receives a
request, it creates an instance of the RequestHandler class associated
with the URL path in the request. To ensure that the right class gets
called, you need to add the request handler to main.py and map it to the

--- Page 509 ---
URL. webapp then calls a method that corresponds with the HTTP
action of the request, such as the get() method for a HTTP GET request.
The statement from testdata_handler import * imports the module
in the test_handler file you just created.
The addition to the webapp2WSGIApplication constructor —
(‘/testdata’, TestDataHandler) — tells App Engine that if you ever
get a request that ends in testdata, you need to run the
TestDataHandler script (which is now accessible because you imported
the testdata_handler file in which the script resides).
Testing in Your Browser
Now that you have your stuff together, you can make the request in your
browser. Back in Chapter 6, when I demonstrated the Geocode web
service, I had you enter the following:
http://maps.googleapis.com/maps/api/geocode/json
   ?sensor=false&address=1 Infinite Drive, Cupertino,
CA&
To add the test data, enter this URL in your browser:
http://localhost:8080/testdata
Doing so brings up what you see Figure 13-3.
Now click the SDK Console button in the GoogleAppEngineLauncher
window toolbar again, and you can see lots of nice data, as demonstrated
in Figure 13-4.
Now that you have some data to work with, you can start implementing
the web services you specified in Chapter 10 in rtpointsofinterest

--- Page 510 ---
Chapter 14
Creating and Using the
pointsofinterest Web Service
In This Chapter
 Creating the pointsofinterest web service
 Modifying RoadTrip to use the pointsofinterest web service
 Downloading points of interest only when necessary
 Making sure the points of interest are current
Chapter 13 is all about getting your data model ready to go. In this
chapter, you tackle one of the main rtpointsofinterest web services
— pointsofinterest — and then go on to develop the lastupdate web
service, which will keep RoadTrip from having to do unnecessary
downloads.
Oh, and by the way, you’ll modify RoadTrip to use both of these web
services as well.
The pointsofinterest Web Service
You’re finally going to get to return some data to the app, and as you
might expect, you’re going to add a new handler to the app you created
using App Engine.
To do that, first add a new file to your application. In TextWrangler,
choose File ⇒ New ⇒ Text Document from the main menu or press 
+N.

--- Page 511 ---
Save the new file as pointsofinterest_handler.py in the rtpointsof
interest (or your app’s) folder.
 You’re going to see some strange line breaks in my upcoming
listings because an entire line of code won’t always fit on the page.
In your listings, you should always place string literals on one line.
Remember that Python is sensitive to indents, so be careful about
breaking statements.
As I explain in Chapter 11, when your webapp application receives a
request, it creates an instance of the RequestHandler class associated
with the URL path in the request. To get the right class called, you add
the request handler to main and map it to the URL, as you did with
TestHandler in Chapter 13. webapp then calls a method that corresponds
with the HTTP action of the request — the get() method for a HTTP
GET request, for example. The method processes the request, prepares a
response, and then returns. Finally, the application sends the response to
the client.
It’s time now to start adding the necessary code to main.py so your web
service will be able to do all that.
First step: Add the bolded code in Listing 14-1 to main.py.
Listing 14-1: Updating main.py
import webapp2
from testdata_handler import *
from pointsofinterest_handler import *
class MainHandler(webapp2.RequestHandler):
    def get(self):
              # self.response.out.write(‘Hello world!’)
        self.response.out.write(“<html><body>”)
        self.response.out.write(“<p>Hello Mr Bill!</p>”)

--- Page 512 ---
        self.response.out.write(“</body></html>”)
app = webapp2.WSGIApplication([(‘/’, MainHandler),
        (‘/testdata’, TestDataHandler),
        (‘/pointsofinterest’, PointsOfInterestHandler)],
          debug=True)
TestHandler gets treated the exact same way in Chapter 12.
But before you add the PointsOfInterestHandler class to your
rtpointsofinterest, you have to do some prep work.
One of the requirements you have for clients of your web services is that
they have an API key and include a (required) parameter in the query
string. Because that is required for all web service requests, you don’t
want to have to duplicate the code to check it in every handler. Instead,
you’ll create a new class — AccessHandler (derived from
RequestHandler). That new class will include a method — the
validate() method — that will validate the API key. Then you’ll derive
all of your classes for AccessHandler and simply call the validate()
method to do the key validation.
As usual, start by adding a new file to your application. In TextWrangler,
choose File ⇒ New ⇒ Text Document from the main menu or press 
+N.
Save the new file as access_handler.py in the rtpointsofinterest (or
your app’s) folder.
Now add the code in Listing 14-2 to access_handler.py.
Listing 14-2: The AccessHandler
“””Check for an api key to allow access”””
from google.appengine.ext import webapp
from datamodel import *
class AccessHandler(webapp.RequestHandler):
    keys = [‘test123’, ‘test456’]
    def validate(self):

--- Page 513 ---
            key = self.request.get(‘key’)
            if (not key):
                raise Exception (“missing key”)
            try:
                i = AccessHandler.keys.index(key)
            except Exception, ex:
                raise Exception (“invalid key: “ + key)
Going through the listing, you can see that you first define the class:
AccessHandler(webapp.RequestHandler):
and then define an instance variable keys:
keys = [‘test123’, ‘test456’]
The line of code above defines what is known in Python as a list — an
array, in Objective-C terms — with two string elements, test123 and
test456.
Of course, in a production app you might have this list in the datastore or
even access it using a web service.
Then you define your first method:
def validate(self):
The first thing you do here is get the key parameter from the request.
As you recall, the request is passed on to the request handler to process.
An instance of the Request class contains information about an
incoming web request. You can access all the information in the request
using the request object.
key = self.request.get(‘key’)
This returns the value of the query (URL) or POST argument with the
given name — key. If multiple arguments have the same name, the first

--- Page 514 ---
argument’s value is returned.
If the value’s not there, you raise an exception:
if (not key):
    raise Exception (“missing key”)  
The if statement in Python is similar to those in other languages,
differing from the Objective-C version only by the use of a colon (:), for
example. There can be additional elif parts (short for else if) with an
optional else part. An if...elif...elif... sequence is used instead
of the switch or case statements found in other languages.
The raise statement allows you to force a specified exception to occur,
with the only argument to raise being an indication of the exception to
be raised. This argument must be either an exception instance or an
exception class (a class that derives from Exception). In this case, you
use base exception — Exception — by initializing an Exception object
with the text corresponding to the error (missing key).
Raising an exception here will result in a return to the caller, and as
you’ll soon see, this exception will be handled by its exception handler.
Next you create a try block and use the index method to see whether
the key is in your list of keys:
try:
    i = AccessHandler.keys.index(key)
Like many other programming languages, Python uses try...except
blocks to handle exceptions and raise to generate them.
The handler continues executing at the beginning of the try clause (the
statement[s] between the try and except keywords). If no exception
occurs, the except clause is skipped, and execution of the try statement
is finished.

--- Page 515 ---
If an exception occurs during execution of the try clause, the rest of the
clause is skipped. Then, if its type matches the exception named after the
except keyword, the except clause is executed, and execution continues
after the try statement.
So look at the first (and last) statement in the try clause:
i = AccessHandler.keys.index(key)
The list’s index method returns the index in the list of the first item
whose value is key. It will raise an exception if there is no item (that is,
if the key passed in cannot be found in the list of keys).
In that case, the except clause is executed because the type specified —
Exception — is the base class for all exceptions:
except Exception, ex:
    raise Exception (“invalid key: “ + key)
In this case, you ignore the exception raised by the index method and
you raise your own exception — invalid key — which will be handled
by the caller.
Now you’ll add a new file to your application. In TextWrangler, choose
File ⇒ New ⇒ Text Document from the main menu or press 
+N. Name
the new file pointsofinterest_handler.py and add the code in Listing
14-3 to it.
Listing 14-3: The PointsOfInterestHandler
“””Return all the points of interest for a
destination”””
from google.appengine.ext import webapp
from datamodel import *
import json
import logging
from access_handler import *

--- Page 516 ---
#class PointsOfInterestHandler(webapp.RequestHandler):
class PointsOfInterestHandler(AccessHandler):
    def get(self):
    
        data = {}
        
        try:
            self.validate()
            destination =
self.request.get(‘destination’)
            if (destination):
                data[‘status’]=”ok”
                pointsofinterest = []
                query = PointOfInterest.all()
                logging.info (“Returning  points of
interest for destination: %s” % (destination))
                query.filter(‘destination = ‘,
destination)
                for pointofinterest in query:
                    pointsofinterest.append(
                                pointofinterest.to_dict(
))
                data[‘results’] = pointsofinterest
                
            else:
                raise Exception(“missing destination”)
        except Exception,  ex:
            data[‘status’] = “error”
            data[‘status_text’] = “exception: %s” % (ex)
        self.response.headers[‘Content-Type’] =
                                      ‘application/json’
        self.response.out.write(json.dumps(data))
You can see that I’ve added two new import statements here. The first
one — import json — is used to import a built-in module. (I explain
more about JSON as I explain the code.)

--- Page 517 ---
As for the second import statement — import logging — this lets you
take advantage of the fact that Google App Engine uses the Python
logging module to allow you to log events that take place in your
application.
 You can see log statements in the GoogleAppEngineLauncher
Logging console by clicking the Logs button on the toolbar in the
GoogleAppEngineLauncher window. When your app is actually
running in App Engine, you can see log statements in the
Administration Console. More on that in Chapter 15.
The logging module provides a lot of functionality and flexibility (check
it out on your own). This line of code for example,
logging.info ("Returning points of interest for
                           destination: %s” %
destination)
simply logs a message (with level INFO) on the Logs window.
Next, you define the PointsOfInterestHandler class as well as the first
method (get):
class PointsOfInterestHandler(webapp.RequestHandler):
    def get(self):
You start by creating a dictionary to hold the data:
data = {}
This line creates a dictionary in Python, similar to an iOS NSDictionary.
Dictionaries are sometimes found in other languages as associative
memories or associative arrays. Unlike sequences, which are indexed by
a range of numbers, dictionaries are indexed by keys, which can be any
immutable type; strings and numbers can always be keys.

--- Page 518 ---
As in NSDictionary, a dictionary in Python is an unordered set of key
value pairs, with each key unique within that dictionary. As you saw, a
pair of braces creates an empty dictionary: {}. Although placing a
comma-separated list of key:value pairs within the braces adds initial
key:value pairs to the dictionary, you’ll do it by adding the pairs
programmatically.
 The main operations on a dictionary are storing a value with
some key and extracting the value given the key. It’s also possible
to delete a key:value pair with del. If you store a new value using
a key that is already in use, the old value is overwritten. Unlike in
NSDictionary, if you try to use a non-existent key, you will get an
exception.
Next, you’ll see a try statement that starts a try…except block.
You call the (super class’s) validate() method:
self.validate()
If there are any exceptions, the rest of the try clause is skipped. I’ll
explain what happens then after I go through the rest of the try clause.
You then get the destination from the request:
destination = self.request.get(‘destination’)
You check to see if there is a destination present:
if (destination):
If the destination is not present, you raise an exception:
else:
    raise Exception(“missing destination”)

--- Page 519 ---
I explain the mechanics of the exception after I go through the rest of the
try clause.
If there is a destination, you add a key to the data dictionary (no
relation here to metadata in a database management system):
data[‘status’]=”ok”
“ok” corresponds to the status you specified that the pointsofinterest
web service would return in Chapter 10. If you’re not successful, you
change this later.
You then create an empty array:
pointsofinterest = []
and get all the PointsOfInterest entities in the datastore:
query = PointOfInterest.all()
all() is a Model class method that returns a Query object that represents
all entities for the kind corresponding to a model — in this case,
PointOfInterest. As you’ll see, there are Query object methods you can
use to filter and specify sort orders to the query before the query is
executed.
An application creates a Query object by calling either the Model class’s
all() class method or the Query constructor (query =
db.Query(User)).
If you want to return only a single entity matching your query, you can
use the query method get(). This query method will return the first
result that matches the query.
u = q.get()
Next, I log the destination — just to show you how this works.
logging.info ("Returning points of interest for

--- Page 520 ---
                           destination: %s” %
destination)
If you were to check out the Logs window, you’d see the following:
INFO     2012-04-17 15:06:40,243         
                           pointsofinterest_handler.py:1
8]
Returning points of interest for destination: 0
Next, I apply a destination filter to the query:
query.filter(‘destination = ‘, destination)
Here I filter the query according to the destination specified in the web
service query string.
Then I add each PointOfInterest in the filtered query to the
pointsofinterest array I created:
for poi in query:
    pointsofinterest.append(poi.to_dict())
append() is an array method that adds to the array. to_dict() is the
method you added to the PointOfInterest model in Chapter 13 that
returns the point-of-interest data in a dictionary. To refresh your memory,
def to_dict(self):
    “””Return the PointOfInterest data in a
dictionary”””
  
    a = {}
    a[‘id’] = str(self.key().id())
    a[‘name’] = self.name
    a[‘description’] = self.description
    a[‘location’] = self.location
    a[‘address’] = self.address
    a[‘destination’] = self.destination

--- Page 521 ---
    a[‘latitude’] = self.coordinate.lat
    a[‘longitude’] = self.coordinate.lon
    a[‘updated’] = str(self.updated)
    return a
With that out of the way, you then add the array of point-of-interest
dictionaries to the Results dictionary with a key of results (as you
specified in Chapter 11).
Now to the except clause, as promised.
When you raise an exception, the rest of the try clause is skipped and
you go immediately to the except clause. This would also happen if the
exception was raised in the validate() method.
There are three exceptions that could have been raised that would lead to
you ending up in the except clause.
The first two were in the validate() method:
missing key
invalid key
and the third was in the get() method:
missing destination
The except clause will be executed if its type matches the exception
named after the except keyword; here, the type Exception is the base
class for all exceptions:
except Exception,  ex:
   data[‘status’] = ‘error’
   data[‘status_text’] = ‘exception: %s’ % ex
The code in the except clause has access to the exception you raised —
ex.

--- Page 522 ---
You set the status key in the data dictionary to error and add the
status_text key with whatever the value of the exception is:
‘exception: %s’ % ex’
One example of exception text you would have created the exception
with is raise Exception (“missing destination”).
Execution continues after the try…except block.
You set the content type of the response to JSON:
self.response.headers[‘Content-Type’] =
“application/json”
and then return the response (in JSON format, of course):
self.response.out.write(json.dumps(data))
This serializes the object as a JSON-formatted stream.
Now if you were to enter the following in Safari, you’d see what you see
in Figure 14-1.
http://localhost:8080/pointsofinterest?destination=0&
                                              key=test12
3
In Chrome, you’d be greeted by what you see in Figure 14-2.
If you omitted the destination parameter when you called this from
your browser, what you would see is
{“status”: “error”, “status_text”: “missing
destination”}
in Safari or
{
    status: “error”,

--- Page 523 ---
Figure 14-
1: Safari
output for
the
allpointsofint
erest web
service.
Figure 14-
2: Chrome
formatted
output.
    status_text: “exception: missing destination”
}
in Chrome.
 The Datastore API provides two interfaces for queries: a Query
Object interface (which you just used), and a SQL-like query
language called GQL, suitable for querying the App Engine
datastore. For a complete discussion of the GQL syntax and
features, see the GQL Reference in App Engine. In this example,
you’ll be using the Query class.


--- Page 524 ---
 As you can see, these requests handlers can be tested by entering
a URL in the browser. You can do that for GET requests like
pointsofinterest but unfortunately not for POST requests like the
ones you’ll add in the Bonus Chapter, available for download from
this book’s website.
Updating RoadTrip
Now that you have an honest-to-goodness callable web service, you can
update RoadTrip to use the web service rather than the
Destination.plist to get the points of interest to display to the user.
You’ll do this in a method, loadPointsOfInterestFromWebService,
which will replace the existing loadPointsOfInterest method — the
one that loads the points of interest from the Destinations.plist and
makes them available to the PointsOfInterestController to display in
its view.
 Until you upload your app to App Engine, the code you’re about
to enter will work only in the Simulator. That’s one of the reasons I
had you surround the iCloud code with #if in Chapter 5 — so you
could still run RoadTrip in the Simulator.
Go ahead and start with the WSManager. I’ve dropped hints now and then
that one of my goals for this book is to give you some patterns that you
can reuse in your own apps.
In Chapter 10, I showed you that, with WSLoader in your pocket, you had
a pattern you could use to enable any app to use a new web service. The
process could be summarized as follows:

--- Page 525 ---
1. Add a method to WSManager that makes the request for a given
HTTP method (GET, DELETE, POST, etc.).
2. Add a method to WSManager to set up the request if there are
parameters common to a set of web services.
3. Add a method to WSManager to create the NSURLRequest for a given
HTTP method (GET, DELETE, POST, etc.).
4. Add a method to YourModel to make the request to the WSManager
for the web service.
5. Add a method to YourModel that processes the JSON response
(returning it in a dictionary) and checks for errors.
You’ll implement that process now using the following specific
methods:
1. The
pointsOfInterestGETWebService:userParams:successBlock:failu
reBlock: method in WSManager
2. The setupPointsOfInterestWebService method in WSManager
3. The existing createGETRequest:withParams: method in WSManager
4. The loadPointsOfInterestFromWebService method in RTModel
5. The createPointsOfInterestResponseDictionary method in
RTModel
Setting up the WSManager methods to
make the request and do the setup
Start by updating WSManager.h in RoadTrip with the new service request
—
pointsOfInterestGETWebService:userParams:successBlock:failure
Block: by adding the bolded code in Listing 14-4. As I explain in
Chapter 10, I make this a generic rtpointsofinterest web service

--- Page 526 ---
request by using the service parameter, which allows me to specify
which rtpointsofinterest web service I want.
Listing 14-4: Adding the
pointsOfInterestGETWebService Declaration
@interface WSManager : NSObject
- (void)geocodeSynchronouslyXML:(NSMutableDictionary
*)userParams successBlock:(void (^)(NSDictionary
*))success failureBlock:(void (^)())failure;
- (void)geocodeAsynchronouslyXML:(NSMutableDictionary
*)userParams successBlock:(void (^)(NSDictionary
*))success failureBlock:(void (^)())failure;
- (void)geocodeAsynchronouslyJSON:(NSMutableDictionary
*)userParams successBlock:(void (^)(NSDictionary
*))success failureBlock:(void (^)())failure;
- (void)pointsOfInterestGETWebService:(NSString*)service
userParams:(NSMutableDictionary *)userParams
successBlock:(void (^)(NSDictionary *))success
failureBlock:(void (^)())failure;
@end
Next, you’ll add the declaration for the
setupPointsOfInterestWebService; by adding the bolded code in
Listing 14-5 to WSManager.m.
Listing 14-5: Adding
setupPointsOfInterestWebService declaration
@interface WSManager () {
  
  void (^returnSuccess)(NSDictionary *);
  void (^returnFail)();
  NSString *webService;
  NSMutableDictionary *params;
}
- (void)setupGeocodingWebService;

--- Page 527 ---
- (NSMutableURLRequest *)createGETRequest:(NSString *)
            baseURL withParams:(NSDictionary
*)userParams;
- (void)requestSynchronousWebService:
                           (NSMutableURLRequest
*)request;
- (void)requestAsynchronousWebService:
                           (NSMutableURLRequest
*)request;
- (void)setupPointsOfInterestWebService;
@end
Now add the actual setupPointsOfInterestWebService method in
Listing 14-6 to WSManager.m.
Listing 14-6: Setting Up the Web Service Request
- (void)setupPointsOfInterestWebService {
  
  params = [[NSMutableDictionary alloc] init];
  [params setValue:kAppID forKey:@”key”];
}
Notice that this particular method allocates the params dictionary and
adds a kAppID (a constant that defines your app ID) with a key of key
(the required parameter name). Keep in mind that this is a required
parameter for all rtpointsofinterest web services.
You’re going to be adding the main method —
pointsOfInterestGETWebService:userParams:successBlock:failure
Block: — in a second by adding the code in Listing 14-9 to
WSManager.m.
Before you do that, though, you need to add the kAppID constant you use
in Listing 14-6 and another constant — BASE_URL, which you’ll use in
the method that the RTModel needs to make the web service request — to

--- Page 528 ---
the RTDefines.h file. So, go ahead and add the bolded code in Listing
14-7 to RTDefines.h.
Listing 14-7: Updating RTDefines.h
#define
kDestinationPreferenceKey  @”DestinationPreferenceKey”
#define kTrackLocationPreference
@”trackLocationPreference”
#define kDestinationCell @”DestinationCell”
#define kItineraryCell @”ItineraryCell”
#define kPointOfInterestCell @”PointOfInterestCell”
#define kAccelerometerFrequency 25
#define kFilteringFactor .1
#define kAccelerationThreshold 2.0
#define kMetersToMiles 1609.344
#define RESPONSE_STATUS  @”status”
#define RESPONSE_STATUS_TEXT  @”status_text”
#define RESPONSE_STATUS_OK  @”ok”
#define kAppID @”test123”
#if !TARGET_IPHONE_SIMULATOR
#define BASE_URL
@”https://rtpointsofinterest.appspot.com/”
#else
#define BASE_URL @”http://localhost:8080/”
#endif
The kAppID defines an app ID that will allow you to access the web
service (an ID that you have in the keys list in the AccessHandler
validate() method).
You also add BASE_URL, which provides the base URL to use for the web
service request. In fact, you’ll specify two. When you deploy
rtpointsofinterest to the cloud, it will look like:
https://rtpointsofinterest.appspot.com/

--- Page 529 ---
But as I explain in Chapter 12, you’ll need to name your application
something other than rtpointsofinterest so you’ll replace that
rtpointsofinterest with whatever you entered in the Application
Identifier field when you created your Application on the Google App
Engine website.
During the development process, however, you’ll use a simulator, and
that base URL will be localhost.
Next, you need to import RTDefines.h into WSManager.m. To do that,
add the bolded code in Listing 14-8 to WSManager.m.
Listing 14-8: Adding the Import Statement
#import “WSManager.h”
#import “WSLoader.h”
#import “RTDefines.h”
@interface WSManager () {
Now you’re set to add the new message to WSManager to request the
pointsofinterest web service. Add the method in Listing 14-9 to
WSManager.m.
Listing 14-9: Calling the pointsofinterest Web
Service
- (void)pointsOfInterestGETWebService:(NSString*)service
userParams:(NSMutableDictionary *)userParams
successBlock:(void (^)(NSDictionary *))success
failureBlock:(void (^)())failure {
  
  [self setupPointsOfInterestWebService];
  returnSuccess = success;
  returnFail = failure;
  webService = [NSString stringWithFormat:@”%@%@?”,  
                                      BASE_URL,
service];   

--- Page 530 ---
  [params addEntriesFromDictionary:userParams];
  NSMutableURLRequest *request = [self
createGETRequest:webService withParams:params];
  [request setCachePolicy:
   NSURLRequestReloadIgnoringLocalCacheData];
  [request setTimeoutInterval:60];
  [self requestAsynchronousWebService:request];
}
Adding the RTModel methods to make
the request and process the JSON
response
As I mention in Chapter 10, you’re going to use a model method to
make the request and process the response.
So go ahead and add the bolded code in Listing 14-10 to RTModel.m so
you can declare my brand-spanking new method
loadPointsOfInterestFromWebService that will use the new
pointsofinterest web service. The added code also declares the
createPointsOfInterestResponseDictionary: method that will do the
common work for all the users of a rtpointofinterest web service.
Listing 14-10: Adding
loadPointsOfInterestFromWebService and
createPointsOfInterestResponseDictionary: to
RTModel.m
@interface RTModel () {  
…
}
@property (readonly, strong, nonatomic) NSFetchRequest
*sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest;

--- Page 531 ---
- (void)geocodeSynchronouslyXML:(NSString
*)findLocation;
- (void)geocodeAsynchronouslyXML:(NSString
*)findLocation;
- (void)geocodeAsynchronouslyJSON:
                                 (NSString
*)findLocation;
- (void)loadPointsOfInterestFromWebService;
- (NSDictionary *)
   createPointsOfInterestResponseDictionary:
                                 (NSDictionary
*)response;
@end
Next, add the code in Listing 14-11 to RTModel.m so you can implement
createPointsOfInterestResponseDictionary:.
Listing 14-11:
createPointsOfInterestResponseDictionary
- (NSDictionary *)
      createPointsOfInterestResponseDictionary:
                                (NSDictionary *)response
{
  
  data = [response objectForKey:@” response”];
  responseStr = [[NSString alloc] initWithData:data
                          encoding:
NSUTF8StringEncoding];
  
  NSError *error = nil;
  NSDictionary *responseDict =
    [NSJSONSerialization JSONObjectWithData:data
options:   
             NSJSONReadingMutableContainers
error:&error];

--- Page 532 ---
  
  if (error != nil) {
    UIAlertView *alert = [[UIAlertView alloc]
      initWithTitle:
        @”Your request could not be carried out”
       message:@”There is a problem with the data
returned
                                          from the
server”
       delegate:nil cancelButtonTitle:@”OK”
       otherButtonTitles:nil];
    [alert show];
    return nil;
  }
  else {
    NSString *statusCode =
               [responseDict
valueForKey:RESPONSE_STATUS];
    if (![RESPONSE_STATUS_OK
       caseInsensitiveCompare:statusCode] ==   
                                          NSOrderedSame)
{
      NSString* errorMessage;    
      NSString *error =
          [responseDict
valueForKey:RESPONSE_STATUS_TEXT];
      NSString *trimmedError =
         [error stringByTrimmingCharactersInSet:
           [NSCharacterSet           
                      whitespaceAndNewlineCharacterSet]]
;
      if ((error == nil) ||
          ((id) error == [NSNull null]) ||
          ([error length] == 0) || (trimmedError == 0))
        

--- Page 533 ---
        errorMessage =  @”An error occurred while
communicating with the server.  We will look
                                               into
this”;
      else
        errorMessage = error;
      UIAlertView *alert = [[UIAlertView alloc]
        initWithTitle:@”Your request could not be
carried
                 out - the server responded with an
error”
         message:errorMessage delegate:nil
         cancelButtonTitle:@”OK” otherButtonTitles:nil];
      [alert show];
      return nil;
    }
  }
return responseDict;
}
As I explain in Chapter 10, this is similar to the
geocodeAsynchronouslyJSON: method in Listing 10-9 in that chapter,
but serializes the response into mutable arrays and dictionaries.
Now you can add the loadPointsOfInterestFromWebServicc method
shown in Listing 14-12 to RTModel.m.
Listing 14-12: The
loadPointsOfInterestFromWebService Method
- (void)loadPointsOfInterestFromWebService  {
  
  void (^success) (NSDictionary *) =
                               ^(NSDictionary *response)
{
    

--- Page 534 ---
    NSDictionary *responseDict = [self
       createPointsOfInterestResponseDictionary:response
];
    if (!responseDict)
      return;
    
    RTAppDelegate *appDelegate =
             [[UIApplication sharedApplication]
delegate];
    NSString *fileComponent =  [NSString
stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”, @”Lastdownload”,
              appDelegate.destinationPreference,
@”.poi”];
    NSString *filePath = [RTModel
filePath:fileComponent];
    NSURL *lastDownLoadURL =
                         [NSURL
fileURLWithPath:filePath];    
    
    NSDateFormatter *dateFormatter =
                          [[NSDateFormatter alloc]
init];
    NSTimeZone *timeZone =
                    [NSTimeZone
timeZoneWithName:@”UTC”];
    [dateFormatter setTimeZone:timeZone];
        [dateFormatter setDateFormat:
                           @”yyyy-MM-dd
HH:mm:ss.SSSSSS”];
    NSString* currentDateTime =
            [dateFormatter stringFromDate: [NSDate
date]];
    [currentDateTime writeToURL:lastDownLoadURL
        atomically:YES encoding:NSUTF8StringEncoding    
                                              error:NULL
];

--- Page 535 ---
    
    NSMutableArray *results =
                   [responseDict
objectForKey:@”results”];
    pointsOfInterestData = results;
    fileComponent = [NSString
stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”,
      @”POI”, appDelegate.destinationPreference,
@”.poi”];
    filePath = [RTModel filePath:fileComponent];
    NSURL *pointsOfInterestDataURL =
                         [NSURL
fileURLWithPath:filePath];
    [pointsOfInterestData writeToURL:  
                  pointsOfInterestDataURL
atomically:YES];
    if ([results count]  > 0) {
      pointsOfInterest =
       [NSMutableArray arrayWithCapacity:[results
count]];
      
      BOOL isInItinerary = NO;
      
      for (NSMutableDictionary *aPointOfIinterest in
                                               results)
{
        for (SharedPointOfInterest
*sharedPointOfInterest
                                          in itinerary)
{
          if ([sharedPointOfInterest.title  
            isEqualToString:[aPointOfIinterest
                                  objectForKey:@”name”]]
)
            isInItinerary = YES;
        }

--- Page 536 ---
        if (!isInItinerary) {
          [pointsOfInterest addObject:
            [[PointOfInterest alloc]
               initWithWebServiceData:aPointOfIinterest]
];
        }
        else {
          isInItinerary = NO;
        }
      }
    }
    [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
postNotificationName:@”PointsOfInterestChanged”
object:self userInfo:nil];
  };
  
  void (^failure) (NSError *) = ^(NSError *error ){
    NSString *errorMessage = [error
localizedDescription];
    UIAlertView *alertView = [[UIAlertView alloc]
         initWithTitle:
                     @”Error getting response from
server”
         message:errorMessage delegate:nil
          cancelButtonTitle:@”OK”
otherButtonTitles:nil];
    [alertView show];
    return;
  };
  
  NSMutableDictionary *params =
                       [[NSMutableDictionary alloc]
init];
    RTAppDelegate *appDelegate =
             [[UIApplication sharedApplication]
delegate];

--- Page 537 ---
  [params setObject:appDelegate.destinationPreference
                                   forKey:@”destination”
];
  WSManager *wsManager = [[WSManager alloc] init];
  
  [wsManager
     pointsOfInterestGETWebService:@”pointsofinterest”
userParams:params successBlock:success
                                    failureBlock:failure
];  
}
 Be aware that you’ll get a compiler error until you add the
initWithWebServiceData: method.
Here I process the returned data the same way I did in the loadPointsOf
Interest method. (Chapter 2 has the details on that one.) The only
difference is that I use a new PointOfInterest method — the
initWithWebServiceData: method (which you’ll add next) instead of
initWithData: — to create the PointOfInterest because dictionary
keys returned by the pointsofinterest web service are lowercase,
whereas the PointOfInterest dictionary you get from the
Destinations.plist has initial caps.
I also create a file where I save the date and time of this download. You
use that later to determine whether you need to reload the points-of-
interest data.
RTAppDelegate *appDelegate = [[UIApplication
sharedApplication] delegate];
NSString *fileComponent =
  [NSString stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”,
@”Lastdownload”,    

--- Page 538 ---
              appDelegate.destinationPreference,
@”.poi”];
NSString *filePath = [RTModel filePath:fileComponent];
NSURL *lastDownLoadURL = [NSURL
fileURLWithPath:filePath];    
First you simply set up the file — the string Lastdownload — with the
current destination as the suffix.
Next you create the string by allocating a date formatter and creating a
format that matches the string you get from the date and time stored in
App Engine. I don’t go into date/time formatting here, but the code is
pretty obvious. Date formatting follows the Unicode Technical Standard
#35 at http://unicode.org/reports/tr35.
NSDateFormatter *dateFormatter =
                          [[NSDateFormatter alloc]
init];
NSTimeZone *timeZone =
                    [NSTimeZone
timeZoneWithName:@”UTC”];
[dateFormatter setTimeZone:timeZone];
[dateFormatter setDateFormat:
                          @”yyyy-MM-dd
HH:mm:ss.SSSSSS”];
NSString* currentDateTime =
            [dateFormatter stringFromDate: [NSDate
date]];
Then I store the current date and time in string format. (Thanks, App
Engine!)
I also save the downloaded data to a file.
NSMutableArray *results =
                   [responseDict
objectForKey:@”results”];

--- Page 539 ---
pointsOfInterestData = results;
fileComponent = [NSString stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”,
      @”POI”, appDelegate.destinationPreference,
@”.poi”];
filePath = [RTModel filePath:fileComponent];
NSURL *pointsOfInterestDataURL =
                         [NSURL
fileURLWithPath:filePath];
[pointsOfInterestData writeToURL:  
                  pointsOfInterestDataURL
atomically:YES];
What I’m doing here is caching the data. In Chapter 6, I explain that one
of the requirements of a well-designed web service is the ability to use
cached data whenever possible. This ability will reduce bandwidth
requirements (and, as a side effect, potentially improve the user
experience). As you’ll soon see in the “Using Cached Data” section,
later in this chapter, you’ll add a new web service that RoadTrip will be
able to use to determine whether it should download all the points of
interest or just use the cached data.
Because I tweaked the WSManager method to be able to handle any
rtpoints ofinterest web service, I had to include the specific web
service — points ofinterest, in this case — that I wanted in the
message:
[wsManager pointsOfInterestGETWebService:
     @”pointsofinterest” userParams:params
successBlock:success failureBlock:failure];  
Adding the required methods to
PointOfInterest
Now it’s time to take care of the compiler error and add the missing
method to the PointsOfInterest class. First add the bolded code in

--- Page 540 ---
Listing 14-13 to PointOfInterest.h to declare the method.
Listing 14-13: Updating PointOfInterest.h
@interface PointOfInterest : NSObject <MKAnnotation>
@property (nonatomic, readwrite) CLLocationCoordinate2D
coordinate;
@property (nonatomic, readwrite, copy) NSString *title;
@property (nonatomic, readwrite, copy) NSString
*subtitle;
@property (nonatomic, readwrite, copy) NSString
*address;
@property (nonatomic, readwrite, copy) NSString
*location;
@property (nonatomic, readwrite, copy) NSString
*comment;
@property (nonatomic, readwrite, copy) NSString
*recordID;
- (id)initWithData:(NSDictionary *)data;
- (id)initWithWebServiceData:(NSDictionary *)data;
- (NSDictionary *)returnPointOfInterestData;
@end
With that done, add the code in Listing 14-14 to PointOfInterest.m to
actually add the method.
Listing 14-14: Adding initWithWebServiceData:
- (id)initWithWebServiceData:(NSDictionary *)data {
  
  self = [super init];
  if (self) {
    CLLocationCoordinate2D coordinate;
    coordinate.latitude =
            [[data objectForKey:@”latitude”]
doubleValue];
    coordinate.longitude =

--- Page 541 ---
            [[data
objectForKey:@”longitude”]doubleValue];
    self.coordinate = coordinate;
    self.title = [data objectForKey:@”name”];
    self.address = [data objectForKey:@”address”];
    self.location = [data objectForKey:@”location”];
    self.comment = [data objectForKey:@”description”];
    self.subtitle = [data objectForKey:@”description”];
    self.recordID = [data objectForKey:@”id”];  
  }
  return self;
}
You’ll notice two things here: First, this method is almost the same as
the initWithData method that is already there. The main difference is
that the keys for the data in the response dictionary returned by the web
are in lowercase (in accordance with Python naming conventions),
whereas the keys used in the Destinations.plist dictionaries have the
first letter capitalized. (I used the info-plist as a guide where
dictionaries have the first letter capitalized.)
You’ll also notice that I’ve added a new property — recordID. As I
explain in Chapter 12, each entity in the data store has a unique record
ID. Until now, I really didn’t have to care about things like record IDs
because the RTModel was managing the objects that contained the data.
But now that the data resides in the cloud, you need a way to identify
each point of interest in the datastore as well. Although you won’t
generally need the record ID in RoadTrip — because you download all
the points of interest — you might, if you took the application further,
have additional data about each point of interest stored in the database (a
guide to a point of interest, for example) that the user could download,
and you’d need a way to connect the two together.
As it stands, though, the only way you’ll use recordID is to identify
points of interest you want to delete from the datastore. (More on

--- Page 542 ---
deletions in the Bonus Chapter, available for download from this book’s
website.)
You have also have to synthesize the getters and setters for the recordID
property. Add the bolded code in Listing 14-15 to PointsOfInterest.m.
Listing 14-15: Synthesize the getters and setters
@implementation PointOfInterest
@synthesize coordinate = _coordinate;
@synthesize title = _title;
@synthesize subtitle = _subtitle;
@synthesize address = _address;
@synthesize location = _location;
@synthesize comment= _comment;
@synthesize recordID = _recordID;
Send the new message
Finally, you need to change the message in initWithDestination from
loadPointsOfInterest to loadPointsOfInterestFromWebService. To
do that, delete the bolded-underlined-italicized code and add the bolded
code in Listing 14-16 to initWithDestinationIndex: in RTModel.m.
(As a heads up, you’ll have to modify two other methods,
persistentStoreChanged: and removeFromItinerary:, but I’ll have
you change both after you make some enhancements to the way you use
web services later in this chapter.)
Listing 14-16: Updating initWithDestinationIndex:
- (id)initWithDestinationIndex:
                            (NSUInteger)destinationIndex
{
  
  if ((self = [super init])) {
    

--- Page 543 ---
    NSURL *destinationsURL = [[NSBundle mainBundle]
URLForResource:@”Destinations”
withExtension:@”plist”];
    NSDictionary *destinations = [NSDictionary
dictionaryWithContentsOfURL:destinationsURL];
    NSArray *destinationsArray =
           [destinations
objectForKey:@”DestinationData”];
    destinationData =
       [destinationsArray
objectAtIndex:destinationIndex];
    destination = [[Destination alloc]
               initWithDestinationIndex:destinationIndex
];
    [self loadEvents];
    NSManagedObjectContext *context =  
                                self.managedObjectContex
t;
    NSError *error = nil;
    itinerary = [NSMutableArray arrayWithArray:
      [context executeFetchRequest:
                self.sharedPointOfInterestFetchRequest
                                           error:&error]
];
    if (error)
      NSLog(@”Core Data Failure! Error code: %u,
description: %@, and reason: %@”, error.code, [error
localizedDescription], [error
localizedFailureReason]);
    
    __block __weak RTModel *weakSelf = self;
    [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
addObserverForName:@”PersistentStoreAdded” object:self
queue:nil usingBlock:^(NSNotification *notif) {
      [weakSelf loadItinerary];
      [weakSelf loadPointsOfInterest];

--- Page 544 ---
      [weakSelf loadPointsOfInterestFromWebService];
      [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
postNotificationName:@”DestinationChanged”
object:weakSelf userInfo:nil];
    }];
#if !TARGET_IPHONE_SIMULATOR
    
    [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
addObserver:self
selector:@selector(persistentStoreChanged:)
name:@”PersistentStoreChanged” object:nil];
#endif
  }
  return self;
}
If you were to build and run your app in the Simulator now, you’d see
that the points of interest have in fact been downloaded from App
Engine. (You could change a word or two in the description in the test
data you generate to assure yourself of that fact.) You do however, need
to be sure that GoogleAppEngineLauncher is up and running and that
you’ve called the testdata web service to be sure there is really data
there.
Using Cached Data
As I explain in Chapters 6 and 11, caching data is a way to minimize the
amount of network resources you use and may, as a side effect, also
improve the user experience.
The way the code in RoadTrip works now, every time you launch the
application you download the web services en masse, but after that, you
never check for updates. What you need to do is check for updates on a

--- Page 545 ---
regular basis and then download the points of interest only if anything
has changed.
The latter technique actually is something you included in your design in
Chapter 11, but the former is something I’ll explain in the following
sections.
Adding the UpdateRecord model
To implement the ability to cache data, you implement the lastupdate
web service you specified in Chapter 11. But to do that, you need to
create a new entity type to store the information about when the last
update occurred. To do that, add the bolded code in Listing 14-17 to
datamodel.py.
Listing 14-17: Updating datamodel.py
“””The PointOfInterest class and updateRecord method”””
from google.appengine.ext import db
import logging
import datetime
class PointOfInterest(db.Model):
    name = db.StringProperty(required=True)
    description = db.StringProperty()
    location = db.StringProperty()
    address = db.StringProperty()
    destination = db.StringProperty(required=True)
    coordinate = db.GeoPtProperty(required=True)
    updated = db.DateTimeProperty(required=True,
auto_now_add = True)
  
    def to_dict(self):
        “””Return the PointOfInterest data in a   
                                             dictionary”
””

--- Page 546 ---
  
        a = {}
        a[‘id’] = str(self.key().id())
        a[‘name’] = self.name
        a[‘description’] = self.description
        a[‘location’] = self.location
        a[‘address’] = self.address
        a[‘destination’] = self.destination
        a[‘latitude’] = self.coordinate.lat
        a[‘longitude’] = self.coordinate.lon
        a[‘updated’] = str(self.updated)
        return a
    
class UpdateRecord(db.Model):
    “””Return the last update”””
    updated = db.DateTimeProperty(required=True,
                                auto_now = True)
          
    @classmethod
    def set_updated(self):
    
        lastUpdate = UpdateRecord.all()
        lastUpdateRecord = lastUpdate.get()
        if (lastUpdateRecord == None):
            lastUpdateRecord = UpdateRecord()
        lastUpdateRecord.put()  
            
    @classmethod
    def last_updated(self):
    
        lastUpdate = UpdateRecord.all()
        lastUpdateRecord = lastUpdate.get()
        if (lastUpdateRecord == None):
            raise Exception (“no pointsofinterest”)
        a = {}
        a[‘datetime’] = str(lastUpdateRecord.updated)

--- Page 547 ---
        return a
Next you define your model class:
class UpdateRecord (db.Model):
which, as you can see, is a subclass of the Model class.
This model class only has one attribute:
updated = db.DateTimeProperty(required=True,
                                          auto_now =
True)
Because auto_now is True, the property value will be set to the current
time whenever the model instance is stored in the datastore, doing all the
work for you in tracking a last-modified date and time.
You’ve also defined two methods and made them class methods. Note
that class methods in Python are the same as in Objective-C — you don’t
need an object of that type to call the method.
The first method — set_updated — will be called whenever a point of
interest is added or deleted.
You first create a query and then get the first and only UpdateRecord:
lastUpdate = UpdateRecord.all()
lastUpdateRecord = lastUpdate.get()
If there is no record yet (the first time through), you create one and save
it to the datastore; otherwise. you simply re-store the existing record
which will update its updated property to the current date and time.
The second method — last_updated — uses that record to report the
last time it was updated.
You first get the one and only record:

--- Page 548 ---
lastUpdate = UpdateRecord.all()
lastUpdateRecord = lastUpdate.get()
and then you check to see if there is a record there:
if (lastUpdateRecord == None):
    raise Exception (“no pointsofinterest”)
If no record exists, you raise an exception. If there is a record, you add
the datetime attribute to a dictionary and return it to the method that
made the call:
a = {}
a[‘datetime’] = str(lastUpdateRecord.updated)
return a
This last_updated method will be used by update_handler. But before
I explain that process, make sure that there is a record to use to test the
logic you’ll be adding to RoadTrip. You can make sure of that by adding
the set_updated call to the test handler. To do that, add the bolded code
in Listing 14-18 to testdata_handler.py.
Listing 14-18: Updating testdata_handler.py
“””TestDataHandler class creates test data”””
from google.appengine.ext import webapp
from datamodel import *
import json
class TestDataHandler(webapp.RequestHandler):
    def get(self):
        “””Create test data - GET used as a convenience
                                               for
test”””
        db.delete(PointOfInterest.all())
…
        pointofinterest = PointOfInterest(name=’Legion
of

--- Page 549 ---
                                                   Honor
’,
            description=’Interesting varied collection’,
            location=’San Francisco’,
            address=’’,
            destination=’1’,
            coordinate=db.GeoPt(lat=37.784773,
                                         lon=-122.500324
))
        pointofinterest.put()
        
        UpdateRecord.set_updated()
        self.response.out.write(‘<pre>’)
        self.response.out.write(
            “Test data, with %d points of interest:” %
                          (PointOfInterest.all().count()
))
        self.response.out.write(“\n”)
        for pointofinterest in PointOfInterest.all():
            self.response.out.write(pointofinterest.name
+
               “ Added: “ + str(pointofinterest.updated)
+
               “ id = “ +
str(pointofinterest.key().id())
                                                    +’\n
’)
        self.response.out.write(‘</pre>’)
All this does is call the set_updated() method whenever it creates test
data. With all that spadework done, you can now add the new web
service — lastupdate.
In TextWrangler, choose File ⇒ New ⇒ Text Document from the main
menu or press 
+N.

--- Page 550 ---
Save the new file as lastupdate_handler.py in the rtpointsof
interest folder.
Next, add the bolded code in Listing 14-19 to main.py — you should
know the drill by now, so I won’t beat it to death.
Listing 14-19: Adding to main.py
import webapp2
from testdata_handler import *
from pointsofinterest_handler import *
from lastupdate_handler import *
class MainHandler(webapp2.RequestHandler):
  def get(self):
    #self.response.out.write(‘Hello world!’)
    self.response.out.write(“<html><body>”)
    self.response.out.write(“<p>Hello Mr Bill!</p>”)
    self.response.out.write(“</body></html>”)
app = webapp2.WSGIApplication([(‘/’, MainHandler),
      (‘/testdata’, TestDataHandler),
      (‘/pointsofinterest’, PointsOfInterestHandler),
      (‘/lastupdate’, LastUpdateHandler)],
        debug=True)
Next, add the new handler and its GET method to
lastupdate_handeler.py by adding the code in Listing 14-20.
Listing 14-20: The new LastUpdateHandler
“””Return the date time of the last PointOfInterest
                                            transaction”
””
from google.appengine.ext import webapp
from datamodel import *
import json
import logging
from access_handler import *

--- Page 551 ---
class LastUpdateHandler(AccessHandler):
    def get(self):
        data = {}
        
        try:
            self.validate()
            destination =
self.request.get(‘destination’)
            if (not destination):
                raise Exception (“missing destination”)
            data[‘status’]=”ok”
            updaterecord = UpdateRecord.last_updated()
            data[‘results’] = updaterecord
                
        except Exception,  ex:
            data[‘status’] = “error”
            data[‘status_text’] = “exception: %s” % ex
        self.response.headers[‘Content-Type’] =
                                        ‘application/jso
n’
        self.response.out.write(json.dumps(data))
As you can see, this handler looks a lot like the
PointsOfInterestHandler. And, as you’ll also soon see, adding new
web services and using them in your app tends to get pretty repetitive.
Oh well, sometimes boring is good.
One important thing to note is that you’re also making
LastUpdateHandler a subclass of AccessHandler, which means
LastUpdateHandler will inherit AccessHandler’s ability to validate the
API key:
class LastUpdateHandler(AccessHandler):
Moving further down Listing 14-20, you create an empty dictionary,
then make sure the destination parameter is there, and finally check for

--- Page 552 ---
the key parameter. If it’s not present, you raise an exception.
data = {}
        
try:
    self.validate()
    destination = self.request.get(‘destination’)
    if (not destination):
        raise Exception (“missing destination”)
Otherwise, you add the status key and give it a value of ok.
Now all you need to do is get the last UpdateRecord, add it to the results
and return the results as you did in PointsOfInterestHandler.
updaterecord = UpdateRecord.last_updated()
data[‘results’] = updaterecord
Now if you enter
http://localhost:8080/lastupdate?
destination=0&key=test123
in Chrome, you’ll see something like this:
{
    status: “ok”,
    results: {
        datetime: “2012-04-17 21:56:05.367248”
    }
}
“2012-04-17 21:56:05.367248” indicates the last time I made the
testdata request and it loaded the test data. (You will, of course, see a
different time and date.)
Updating RoadTrip to use cached data

--- Page 553 ---
If you’ve been a good little developer and have made all the
modifications to the code spelled out in the previous sections of this
chapter, you can now actually have RoadTrip check to see whether the
cached data is current before it goes out and downloads all those points
of interest.
Because of what you did in the “Updating RoadTrip” section, earlier in
this chapter, you don’t have to do anything to WSManager to call the
lastupdate web service. In fact, all you have to do is add the method to
RTModel tasked with requesting the lastupdate web service — the
loadUpdatedPointsOfInterest; method, to be more precise. In this
method, you’ll check to see if the date for the last update to the
rtpointsofinterest database lies after your last download. If it is, you
send the loadPoints OfInterestFromWebService message and
download the latest points of interest.
Start by adding the bolded code in Listing 14-21 to RTModel.h to declare
the new method.
Listing 14-21: Updating RTModel.h
#import <Foundation/Foundation.h>
#import <MapKit/MapKit.h>
#import <CoreData/CoreData.h>
@class Annotation;
@class PointOfInterest;
@class SharedPointOfInterest;
@interface RTModel : NSObject <NSXMLParserDelegate>
+ (RTModel *)model;
- (id)initWithDestinationIndex:
                             (NSUInteger)destinationInde
x;
- (void)loadItinerary;
- (void)addToItinerary:(PointOfInterest
*)pointOfInterest;
- (void)removeFromItinerary:(SharedPointOfInterest *)

--- Page 554 ---
                                          pointOfInteres
t;
- (void)loadPointsOfInterest;
- (void)loadUpdatedPointsOfInterest;
- (NSArray *)returnPointsOfInterest;
- (void)addPointOfInterest:(NSMutableDictionary *)
                                      pointOfInterestDat
a;
- (UIImage *)destinationImage;
- (NSString *)destinationName;
- (CLLocationCoordinate2D)destinationCoordinate;
- (NSString *)weather;
- (void)loadEvents;
- (NSUInteger)numberOfEvents;
- (NSString *)getEvent:(NSUInteger)index;
- (NSString *)mapTitle;
- (NSArray *)createAnnotations;
- (void)addLocation:(NSString *)findLocation
      completionHandler:(void (^)(Annotation
*annotation,
                              NSError* error))
completion;
- (CLLocation *)foundLocation;
+ (NSString *)filePath:(NSString *)fileComponent;
#if !TARGET_IPHONE_SIMULATOR
- (void)persistentStoreChanged:
       (NSNotification*)notification forContext:
(NSManagedObjectContext*)context;
#endif
@property (readonly, strong, nonatomic)
            NSManagedObjectContext
*managedObjectContext;
@property (readonly, strong, nonatomic)
                NSManagedObjectModel
*managedObjectModel;
@property (readonly, strong, nonatomic)

--- Page 555 ---
NSPersistentStoreCoordinator
*persistentStoreCoordinator;
@end
With that in place, add the loadUpdatedPointsOfInterest method
shown in Listing 14-22 to RTModel.m.
Listing 14-22: Adding
loadUpdatedPointsOfInterest
- (void)loadUpdatedPointsOfInterest  {
  
  void (^success) (NSDictionary *) =
                               ^(NSDictionary *response)
{
    
    NSDictionary *responseDict =
      [self createPointsOfInterestResponseDictionary:
                                                response
];
    if (!responseDict)
      return;
    RTAppDelegate *appDelegate =
             [[UIApplication sharedApplication]
delegate];
    NSString *fileComponent =
      [NSString
stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”,@”Lastdownload”,  
              appDelegate.destinationPreference,
@”.poi”];
    NSString *filePath = [RTModel
filePath:fileComponent];
    NSURL *lastDownLoadURL =
                         [NSURL
fileURLWithPath:filePath];    
    NSString *lastDownLoad =

--- Page 556 ---
              [responseDict
objectForKey:@”Lastdownload”];
    [lastDownLoad writeToURL:lastDownLoadURL
      atomically:YES encoding:NSUTF8StringEncoding
                                              error:NULL
];   
    
    NSDictionary *results =
                   [responseDict
objectForKey:@”results”];
    if (results) {
      RTAppDelegate *appDelegate =
             [[UIApplication sharedApplication]
delegate];
      NSString *fileComponent =
        [NSString stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”,
@”lastdownload”, appDelegate.destinationPreference,
@”.poi”];
      NSString *filePath =
                         [RTModel
filePath:fileComponent];
      NSURL *lastDownLoadURL =
                         [NSURL
fileURLWithPath:filePath];
      NSString *lastSavedDownLoad =
        [NSString
stringWithContentsOfURL:lastDownLoadURL   
                encoding:NSUTF8StringEncoding
error:NULL];
    
      NSString *lastUpdated =
                       [results
objectForKey:@”datetime”];
      
      if (lastSavedDownLoad) {

--- Page 557 ---
        if ([lastSavedDownLoad
caseInsensitiveCompare:lastUpdated] ==
                                    NSOrderedAscending)
{
          [self loadPointsOfInterestFromWebService];
        }
        else {
          pointsOfInterest =
            [NSMutableArray arrayWithCapacity:[results
                                                  count]
];
          RTAppDelegate *appDelegate =
             [[UIApplication sharedApplication]
delegate];
          NSString *fileComponent =
            [NSString stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”,
@”POI”,
              appDelegate.destinationPreference,
@”.poi”];
          NSString *filePath =
                         [RTModel
filePath:fileComponent];
          NSURL *pointsOfInterestDataURL =
                         [NSURL
fileURLWithPath:filePath];
          pointsOfInterestData =
           [NSMutableArray arrayWithContentsOfURL:
                                 pointsOfInterestDataURL
];
          
          BOOL isInItinerary = NO;
          for (NSMutableDictionary *aPointOfIinterest in
                                   pointsOfInterestData)
{
            for (SharedPointOfInterest

--- Page 558 ---
                    *sharedPointOfInterest in itinerary)
{
              if ([sharedPointOfInterest.title
                isEqualToString:[aPointOfIinterest  
                                   objectForKey:@”name”]
])
                isInItinerary = YES;
            }
            if (!isInItinerary) {
              [pointsOfInterest
               addObject:[[PointOfInterest alloc]
               initWithWebServiceData:aPointOfIinterest]
];
            }
            else {
              isInItinerary = NO;
            }
          }
       [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
postNotificationName:@”PointsOfInterestChanged”
                                object:self
userInfo:nil];
        }
      }
      else {
        [self loadPointsOfInterestFromWebService];
      }
    }
  };
  
  void (^failure) (NSError *) = ^(NSError *error ){
    NSString *errorMessage = [error
localizedDescription];
    UIAlertView *alertView = [[UIAlertView alloc]
       initWithTitle:@”Error getting response from
server”

--- Page 559 ---
       message:errorMessage delegate:nil
       cancelButtonTitle:@”OK” otherButtonTitles:nil];
    [alertView show];
    return;
  };
  
  NSMutableDictionary *params =
                    [[NSMutableDictionary alloc] init];
  RTAppDelegate *appDelegate =
          [[UIApplication sharedApplication] delegate];
  [params setObject:appDelegate.destinationPreference
                                forKey:@”destination”];
  WSManager *wsManager = [[WSManager alloc] init];
  [wsManager pointsOfInterestGETWebService:@”lastupdate”
      userParams:params successBlock:success
                                  failureBlock:failure];
  
}
You should already be familiar with much of what this method does
because it is similar to the other methods you have added to RTModel that
make web service requests. Let me focus on a few of its unique aspects.
You first load the file that you saved in
loadPointsOfInterestFromWebService with these lines:
RTAppDelegate *appDelegate =
             [[UIApplication sharedApplication]
delegate];
NSString *fileComponent =
     [NSString stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”,
@”lastdownload”, appDelegate.destinationPreference,
@”.poi”];
NSString *filePath = [RTModel filePath:fileComponent];
NSURL *lastDownLoadURL = [NSURL
fileURLWithPath:filePath];    

--- Page 560 ---
NSString *lastDownLoad =
              [responseDict
objectForKey:@”Lastdownload”];
[lastDownLoad writeToURL:lastDownLoadURL atomically:YES
                encoding:NSUTF8StringEncoding
error:NULL];   
You then get the datetime from the results dictionary:
NSString *lastUpdated =
                       [results
objectForKey:@”datetime”];
Finally, you compare the two strings, lastSavedDownload and
lastUpdated.
 It’s really better practice to leave these as dates and compare the
dates since my approach only works if you can guarantee the
format of the string. I did it this way because it’s a lot simpler:
if (lastSavedDownLoad) {
  if ([lastSavedDownLoad
        caseInsensitiveCompare:lastUpdated] ==  
                                NSOrderedAscending) {
     [self loadPointsOfInterestFromWebService];
}
else {
If the last update is later than the last download, you send the
loadPoints OfInterestFromWebService message. Otherwise, you load
the saved point-of-interest data:
pointsOfInterest =
    [NSMutableArray arrayWithCapacity:[results count]];
RTAppDelegate *appDelegate =
          [[UIApplication sharedApplication] delegate];

--- Page 561 ---
NSString *fileComponent =
   [NSString stringWithFormat:@”%@%@%@”, @”POI”,
appDelegate.destinationPreference, @”.poi”];
NSString *filePath = [RTModel filePath:fileComponent];
NSURL *pointsOfInterestDataURL =
                         [NSURL
fileURLWithPath:filePath];
pointsOfInterestData = [NSMutableArray
          arrayWithContentsOfURL:pointsOfInterestDataURL
];
You then construct the pointsOfInterest array:
BOOL isInItinerary = NO;
for (NSMutableDictionary *aPointOfIinterest in
                         pointsOfInterestData) {
  for (SharedPointOfInterest *sharedPointOfInterest in
                                             itinerary)
{
    if ([sharedPointOfInterest.title isEqualToString:
                [aPointOfIinterest
objectForKey:@”name”]])
      isInItinerary = YES;
    }
    if (!isInItinerary) {
      [pointsOfInterest addObject:[[PointOfInterest
       alloc]
initWithWebServiceData:aPointOfIinterest]];
    }
    else {
      isInItinerary = NO;
    }
You also have to update the RTModel initWithDestination: method to
send the loadUpdatedPointsOfInterest message instead of the
loadPointsOfInterestFromWebService message. To do that, delete the

--- Page 562 ---
bolded-underlined-italicized code and add the bolded code in Listing 14-
23 to initWithDestinationIndex: in RTModel.m.
Listing 14-23: Update initWithDestination
- (id)initWithDestinationIndex:
                                      (NSUInteger)destin
ationIndex {
  
  if ((self = [super init])) {
    
    …
    
    __block RTModel *weakSelf = self;
    [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
addObserverForName:@”PersistentStoreAdded” object:self
queue:nil usingBlock:^(NSNotification *notif) {
      [weakSelf loadItinerary];
      [weakSelf loadPointsOfInterestFromWebService];
      [weakSelf loadUpdatedPointsOfInterest];
      [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
postNotificationName:@”DestinationChanged”
object:weakSelf userInfo:nil];
      weakSelf = nil;
    }];
#if !TARGET_IPHONE_SIMULATOR
    
    [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
addObserver:self
selector:@selector(persistentStoreChanged:)
name:@”PersistentStoreChanged” object:nil];
#endif
  }
  return self;
}

--- Page 563 ---
Keeping the Points Of Interest
Current
You have one last thing left to do. When the app is running, you’ll never
go out and reload the points of interest — the idea here is that the app
should generally check to see whether the points of interest should be
downloaded only when it is launched or the user selects a new
destination. With that being said, though, there are still a few places you
might want to periodically check for updates — one being
applicationWillEnterForeground:. This message is sent every time an
app goes from background to foreground but not when the app is first
launched.
To make that check, add the bolded code in Listing 14-24 to
applicationWillEnterForeground: in RTAppDelegate.m. That way,
you can check to see if there are any new points of interest in the cloud
when your app is activated from the background.
Listing 14-24: update RTAppDelegate.m
- (void)applicationWillEnterForeground:
                              (UIApplication
*)application
{
  [[RTModel model] loadUpdatedPointsOfInterest];
}
Now is the right time to turn to those other two methods I mentioned
earlier that you’ll need to change if you want to use web services rather
than RTModel loadPointsOfInterest — persistentStoreChanged:
and removeFromItinerary:.
Whenever the persistent store changes or you remove a point of interest
from the itinerary, you need to update the points-of-interest display to
reflect that change. This is also a good time to check whether there are

--- Page 564 ---
any updates. To make that possible, delete the bolded-underlined-
italicized code and add the bolded code in Listing 14-25 to
persistentStoreChanged: in RTModel.m and then do the same thing in
Listing 14-26 to removeFromItinerary:.
Listing 14-25: Modifying the
persistentStoreChanged: Notification Method
- (void)persistentStoreChanged:(NSNotification *)notif {
  
  …
  [self loadPointsOfInterest];
  [self loadUpdatedPointsOfInterest];
  [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
postNotificationName:@”PointsOfInterestChanged”
object:self userInfo:nil];
  [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
postNotificationName:@”ItineraryChanged” object:self
userInfo:nil];
}
Listing 14-26: Modifying the
removeFromItinerary: Method
- (void)removeFromItinerary:
          (SharedPointOfInterest *)sharedPointOfInterest
{
  
  …
  [self loadPointsOfInterest];
  [self loadPointsOfInterestFromWebService];
  [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]
     postNotificationName:@”ItineraryChanged”
object:self
                                            userInfo:nil
];
  [[NSNotificationCenter defaultCenter]

--- Page 565 ---
     postNotificationName:@”PointsOfInterestChanged”
                                object:self
userInfo:nil];
}
When you run this, you need to be sure that App Engine is running and
that you have actually run testdata to ensure there are points of interest
by entering this URL in your browser:
http://localhost:8080/testdata
Of course, you probably want to go beyond pre-generated test data. So in
the next chapter, I’ll show you how to use POST to add new points of
interest and DELETE to delete existing ones.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 566 ---
Chapter 15
Deploying Your Web Services
In This Chapter
 Cleaning up your app to deploy it to the cloud
 Tackling security considerations
 Deploying rtpointsofinterest to Google App Engine
So here you are. The Moment of Truth.
RoadTrip can now download points of interest using a web service or
two, and Road Trip Editor can add and delete points of interest. All you
have left to do is to deploy your resource and its web services (the
GoogleAppEngineLauncher application) to Google App Engine, and
you’ll be officially running in the cloud. At that point, you’ll be able to
access the points of interest web service and download the points of
interest to your device.
Once you’ve done that, you’ll be able to add and delete points of interest
from your itinerary and have that synchronized across all your devices
courtesy of Core Data and iCloud.
Not a bad day’s work.
Interestingly enough, after setting up App Engine, developing the web
services, and modifying RoadTrip to use them, actually deploying your
app to App Engine is a bit anticlimactic — as in it’s really, really easy.
But before you press the button to send your app cloud-wards, there are
some things you’ll want to do and some things you’ll want to consider.

--- Page 567 ---
Cleaning Up Your App
The first thing to do is eliminate the web page at https://rtpointsof
interest.appspot.com/ that displays “Hello Mr. Bill.” There really is
no need for it in a production environment. You can alternatively expand
the web page to display something more useful, but you’ll have to do
that on your own.
You also don’t need to generate test data any longer because you have
the Road Trip Editor, so you can eliminate that bit as well.
 Then again, you may want to turn TestDataHandler into a bulk
loader of points of interest (instead of using Road Trip Editor to do
it one at a time) and then delete the handler and redeploy the app
after you’ve done the upload.
When you do want to delete TestDataHandler and the web page, update
main.py by deleting the bolded-underlined-italicized code in Listing 15-
1.
Listing 15-1: Goodbye, Mr. Bill
class MainHandler(webapp2.RequestHandler):
    def get(self):
        #self.response.out.write(‘Hello world!’)
        self.response.out.write(“<html><body>”)
        self.response.out.write(“<p>Hello Mr Bill!</p>”)
        self.response.out.write(“</body></html>”)
app = webapp2.WSGIApplication([(‘/’, MainHandler),
        (‘/testdata’, TestDataHandler),
        (‘/pointsofinterest’, PointsOfInterestHandler),
        (‘/lastupdate’, LastUpdateHandler),
        (‘/allpointsofinterest’,
AllPointsOfInterestHandler),

--- Page 568 ---
        (‘/addpointofinterest’,
AddPointOfInterestHandler),
        (‘/deletepointofinterest’,
DeletePointOfInterestHandler)],
          debug=True)
You then need to delete the testdata_handler.py file as well.
Lots of possibilities here to modify what you’ve already done to add new
functionality.
Speaking of possibilities, you’ll always have some things you want to
do, and then again you’ll have some things you really want to think
about. One of these thinkable things is security.
Transmitting Data Securely Across
the Network
Admittedly, the whole security thing isn’t much of an issue with
RoadTrip, but generally speaking, making sure that data is sent securely
from your iOS device to the web service (across the wire) should be a
major concern of yours. You should be especially concerned about
security when you’re sending sensitive information such as passwords or
even the user’s location.
The easiest and best way to deal with security issues is to use a
mechanism that is already in place — one that’s been well tested and is
well supported. I am of course referring to secure HTTP, or HTTPS for
short. Because you’re sure to have seen it in your own web interactions,
and I give it a brief mention in Chapter 6, I’m going to suggest you
explore the finer details of HTTPS on your own. Don’t worry, though; I
give you the basics here and then show you how to use HTTPS with App
Engine.

--- Page 569 ---
HTTPS is syntactically identical to the HTTP scheme you’ve been using
so far, but it uses an added encryption layer of the SSL/TLS protocol to
protect the data.
That means that, strictly speaking, HTTPS isn’t a separate protocol at
all; it’s simply ordinary HTTP over an encrypted Secure Sockets Layer
(SSL) or Transport Layer Security (TLS) connection.
TLS and its predecessor, SSL, are cryptographic protocols that provide
communications security over the Internet. TLS and SSL encrypt the
segments of network connections above the Transport Layer, using
symmetric cryptography — a type of encryption where both the sender
and receiver share the same key — for privacy and a keyed message
authentication code for message reliability.
Normally, in order to enable a web server to accept HTTPS connections,
you would need to create a public key certificate for the web server — a
certificate which would then have to be signed by a trusted certificate
authority for the web service client (on the iOS device this is the
NSURLConnection which supports HTTPS) or web browser to accept it.
The authority certifies that the certificate holder is indeed the entity it
claims to be.
Everything in the HTTPS message is encrypted, including the headers
and the request/response data. With some exceptions, an attacker knows
only three things: the domain name, the IP addresses, and that there is a
connection between the two parties (a fact that’s already known).
The main idea of HTTPS is to create a secure channel over an insecure
network. This ensures reasonable protection from eavesdroppers and
man-in-the-middle attacks (the attacker makes independent connections
with the victims and relays messages between them, making them
believe that they are talking directly to each other over a private
connection, when in fact the entire conversation is controlled by the
attacker), provided that adequate cipher suites are used and that the
server certificate is verified and trusted.

--- Page 570 ---
Google App Engine supports secure connections via HTTPS for URLs
using the *.appspot.com domain. When a request accesses a URL using
HTTPS and that URL is configured to use HTTPS in the app.yaml file,
both the request data and the response data are encrypted by the sender
before they are transmitted and decrypted by the recipient after they are
received. Secure connections are useful for protecting customer data,
such as contact information, passwords, and private messages.
To configure a URL to accept secure connections, you provide a secure
parameter for the handler. To do that for your web service, update
app.yaml with bolded code in Listing 15-2.
Listing 15-2: Updating app.yaml to Support a
Secure Connection
application: rtpointsofinterest
version: 1
runtime: python27
api_version: 1
threadsafe: yes
handlers:
- url: /favicon\.ico
  static_files: favicon.ico
  upload: favicon\.ico
- url: .*
  script: main.app
  secure: always
libraries:
- name: webapp2
  version: “2.5.1”
With this configuration (secure) even a request that does not use
HTTPS is automatically redirected (sent) to the HTTPS URL with the
same path. When this is done, the message stays intact (the query
parameters) — you’ll understand why I mention that when I explain the
other options.

--- Page 571 ---
Figure 15-
1: The
redirect
strips out
the query
string.
Another option is optional.
- url: .*
  script: main.app
  secure: optional
optional is the default if you don’t specify secure for a handler. Both
HTTP and HTTPS requests are sent to the handler without redirects and
the application can examine the request to determine whether HTTP or
HTTPS was being used. (request.url gives you access to the URL.)
The final option is never.
- url: .*
  script: main.app
  secure: never
In this case, HTTPS requests are automatically redirected to the HTTP
equivalent URL. When this happens, the query parameters are removed
from the request. This is done to ensure that a user doesn’t accidentally
use a non-secure connection to submit query data that was intended for a
secure connection. The first indication of that will be a missing key alert
(as you can see in Figure 15-1) when you use RoadTrip — all the query
information was stripped off, so of course there is no key.

--- Page 572 ---
Figure 15-
2: There is
no SSL
support in
GoogleApp
To use HTTPS from RoadTrip, all you need to do is specify HTTPS
rather than HTTP in your request. All you need to do is replace http
with https (I’ve bolded the s below) in RTDefines.h, as shown in
Listing 15-3.
Listing 15-3: Making an HTTPS Request
#if !TARGET_IPHONE_SIMULATOR
#define BASE_URL
@”https://rtpointsofinterest.appspot.com/”
#else
#define BASE_URL @”http://localhost:8080/”
HTTPS is also not supported by GoogleAppEngineLauncher, as you can
see in Figure 15-2.

--- Page 573 ---
Engine
Launcher.
So don’t use HTTPS when you’re working on localhost.
Storing Data Securely
Right now, you’re storing data as a plain text in the App Engine
datastore as well as on the device. Security and encryption is a very
complex and nuanced subject, and it’s out of this book’s scope. I do
suggest that you explore it on your own. To help with that, Apple has
just published a new whitepaper on iOS security that can be found at
http://images.apple.com/ipad/business/docs/iOS_Security_May12
.pdf.
Deploying rtpointsofinterest to
Google App Engine

--- Page 574 ---
Figure 15-
3: Click the
Deploy
button.
Figure 15-
4: Sign in.
I said it before, and I’ll say it again: After all this work, actually
deploying rtpointsofinterest to Google App Engine is a bit
anticlimactic.
In the GoogleAppEngineLauncher (see Figure 15-3), click the Deploy
button.
You need to sign in to your Google account, as you can see in Figure 15-
4.
You’re done.
You can watch all the action in the Logs window. (See Figure 15-5.)
You’ll be able to keep tabs on your progress — the uploading, the
checking for success, and the final checking to see whether the app is
serving.

--- Page 575 ---
Figure 15-
5: The
actual
deployment.
Then all you need to do is build and run your app on the device, and
you’ll be off and using the cloud.

--- Page 576 ---
Figure 15-
6:
Monitoring
your app in
the cloud.
 You can always monitor your app on App Engine by clicking the
Dashboard button. (Refer to Figure 15-3.) Figure 15-6 gives you an
idea of the kinds of things you can review.
And with that, you’re done!
What’s Next
While RoadTrip is not yet a world class application (in the next chapter,
I point out some additions that you’d want to make to RoadTrip to kick
off the process of making it so), it still is pretty robust and has the basic
infrastructure needed to support the Application Ecosystem I explain in
Chapter 1.
More importantly for you, you can now easily use WSManager and
WSLoader to implement web services in your own apps, as I explain in
Chapter 10. You can also use the Core Data iCloud implementation to

--- Page 577 ---
enable the user to share data between their devices running RoadTrip.
You can also use the Core Data iCloud implementation as a jumping off
point to explore the deep and rich functionality that I haven’t had the
space to cover in this book.
The announcement of iOS 6 has shown us that both iCloud and web
services are becoming more and more central to iOS, and with what you
have just learned, you are in a good position to take advantage of the
new features in iOS 6.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 578 ---
Part V
The Part of Tens
In this part . . .
Of course, there are always some last-minute words, and here they are in
neatly organized lists of ten.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 579 ---
Chapter 16
Ten Ways to Extend the
RoadTrip App
In This Chapter
 Discovering some additional features for the RoadTrip app
 Making structural improvements to the app
 Making the Road Trip Editor easier to use
Although the example app developed in this book — the RoadTrip app
— has the basic structure and features that you would include in a
commercial app of this type, you would have some additional tasks to
take care of if you intended to make it a true, viable commercial
application.
First and foremost, you’d definitely have to add more content to the app.
(Content is king.) You’d also need to add more features, as well as
strengthen the basic structure a bit.
In this chapter, I suggest some changes you would need to make to
RoadTrip in order to give it a fighting chance at commercial success.
Dealing with Errors
Currently, RoadTrip does a pretty good job of reporting errors, especially
when using web services. It can, however, improve that error handling
by actually trying to do something about the error besides simply
reporting it.

--- Page 580 ---
Take network connectivity, for example. Currently, if there is no network
connection, all RoadTrip does is report that fact. It would be far better if
RoadTrip were able to modify the user interface to reflect that
(connection-less) state — perhaps by disabling some functionality or
even by using cached data. (See the “Cache Data” section, coming up
soon in this chapter.) RoadTrip should also notify the user of any change
in network connectivity and respond accordingly — again, either
disabling some functionality or by using cached data if an Internet
connection is no longer available. In this scenario, you’d also have to
ensure that RoadTrip can re-enable functionality and use real-time data
when the network connection does become available.
Make Events a Web Service
This is an obvious and expected (content) enhancement. Folks definitely
want to know what events are planned for a point of interest. If it were
me, I would also make events annotations and provide directions to
them.
Expand the Point of Interest Data
I would add more data about the point of interest. The user should be
able to tap a point of interest on a map and get more detailed information
about the point of interest, including directions from her current location.
Crowd Source Points of Interest
Allow users to add their own points of interest that would be shared
between devices using iCloud. Allow individual users to upload their

--- Page 581 ---
points of interest so that that they can be evaluated (by you) and added
as an additional place to check out.
Cache Data
If you allow users to turn off Internet access, or if the user is someplace
where Internet service isn’t available, you need to add the necessary
logic to RoadTrip so that it can cache data (such as events). Then, when
Internet access isn’t available or the user doesn’t want to use the
Internet, RoadTrip will be able to use the cached data.
Post to Facebook and Twitter
Unless you’re living under a rock, you know that social networking apps
are all the rage. Twitter support is built into the SDK, but you’re on your
own when it comes to Facebook.
Send Postcards from the Road
In some of my applications, I have a Postcard feature. It would be nice in
RoadTrip to allow the user to take a photo and attach it to an e-mail to
make all her friends jealous.
Add Hotels and Reservations
A great feature to include in the RoadTrip app is to allow the user to add
hotel reservations. You keep track of them in the app by enabling the
user to add a reservation to her calendar, a hotel to the address book, and
so on.

--- Page 582 ---
It’s Never Early Enough to Start
Speaking a Foreign Language
With the world growing even flatter and the iPhone and iPad available
worldwide, the potential market for your app is considerably larger than
just among people who speak English. Localizing an application isn’t
difficult, just tedious. Although you obviously can’t implement all the
features in your app all at once (that is, some have to be done later than
others), when it comes to localizing the strings you use in your
application, you had better build them right — and build them in from
the start.
In the Road Trip Editor
Right now, the Road Trip Editor lists all the points of interest. I would
allow the user to sort them by destination, location, and so on. This
would make it easier to manage.
Because multiple users could be updating the point of interest, I would
check for any changes before I add, delete, or update a point of interest.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 583 ---
Chapter 17
Ten Ways to Be a Happy
Developer
In This Chapter
 Finding out how not to paint yourself into a corner
 Keeping it simple
 Having fun
 Avoiding, “There’s no way to get there from here”
Think of all the things you know you’re supposed to do but don’t
because you think they’ll never catch up with you. Not that many people
enjoy balancing the checkbook or cleaning out gutters, and after all, not
flossing won’t cause you problems until your teeth fall out years from
now (right?).
But in iOS application development, those gotchas will catch up with
you early and often, so I want to tell you what I’ve learned to pay
attention to from the very start in app development, as well as a few tips
and tricks that lead to happy and healthy users.
Keep Things Loosely Coupled
A loosely coupled system is one in which each component has little or
no knowledge (or makes no use of any knowledge it may have) of other
components. And because loose coupling refers to the degree of direct
knowledge that one class has of another, it’s not about encapsulation —

--- Page 584 ---
one class’s knowledge of another class’s attributes or implementation —
but rather just knowledge of that other class itself.
I explain loose coupling in more detail in Chapter 11.
Remember Memory
The iOS does not store changeable memory (such as object data) on disk
and then read it back in later when needed as a way to free up some
space. This means that running out of memory is easy; you should
therefore definitely use automatic reference counting (ARC) to make the
most of the memory available to you. All you have to do is follow the
rules:
 Rule 1: Do not send retain, release, or autorelease
messages.
 Rule 2: Do not store object pointers in C structures.
 Rule 3: Inform the compiler about ownership when using Core
Foundation–style objects.
 Rule 4: Use the @autoreleasepool keyword to mark the start of
an autorelease block.
 Rule 5: Follow the naming conventions.
If you follow the rules, all you have to worry about is the retain cycle.
This cycle occurs when one object has a back pointer to the object that
creates it, either directly or through a chain of other objects, each with a
strong reference to the next leading back to the first. Use the weak
lifetime qualifiers for objects and the weak property attribute.
The fact of the matter is, though, that even if you do everything
correctly, in a large application you may simply run out of memory and

--- Page 585 ---
need to implement the methods that UIKit provides to respond to low-
memory conditions. Such methods include the following:
 Overriding the viewDidUnload and didReceiveMemoryWarning
methods in your custom UIViewController subclass
 Implementing the applicationDidReceiveMemoryWarning:
method of your application delegate
 Registering to receive the UIApplicationDidReceiveMemory
WarningNotification: notification
Don’t Reinvent the Wheel
iOS devices are cutting-edge enough that opportunities to expand its
capabilities are plentiful, and many of them are (relatively) easy to
implement. You’re also working with a very mature framework, so if
you think that something you want your app to do is going to be really
difficult, check the framework; somewhere there you may find an easy
way to do what you have in mind.
For example, I once needed to compute the distance between two points
on a map. So I got out my trusty trig books, only to find out later that the
distanceFromLocation: method did exactly what I needed.
Understand State Transitions
The UIApplication object provides the application-wide control and
coordination for an iOS application. It is responsible for handling the
initial routing of incoming user events (touches, for example) as well as
dispatching action messages from control objects (such as buttons) to the
appropriate target objects. The application object sends messages to its
application delegate to allow you to respond — in an application-

--- Page 586 ---
unique way, when your application is executing — to things such as
application launch, low-memory warnings, and state transitions (moving
into background and back into foreground, for example).
You should implement the UIAppDelegate methods shown in Table 17-1
in your application:
Table 17-1 UIAppDelegate methods
Method What You Do with It
application:didFinish
LaunchingWithOptions:
In this method, do what you need to do to initialize your
application after it’s launched.
applicationWillResign
Active:
This message is sent when the application is about to move
from an active state to an inactive state. Use this method to
do things such as pause ongoing tasks and anything based
on a timer (such as a game). Using this method doesn’t
mean that the app will be entering the background, but it
does mean that your app won’t be executing.
applicationDidEnter
Background:
This message is sent when your application is going to be
entering the background. At this point, you need to assume
that your application may eventually be terminated without
warning, so save user data, invalidate timers, and store
enough application state information.
applicationWillEnter
Foreground:
This message is sent when your application has been
rescued from the background. In this method, reverse what
you did in application DidEnterBackground:.
applicationDidBecome
Active:
Your application is now active. You should reverse whatever
you did in applicationWillResign Active:. You also may
want to refresh the user interface.
Do the Right Thing at the Right
Time

--- Page 587 ---
While there are many places where timing is critical, it pays for you to
pay attention to the way view controllers work. When it comes to the
view controller, you need to be aware of two methods, and you need to
know what to do in each method.
The viewDidLoad message is sent to a view controller when the view has
been loaded and initialized by the system. It is sent only when the view
is created — and not, for example, when your app returns from the
background or when a view controller is returned to after another view
controller has been dismissed.
The viewWillAppear: message, on the other hand, is sent whenever the
view appears, including when the view reappears after another view
controller is dismissed.
Do view initialization in viewDidLoad, but make sure that anything you
do to refresh a view whenever it appears is done in viewWillAppear:.
Avoid Mistakes in Error Handling
Opportunities for errors abound. Use common sense in figuring out
which ones you should spend time on. For example, don’t panic over
handling a missing bundle resource in your code. If you included it in
your project, it’s supposed to be there; if it’s not, look for a bug in your
program. If it’s really not there, the user has big problems, and you
probably won’t be able to do anything to avert the oncoming
catastrophe.
Having said that, here are two big potential pitfalls you do have to pay
attention to:
 Your app goes out to load something off the Internet, and (for a
variety of reasons) the item isn’t there, or the app can’t get to it.
You especially need to pay attention to Internet availability and
what you’re going to do when the Internet isn’t available.

--- Page 588 ---
 A geocoder may fail for any number of reasons. For example,
the service may be down, there may not be a street address at a
certain GPS coordinate, or the user may access the data before
the geocoder has returned.
Use Storyboards
Storyboards are a great way to examine the flow of the application as a
whole. In addition, they require you to use less code. They are one of my
favorite parts of Xcode 4.3 and iOS 5.0, and I use them in all my apps.
In this book, storyboards make creating a universal app as easy as
possible.
Remember the User
I’ve been singing this song since Chapter 1, and I’m still singing it now:
Keep your app simple and easy to use. Don’t build long pages that take
lots of scrolling to get through, and don’t create really deep hierarchies.
Focus on what the user wants to accomplish and be mindful of the
device limitations, especially battery life. And don’t forget international
roaming charges.
In other words, try to follow the Apple iOS Human Interface Guidelines,
found with all the other documentation in the iOS Dev Center website at
http://developer.apple.com/iOS in the iOS Developer Library
section. Don’t even think about bending those rules until you really,
really understand them.

--- Page 589 ---
Keep in Mind that the Software
Isn’t Finished Until the Last User
Is Dead
One thing that I can guarantee about app development is that nobody
gets it right the first time. The design for RoadTrip (the example app in
this book) evolved over time as I learned the capabilities and intricacies
of the platform and the impact of my design changes. Object orientation
makes extending your application (not to mention fixing bugs) easier, so
pay attention to the principles.
Keep It Fun
When I started programming for the iPhone, it was the most fun I’d had
in years. Keep things in perspective: Except for a few tedious tasks (such
as provisioning and getting your application into the Apple Store),
expect that developing iOS apps will be fun for you, too. So don’t take it
too seriously.
 Especially remember the fun part at 4 a.m., when you’ve spent
the last five hours looking for a bug.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 590 ---
To access the cheat sheet specifically for this book, go to
www.dummies.com/cheatsheet/iosclouddevelopment.


--- Page 591 ---
Find out "HOW" at Dummies.com
OceanofPDF.com