--- Page 3 ---
Programming iOS with
Swift 5.3
For Beginners to Pro
In 1 Hour
(2021 Edition)
A Crash Course on Developing iOS and Mac Apps Using Swift 5.3 and
Xcode 12.3
Robert Kissinger

--- Page 4 ---
Copyright
Copyright©2021 Robert Kissinger
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or used in any
manner without the prior written permission of the copyright owner, except
for the use of brief quotations in a book review.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of
publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility
for any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied,
with respect to the material contained herein.
Printed in the United States of America
© 2021 by Robert Kissinger

--- Page 5 ---
Table of Contents
Copyright
INTRODUCTION
Ground of Being
Object
Object type
Variables
Functions
The Swift file
Lifetime and scope
Object members
Namespaces
Modules
Instances
Why the use of instances?
Keyword shelf
Privacy
Design
CHAPTER ONE
Getting Familiar with the essentials of Xcode
Technical requirements
Downloading/installing Xcode from App Store
Understanding the Xcode user interface
Using the iOS simulator to run the app
Summary
CHAPTER TWO
Simple Values and Types
Technical requirements
Understanding Swift Playgrounds
Exploring Data Types
Using Constants and Variables
Understanding Type Interface and Types Safety
Exploring Operators
Using the print () instruction
Summary
CHAPTER THREE
Conditionals and Optional

--- Page 6 ---
Technical Requirements
Introducing Conditionals
Introducing Optional
Summary
CHAPTER FOUR
Range Operators and Loops
Technical Requirements
CHAPTER FIVE
Collection types
Technical Requirements
Understanding arrays
Understanding dictionaries
Understanding sets
Summary
CHAPTER SIX
Functions and Closures
Technical Requirements
Understanding Functions
Understanding Closures
Summary
CHAPTER SEVEN
Classes, Structures, and Enumerations
Technical Requirements
Understanding Classes
Understanding Structures
Understanding Enumerations
Summary
CHAPTER EIGHT
Protocols, Extensions, and Error Handling
Technical Requirements
Understanding Protocols
Understanding Extensions
Exploring Error Handling
Summary
CHAPTER NINE
Setting up the user interface
Technical requirements
Learning useful terms in iOS development

--- Page 7 ---
Touring the Let’s Eat app
Creating a new Xcode project
Setting up the Launch screen
Summary
CHAPTER TEN
Building your user interface
Adding a collection view to the explore screen
Connecting storyboard element to outlets in a view controller
Configuring data source methods for the collection view
Adding a section header to the collection view
Configuring storyboard element sizes
Presenting a view modally
Summary
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Finishing up your User Interface
Technical requirement
Adding a table view
Implementing the Restaurant list screen
Implementing the Restaurant detail screen
Implementing the Map screen
Summary
CHAPTER TWELVE
Modifying and Configuring Cells
Technical requirements
Modifying the Explore screen header
Modifying the exploreCell collection view cell
Modifying the restaurantCell collection view cell
Configuring the locationCell table view cell
Summary
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Getting started with MVC and Collection Views
Technical requirements
Controller design pattern
Exploring controllers and classes
Summary
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
Bringing Data into Views Collection
Technical Prerequisite

--- Page 8 ---
Comprehending Model Objects
Comprehending .plist files
Building a Pattern to Represent a Cuisine
Enforcing a Data Manager Group to Read Data from a .plist file
Exhibiting Data in a View Collection
Summary
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Introduction to Views Table
Technical Prerequisite
Comprehending Views Table
Building the Location View Controller Group
Including the Delegate and Data Source
Including Location Data for the View Table
Building the Location Data Manager Group
Summary
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Introduction To MapKit
Comprehending and Building Annotations
Creating and Including Annotations
Moving from the Screen Map to the Restaurant Detail Screen
Arranging Your Code
Restructuring the MapViewController class
Summary
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
Introduction to JSON files
Technical Prerequisite
Sourcing Data from JSON files
Producing the Restaurant Data Manager Class
Utilizing Data from JSON files in your Application
Summary
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
Showing Data in a Stationary View Table
Technical Prerequisite
Creating Outlets for the Restaurant Detail View Managing Group
Showing Data in a Stationary View Table
Moving Data to the Restaurant Detail View Controller Instance
Summary
CHAPTER NINETEEN

--- Page 9 ---
Introduction to Custom UIControls
Technical Prerequisite
Building a Conventional UIControl Subclass
Giving Support for Tinge Events
Using an Unwind Option for the Cancel button
Building the Review Form View Managing Group
Summary
CHAPTER TWENTY
Introduction to Image Libraries and Cameras
Technical Prerequisite
Comprehending Filters
Building Pattern Items for the Photo Filter Screen
Building the Image Filtering Procedure
Building View Controller for the Image Filter Screen
Creating a View Controller for the View Collection cells
Obtaining Permission to Use the Photo Library or Camera
Summary
CHAPTER TWENTY ONE
Comprehending Core Data
Technical Prerequisite
Getting Started with Core Data
Enforcing Core Data Parts for your Application
Generating a Data Model
Comprehending how Loading and Saving works
Revamping the Photo Filter View Controller group to keep photos
Showing photos and reviews saved on the Restaurant Detail screen
Computing a Restaurant's Overall Performance
Summary
CHAPTER TWENTY TWO
Introduction to Apple Silicon Macs
Technical Prerequisite
Repairing User Interface Problems
Enabling your Application work
Upgrading the App to run on macOS
Summary
CHAPTER TWENTY THREE
Introduction to SwiftUI
Technical Prerequisite

--- Page 10 ---
SwiftUI Xcode Project Creation
Restaurant List Screen Building
Including Configuring Navigation and Model Objects
Utilizing SwiftUI and UIKit Views Jointly
Finishing the Restaurant Detail Screen
Summary
CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR
Introduction to Widgets
Technical Prerequisite
Getting Started with Widgets
Including a Widget Object to your App
Enabling Timeline Access to your Widget
Configuring a Widget's View
Including a Widget to the Home Screen
Summary
CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE
Getting Familiar with App Clips
Technical Prerequisite
Knowing App Clips
Including an App Clip to your Project
Customizing your App Clip
Transferring Restaurant Data to the Restaurant Detail Screen
Summary
CHAPTER TWENTY SIX
Examining and Presenting your App to the App Store
Technical Prerequisite
Obtaining an Apple Developer Account
Touring your Apple Developer Account
Presenting your App to the App Store
Generating your App's Icons
Generating your App's Screenshots
Generating an Apple Store Listing
Examining your App
Examining your App Internally
Examining your App Externally
Summary
About Author

--- Page 11 ---
INTRODUCTION
With the release of iOS 14, users of the Apple device can now perform
basic to advanced level programming. Thanks to the great programming
languages that this operating system can support.
Programming generally involves some simple to complex coding system or
instructions performed based on machine coding. These instructions are
created to facilitate a set of actions leading to a specific computing task's
execution. With good programming, many software and application
programs that operate successfully are created.
The Swift language is efficient and fast and can be incorporated into an
existing Objective-code, saving many developers' time writing codes.  The
Integrated Development Environment (IDE) is the point of interaction with
any programming language, and Swift uses the Xcode as its IDE.
The Xcode has a good interface and autocompletion support; it is utilized
when programming in JavaScript, HTML, and CSS by turning into a simple
text editor without the coding facility obtainable using Swift and Objective-
C.
The basic design of the Swift programming language involves the
following.
Ground of Being
The normal layout of the Swift program is such that there are only one
statement and one line. There are several lines in a Swift text file, but a
statement represents a complete Swift command.
Example print ( “hello“ )

--- Page 12 ---
print ( “world” )
These statements can be combined to make a line by putting semi-colon
between them,
 print ( “hello“ ) ; print ( “world” )
Multiple lines can also be used for a single statement,
 print (
 “world” )
A line with a comment contains two slashes after it, this is a variant of the
C++ programming,
 print ( “world” )// (Swift will usually ignore this type of
comment)
Comments can also be enclosed in /’*………..*/ in a variant of C
programming.
Curly braces are used by many constructs in Swift as delimiters
 class Dog {
 func bark ( )  {
 print ( “woof” )
 }
 }
These curly braces are normally indented for clarity
Class Dog { func bark ( ) {  print ( “woof” ) } }
The Swift language codes must pass through the compiler and change from
text to a language easily understood before running and function. You will

--- Page 13 ---
often need to fix several running issues flagged by the compiler, but
sometimes it will just warn you. A warning means your codes can run, but
it is always necessary that you fix any issues flagged by the compiler
whether such a program can run or not.
When the compiler flags any error, you should know that something is
wrong with your coding line. It is advisable to divide the lines of codes into
a simpler part, making you know where the problem is coming.
Object
An object represents a body that can receive a message or command and
execute it. For instance, you can tell your toddler to "sit," "dance," etc.
Here, your toddler represents the object and will execute the
message/instruction (to sit or dance).
Swift uses a dot-notation as the syntax to send a message. The object comes
first, then the dot, followed by the message.
 fido . bark ( )
 rover . sit ( )
This dot-notation can be broken into more lines
 rover
 . sit ( )
Object type
Structs, classes , and enums are the main object type in Swift. Enum and
struct exist in Objective-C but not as objects. Enum particularly can be sent
a message, and struct in Swift are significant for a universal programming.

--- Page 14 ---
Variables
A variable refers to an object, and it has a value . Variables are normally
declared in Swift; if you want to declare, you use var or let.
 Let one = 1
 Var two = 2
Since you have declared your variable, you can now use them. Additionally,
we can alter the value of two to be the same as that of one.
 Let one = 1
 Var two = 2
 Two = one
The third line of the above code uses the name one, and the name two
declared in the first two lines. The name one (on the right of the equal sign)
is merely used to refer to the value 1. The name two (on the left of the equal
sign) is used to replace the value. Therefore, when we say two = one, the
value of two was 2 before it became 1.
The equal sign used here is an assignment operator, while the states with
the variable name on the left of the line are the assignment. The equal sign
is rather a command than the algebraic assertion of equality, translated as
"replace what's on my right side with the value of what's on my left side."
The value of a variable declared with let is constant and will not change;
hence, the lines declaration below will not compile.
 Let one = 1
 Var two = 2

--- Page 15 ---
 One = two // compile error
Always use let to declare a name that will not change; otherwise, use var for
better flexibility.
Functions
Executable codes like print ( “hello” ) or fido . bark ( ) should be inside the
body of a function. A function is a set of code that is told to run. A function
gets its name through function declaration.
Func go ( ) {
 Let one = 1
 Var two = 2
 Two = one
}
The above describes the sequence of tasks to be done, which is a
declaration of one, declaration of two, changing the value of two for one.
This sequence can, however, be performed when you call the function.
The Swift file
A file on the represents a significant entity. You may have more than one
file in a Swift package. The Swift file only accept limited things; some of
these are
●     Object declaration: This is a declaration for a struct, class, or enum
●     Variable declaration: A global variable is normally affirmed at the
highest level of a file. All code can access this variable in any file
without passing across a message to an object.

--- Page 16 ---
●     Functions declaration: A global function is stated at the highest
level of a file.
●     Module import statements: An import statement is needed for a
module to interact with another module.
Below is a case of a Swift file consisting of declarations (variable, object,
and function), enum, struct, class, and module import statement.
Import UIKT
 var one = 1
 func changeOne ( ) {
 }
 class Manny {
 }
 struct Moe {
 }
 enum Jack {
 }
The curling braces can also contain declarations contained by them, but an
executable code cannot be at the highest level of the file. Only the function
body can contain an executable code. The statement print ( "hello" ) or one
= two are executable code but cannot be at the top-level of a file.
The former example of func changeOne ( ) (which is a function declaration)
is a function body and can allow executable code within its curly braces.
 var one = 1

--- Page 17 ---
 // executable code can’t go here
 func changeOne ( ) {
 let two = 2 //executable code
 one = two // executable code
 }
The highest level of a class declaration also has curling braces, which will
not allow executable code access since it isn’t a function body. However, a
class declaration can contain executable code that contains a function
declaration.
 class Manny {
 let name = “manny”
 // executable code can’t go here
 func sayName ( ) {
 print ( name ) // executable code
 }
Below is a schematic structure of a legal Swift file
 Import UIKit
 var one = 1
 func changeOne ( ) {
 let two = 2
 func sayTwo ( ) {
 print ( two )
 }

--- Page 18 ---
 class Klass { }
 struct Struct { }
 enum Enum { }
 one = two
 }
 class Manny {
 let name = “many”
 func sayName ( ) {
 print ( name )
 }
 Class Klass { }
 struct Struct { }
 enum Enum { }
 }
struct Moe {
 let name = “moe”
 func sayName ( ) {
 print ( name )
 }
 class Klass { }
 struct Struct { }
 enum Enum { }

--- Page 19 ---
 }
 Enum Jack {
 var name : String {
 return “jack”
 }
 func sayName ( ) {
 print ( name )
 }
 class Klass { }
 struct Struct { }
 enum Enum { }
 }
The essence is that a class declaration can contain a class declaration, and
this could be contained within a class declaration as well, as so on.
Lifetime and scope
The scope is the ability to see your coding program. The significant thing is
that you can see these things at a top level that contains them and at their
level. These levels of scopes are
●      Curly braces
●      File
●      Module
The lifetime of things is also corresponding to their scope, consider
 func silly ( ) {

--- Page 20 ---
 if true {
 class Cat { }
 var one = 1
 one = one + 1
 }
 }
In this example, the silly function is called before calling variable one and
class Cat can come into existence.
Object members
Special names are given to things declared at the highest level in the object
types (struct, class and enum). Using the Manny example for instance
 class Manny {
 let name = “many”
 func sayName ( ) {
 print ( name )
 }
 }
In the above code,
A name is a variable declared at the top level of the object declaration.
Name , therefore, is the object's property.
sayName is a function declared at the top level of the object declaration.
sayName , therefore, is called a method of the object.

--- Page 21 ---
Namespaces
The named program region is referred to as namespaces . Namespaces will
help to know the implication of declaring an object at the object's top level.
 Class Manny {
 Class Klass { }
 }
The above is a nested approach used to declare Klass. By doing so, Klass is
hidden inside Manny.
Modules
Namespaces in the highest level of things are called modules. All top-level
declarations of a module are always visible to your code whenever you
import a module without referring to its namespaces. The Swift module
doesn’t need import because your code will implicitly import it.
Instances
All object types (struct, enum, and class) may be instantiated . An object
type declaration means you describe a type, but you instantiate by making a
thing (an instance).
 class Dog {
 func bark ( ) {
 print ( “woof” )
 }
 }

--- Page 22 ---
The function name is used as the name of the object type to create an
instance by calling the function name. Doing this involves the use of
parentheses.
 let fido = Dog ( )
In the above example, Dog is instantiated (fido), making fido an instance of
a Dog.  You may send instant messages to the Dog instances. These
messages are Dog's properties and methods.
 let fido = Dog
 fido . bark ( )
However, you should know that you cannot use properties and methods as
messages without an instance.
 Dog . bark ( ) // compile error
Although a function of Dog . bark ( ) can be declared but is a static or class
function.
Why the use of instances?
You should know that we define the value of an instance property in
reverence to a particular instance. Consider the Dog class example again
and giving it a bark property and name method,
 class Dog {
 var name = “ “
 func bark ( ) {
 print ( “woof” )
 }

--- Page 23 ---
 }
We have a blank name (empty String) with a Dog instance while the
property name is var. We can now add a new string value.
 Let dog1 = Dog ( )
 Dog1 . name = “Fido”
We may add the name of the Dog’s instance too
 Let dog1 = Dog ( )
 Dog1 . name = “Fido”
 print ( dog1 . name ) // “Fido”
This helps us to make two dog instances with different property name value
 let dog1 = Dog ( )
 dog1 . name = “Fido”
 let dog2 = Dog ( )
 dog2 . name = “Rover”
 print ( dog1 . name ) // “Fido”
 print ( dog2 . name ) // “Rover”
Keyword shelf
An object is usually the recipient of messages and it also represents an
instance. The keyword shelf makes it possible for messages to go to an
instance by itself. Supposing we keep the “bark” of the dog as property , we
will normally refer to the property when implementing the bark.
 class Dog {
 var name = “ “

--- Page 24 ---
 var whatADogSays = “woof’’
 func bark ( ) {
 print ( self . whatADogSays )
 }
 }
Privacy
Object-based programming usually uses privacy provisions for its object
member. This privacy means other objects will not see these members.
 class Dog {
 var name = “ “
 var whatADogSays = “woof”
 func bark ( ) {
 print ( self . whatADogSays )
 }
 func speak ( ) {
 print ( self . whatADogSays )
 }
 }
We can alter the property of "whatADogSays," like using that of a cat. Even
though it's undesirable, You can execute it.
 let dog1 = Dog ( )
 dog1 . whatADogSays = “meow”

--- Page 25 ---
 dog1 . bark ( ) // meow
Design
You have to instantiate type consistently, and other instances see these
instances according to the scope of the variables that refer to it. Hence, you
will give enough lifetime to instances and make them evident to each other.
Swift will supply much useful object type for you, and real-world interface
objects will focus on your code when programming with iOS.

--- Page 26 ---
CHAPTER ONE
Getting Familiar with the essentials
of Xcode
Xcode is the Integrated Development Environment (IDE) and can build
apps in iOS 14. Building such apps, however, involve some technicalities
and familiarity with some things. This familiarity will enable you to have
fore-knowledge about how the programming works.
Technical requirements
For your codes to run smoothly and without having any hitch while
programming, you should ensure that your device has at least 8 GB RAM
and is 64-bit. The disk space should not be less than 200 GB.
Downloading/installing Xcode from
App Store
You can download Xcode using the app store by launching the app store on
iOS 14 supporting device and log in. Search for Xcode in the search bar;
when you find it, press on the install button.
Understanding the Xcode user
interface
After installation, launching the Xcode will bring you to its user interface
(UI). First-time users will see No Recent Projects on the panel's right side,

--- Page 27 ---
while returning users will see a list of their recently created projects. You
can start by clicking on the Create a new Xcode project button on the
panel's left side. This panel will open up the new project screen to select
iOS, followed by Single View Application, and then click on Next.
After this, you can now choose your new project option, which includes
product name (your app), team, organization name (use the organizer's
identifier, in reverse, to be your organization name).  Other options are
language (you use Swift, of course), devices (use iPad and iPhone), and
checkboxes (uncheck Include Unit Test, Include UI Test, and Use Core
Data ). The Xcode user interface has six panels.
●     Utilities panel : This contains the library pane (which assists you in
input code snippets, objects, and image assets) at the bottom and the
inspector pane (this allows you to alter the properties of things) at the
top.
●     Navigator panel : You use this panel to navigate existing and new
files.
●      Debug panel : The debug panel the app’s log messages.
●     Standard panel : Using the standard editor makes the Swift files,
view project settings, and Storyboard files visible to you.
●     Windowpane controls : This contains the View and Editor Mode
icons.
●      Toolbars : The toolbar has the Stop and Play Button.
Using the iOS simulator to run the
app

--- Page 28 ---
Building an app involves connecting a device to Xcode or using the
simulator, you can use the simulator because using a device may be slower.
●     After connecting your device using USB, select using the list of the
dropdown menu.
●     When you see the Ready status, it means that Xcode has indexed your
selection.
●     Click on Cmd+R or the Play button to run your project.
●     Click on Add Account (using the Add Apple ID) when you might
have Signed in from the Standard editor.
●     You will see your account after creating your Apple ID.
However, a dropdown list will appear containing your account if you
already have one.
Summary
The nitty-gritty of Xcode is exploited in this chapter. We have seen the
technical requirements, how to download the Xcode and its user interfaces,
and o how to start the app using the iOS simulator. All these will be the
foundation for more of what we need to learn as we advance.

--- Page 29 ---
CHAPTER TWO
Simple Values and Types
Swift’s Objective-C includes Int used for integer, Bool used for Boolean
values, String used for textual data, and Double and Float used for floating-
point values. The collection types used in Swift include Set, Array , and
Dictionary.
Swift uses familiar types, such as tuples and optional types that handle
when a value is absent. The optional type will either say "there is no value
at all" or “there is a value, but it is equal to X.”
Technical requirements
Swift needs some familiarization with types, as cannot be seen in Objective
C. Swift has type options for its programming. As such, the options for a
particular program are either "there isn't a value at all" or "there is a value,
and it equals x." You should know the foundation of such parameters and
how they are used.
Understanding Swift Playgrounds
The Swift Playgrounds comes with the Xcode as a built-in feature to help
developers experiment with Swift programming. When you might have
launched your Xcode, you can create a Playground file by going to the
Xcode menu interface and click on the file, followed by new and the
playground.

--- Page 30 ---
Select the iOS blank since we want to use an iOS environment and press on
Next. Xcode will bring out your Playground coding interface after you
might have saved the file. There are two code lines in the Swift Playground,
and you can use this to test your coding skill level.
Exploring Data Types
Data is the value that can be stored using a constant or variable. For
instance, if you want to create a game with the interface showing the high
score and player's name, you will need two constants or variables to store
the data.
 Var highScore : Int = 59
 Var playerName : String = “Jack”
Using Constants and Variables
Constants are variables whose values cannot be changed and are used in
Swift to provide a safer coding environment.  A type (string or 10) is
associated with a name (such as welcomeMessage ) using constants and
variables. As we have seen in the introduction, a variable can be set to
different values, while you cannot change a constant value.
Say x = y + 10, and we declare constant with let and variable with var ,
then,
 Let constant = 10
 Var y = 10
 Var x = y + constant

--- Page 31 ---
When the Swift Playgrounds is used for the above, you can access your
result by hitting the Play button.
Understanding Type Interface and
Types Safety
In Swift, you can know the type of value that will not work with your
codes, and through this, you can detect those that will efficiently work. The
Swift type-safe language will let you use Int for Int and String for String,
this type of language will prevent you from using a non-optional string for
one that requires an optional string.
Like we have seen, the let is used to declare a constant, while var is used to
declare a variable. For instance, if we say
 let
 maximumNumberOfLoginAttempts
 = 10
 Var
 currentLoginAttempt
 = 0
The above code is understood to mean, "Give the value of 10 to a new
constant, maximumNumberOfLoginAttempt , you have declared. Hence,
give the first value of 0 to a new variable, currentLoginAttempt , you have
declared." You can also declare many variables and constants.
 Var x = 0.0, y = 0.0, z = 0.0
Exploring Operators

--- Page 32 ---
Swift’s operators can be divided into two main categories
1. Operation of an operator: The operation of an operator can be
classified into the following
●          Arithmetic operators: These operators perform all
mathematical functions and include +, -, *, / and % and are
used for addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and the
remainder, respectively.
●     Assignment operators: You can use these operators to give
values to a property (either constant or variable). They are
obtained from different combinations of the arithmetic
operators and have different functions. Some of these operators
include = (simple assignment operator), -= (subtract AND
assignment operator), += (add AND), /= (divide AND), *=
(multiply AND), &= (bitwise AND), >>= (right shift AND),
<<= (left shift AND), |= (bitwise inclusive OR and) and ^=
(bitwise exclusive OR and).
●     Logical operators: You can use Boolean values with logical
operators with Boolean values. This operation type is normally
done when you want to control the program's flow using if,
while, else, or other statements. These logical operators include
&& (logical-AND, which is true if every Boolean expression is
true) and || (logical-OR, which is true if any one of the Boolean
expressions is true).

--- Page 33 ---
●     Comparison operators: You use this operator to compare two
values. The Bool value interprets these values if the statement
is true or not. These operators include < (less than), > (greater
than), != (not equal to), == (equal to), <= (less than or equal to)
and >= (greater than or equal to).
2. Number of operands : The number of operands has several
categories of operators, which include;
●           Binary operator: Binary operators function using two
operands, e.g
let result = 20 + 30
print result
 The output for the above program is 50
●      Unary operator: Unary operator functions using one operand,
e.g.
Print ( ! true )
Var a = -5print (-a)
 The output for the above program will be “false 5.”
●      Ternary operators: Ternary operators functions using three
operands, e.g.
Let result – ( 5 > 10 ) ? “value larger” : “Value Smaller”
print ( result )
 The output here is “Value Smaller”.
Using the print () instruction

--- Page 34 ---
As a developer, you should know that Swift programming language's print
instruction is different from the print f (of C) function or echo (of PHP).
The swift print gives a single line output of the textual representations of
things. For instance, the output of
print (1) print (2) print (3)
will be
 1
 2
 3
Whereas In the C language, the output is 123
Generally, any variable or constant is printed in Swift using the print ( )
function. Having known that variables are declared by var and constants are
declared by let.  To send your input to the output screen, you can use
 print (_: separator: terminator : )
The above function accepts three parameters
Separator : This is a string to print between items). By default, it is
represented by a single space ( “  “).
Items: The console depends on the item to print. It can receive more than
one item.
Terminator: When every item has been printed, the terminator serves as
the String to print. By default, it is represented as a newline( " \ n " ).
Here is an instance,
 print ( “Hello, World” )

--- Page 35 ---
 print ( “I love Swift” )
The output of the above program will be
 Hello, World
 I love Swift
Summary
Swift's constants or variables' ability to infer the type from the value's store
makes it a Type Inference Language. You can create a constant or variable
without using the type, but it is always good to use type for easy reading.

--- Page 36 ---
CHAPTER THREE
Conditionals and Optional
Conditionals and optional are data types in Swift, which are often utilized to
make certain programming decisions. The optional is one of the enums in
Swift programming with two possible values of Some(T) and None, where
T represents the value of the exact data type.
Technical Requirements
For optional, you should note that a value may and may not be contained in
it. Before accessing such a data type, you should know that you may find or
may not find what you need.
Introducing Conditionals
You make use of conditionals to make decisions in the Swift programming.
The statements used are else , if , and else if. Because these conditional
statements involve making a decision, such decisions are called branching
or control flow . For example,
 If password == “Open sesame!” {
 Cave. open ( )
 Treasure. steal ( )
From the above program, here are what can be deduced
●     Boolean logic is used to know whether the variable password
is equivalent to the string Open Sesame in the expression
password == “Open sesame”

--- Page 37 ---
●     The code within the curling bracket will be executed when this
expression is executed to be true. We call this the conditional
body.
You can also combine several conditions if you want to use the else, if , and
else if statement, an instance is
Let color = “purple”
 If color == “green”
 {
 Print ( “I love the color \
 ( color ) ! “ )
 }
 Else if color == “blue” ||
 Color == “purple”
 {
 Print  ( “I kinda like the color \ ( color )…” )
 }
 Print ( “I absolutely HATE the color \ ( color ) !!! “ )
 }
The above statement has combined the use or else, if and else if. Hence,
expressions in the conditions like this are evaluated one after the other from
the top to the last statement.
Introducing Optional

--- Page 38 ---
The default value of optional in the Swift programming is a null value (nil).
Hence, optionals are used when you want a constant or variable to contain
no value. This optional type means that it may and may not contain a value
(i.e., a null value).
To declare optionals, you only need to add the ! or ? sign to the data type.
An optional with a value will return as Optional<value>, if no value is
contained, it will return as nil. For example,
 var someValue : Int?var someAnotherValue : Int! print
(someValue)
print (someAnotherValue)
When the above program is run, the results will come back as
 Nil
 Nil
However, our example has initialized an optional type using both! and ?.
Although you are valid if you use any of these ways to create such optional
types, some differences exist.
When you declare an optional type like Int , the variable will either have no
value or have an integer value. The output for such with no value assigned
to the variable, both print statement output nil appear on the screen.
Summary
You have been introduced to how conditions and optionals work in this
chapter. Including how to use the else, if, and else if statements. As far as
we know, optionals may operate without conditionals since it is

--- Page 39 ---
straightforward. Conditionals may serve a bit more expressive, though. You
have, however, known how these two operate.

--- Page 40 ---
CHAPTER FOUR
Range Operators and Loops
In Swift, range operators express value ranges since a range represents an
interval of values. Range values are often sequential so that they always
follow a regular pattern and easily read. Coding in Swift also requires
executing some basic statements several times, and the loop statements are
always used for this.
Technical Requirements
You should know that the start of a range must be equal to or less than its
end, and you may use such a range operator to access some elements of an
array. You should also know that you can create and combine patterns of
loops for easier programming.
Exploring range operators
There are two range operators used in Swift to express ranges of values
●     Half-Open Range: (a..<b) is described as a range of values from a to
b, but this value does not include b. For example, 1…<5 is interpreted
as 1, 2, 3, and 4. In this Range, 5 is not included.
Another instance for this is,
 // 1..<3 defines a range containing values 1, 2 for value in
1..<3 {
 print ( value )
 }

--- Page 41 ---
The output of the above program when you run it will be
 1
 2
●     Closed Range: (a…b) is described as a range of values from a to b
and includes the values of both a and b. For example, 1…5 is
interpreted as 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5.
Another programming instance is
 // 1…3 defines a range containing values 1, 2, and 3 for
value in 1…3 {
 print ( value )
 }
The output of the above program when you run it will be
 1
 2
 3
Exploring loops
The major types of loop statements occur in the Swift programming
language include
●     For-In loops: The For-In loop has its structure as follows
for <incrementValue> in
<sequence> { //
Statements…}
 An example of this is
 For I in 1…5
 print ( “Outer loop iteration”, i )

--- Page 42 ---
 for j in 1…2 {
 print ( “Inner loop iteration “, j )
 print ( “i = \ (i); j = \ (j)” )
 }
 }
 The above code has the following output
 Outer loop iteration 1
 Inner loop iteration 1
 I = 1 ; j = 1
 Inner loop iteration 2
 i = 1 ; j = 2
 Outer loop iteration 2
 Inner loop iteration 1
 i = 2 ; j = 1
 Inner loop iteration 2
 i = 2 ; j = 2
 Outer loop iteration 3
 Inner loop iteration 1
 i = 3 ; j = 1
 Inner loop iteration 2
 i = 3 ; j = 2
 Outer loop iteration 4

--- Page 43 ---
 Inner loop iteration 1
 i = 4 ; j = 1
 Inner loop iteration 2
 i = 4 ; j = 2
 Outer loop iteration 5
 Inner loop iteration 1
 i = 5 ; j = 1
 Inner loop iteration 2
 i = 5 ; j = 2
The above programs show that the outer loop iterates 5 times while
the inner loop iterates 2 times in each of the outer loop.
●     While-loop: A while loop is contained as a statement in another
while loop in this type of programming. Several numbers of while
loops may exist in this case. For example,
var i = 1while i = <= 5 {
 print ( “Outer loop iteration ”, I )
 var j = 1
 while j <= 2 {
 print ( “Inner loop iteration ‘, j )
 print ( “I = \ (i) ; j = \ (j) ‘ )
 j += 1
 }
 I += 1

--- Page 44 ---
}
 The output of this program is
Outer loop iteration 1
Inner loop iteration 1
 I = 1 ; j = 1
 Inner loop iteration 2
 i = 1 ; j = 2
 Outer loop iteration 2
 Inner loop iteration 1
 i = 2 ; j = 1
 Inner loop iteration 2
 i = 2 ; j = 2
 Outer loop iteration 3
 Inner loop iteration 1
 i = 3 ; j = 1
 Inner loop iteration 2
 i = 3 ; j = 2
 Outer loop iteration 4
 Inner loop iteration 1
 i = 4 ; j = 1
 Inner loop iteration 2
 i = 4 ; j = 2

--- Page 45 ---
 Outer loop iteration 5
 Inner loop iteration 1
 i = 5 ; j = 1
 Inner loop iteration 2
 i = 5 ; j = 2
●     Repeat-while loop: A repeat-while loop is contained as a statement
in another repeat-while loop. Several repeat-while loops may exist in
this case. For example,
var i = 1repeat {
 print ( “Outer loop iteration “, i )
 var j = 1
 repeat {
 print ( “Inner loop iteration “, j )
 print ( “ i = \ (i) ; j = \(j) “ )
 j += 1
 } while (j <= 2)
 i += 1
} while (I <= 5)
 The output of the above is
Outer loop iteration 1
 Inner loop iteration 1
 I = 1 ; j = 1

--- Page 46 ---
 Inner loop iteration 2
 i = 1 ; j = 2
 Outer loop iteration 2
 Inner loop iteration 1
 i = 2 ; j = 1
 Inner loop iteration 2
 i = 2 ; j = 2
 Outer loop iteration 3
 Inner loop iteration 1
 i = 3 ; j = 1
 Inner loop iteration 2
 i = 3 ; j = 2
 Outer loop iteration 4
 Inner loop iteration 1
 i = 4 ; j = 1
 Inner loop iteration 2
 i = 4 ; j = 2
 Outer loop iteration 5
 Inner loop iteration 1
 i = 5 ; j = 1
 Inner loop iteration 2
 i = 5 ; j = 2

--- Page 47 ---
Summary
In this chapter, we have explored the use of loop and range in programming,
the different types of range operators and loops. And we have seen that
loops can be programmed in such a way that any types of nested loops we
use give us the same result.
CHAPTER FIVE
Collection types
You can store collections of values in different collection types that are
provided in Swift. These collection types include arrays, dictionaries and
sets. While collection values of arrays are ordered, sets have an unordered
type of collection value. Dictionaries also use unordered collections of key-
value associations.
Technical Requirements
You should know that you cannot input a wrong value of any collection
type in your Swift code. It would be best if you were not mistaken so that
you can be poised about your codes. This collection is mutable, and you
should know when to choose to use a mutable item or an immutable one.

--- Page 48 ---
Understanding arrays
Unlike a variable, an array can have many values as possible because it
appears in the form of a numbered list. For instance
 1
 2
let names = [ “Arthur”, “Ford”, “Tr:
print ( names )
In the above, an array has been created, which was assigned to the constant
name. This array is printed out as the value of the name.
Understanding dictionaries
The Swift programming offers a unique key identifier to save values that
can later be referenced using the same key.
To create a dictionary, you can use initializer syntax, e.g.
 var someDict = [KeyType : ValueType] ( )
You can create an empty dictionary  using the Int type as key and
strings as the associated value e.g.
 var someDict = [Int : String] ( )
A good example of a program of dictionary is
 let scores = [
 “Bob” : 42
 “Alice” : 10
 “Diasy” : 33

--- Page 49 ---
 ]
 Print ( scores )
Mutability exists so that when you use the let constant to initialize a
dictionary, you cannot alter the items again. As such, the collection is
immutable. A mutable collection is usually started with the var declaration,
and we can alter items in such collections.
Understanding sets
You use a set for a one-dimensional list or collection of items. If we want to
create a set to be known as a fruit. We say
 let fruit : Set = [ “apple”, “banana”,
 print ( fruit )
We have used the literal syntax to create the fruit set in the above code; we
can add other items to this set as follows
 Var fruit = Set<String>( )
 Fruit . insert ( “pineapple” )
 print ( fruit )
There are several empty functions in a set; they include
●      First, which returns the first item in the set.
●     isEmpty, which returns true when the set has no item.
●      First (where:), which returns a satisfying item.
●      count, which returns the set's number of items.
●      randomElement (), which returns the set's random item.
Summary

--- Page 50 ---
We have seen the use of the different types of collections in Swift
programming in this chapter. We are exposed to how we can create these
collection types and how they could be similar or different from each other
while coding.

--- Page 51 ---
CHAPTER SIX
Functions and Closures
A function is used in Swift for some collections of statements having a
specific assignment. You may write this function in a complex form, just
like an Objective C function, or maybe as simple as a C function. You use
closures as your code's functional blocks; these closures are comparable
with what is obtained in the C, Objective-C or lambda programming
languages.
Technical Requirements
Expressions involving closures follow crisp, optimization, and lightweight
syntax styles and are usually identical to many, self-contained functions
grouped as blocks. Because many variables and constants are captured in
closures, you should know that they function as a special closure type.
Understanding Functions
The function makes us transfer global and local parameters
●     Function definition: The function definition has to do with the real
function body.
●     Function declaration: Function declaration tells the compiler about
the parameters, name, and type of function.
In general, a function’s argument should follow the syntax below
 Func funcname (parameter)
 -> return type {

--- Page 52 ---
 Statement1 Statement2
 --- Statement N
 Return parameters}
In the instance below, we declare the program's name as a data string in the
"program" function. You should note that it will return the name of the
student if the function is called.
 Func program ( name: String
 ) -> String {
 }
 print ( program ( name :
 “Hello” ) )
 print ( program ( name :
 “World” ) )
Understanding Closures
Closures store several contexts of variables and constants. A special case of
closure is the nested and global functions. Closure generally fall into three
divisions
●     Closure expression: Closure expressions are unnamed lightweight
syntax codes that capture values from the surroundings.
●     Global functions: These are named closures which do not capture
any value.
●     Nested functions: These closures have a name and also captures
values from the enclosing functions.

--- Page 53 ---
The syntax code of closures can be represented by
 { ( parameters ) -> return
 Type in statements}
For example
 let closureexample = {
 print ( “Swift Closures ) }
 closureexample ( ) The below closure example takes two Int
parameters and returns an integer.
 { ( Int, Int )
 -> Int in Statement1
 Statement2 ---
 Statement n } let multiply =
 {
 Val1 : Int, val2 : Int ) –
 >Int in
 Return val1 *val2
 } let result = multiply (
 10 , 20 ) print ( result )
The output for the above program will be 200
Summary
We now have the idea of how Swift functions and closures work in this
chapter. We will be using functions when we need to group a few

--- Page 54 ---
statements that perform particular tasks together. Closures are intentional
codes and may need a lot of practice, especially if you want to manage
memory.

--- Page 55 ---
CHAPTER SEVEN
Classes, Structures, and
Enumerations
It is easier to use struct by default when using Swift, but when are you
supposed to use class or enums. Structs enable codes to be more flexible for
use. We already know that structs are value types and classes are reference
types. You do not need to create another interface to implement files for
classes and structures.
Technical Requirements
You need to know that you define both classes and structure using a single
file. You should know that other codes can use the external interface to that
structure or class by doing this. You can also define classes' methods and
properties, only that you will need to implement files and create an
interface. Enumerations allow you to work with a safe code because it
defines a common type for corresponding values. Hence, your provision of
values for any case of enumeration may not be necessary.
Understanding Classes
Swift classes are made of flexible constructs of building blocks. These
classes define properties to store values and initialize methods for improved
function. From the syntax below
 Class classname {
 Definition 1

--- Page 56 ---
 Definition 2
 ---
 Definition N
 }
The class definition will follow as
 Class student {
 var studname : String
 var mark : Int
 var mark2 : Int
 }
The syntax to create instances will be
 Let studrecord = student ( )
For example
 Class MarksStruct {
 Var mark : Int
 Init ( mark : Int ) {
 Self : mark = mark
 } } class studentMarks {
 var mark = 300 } let marks = studentMarks ( ) print ( “Mark is \
(marks.mark)”)
The result for the above program is 300
Understanding Structures

--- Page 57 ---
Structs are important for simple data types and value type structs like String
are easy for coding. You can use and define struct in the sample coding
below
 struct NewsItem {
 var title : String = “ “
 var url : String = “ “
 }
var  item = NewsItem ( )
item. Title = “Comparing Classes
vs. Structs in Swift."
item.
URL =
"HTTP : //learnappmaking.com/classes-structs-comparison-swift-
programming”
print (item)
// Output : NewsItem ( title :
“Comparing Classes vs. Structs in Swift
," URL :
"HTTP : //learnappmaking.com/classes-structs-comparison-swift-
proramming”)
You will notice that we used the same syntax for defining and using a class
from the above. We used
Struct [name] {…. Instead of class [name]…

--- Page 58 ---
Understanding Enumerations
You can use enumerations to store different case values using cases
associated with values of any type. Just like we have seen previously, you
introduce or declare enumeration using enum. Such declaration allows you
to put their definition within the pair of curly braces
 Enum SomeEnumeration {
 // enumeration
 Definition goes here
 }
For example, we can use enum for different points of a compass as follows
 Enum CompassPoint {
 Case north
 Case south
 Case east
 Case west
 }
The values of north, south, east, and west defined above are called
enumeration cases . These cases can appear together on a single line and
separated by commas
 Enum Planet {
 Case mercury, Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, Earth, Uranus, Mars,
Neptune 
 }

--- Page 59 ---
Summary
We have seen how type-safety is introduced in codes with fewer coding
errors by using enums. This chapter has also exposed us to how classes and
structures, though used in similar ways, works when defining specific
codes.

--- Page 60 ---
CHAPTER EIGHT
Protocols, Extensions, and Error
Handling
A protocol is used to define properties, the blueprint of methods, and some
other requirements that suit a function or task. On the other hand,
extensions allow us to modify types that we don't know by adding
functionality to structures, classes, etc.
Technical Requirements
When using a protocol, you may not know its exact implementation method
until it is implemented. You should know that extensions would give new
initializers, add computed properties and functions, add default
implementations to protocols using protocol extensions, and make an
existing type to conform to a protocol.
Understanding Protocols
Let delve into protocols by considering the following example
 Protocol Edible
 {
 Func eat ( )
 }
From the above, the name of the protocol is Edible . It is used for anything
that can be eaten, such as food. A protocol is designed in similar syntax,
like how classes work

--- Page 61 ---
 Protocol name {
 Body
 }
You should know that a protocol will define a function but will not
implement it. But we can define a protocol and implement it in a class, just
as below
 Class Apple: Edible {
 Func eat ( )
 {
 print ( “Omnomnom! Eating the apple…” )
 }
 }
From the above, you observe that the Apple class has used the Edible
protocol by separating it with a colon and writing it after the class name.
The Apple class implemented the eat ( ) function by providing a function
body via repeated function declaration fun eat ( ).
Understanding Extensions
We use extensions to organize our codes. An example is if we consider that
we don’t have access to the code of another developer who already defined
a class in his code. If his code looks like this
 Class Airplane {
 Var altitude : Double = 0
 Func setAltitude ( feet :

--- Page 62 ---
 Double ) {
 Altitude = feet
 }
 }
This developer used feet to measure the altitude of the Airplane. Suppose
you want to use meters, you can use Swift extension since you cannot edit
the developer's code, and you will also not want to subclass Airplane. Your
extension will look something like this
 Extension Airplane {
 Func setAltitude ( meter :
 Double ) {
 Altitude = meter *
 3.28084
 }
 }
You can now express an ordinary function by using the function of
setAltitude(meter : ) on an instance of Airplane just like below
 let boeing = Airplane ( )
 boeing . setAltitude ( meter :
 12000)
 print (boeing . altitude ) //
 Output : 39370.08

--- Page 63 ---
Exploring Error Handling
Coding in Swift may come with its errors, but these errors can be handled
and given response to appropriately.
●      Throwing Error: Let's consider the code below
If fuel < 1000 {
throw
RocketError . InsufficientFuel
}
 The above means that the code is used to throw an error type
RocketError.insufficientfuel if the fuel variable is not up to 1000. If we
want to fire a rocket, then,
 Func
 igniteRockets ( fuel : Int,
 astronauts : Int ) throws {
 if fuel < 1000 {
 throw
 RocketError . insufficientduel
 }
 Else if astronauts < 3 {
 Throw
 RocketError . insuffiecientAstronauts ( needed : 3)
 }
 Print ( “3….2…1…Ignition !!!LIFTOFF!!!!” )

--- Page 64 ---
 }
The above code means that the function igniteRockets(fuel:astronauts: ) can
only ignite if there are at least 3 astronauts on board and the fuel is more
than or equivalent to 1000.
●         The Initial Approach-try!: Consider the code below, which
produces an error from the Swift compiler
Let urls =
FileManager. default . URLs (for :
. applicationSupportDirectory, in : .userDomianMask)
try
FileManager . default . create
Directory (at :
URLs [0], withIntermediateDirectories : true ,
Attributes : nil )
We can fix the error above by using the try! approach, which forces
unwrapping
 try
FileManager . default . create
Directory (at :
URLs [0], withIntermediateDirectories : true ,
Attributes : nil )
Meanwhile, this approach is used when you are sure that the error will not
occur.
●     The optional try-try?: We can also make use of Try? To ignore any
error such as below

--- Page 65 ---
try?
FileManager. Default.create
Directory (at :
URLs [0], withIntermediateDirectories : true,
Attributes : nil )
●     Do-try-catch: It is also possible for us to catch errors
Do {
try FileManager . default
. createDirectory
} catch let err {
print ( err ) // or do something different?
}
The above method sees us creating the directory. We can simply go directly
to the second block, where we can handle the problems.
Summary
You now know that extensions cannot replace the functionality or alter a
class's main structure or other declarations; they can only add functionality.
You can now use the protocol to define rules to conform to an adopting
class.
CHAPTER NINE
Setting up the user interface

--- Page 66 ---
The Swift user interface will help us to use our codes to build an app we
want. In this chapter, we will look at how to create the Let’s Eat app. We are
going to review the already finished product and see how we can build ours.
Technical requirements
You must set up your storyboard for the Let's Eat app you want to create.
You will also need to know the locations of the Tab bar buttons and the
Navigation controllers. You will need to know how to build the app from
scratch by deleting any existing project using the ViewController.swift file
and add the app assets using the Assets.xcassets folder.
Learning useful terms in iOS
development
As we further our knowledge in Swift programming, here are few terms we
should know
●     View Controller: All view controllers have view property, and they
determine what happens when a user interacts with a view because
they are an instance of UIStackView.
●     View: Whatever is displayed on your screen is known as a view. It is
an instance of UIView class or subclasses.
●     Stack View: The UIView is a subclass of UIStackView, which the
Stack view takes to be its instance.
●     Argument: You pass an argument (value) to a method, function, or
initializer to satisfy one of its parameters.
●     Class: A code that provides the blueprint or function for an object.

--- Page 67 ---
●     Tab bar controller: We use this Controller to manage an array of the
view controller.
●        Console: Console serves as a tool used to log information for
debugging processes or for debugging especially.
●     Function: Function helps you to navigate to a particular declaration
easily.
●     Storyboard: The storyboard shows the visual representation of your
app.
●     Global: A global is defined at the highest level of a program and is
usually a variable, function, or constant.
●     Segue: Segue connects controllers and allows you to transit from one
screen to another without much programming.
●      Iterate: To do some task repeatedly.
●         Local: Local describes the limited definition of a variable or
constant.
●     Auto Layout: This tool allows you to set different constraints on UI
elements so that you can use a single storyboard for all devices.
●     Playground: This file enables you to alter Swift programs in Xcode
and see the output.
●     Property: Property is what is encapsulated within an enum, class, or
struct.
●     Simulator: The simulator is an Xcode app that mimics how an app
runs on the device.
●      Tuple: Tuple represents when values are grouped.
Touring the Let’s Eat app

--- Page 68 ---
We want to build the Let’s Eat app, which is a restaurant reservation app.
We can find, within this app, several options like
●     Explore: The explore tab comes first whenever you launch the Let's
Eat app, and it shows the list of cuisines available for you to pick.
●     Locations: We can get access to this from the explore tab, and it
shows several cities from which the user can select so that the app
loads the list of restaurants.
●        Restaurant Listings: Restaurant listings shows the numbers of
restaurants within an area based on their cuisines
●     Restaurant details: We are going to build this using the static cells
of the UITableView. The restaurant details will have the information
about the restaurants.
●     Map tab: This is a View Controller on the Let's Eat app showing the
restaurants' location.
Creating a new Xcode project
We are now going to try to create our project for the Let’s Eat app.
●     First, we will launch the Xcode and press the Create a new Xcode
project button
●      Choose the Single View App and press Next
●     An option screen will appear; add the following to it
Product Name: Let’s Eat
Team: Leave it blank or use your account for it
Organization Name: Use your name or company
Language: Swift

--- Page 69 ---
Devices: Universal
Use Core Data: Unchecked
Include Units Tests: Unchecked
Include UI Tests: Unchecked
●     Select the folder to save your project and click on Create.
Setting up a tab bar controller scene
Having created our new project, we can now familiarize ourselves with the
tab bar controller scene. We need to set up our storyboard; first, this
storyboard will access the tab bar controller scene. We do this by updating
the Main.storyboard .
●      First, choose the Main.storyboard file from the Navigator panel.
●      Choose the View Controller scene from the Outline View.
●     Press the Backspace/Delete key so that the Main.storyboard becomes
empty.
●     Go to the utilities panel and choose the object library from the library
selector bar.
●     View more of the object library by pulling up the library selector bar.
●      Look for the tab bar controller.
●      Drag the tab bar controller into the canvas.
With the above steps, we have set up the tab bar controller, which has two
tabs.
Setting up the Launch screen
We need to set up the launch screen; this is particularly important because it
will help us set up one asset for all orientations and devices. By doing this,

--- Page 70 ---
we will not need to build images for every device orientation.
●        Choose the LaunchScreen.storyboard file. Ensure that the View
Controller and View Controller Scene's disclosure arrows face down
in the Outline View. Then, choose View under View Controller.
●     Choose the Attributes inspector in the utilities panel and click on the
Background bar.
●     Select the Color Slider on the second tab of the Color panel.
●     Update the value of FFFFFF to 4A4A4A under the RBG Sliders, Hex
color #. The background color will change from white to dark grey.
●         If you need to select the background color again, choose the
background bar in the Attributes inspector to change the Hex color #
to FFFFFF. Then, change it back to 4A4A4A. The background color
update will appear in the Standard Editor panel.
●     We now need to bring the app logo by selecting the Media Library
that can be seen under the Library selector bar in the utilities panel.
All these are to be done while still in the Launch.storyboard.
●     We can now type detail-logo in the filter, which shows at the bottom
of the Library pane. Then, we can drag and drop the logo into the
Launch.Screen.storyboard.
●     If you observe that, the logo did not drag out to size, select the logo,
open the size inspector in the utilities panel, and set the height and
width to 112 and 220.
●     To let our Let’s Eat app logo appear at the center of any device, we
select detail-logo and the Pin icon near the Filter bar. All these are
done by applying the auto-layout.

--- Page 71 ---
●     We can now adjust as preferable by selecting the Align icon and
checking Vertically's boxes in the container and Horizontally.
With all the above steps, we have now set up our launch screen for any
device. When we launch this program, it will show the Let’s Eat logo and
the new background color.
Summary
This chapter has exposed us to how we can create a basic app called Let's
Eat. So far, we have set up the logo and background color using the
stepwise methods of setting up the tab bar controller scene and launching
the screen.
CHAPTER TEN
Building your user interface
You have been exposed to the creation of Tab bar controller in the previous
chapter; this chapter will deal with how to create some other View
controller that we need so that we will be able to navigate across the
different sections of the app.
For this app we are building, we will need to add the
RestaurantViewController and ExploreViewController. We can download
this at GitHub (although we can create this for quick use, let's use the
downloaded format first).
Adding a collection view to the
explore screen

--- Page 72 ---
●     You will want to display elements in a grid format; this is done using
the Collection View. To set up our Collection View.
●     Choose the Main.storyboard file and select the object library tab
from the utilities panel.
●     You can now type “collection view” in the filter field.
●      Drag the collection view into the explore view controller.
●     Choose the Pin icon around the collection view component and enter
the values.
●      Press Add 4 constraints .
Connecting storyboard element to
outlets in a view controller
We can now link our UIViewController in the storyboard with the
ExploreViewController.
●          Go to the left icon at the Controller's top and choose the
UIViewController in the Collection View.
●     Choose the Identity Inspector (third icon from left) from the utilities
panel.
●     Select the ExploreViewController in the Class menu of dropdown
and click Enter.
●     Select the Connections Inspector (last icon on the right hand) from
the utilities panel.
Configuring data source methods for
the collection view

--- Page 73 ---
To configure data source methods for collection view.
●     Click on the Collection View (empty) circle seen under outlets and
drag it from the circle to the added UIViewController.
●      Release it and ensure that the circle is filled.
●        We can now hook up the delegate and data source by selecting
Collection View from the screen and Connection Inspector from the
utilities panel.
●     Select and drag datasource property to the Explore View Controller
in the Outline view, then release it.
●     Do the same step above for the delegate property under the outlet
section.
Adding a section header to the
collection view
The section header for the collection view will include the selected location,
page title, and a button for the selected location. The following steps can
add this header.
●     Go to the Main.storyboard outline and select the Collection View.
●     Select Attributes inspector from the utilities panel and click on the
checkbox next to the section header under the Collection View
Accessories.
●     Select the new header by checking the box that appears above our
Demo Grey cell.
●     Update the Identifier to Header from the Utilities panel’s Attributes
inspector.

--- Page 74 ---
Configuring storyboard element sizes
You can change the size of the storyboard based on the type of device you
use. We need to follow the steps below
●     Use Cmd + Shift + O and type Main.storyboard in the Open Quickly
window, then press Enter.
●        Select the Collection View and choose Size Inspector from the
Utilities panel.
●     Update the values as appropriate based on the current simulator you
are using. These values will allow you to alter the width, height, and
other things.
Presenting a view modally
To present a view modally, you will notice that we have to add the +
location button from our Let's Eat app, which is necessary to display several
restaurants' locations. We can now present the modal by the following steps.
●        Select the object library from the Mian.storyboard file and type
button in the filter field at the Library pane's bottom.
●     You can now go ahead and drag the Button into the section header
that is created in the previous Explore View Controller.
After the above steps, we can now add another View Controller to the
storyboard.
●     Type viewcontroller in the filter and drag the ViewController in the
Main.
●        Navigate to Editor | EmbedIn | NavigationController using the
selected View Controller.

--- Page 75 ---
●     Press Ctrl + drag where you have Button under the Explore tab in the
View Controller to the Navigation Controller just created.
●      Select the Present Modally from the menu that appears.
Summary
With all that is done in this chapter, we are almost done with our app. We
have been able to create a dummy cell Collection View, which will enable
us to create the rest of the app's structure. Then, we can simulate the design
of the app.
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Finishing up your User Interface
We will try to finish our app in this chapter so that we will now be able to
get the basic structure of our app. This structure will allow us to get ready
for any asset we need before there is any additional coding so that the app's
design will just be the perfect one.
Technical requirement
You will need to be accustomed to integrating the Main.storyboard with the
UITableView, UIViewController, and others for the optimal function of the
app being built. Choosing values is also very important in this chapter, and
you must master the act.

--- Page 76 ---
Adding a table view
We can add the UITableView into our UIViewController by the following
steps
●         Type tableview in the filter field of the utilities panel of the
Main.storyboard and drag the Table View into the scene.
●      Choose the Pin icon and input the following values
You should set all values under Add New Constraints to 0.
Uncheck the Constraint to margins checkbox.
Click on Add 4 Constraints.
Implementing the Restaurant list
screen
We can set up and implement our restaurant list screen by doing the
following
●     Select the Main.storyboard file and make sure that the object library
is chosen from the utilities panel.
●     Type viewcontroller in the filter field and drag it next to the Explore
View Controller.
●      Type collection view in the filter field.
●        Drag the Collection View into the new View Controller near the
Explore View Controller.
●     Select the Pin icon and input the following values after dropping it
onto the scene.

--- Page 77 ---
Set all values under Add New Constraints to 0.
Ensure you uncheck Constraints to margins .
●      Click Add 4 Constraints.
Implementing the Restaurant detail
screen
We can now connect the UIViewController with our
RestaurantViewController by doing the following.
●      Use the Collection view just created with the UIViewController.
●      Select the Identity inspector from the utilities panel.
●     Select RestaurantViewController from the Class dropdown menu of
the Custom Class and press Enter.
●      From the utilities panel, select the Connections Inspector.
●     Click the CollectionView circle under the Outlets and drag it to the
Collection View just added to the UIviewController.
●     Select the Collection View from the scene and Connection Inspector
from the Utilities panel.
●     Drag the data source property to the Restaurant View Controller via
the Outline view.
●     Drag the delegate property to the Outline view’s Restaurant View
Controller.
Implementing the Map screen
We will now connect the View Controller to the Map tab by selecting the
Main.storyboard so that we will be able to implement our Map screen.

--- Page 78 ---
●     Navigate to Editor, Embed In, and Navigation Controller with the
selected View Controller.
●     Type map in the filter field in the utilities panel while the object
library is selected.
●     Drag the Map Kit View into the Map View Controller.
●      Choose the Pin icon and input the following values.
Uncheck the checkbox of Constraints to margins.
Set all values under Add New Constraints to 0.
Click Add 4 Constraints.
You can now run the project by using the cmd + R or by hitting the play
button
Summary
We are done with the basic structure of the app in this chapter. You may
want to create the app again for perfection because we will be dealing with
the other general aspect of the app in the subsequent chapter.
CHAPTER TWELVE

--- Page 79 ---
Modifying and Configuring Cells
We are trying to let our app be very similar to the designs and other
specifics of the Let’s Eat app. We will be modifying and configuring the
cells in this chapter. We will work with the table view cells, collection view
cells, etc.
Technical requirements
What we will be doing here involves a series of technical repeated actions
which will give us the exact app we are developing. You should know how
to use the several update methods involving the Size inspector and the
Attributes inspector.
Modifying the Explore screen header
The explore screen header of the Let's Eat app has four elements: a button, a
gray line, and two UILabels (subtitle and title). We only need to add the
UILabels because we have created the Button from the previous chapter.
●     Select the prototype header in the Main.storyboard and put width as 0
and height as 100 in the Size inspector.
●     Type view in the filter field of the object library and drag the View
into the prototype header.
●     Select View and update X as 0, Y as 0, width as 375, and height as 90
in the Size inspector.
●     Type label using the filter field of the object library
●     Drag out the two labels into the prototype header’s View
●     Add a new color to the Assets.xcassets file and name it LetsEat Light
Grey. Then, set the Hex Color # to AFAFB2.

--- Page 80 ---
●      Rename the Demo Grey to LetsEat Dark Grey.
●     Use one of the labels as a subtitle and update Color as LetsEat Light
Grey and Font as System Semibold 13 into the Attributes inspector.
●     Update X as 8, Y as 24, width as 350, and height as 21 into the Size
inspector.
●     Select the other label to be used as the title and update the value Font
of the Attributes inspector to System Heavy 40.0.
●     Update X as 8, Y as 45, width as 255, and height as 37 in the Size
inspector.
●     Choose Button in the Attributes and update Type as Custom, Image
as btn-location and then, remove the text button.
●     Update X as 271, Y as 50, width as 96, and height as 25 in the Size
inspector.
●      Type view in the object library’s filter field.
●      Drag the View into the prototype’s header.
●     Select the View and update X as 8, Y as 89, width as 359, and height
as 1 in the Size inspector.
●     Select the Button and update the value of Background to LetsEat
Light Grey in the Attributes inspector.
Modifying the exploreCell collection
view cell
To work on the Explore Collection View cell
●     Select, from the Attributes inspector, the exploreCell prototype and
update the background color to white.

--- Page 81 ---
●        Update the value of width as 164 and height as 195 in the Size
inspector and Explore View Controller.
●     Type view in the filter field of the object library.
●      Drag a view into the prototype.
●     Select View and update X as 0, Y as 0, width as 164, and height as
164 in the Size inspector.
●      Type image in the filter field.
●      Drag the Image view to the View just added
●     Update X as 0, Y as 0, width as 164, and height as 164 while the
Image view is selected.
●      Type label in the filter field.
●         Update Font to Avenir Next Condensed Demibold 20 in the
Attributes inspector while the label is selected.
●     Update X as 6, Y as 169, width as 152, and height as 21 in the Size
inspector.
Modifying the restaurantCell
collection view cell
There are several elements in the restaurant cell that we are going to
modify. We go through the Restaurant View Controller and follow the steps
below.
●      Update the background color in the Attributes inspector.
●        Select the restaurant list prototype cell and update width as 375,
height as 312 in the Size inspector.
●     Type view in the filter field of the object library.

--- Page 82 ---
●      Drag view into the prototype cell.
●     Update X as 75.5, Y as 245, width as 224, and height as 56 in the
Size inspector while View is selected.
●      Type label in the filter field.
●      Drag label to the View that is just added.
●     Update X as 0, Y as 2, width as 224, and height as 21 in the Size
inspector while the label is selected.
●     Update Text as Add Available Times , Color as Black , alignment as
center , and font as Avenir Next Condensed Bold 17 in the Attributes
inspector.
●      Type button in the filter field.
●     Update Type as System, title as Plain, font as Avenir Next Condensed
Regular 17, text color as white color and background as time-bg in
the Attributes inspector while Button is selected.
●     Update width as 68 and height as 27 in the Size inspector.
●     Press cmd + C to copy after you might have selected the Button in
the Outline.
●     Press cmd + V twice to paste. You can now have three Buttons after
you have done this.
●     Press cmd + each created Button and click on the Embed in Stack.
●        Update axis as horizontal, alignment as fill, distribution as equal
spacing, and spacing as 10 in the Attributes inspector while the
Outline View's stack view is selected.
●     Set X as 0 in the Size inspector and type view in the object library's
filter field.

--- Page 83 ---
●     Drag view into the prototype cell and update X as 11, y as 42, width
as 353, and height as 200 in the Size inspector while View is selected.
●     Type Image in the filter field and drag the Image view into the View
just created.
●     Update the Image’s value in the Attributes inspector as American
while the Image view of the outline view is selected and update X as
0, Y as 0, width as 353, and height as 200.
●     Type label in the filter field and drag two labels into the prototype
cell.
●     Update one of the label’s fonts as Avenir Next Condensed Demi Bold
17. Update X as 10, Y as 8, width as 355, and height as 19.
●         Update color as LetsEat Dark Grey and font as Avenir Next
Condensed Regular 14 for the second label in the Attributes inspector.
●     Update X as 10, Y as 32, width as 355, and height as 19 in the Size
inspector.
Configuring the locationCell table
view cell
We need to look out for the Location View Controller to set the Location
cell. We will be using the predefined cell provided by Apple for this.
●      Update Prototype Cells as 1 in the Table View.
●     Input the Style as Basic and Identifier as locationCell in the selected
prototype cell.
Summary

--- Page 84 ---
We have been able to mimic the LetsEat app by formatting cells to match
our design. Although you may write some of the layouts with code, the
method we have used here is easier, especially when dealing with the
storyboard.

--- Page 85 ---
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Getting started with MVC and
Collection Views
The Model View Controller (MVC) is a software design pattern that
proffers solutions to common errors in the software design. Because the iOS
app is built using the MVC design pattern, we have three divisions known
as Model, View, and Controller. The Controller has a lot of responsibility
because of the MVC architecture, but we can tweak this pattern to be less
pressure on the MVC.
Technical requirements
You should know that you might find it a little bit difficult when using the
MCV architecture since it makes you uncertain about where to put some
things. The nature of the MCV is such that a lot of responsibility is on the
Controller camp.
You should know that the Controller camp's fundamental importance is to
respond to user's interactions and pass them over to the View or Model
camp. In such a way, any task completed by the Model is passed back to the
Controller. The Controller can now interact with the View. As such, some
technicalities are needed because we will alter the pattern so that less
responsibility will be on the Controller.
Controller design pattern

--- Page 86 ---
You structure an app in your code using the architectural pattern provided
by Apple's MVC. This pattern decides our app to include
●     Model: The app's business logic and data are built upon the Model
camp. The Model is used to store data; several operations performed
on it, and handle several data representations.
●     View: Everything that appears on the screen is the responsibility of
the View camp. Because of the user's interaction, the View camp will
format and present every data result.
●     Controller: The Controller camp serves as an intermediary between
the View camp and the Model camp. The Controller camp works on
several setups and connections from the Model camp to the View
camp. The View camp and the Model camp do not know about any
operation going on with each other. These operations and exchanges
are being taken care of by the Controller camp.
Exploring controllers and classes
The Controllers and classes work hand-in-hand. You will need to create the
class file for each Controller's element (UIViewController,
UICollectionViewController , and UITableViewController ). The class file is
responsible for handling the numerous interactions and logic that the
Controller receives and sends across. The class file will also receive any
form of data.
Summary
We have learned about how Controllers and classes work and the basic
architecture of the MVC. These structures are paramount to the subsequent

--- Page 87 ---
knowledge gained in the following chapters of this book.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
Bringing Data into Views
Collection
You have learned about collection views in the previous chapter, and you've
seen and probably now understand how collection views work on two
different screens. In this chapter, you will be implementing the Explore
screen's model objects to make the screen show a record of cuisines and so
on.
Technical Prerequisite
In this chapter, you will need the previous chapter's knowledge to learn
more about the collection view and how to implement it.
Comprehending Model Objects
From Chapter 13, Introduction to MVC and Collection Views , MVC is a
regular design model for iOS apps. Recapping, MVC segment apps into
three individual parts:
* Model : This takes care of data processing, representation, and data
storage tasks.
* View : This refers to anything that the user can relate to on the screen.
* Controller : This handles the channel or communication between the first
two - Model and View.

--- Page 88 ---
The Explore screen exhibits a specific format when you build and execute
your app. You will see empty cells. That is because you have concluded the
execution of views (collection view and section header) as well as the
controller (class ExploreViewController ). Next, attach model objects that
will give the data to be exhibited.
Combine a property list - ExploreData.plist first to your project, containing
the image filename and name for individual cuisine. However, you already
have the cuisine images in your Assets.xcassets folder. Next, create or
devise a model object, ExploreItem , which is a design with two qualities.
One of the qualities will be utilized to file names of cuisine, while the other
will be used for reserving image filenames. Subsequently, you will set up a
data manager class ExploreDataManager , which will run the data from
ExploreData.plist , enter it into an arrangement of ExploreItem instances,
and give the arrangement to the instance of the ExploreViewController .
Conclusively, you will alter the ExploreViewController class to enable it
to supply data for the collection view to show.
Comprehending .plist files
Property lists were developed to store object states or data structures for
later recreation and transference. Property list files employ the filename
extension .plist, and therefore are commonly called p-list files . These files
are frequently used to save users’ settings. They are also used to reserve
information about applications and bundles, a function the resource fork
serves out in the previous Mac OS.
Project lists are also utilized for localization strings for advancement. The
files make use of the .stringsdict or .strings filename extensions. The former
is a developed plist, while the latter is a ‘reduced’ out-of-date plist, which
contains solely one dictionary minus the braces.
Building a Pattern to Represent a
Cuisine
To build a model object to represent or depict a cuisine in your app, add a
recently created file to your project, ExploreItem.swift , then declare or

--- Page 89 ---
state an ExploreItem pattern with attributes for a cuisine’s image and
name. Use the steps below:
Right-click on the ‘Model’ folder, then hit ‘New File.'
iOS is selected already. Select ‘Swift File’ and click on ‘Next.'
Title the file ExploreItem.swift , and then click on ‘Create.' It becomes
visible in the Project Navigator. Click on it, and its contents will become
visible in the Editor area. An import statement is the sole line in the file.
Add the code below to the file to pronounce or declare a pattern titled
ExploreItem :
struct ExploreItem {}
Add the code below before the final curly brace to attach two properties of
String to the ExploreItem pattern:
var name: String
var image: String
The property, name will save the cuisine name, and the image will save an
image’s filename from Assets.xcassets . Your pattern should resemble:
struct ExploreItem {
var name: String
var image: String
}
Dictionaries are discussed in Chapter 5, Set Categories , Structures in
Chapter 7, and Extensions in Chapter 8, Procedures, Tracts, and Error
Handling .
Enforcing a Data Manager Group to
Read Data from a .plist file
After adding ExploreData.plist to your work, which contains the cuisine
data, and creating a pattern, ExploreItem that saves individual cuisine’s
details, it is necessary to set up a new class, ExploreDataManager . The
class can peruse and interpret the .plist file’s data and keep it in an

--- Page 90 ---
arrangement of ExploreItem instances. This class or group will be termed a
data manager group. Use the steps below:
1. Right-click on the ‘Model’ folder, then hit ‘New File.'
2. iOS is selected already. Select ‘Swift File’ and click on ‘Next.'
3. Title the file ExploreDataManager.swift , and then click on ‘Create.'
Click on the file to show its content in the Editor’s area.
4. In the file, input the code below to declare the class,
ExploreDataManager :
class ExploreDataManager {}
Input the code below in the curly braces. This executes the loadData()
method, which will interpret the ExploreData.plist file’s contents and give
back a range of dictionaries.
fileprivate func loadData()  -> [[String:  AnyObject]]  {    
guard let path =
Bundle.main.path(forResource:      “ExploreData”,
ofType:  “plist”),  let items
=       NSArray(contentsOfFile:  path) else  {
return  [[ : ]]
}
return items as!  [[String:AnyObject]]
}
Breaking down the method above:
1. fileprivate
The keyword, fileprivate means that the method is private and can only be
employed within the class.
2. func loadData()  ->  [[String:   AnyObject]]
The declared method, loadData(), has zero arguments and returns an
arrangement of dictionaries. Each dictionary contains elements with a value
of the type, AnyObject , and a String key.
3. guard

--- Page 91 ---
The guard statement tries to execute two statements - let path =
Bundle.main.path(forResource:      “ExploreData”,  ofType:  “plist”) and let
items =       NSArray(contentsOfFile:  path). If one statement or the other
fails, it returns an empty group of dictionaries.
4. let path =
Bundle.main.path(forResource:      “ExploreData”,  ofType:  “plist”)
When you build or create your app, a folder containing all the app’s
resources, known as the application bundle, is the outcome.
ExploreData.plist is contained in this bundle. The above statement
acquires the path to the file, ExploreData.plist and allocates it to a path
constant.
5. let items =       NSArray(contentsOfFile:  path)
If you use ExploreData.plist in your work or project, keep in mind that the
base level object is an array, and each element in the array is a dictionary.
This statement tries to produce an array from the ExploreData.plist file’s
contents and allocates it to constant items.
return items as!
[[String:AnyObject]]
The last statement returns items as a group of dictionaries, and each
dictionary is of the type, [String: AnyObject] .
Here, you have a data manager group or class, ExploreDataManager ,
which contains a method that runs data from ExploreData.plist and
appoints it to the items array.
Exhibiting Data in a View Collection
Presently, the Explore screen's view collection exhibits twenty collection
view cells, each containing a label and an empty image view. You need a
method to set the image view’s values and the label inside the cells; so for
this purpose, you will be creating a view controller, ExploreCell.
Afterward, you can structure the view controller for the view collection,
ExploreViewController , to get details for the cuisine from the
ExploreDataManager instance and give it to the collection view for an
exhibition. To set up ExploreCell , follow the steps below:

--- Page 92 ---
1. In the Project navigator, right-click on the ‘Explore’ folder, then select
‘New Group.'
2. Retitle the new group ‘View.'
3. Right-click on the ‘View’ and choose ‘New File.'
4. ‘iOS should be chosen already. Select ‘Cocoa Touch Class’ and hit
‘Next.'
5. Structure the class as displayed below:
* Class: ExploreCell
* Subclass: UICollectionViewCell
* Also create XIB: Unchecked
* Language: Swift
Click on ‘Next’.
Then ‘Create.'
A new file, ExploreCell, will be combined with your project. Click on it,
and it will show the following:
import  UIKit
class  ExploreCell: UICollectionViewCell  {
}
Set the ExploreCell class as the status of the exploreCell view collection
cell. In the Project navigator, select Main.storyboard and choose
exploreCell within Explore View Controller Scene in the document draft.
Click on the Identity inspector tab.
Set ‘Class’ to ExploreCell under the section, Custom Class . This places
an ‘ExploreCell’ instance as the controller view for exploreCell . When
done, tap Return.
To control what is being exhibited on the Explore screen by the view
collection cells, you will link the label and image view in the exploreCell
view collection cell to the ExploreCell class’ outlets. You will utilize the
assistant editor to achieve this.
Summary

--- Page 93 ---
In this chapter, you learned how to add a property list file to your project.
You also executed the ExploreItem pattern, the Explore screen’s model
objects. You learned how to set up a data manager group,
ExploreDataManager, to interpret data from ExploreData.plist, enter the
data into a group of ExploreItem instances, and give it to
ExploreViewController. You got how to create a controller view for the
exploreCell view collection cell. Lastly, structuring data source methods in
the class, ExploreViewController to utilize data from ExploreItem
instances.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Introduction to Views Table
In this chapter, we will be looking at how to effect table view controllers,
which will enable you to execute a views table that employs .plist files for a
data source for your apps.
Technical Prerequisite
We will start by learning about how table views work by effecting a view
controller that runs a table view in a code playground. Set up a new
playground and title it ViewTableBasics . You can input and run all the
programs or code demonstrated under the upcoming subheadings as you
move on.
Comprehending Views Table
A view table (UITableView) is a scrolling UIScrollView in a vertical
direction that contains a sole column of rectangular cells. Each rectangular
cell is a UITableViewCell, a subclass of UIView . A view table has three
principal functions - Navigation, Information, and Choice.
A view table can exhibit a few other features asides from its column of
cells:

--- Page 94 ---
* A table can include a header and footer view at the top and bottom,
respectively.
* The cells can be clustered into segments. Each segment can include a
header and a footer, explaining the segment and informing the user of the
location within the table.
* Tables can be adjustable: a user might have the permission to delete,
reorder and insert cells, and edit or modify data within a cell.
* Cells can include menus: a user can swat a cell sideways to disclose
buttons that function concerning that cell.
* Cells can include menus: a user can press a cell for long to show a menu
with clickable menu items.
* A table can feature a clustered format, where the cells are rooted into a
regular background that encompasses the segment header and footer details.
To comprehend how the views table works, you will execute a controller
view subclass that manages a view table in your ViewTableBasics
playground. Follow the steps below:
Open the ViewTableBasics playground you created earlier. At the
playground’s top, delete the ‘var’ statement and put in a different statement,
import PlaygroundSupport. Now, your playground should have the
following:
import UIKit
import PlaygroundSupport
The initial import statement imports or brings in the API for developing
iOS apps. The second permits the playground to exhibit a live view, which
you will employ to show the table view.
Input the code below after the ‘import’ statements to affirm or declare your
class.
class TableViewExampleController: UIViewController {}
This declares the TableViewExampleController class. This class or group
is a subgroup of UIViewController, a group that manages on-screen views.
Input the code below inside the braces to declare an array property and a
view table property to the TableViewExampleController class:

--- Page 95 ---
var tableView:UITableView?
var names: [String] = [“April”, “Raj”, “Jimmy”]
The initial line adds a view table property, tableView, an elective property
allotted a UITableView instance. The second line produces an array labeled
names .
Confirm that your program looks like the following:
class TableViewExampleController: UIViewController {
var tableView: UITableView?
var names: [String] = [“April”, “Raj”, “Jimmy”]
}
Building the Location View
Controller Group   
You will produce the class, LocationViewController as the Locations
screen’s view controller, add the table view’s outlet to it, and align it as the
data source for the table view and delegate. First, inside the location folders,
open three new folders - View, Model, and Controller. To perform this,
right-click on the ‘Location’ folder and select ‘New Group’ to produce a
new folder.
Right-click on the Locations folder inside ‘Controllers’ and choose ‘New
File.'
In the ‘Choose a template for your new file’ area, choose iOS at the top and
‘Cocoa Touch Class’ next. Then click on ‘Next.'
Input the following after ‘New File’ in the ‘Options’ screen that pops up:
Class : LocationViewController
Subclass : UIViewController
Also create XIB : Unchecked
Language : Swift
Click ‘Next’, then ‘Create’.

--- Page 96 ---
You need to connect your Table view to your LocationViewController
class to communicate with both. Follow the steps below to connect both:
1. Add the code below to the LocationViewController.swift file after the
class has been declared:
@IBOutlet weak var tableView: UITableView!
2. Saving the file using command + S. Your file should contain or include
the following:
class LocationViewController: UIViewController {
@IBOutlet weak var tableView:UITableView!
Before we begin, clean up your LocationViewController class file. Erase
everything after viewDidLoad():
Now, you can connect your table view to the class file:
1. Open Locations.storyboard and ensure that Location View Controller is
selected in the Outline view.
2. In the Utilities panel, choose the 'Collections' inspector. Under 'Outlets,'
you will see a table view with an empty circle in front of it.
Click on and drag the vacant circle to the Table view in the storyboard.
Now, you have connected your Table view to your
LocationViewController class.
Including the Delegate and Data
Source
You need to add a delegate and data source to your Table View. Follow the
steps below to include both:
In the ‘Outline’ view, choose ‘Table View .' In the ‘Utilities’ panel, select
‘Connections’ inspector.
Click on and drag from the delegate and dataSource property to the
Location View Controller within the Outline view.
Choose the Table View and select the ‘Attributes’ inspector in the ‘Utilities’
panel, if not already selected.

--- Page 97 ---
Next, for you to exhibit anything in Tableview, you need to include the
UITableViewDataSource protocol and execute the methods required by
this protocol. Type in the methods below after viewDidLoad():
func
tableView(_  tableView:   UITableView,   numberOfRowsInSection  section
:  Int) ->  Int{
return 11            }
func numberOfSections(in  tableView: UITableView)  -> Int {
return 1
}
func tableView(_  tableView:
UITableView,  cellForRowAt  indexPath:  IndexPath)  -
>  UITableViewCell  {
let cell =
tableView.dequeueReusableCell(withIdentifier:  “locationCell”,  for:  index
Path)  as UITableViewCell  cell.textLabel?.text  =  “A cell”
return cell
}
Including Location Data for the View
Table
Now that your Table View displays data, you need it to show a list of real
locations. Update your Table View to display locations:
Add the following directly under the variable, tableView :
let locations = [“Chicago”, “Aspen”, “Houston”, “New York”, “Los
Angeles”, “Philadelphia”, “San Francisco”, “San Antonio”]. You can make
a longer list.
To update your cell to show the locations, you need to substitute the
cell.textLabel?.text = “A cell” in the methods above with the following:
cell.textLabel?.text =  locations[indexPath.item]

--- Page 98 ---
Structure then run the project by using command + R or clicking on the
‘Play’ button.
You should see the list of set locations after clicking on “Select a location in
your simulator."
Building the Location Data Manager
Group
To create the Location Data Manager Group:
In the ‘Location’ folder, right-click on the 'Model’ folder, then choose ‘New
File.'
iOS should be selected already. Click on ‘Swift File,' then ‘Next.'
Title this file LocationDataManager , and click on ‘Create.'
You need to define your class. So, under the import statement, input the
following:
class  LocationDataManager {
}
Within the class definition, add the variable below to keep your array
private .
private  var  locations:[String]  =  []
Next, add the methods below after your variable:
init() {
fetch()
}
func fetch() {
for location in loadData() {
if let city = location["city"] as? String,
let state = location["state"] as? String {
locations.append("\(city), \(state)")

--- Page 99 ---
}
}
}
func numberOfItems() -> Int {
return locations.count
}
func locationItem(at index:IndexPath)  -> String  { locations[index.item]
}
Breaking down:
loadData() - This loads the location data and returns a group of
dictionaries. Each dictionary saves the state and city of a location.
fetch() - This takes the data given by loadData() , strings the state and city
for each member, and affixes the ensuing string to the array.
numberOfItems() - This returns the count or number of components in the
locations array.
locationItem(at:) - This returns the string reserved in the locations array at
specified array index.
Summary
In this chapter, we looked at table views - how to execute one. Next, we
created the LocationsViewController class, a view table controller for
Locations . Lastly, we produced a data manager group,
LocationsDataManager , to read data from Locations.plist .

--- Page 100 ---
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Introduction To MapKit
In this chapter, we will be looking at what annotations are and how to
include them in a map, build personalized annotations, and move from the
screen map to the restaurant detail screen.
Comprehending and Building
Annotations
In your map, you are going to drop pins at an individual restaurant location.
These pins are termed annotations, more precisely, MKAnnotation . ‘MK’
means MapKit and is a segment of the MapKit configuration.
An MKAnnotation or Annotation is a protocol that gives information
about a view map. Protocols issue a blueprint for properties, methods, and
other needed functionalities. MKAnnotation contains information such as
the heading and subheading of the annotation and coordinates (longitude
and latitude). To drop a pin on a map, you need to subclass MKAnnotation
.
Creating and Including Annotations
To get the annotations displayed on the map, you need to create Your
MapViewController file and link it to your map view and
UIViewController in the storyboard. To create the file:
Right-click on the ‘Map’ folder and choose ‘New File.'
iOS should be selected already. Select ‘Cocoa Touch Class,' then ‘Next.'
In the ‘Options’ screen that pops up, input the following:
Class : MapViewController
Subclass : UIViewController
Also create XIB : Unchecked
Language : Swift

--- Page 101 ---
Click on ‘Next,' then ‘Create.'
Input import MapKit under the statement, import UIKit .
Modify your class definition to include:
class MapViewController:
UIViewController,  MKMapViewDelegate {
You have just declared or defined the MapViewController class. Follow
the steps below to link the class to your map view in the storyboard.
Click on Main.storyboard . Then in ‘View Controller Scene’ for the ‘Map’
screen, click on the ‘View Controller’ symbol. Set Class to
MapViewController in the Identity inspector below Custom Class .
From the document outline, choose ‘Map View.'
Click on ‘Adjust Editor Options.'
Select ‘Assistant’ from the menu that appears.
The assistant editor will come into view, revealing
MapViewController.swift ’s contents. Tap Ctrl + Drag from the view map
to the area just below the class definition.
Add mapView in the ‘Name’ field and hit ‘Connect.'
Now, you have connected the map view to the MapViewController class.
Moving from the Screen Map to the
Restaurant Detail Screen
To move to the restaurant detail or information from the callout, you need to
update your app so that your map can also unlock the restaurant detail. To
achieve this, you need to produce a storyboard reference:
Open Main.storyboard , and drag ‘Storyboard Reference’ into
Map.storyboard , in the object library.
Open the folder and resources downloaded initially and find the storyboard
files (ReviewForm.storyboard , PhotoFilter.storyboard ,
RestaurantDetail.storyboard ).
In the Project navigator, open a new folder, name it RestaurantDetail and
copy RestaurantDetail.storyboard into it.

--- Page 102 ---
Create a second new folder, name it ReviewForm and copy
ReviewForm.storyboard into it. Then create the third folder, name it
PhotoFilter and copy PhotoFilter.storyboard into it.
You need to allot RestaurantDetail.storyboard to the storyboard reference
added earlier. Click on Main.storyboard , choose the storyboard reference
you included earlier, and then click on the Attributes inspector button. Set
Storyboard to RestaurantDetail.storyboard under ‘Storyboard
Reference’.
Ctrl + Drag from the Map View Controller symbol to the storyboard
reference and select ‘Show’ from the menu that appears to include a segue
between the storyboard reference and the Map View Controller Scene
area.
Choose the segue linking the Map View Controller Scene area to the
storyboard reference to set a segue's Identifier.
In the Attributes inspector, below Storyboard Segue , put Identifier to
showDetail .
You have now connected the view controller for the Restaurant Detai l
screen to the view controller for the Map screen utilizing a segue.
Arranging Your Code
Extensions are convenient for including functionality to standard classes,
structs, or libraries - such as ints, strings, and arrays or to your data types.
They can help you avoid clutter and make it easier to read. In this part, you
will organize your program into a class - MapViewController .
Restructuring the MapViewController
class
You will join two extensions to the class to restructure. Follow the steps
below:
1. In the Project navigator, click on MapViewController.swift . After the
closing curly brace, input the following:
// MARK: Private Extensionprivate extension MapViewController

--- Page 103 ---
{// code goes here}
// MARK: MKMapViewDelegateextension MapViewController:
MKMapViewDelegate
{// code goes here}
}
The first method will include the MapViewController class's private
methods. The second will include all the methods for
MKMapViewDelegate .
2. Erase the MKMapViewDelegate from the class definition or declaration
at the file's top. Your class declaration should resemble the following:
class MapViewController: UIViewController  {
3. Move all the methods for MKMapViewDelegate into extension number
two. It should resemble:
// MARK:  MKMapViewDelegate
extension  MapViewController:  MKMapViewDelegate {   
func mapView(_ mapView: MKMapView, annotationView      view:
MKAnnotationView, calloutAccessoryControlTapped      control:
UIControl)
{
guard let annotation = mapView.          selectedAnnotations.first
else { return }          selectedRestaurant = annotation
as?          RestaurantItem           self.performSegue(withIdentifier:
Segue.          showDetail.rawValue, sender: self)     }     func mapView(_
mapView: MKMapView, viewFor      annotation:MKAnnotation) ->
MKAnnotationView? {     
let identifier = "custompin"
guard !annotation.isKind(of: MKUserLocation.          self)
else { return nil }          var annotationView:
MKAnnotationView?    
if let customAnnotationView
=           mapView.dequeueReusableAnnotationView           (withIdentifier:

--- Page 104 ---
identifier) {
annotationView =
customAnnotationView                annotationView?.annotation
=  annotation          }
else {               let av =
MKAnnotationView(annotation:               annotation, reuseIdentifier:
identifier)           
av.rightCalloutAccessoryView
=   UIButton(type:.detailDisclosure)               annotationView =
av          }      
if let annotationView = annotationView
{                annotationView.canShowCallout = true             
annotationView.image = UIImage(named:               "custom-
annotation")          }         
return  annotationView     }
}
4. Move the showRestaurantDetail(segue:), addMap(_:), and initialize()
methods into extension one. It should resemble:
// MARK: Private Extensionprivate extension MapViewController {    
func initialize() {           mapView.delegate =
self           manager.fetch { (annotations) in           addMap(annotations)
}     }  
func addMap(_ annotations:[RestaurantItem])
{          mapView.setRegion(manager.         
currentRegion(latDelta: 0.5, longDelta: 0.5),          animated: true)         
mapView.addAnnotations(manager.annotations)
}
func showRestaurantDetail (segue:UIStoryboardSegue){        
if let viewController = segue.destination.as?
RestaurantDetailViewController,
let           restaurant =
selectedRestaurant           {    viewController.selectedRestaurant

--- Page 105 ---
=  restaurant  }
}
}
You have just organized MapViewController using extensions.
Summary
In this chapter, we talked about what MKAnnotations represent and how to
include them to use them on your map. You also learned how to personalize
your annotations. Your app now moves from hitting on an annotation to a
restaurant information or detail page. Lastly, you learned that extensions
help to sort code and include functionality without changing the main struct
or class with which you are working.
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
Introduction to JSON files
In this chapter, you will learn how to load and analyze data from JSON files
to utilize in your apps. We will also look at UITableViewDelegate methods
and procedures to move data from a controller view to another.
Technical Prerequisite
You will use your modified project from the previous chapter and continue
working on it.
Sourcing Data from JSON files

--- Page 106 ---
JSON is a way to arrange data in a format or file that can be simply read by
people and computers. Several iOS apps work with an online service based
on the web to gain access to JSON files, which are subsequently used to
supply data to the app.
To help you comprehend the JSON template, download some JSON files
and study one of the files' order. Follow the steps below:
1. In the Project navigator, open a new group inside the folder, Misc, and
title it 'JSON.'
2. Drag the downloaded JSON files into the newly created JSON folder.
3. Click on 'Finish' on the pop-up screen.
4. Click on a detail option under the JSON file.
5. You will see that the file begins with an opening bracket and ends with a
closing square bracket. Each item within the bracket contains key-value
pairs containing the file's information, parted by commas and surrounded by
curly braces. The brackets indicate arrays, and the braces indicate
dictionaries. Put differently, JSON files consist of a line-up of dictionaries,
precisely similar to the .plist files you utilized earlier.
Now, you know what a JSON file resembles. Next, let's produce a data
manager instance or class to run data from a JSON file into your
application.
Producing the Restaurant Data
Manager Class
You will create a data manager class, RestaurantDataManager, that loads
and reads data from the JSON files you added earlier. You will see that
reading data from JSON files is much like loading from a .plist file.
Before creating the RestaurantDataManager class, you need to adjust the
RestaurantItem class to comply with the Decodable convention. Enacting
this convention or protocol permits you to utilize the JSONDecoder class
to occupy RestaurantItem instances utilizing JSON files' data.
To alter the RestaurantItem class so that it complies with the Decodable
convention, take the steps below:

--- Page 107 ---
1. In the Project navigator, click on RestaurantItem.swift inside the folder,
'Model' in the 'Map' folder. Adjust the class definition for RestaurantItem
as displayed below, to follow the Decodable protocol:
class RestaurantItem: NSObject, MKAnnotation, Decodable {
2. Delete the init() method and input the following catalog to make the
RestaurantItem class comply with the Decodable protocol:
enum CodingKeys: String, CodingKey {    
case name   
case cuisines     
case lat   
case long     
case address    
case postalCode = "postal_code"     
case state    
case imageURL = "image_url"    
case restaurantID = "id"
}
The CodingKeys catalog equals the RestaurantItem class attributes to the
JSON file's keys. This enables the JSONDecoder instance to obtain figures
from the JSON file and set them to attributes in the RestaurantItem class.
If the key title does not equal the property or attribute name, you can assign
the key name to the attribute name, as shown in the previous code block for
restaurantID , imageURL , and postalCODE.
After altering the RestaurantItem class, you'll spot an error in a method -
fetch(completion:) in MapDataManager.swift. It will be fixed in the next
section, don't worry.
You will now produce the RestaurantDataManager class, which will load
and read the JSON file's data and put it into a line-up of RestaurantItem
instances. Follow the steps below.
1. Right-click on the folder, Restaurants , open a new group and name it
Model . Then, right-click on the Model group and select 'New File.'

--- Page 108 ---
2. iOS should be selected already. Select 'Swift File,' then click on 'Next.'
3. Title the file RestaurantDataManager . Hit 'Create.'
RestaurantDataManager.swift pops up in the Project navigator.
4. Input the following below the import statement to define the
RestaurantDataManager class:
class: class RestaurantDataManager { }
5. Include the property below between the curly braces to contain a group
of RestaurantItem i nstances:
private var items: [RestaurantItem] = [ ]
The items range will reserve the RestaurantItem instances obtained from
the JSON file. The private keyword denotes it can only be accessed from
within the class.
6. Input the method below after the items attribute to load a JSON file and
return an arrangement of RestaurantItem instances:
func fetch(by location:String, with filter:String = "All",
completionHandler:(_ items:[RestaurantItem]) -> Void) {     
if let file = Bundle.main.url(forResource:
location,     withExtension: "json") {
do {             
let data = try Data(contentsOf: file)               let
restaurants = try JSONDecoder().       
decode([RestaurantItem].self, from: data)
if filter != "All" {
items =  restaurants.filter
({  ($0.                    cuisines.contains(filter))})
}
else { items = restaurants }               }
}
catch {               print("there was an error \(error)")
}
}

--- Page 109 ---
completionHandler(items)  }
7. Include a method just below the fetch(by:with:completionHandler:)
method to get the number of items contained in the items array:
func numberOfItems() -> Int {     items.count
}
8. Input a method just below the numberOfItems() method to get a
RestaurantItem instance from the items array at the provided index:
func restaurantItem(at index:IndexPath) -> RestaurantItem{    
return items[index.item]
}
You will request this method to structure each view collection cell's
contents on the Restaurant List window.
Utilizing Data from JSON files in
your Application
You will be configuring the class, MapDataManager to read data from
JSON files containing restaurant details rather than .plist files.
Customizing the MapDataManager class to utilize data from the
RestaurantDataManager class
You will now revise the MapDataManager instance to utilize the
RestaurantDataManager class as a source of data fixing an error in the
instance's method - "fetch(completion:) " in the process.
1. In the Project navigator, inside the folder, Model in the Map folder, click
on MapDataManager.swift.
2. Amend the fetch(completion:) method as shown below:
func fetch (completion:(_ annotations:[RestaurantItem]) -> ()){
let manager =
RestaurantDataManager()                     manager.fetch(by: "Boston",
completionHandler: {
(items) in self.items = items

--- Page 110 ---
 completion(items)
       })
 }
Summary
We started this chapter by discussing the JSON format, and you created a
data manager group, RestaurantDataManager , that can read JSON files.
Then, you structured the MapViewController class to obtain data from the
RestaurantDataManager instance to exhibit a record of restaurants on the
screen Map.

--- Page 111 ---
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
Showing Data in a Stationary View
Table
In this chapter, you will learn how to make a views table containing static
cells exhibit data and how to produce a made-to-order map image.
Therefore, you will be able to apply these qualities in your apps.
Technical Prerequisite
You will work on the modified project from the preceding chapter.
Creating Outlets for the Restaurant
Detail View Managing Group
All of your app's screens except the Restaurant Detail screen have data on
them. This screen is checked by hitting the restaurant annotation view's
callout bubble button on the screen Map or hitting a restaurant on the
Restaurant List window. If you set up and operate your app, selecting a
restaurant on the Restaurant List window displays the stand-in Restaurant
Detail screen. Hitting on the button in the restaurant annotation view's
callout bubble on the screen, Map displays the authentic Restaurant Detail
screen, but it doesn't include any restaurant data.
To address this, you will create the outlets for the class,
RestaurantDetailViewController:
1. In the Project navigator, click on
RestaurantDetailViewController.swift.
2. Input the outlets below before the selectedRestaurant property
definition and after the class definition:
// Nav Bar
@IBOutlet weak var btnHeart: UIBarButtonItem!

--- Page 112 ---
 // Cell One
 @IBOutlet weak var lblName: UILabel!
 @IBOutlet weak var lblCuisine: UILabel!
 @IBOutlet weak var lblHeaderAddress: UILabel!
 // Cell Two
 @IBOutlet weak var lblTableDetails: UILabel!
 // Cell Three
 @IBOutlet weak var lblOverallRating: UILabel!
 // Cell Eight
@IBOutlet weak var lblAddress: UILabel!
 // Cell Nine
 @IBOutlet weak var imgMap: UIImageView!
The outlets you just created are the following:
btnHeart - is the heart-shaped button's outlet. The button is located in the
navigation bar.
lblName - This is for the label that shows the restaurant's name in the first
cell.
lblCuisine - is the outlet for the label that shows the restaurant's cuisines in
the first cell.
lblHeaderAddress - This is for the label that shows the restaurant's address
in the first cell.
lblTableDetails - is the outlet for the label that shows the restaurant's table
details in the second cell.
lblOverallRating - is for the label that shows the restaurant's overall rating
in the third cell.
lblAddress - is the outlet for the label that shows the restaurant's address in
the eighth cell.
imgMap -  is the outlet for the image view that shows the restaurant's
location map in the ninth cell.

--- Page 113 ---
In the Restaurant Detail View Controller section in
RestaurantDetail.storyboard, connect the outlets to the UI elements after
setting them up.
Showing Data in a Stationary View
Table
You won't be taking on the UITableViewDataSource convention to inhabit
the outlets since this is a stationary table view. Instead, you will draft
methods to achieve that. Follow the steps below:
1. In the Project navigator, click on
RestaurantDetailViewController.swift.
2. Add code as shown below to import the MapKit configuration after the
current import statement:
import MapKit
This is necessary since you will be utilizing the MapKit configuration's
attributes and methods to produce a map image for the image view
contained in the last cell.
3. Include a private extension consisting of code as shown below to place
the labels in the Restaurant Detail screen subsequent to the final curly
brace:
private extension  RestaurantDetailViewController {
func setupLabels()  {
guard let restaurant = selectedRestaurant else           { return }
if let name = restaurant.name  {
lblName.text = name
title = name          
}
if let cuisine = restaurant.subtitle  {
lblCuisine.text = cuisine          
}

--- Page 114 ---
if let address = restaurant.address  {
lblAddress.text = address
lblHeaderAddress.text = address          
}
lblTableDetails.text = "Table for 7, tonight at           10:00 PM"
}
}
setupLabels () is quite simple and straightforward; it obtains values from a
RestaurantItem instance and places them in the
RestaurantDetailViewController instance's outlets, except for
lblTableDetails , which is just allotted a string.
4. In the last cell, you will exhibit a map image. To achieve this, you will
produce an image from a map zone and adjust the outlet, imgMap , to show
that image. This image will also exhibit the exact custom annotation image
you adopted on the screen Map. Include the method below after
setupLabels() and before the final curly brace:
func createMap()  {
guard let annotation = selectedRestaurant,      let long
=       annotation.long, let lat  = annotation.lat else      { return }
let location = CLLocationCoordinate2D(latitude: lat,     longitude:
long)
takeSnapShot (with: location)
}
This method generates a CLLocationCoordinate2D instance utilizing the
selectedRestaurant property's latitude(lat) and longitude(long) attributes
and allocates it to location . Then, it summons the takeSnapShot(with:)
method, passing location as a framework or parameter.
5. You'll spot an error since takeSnapShot(with:) has not been executed
yet, so include the code below after the createMap() function to execute it:
func takeSnapShot(with location: CLLocationCoordinate2D) {    
let mapSnapshotOptions = MKMapSnapshotter.Options()     

--- Page 115 ---
var loc = location
let polyline = MKPolyline(coordinates: &loc,      count: 1 )    
let region =
MKCoordinateRegion(polyline.     boundingMapRect)
mapSnapshotOptions.region = region
mapSnapshotOptions.scale = UIScreen.main.scale  
mapSnapshotOptions.size = CGSize(width: 340,      height:
208)
mapSnapshotOptions.showsBuildings = true
mapSnapshotOptions.pointOfInterestFilter =     .includingAll   
let snapShotter = MKMapSnapshotter(options:
mapSnapshotOptions)  
snapShotter.start() { snapshot, error in
guard let snapshot = snapshot else  { return }
UIGraphicsBeginImageContextWithOptions
(mapSnapshotOptions.size, true, 0)       
snapshot.image.draw(at: .zero)        
let identifier = "custompin"
let annotation = MKPointAnnotation()
annotation.coordinate = location
let
pinView  =  MKPinAnnotationView(annotation:          annotation,reuseIdent
ifier: identifier)
pinView.image = UIImage(named:
"custom-          annotation")!                    
let pinImage = pinView.image
var point = snapshot.point (for : location)
let rect = self.imgMap.bounds
if rect.contains(point) {

--- Page 116 ---
let pinCenterOffset = pinView.centerOffset
point.x -= pinView.bounds.size.width/2
point.y -= pinView.bounds.size.height/ 2
point.x += pinCenterOffset.x
point.y += pinCenterOffset.y
pinImage?.draw (at: point)
}
if let image
=          UIGraphicsGetImageFromCurrentImageContext() {
UIGraphicsEndImageContext()
DispatchQueue.main.async {
self.imgMap.image = image
}
}
}
}
Simple explanation : Given a region, the above method takes a photograph
of the map at that region or location, includes the custom annotation you
applied earlier in the screen Map, turns it into an image or photograph, and
sets it to the outlet, imgMap in the RestaurantDetailViewController
instance.
6. In the private extension preceding the method, setupLabels() definition,
include a method, initialize() that calls the createMap() and setupLabels()
methods as shown below:
func initialize()  {   
setupLabels()    
createMap()
}
7. Revise the viewDidLoad() method to summon the initialize() method
when RestaurantDetailViewController loads its view:

--- Page 117 ---
override func viewDidLoad()  {
super.viewDidLoad()    
initialize()
}
Moving Data to the Restaurant Detail
View Controller Instance
After adding and connecting the Restaurant Detail screen's outlets inside
the class, RestaurantDetailViewController and adding code to the class to
obtain an instance of RestaurantItem and utilize it to occupy its outlets,
the final thing to do is move the chosen RestaurantItem instance from the
instance of RestaurantListViewController to the
RestaurantDetailViewController instance. Follow the steps below:
1. In the project navigator, click on RestaurantListViewController.swift .
2. Add the code below after viewDidLoad() to summon a
showRestaurantDetail(segue:) method if showDetail is the segue
identifier:
override func prepare (for segue:UIStoryboardSegue,
sender:Any?)  {
if let identifier = segue.identifier  {
switch identifier {
case  Segue.showDetail.rawValue:
showRestaurantDetail (segue : segue)
default:
print ("Segue not added")
}
}
}
Recollect that you included a segue between the Restaurant Detail View
Controller Scene and the Restaurant List View Controller Scene on the

--- Page 118 ---
storyboard. Before the instance, RestaurantListViewController converts
to a different controller view, the segue identifier is examined. If
showDetail is the segue identifier, then the method, showRestaurantDetail
is implemented.
Only the segue between the Restaurant Detail View Controller Scene and
the Restaurant List View Controller Scene holds the showDetail
identifier, so the RestaurantDetailViewController instance must be the
destination view controller.
3. You will notice a lapse because the method,
showRestaurantDetail(segue:) hasn't been executed. From the
RestaurantListViewController instance, this method will move the
RestaurantItem instance to the RestaurantDetailViewController
instance. Include it after the private extension's initial curly brace in the
RestaurantListViewController class:
func showRestaurantDetail (segue:UIStoryboardSegue) {    
if let viewController = segue.destination
as?     RestaurantDetailViewController, let index
=     collectionView.indexPathsForSelectedItems?.first {  
selectedRestaurant =
manager.restaurantItem(at:          index)         
viewController.selectedRestaurant
=             selectedRestaurant    
}
}
Firstly, this method inspects whether the segue destination is a
RestaurantDetailViewController instance, and obtains the index of the
view collection cell that was exploited. Then, manager gives back the
RestaurantItem instance reserved at that index, which is set to
selectedRestauran t. The selectedRestaurant property of the
RestaurantDetailViewController instance is then assigned to this
instance.
Looking at Main.storyboard , the Restaurant List View Controller
Scene in it is presently linked to View Controller Scene, which is a
placeholder. You'll revise Main.storyboard to eliminate the placeholder

--- Page 119 ---
and link the Restaurant List View Controller Scene to the Restaurant
Detail View Controller Scene in RestaurantDetail.storyboard . Follow
the steps below:
1. Click on Main.storyboard . In the document profile, click on
restaurantCell . Then, Ctrl + Drag to the RestaurantDetail storyboard
reference (produced in Chapter 16 , Introduction to MapKit) from
restaurantCell .
2. Select 'Show' from the menu that appears.
3. The placeholder scenes are not needed anymore. So, erase them from the
storyboard by clicking them and hitting 'Delete' on your keyboard.
4. Assign the segue identifier to showDetai l. As reviewed earlier, this will
assign the selectedRestaurant property of the
RestaurantDetailViewController instance. Choose the segue you just
included.
5. Click on Attributes inspector. Assign showDetail to identifier, under
"Storyboard segue."
Create and execute your project. Choose a type of cuisine and a city. Click
on a restaurant on the Restaurant List page. The selected restaurant's
details will come into view on the Restaurant List page.
Now, you've completed the execution for the Restaurant Detail and Map
screens.
Summary

--- Page 120 ---
CHAPTER NINETEEN
Introduction to Custom UIControls
In this chapter, you will learn how to generate custom UIControl groups or
classes, operate touch or tinge events, and apply review forms for your
apps.
Technical Prerequisite
You will work on the project from the chapter before.
Building a Conventional UIControl
Subclass
You will produce a conventional subclass of the class, UIView, the
RatingsView class that you will apply in both the Table View Controller
Scene in ReviewForm.storyboard and the Restaurant Detail View
Controller Scene in RestaurantDetail.storyboard . UIControl is a
subclass of UIView, and it is utilized as the superclass for class
RatingsView because instances of RatingsView have to react when the
user hits them.
A RatingsView instance will exhibit ratings as stars. The user will also be
allowed to choose half-stars. Let's start by building a subclass of the class,
UIControl . Follow the steps below:
1. Right-click on the Review Form folder and choose 'New File.'
2. iOS should be selected already. Select Cocoa Touch Class and hit 'Next.'
3. Set up the file as shown below:
Class : RatingsView
Subclass : UIControl
Language : Swift
Hit 'Next'.

--- Page 121 ---
4. Click on 'Create'. You will see RatingsView.swift in the Project
navigator.
Next, you will set the status of the object view immediately after the 0.0
label located in the Restaurant Detail View Controller Scene to
RatingsVie w. Follow the steps below:
1. In the Project navigator, amplify the RestaurantDetail folder. Click on
RestaurantDetail.storyboard and choose the object view immediately
after the 0.0 Label.
2. Hit the Identity inspector tab or button. Set class to RatingsView under
Custom Class .
Now, you will reform the RatingsView class to enable it to exhibit stars.
You'll utilize the graphic assets contained in the Assets.xcassets folder to
achieve this in the following section.
Showing stars in your personalized UIControl Subclass
In the upcoming sections of this chapter, a UIButton class' instance will be
called a button while a RatingsView class' instance will be called a ratings
view. You will include a few code lines to the RatingsView class to enable
a ratings view show stars. Use the steps below:
1. In the Project navigator, click on RatingsView.swift .
2. Input the following line of code after the RatingsView class's declaration
to generate a  property that saves a filled star's image. After typing it, you
should see the autocomplete list or menu:
let imgFilledStar = Imag
3. From the autocomplete list, select Image Literal.
4. A placeholder graphic will appear. Double-click on it.
5. You should see the custom visuals in Assets.xcassets in a pop-up box.
6. Look for and choose the red star.
7. Input the lines of code below after let imgFilledStar = (picture of a filled
star), applying Image Literal to allocate the visuals for imgEmptyStar and
imgHalfStar :
let imgHalfStar = (picture of a half-filled star)
let imgEmptyStar = (picture of an empty star)

--- Page 122 ---
var rating = 0.0
var totalStars = 5
The properties - imgEmptyStar , imgFilledStar and imgHalfStar are used
to save the star images. The 'rating' attribute is used to reserve a restaurant
rating. The sorts of stars displayed is determined by ratings ' value.
The property, totalStars, decides the number of stars to be portrayed.
8. Now, include initializers in this class. Type the code below after
declaring the property:
override init(frame: CGRect)  {  
super.init (frame: frame)
}
required init? (coder: NSCoder) {   
super.init (coder:  coder)
}
The above are typical initializers for UIView . Recall that UIControl is a
subclass of class UIView .
Giving Support for Tinge Events
You need to assist touch or tinge events to allow the ratings view react to
taps. To assist tinge events, you will revise the RatingsView class to trace
the users' screen touches and employ them to find out the rating: Follow the
steps below:
1. In the Project navigator, click on RatingsView.swift and input the
following after draw(_:) method :
override var canBecomeFirstResponder: Bool {
return tru e
}
canBecomeFirstResponder is a property of UIControl property that tells
whether an object can get to be the foremost responder. To react to tinge
events, the ratings views have to become a foremost responder. By default,
this method returns false . You will override to make it give back or return
true so the view ratings can become a first responder.

--- Page 123 ---
2. To trace the user's screen touches, type the code below after the
canBecomeFirstResponder attribute you just included:
override func beginTracking (_ touch:  UITouch, with
event  UIEvent?) -> Bool  {
guard self.isEnabled else {
return false  
}
super.beginTracking (touch, with: event)
handle(with: touch)    
return true
}
3. You'll notice an error because you are yet to execute the handle(with:)
yet. So, input the code below into the private extension for declaration and
definition:
func handle(with touch: UITouch)  {
let cellWidth = self.bounds.size.width /     CGFloat (totalStars)
let location = touch.location (in: self)
var value = location.x / cellWidth
if ((value + 0.5) < value.rounded(.up))  {
value = floor(value) + 0.5
}   else   {          value = value.rounded (.up)
}
updateRating (with: Double(value))
}
For instance, let's assume the width of the ratings view is 200.
cellWidth would be assigned to 200/5 = 40. Suppose the user tapped the
screen at spot x = 130;  y = 19. value would be allotted 130/40 = 3.25. So,
the if statement would evaluate 3.25 + 0.5 < 3.25.rounded(.up) , which
becomes (3.75 < 4.0), which gives 'true'. Therefore, value would be
assigned to floor (3.25) + 0.5, which turns into 3.0 + 0.5, which is 3.5. So, a
value of '3.5' will be passed to updateRating(with:).

--- Page 124 ---
4. You will notice an error because you are yet to execute
updateRating(with:). So, input the code below into the private extension
below the handle(with:) method:
func updateRating (with value: Double) {
if (self.rating != value && value >= 0 && value <=     Double
(totalStars))  {
self.rating = value        
setNeedsDisplay ()
}
}
From the previous example, since 3.5 is between 0 and 5, it will be
allocated to rating if it is not equivalent to the current rating 's value.
Now, you need to update the class, RestaurantDetailViewController.swift
in the Project navigator to assign isEnabled for the view ratings. In the
Project navigator, click on RestaurantDetailViewController.swift and
adjust the createRating() method, as shown below:
func createRating()  {
ratingsView.rating = 3.5
ratingsView.isEnabled = true
}
Using an Unwind Option for the
Cancel button
The Review Form page appears when you hit the Add Review button in
the Restaurant Detail page. As you did for Locations screen, you will use
an unwind method to put away the Review Form page. Follow the steps
below:
1. In the Project navigator, click on
RestaurantDetailViewController.swift.
2. Apply the unwind method in the private extension before
createRating() as shown below:

--- Page 125 ---
@IBAction func unwindReviewCancel
(segue:UIStoryboardSegue)   {}
This method is summoned when the Review Form page changes to the
Restaurant Detail page.
3. Open ReviewForm.storyboard by clicking on it and Ctrl + Drag from
the Cancel button to the Scene Dock's exit symbol.
4. Select unwindReviewCancelWithSegue in the menu that appears.
Now, you can put away the Review Form page or screen by hitting the
Cancel button.
Building the Review Form View
Managing Group
To process or operate user input, you will produce the
ReviewFormViewController class as the controller view for the Review
Form page. For now, you will design this class to take all the values from
the fields of the Review Form screen and print these values in the Debug
section. Follow the steps below:
1. Right-click on the ReviewForm folder and choose 'New File'.
2. iOS should be selected already. Select Cocoa Touch Class and hit 'Next'.
3. Structure the file as shown below:
Class : ReviewFormViewController
Subclass : UITableViewController
Also create XIB : Unchecked
Language : Swift
Hit 'Next'.
4. Click on 'Create'. You will see ReviewFormViewController.swift in the
Project navigator.
5. Erase all after viewDidLoad() and include the outlets below after
declaring the class. They correlate with the Review Form page's fields:
IBOutlet weak var ratingsView: RatingsView!

--- Page 126 ---
@IBOutlet weak var tfTitle: UITextField!
@IBOutlet weak var tfName: UITextField!
@IBOutlet weak var tvReview: UITextView!
6. You will also align the Save button's action. Add the code below after
declaring the outlets:
@IBAction func onSaveTapped (_ sender: Any)  {
print (ratingsView.rating)
print (tfTitle.text as Any)  
print (tfName.text as Any)     
print (tvReview.text as Any)
dismiss (animated: true, completion: nil)
}
The above method prints the Review Form screen's fields' contents to the
Debug section and dismisses it.
Summary
In this chapter, you produced RatingsView , a new custom subclass of
UIControl from the beginning and integrated it to the Review Form and
Restaurant Detail screens. You customized it to react to touches, enabling
a user to place a restaurant rating on the Review Form page or screen.
Lastly, you executed the ReviewFormViewController class, a controller
view for the Review Form page, and customized the Cancel button.
CHAPTER TWENTY
Introduction to Image Libraries
and Cameras

--- Page 127 ---
In this chapter, you will learn how to import or bring in photos to your apps
and add filters to them.
Technical Prerequisite
You will work on the modified project from the preceding chapter .
Comprehending Filters
iOS has a variety of innate filters that you can apply to complement photos.
You can access these filters via the Core Image repertoire or library. Core
Image is an analysis and image processing technology that renders high-
efficiency processing for video and still images. Core Image contains over
170 filters, offering you the ability to add a wide variety of cool effects to
your images.
For this project, you will be applying just ten filters. Download these filters,
put them in a .plist file, and title the file FilterData.plist. Next, import the
file into your app using the steps below:
1. In the Project navigator, produce a new group inside the folder,
PhotoFilter and title it Model .
2. Drag the FilterData.plist file to Model . Ensure you tick Copy items if
needed and hit Finish.
Building Pattern Items for the Photo
Filter Screen
This move the information in FilterData.plist into your app, you will create
a FilterItem class, that can reserve a filter's details and FilterManage r, a
data manager class that will load the FilterData.plist file and and create a
range of FilterItem instances. This is like the method used to load location
details and cuisine into your app. To start, let's make the FilterItem class:
1. In the folder, PhotoFilter , right-click on the Model folder and choose
'New File'.
2. iOS should be selected already. Select 'Swift File' and hit 'Next.'

--- Page 128 ---
3. Title this file FilterItem . Hit 'Create'. FilterItem.swift will come into
view in the Project navigator.
4. After import , input the code below inside FilterItem.swift for the
declaration and definition of the FilterItem class:
class FilterItem:NSObject  {   
let filter: String  
let name: String
init (dict:[String:AnyObject])  {  
name = dict["name"] as! String    
filter = dict["filter"] as! String
}
}
This class has an initializer and two properties. The filter property will
reserve filter names while the name property will save the short filter
description. The initializer utilizes a dictionary as a parameter to assign the
filter and name properties when one of this class' instances is created.
Now, you have produced the FilterItem class. Next, you will create
FilterManager, the data manager class. Follow the steps below:
1. In the folder, PhotoFilter , right-click on the Model folder and choose
'New File'.
2. iOS should be selected already. Select 'Swift File' and hit 'Next'.
3. Title this file FilterManager . Hit 'Create'. FilterManager.swift will
come into view in the Project navigator.
4. After import , input the code below inside FilterManager.swift for the
declaration and definition of the FilterManager class:
class FilterManager: DataManager {
func fetch (completionHandler:(_ items:[FilterItem]) -
>      Void)   {
var items: [FilterItem] = [ ]    
for data in load (file: "FilterData")   {        
items.append(FilterItem(dict: data))

--- Page 129 ---
}
completionHandler (items)
}
}
The class, FilterManager utilizes the DataManager procedure you
generated earlier in Chapter 16, Introduction to MapKit .
Building the Image Filtering
Procedure
To add a filter to a photo, you will generate a procedure, ImageFiltering ,
that executes a method, apply(filter:originalImage:). This method, which
adds a defined filter to a photo, will be available to any class that follows
this procedure. Follow the steps below:
1. Right-click on the PhotoFilter folder and choose 'New File'.
2. iOS should be selected already. Select 'Swift File' and hit 'Next'.
3. Title this file ImageFiltering . Hit 'Create'. ImageFiltering.swift will
come into view in the Project navigator.
4.  Include the code below to this file for the declaration and definition of
the ImageFiltering procedure or protocol:
import UIKi t
import CoreImage
protocol ImageFiltering  {  
func apply (filter:String, originalImage:UIImage) -
>     UIImage
}
extension ImageFiltering {
func apply (filter:String, originalImage:UIImage) -
>       UIImage  {
let initialCIImage = CIImage(image:
originalImage,      options: nil)  

--- Page 130 ---
let originalOrientation =       originalImage.imageOrientation
guard let ciFilter = CIFilter(name: filter) else  {    
print ("filter not found")    
return UIImage ()
}
ciFilter.setValue(initialCIImage,
forKey:         kCIInputImageKey)
let context = CIContext()
let filteredCIImage = (ciFilter.outputImage)!  
let filteredCGImage
=      context.createCGImage(filteredCIImage,
from:     filteredCIImage.extent)  
return UIImage(cgImage: filteredCGImage!, scale:
1.0,     orientation: originalOrientation)
}
}
Building View Controller for the
Image Filter Screen
In this section, you will produce and customize a controller view for the
view collection cells. Each cell will show a thumbnail sample of what an
image resembles with filters.
Creating a View Controller for the
View Collection cells
The Photo Filter page provides or renders the user interface that permits
the user to choose a filter to be applied to an image. If you click on
PhotoFilter.storyboard in the Project navigator, you will notice that the
view collection is already there in the View Controller Scene , but you

--- Page 131 ---
can't set the view collection cells' contents as there is no method to do so.
You will produce a class to handle them by using the steps below:
1. Right-click on the PhotoFilter folder and choose 'New File'.
2. iOS should be selected already.
3. Select Cocoa Touch Class and hit 'Next'.
4. Structure the file as shown below:
Class : FilterCell
Subclass : UICollectionViewCell
Also create XIB : Unchecked
Language : Swift
Hit 'Next'.
4. Click on 'Create'. FilterCell.swift will come into view in the Project
navigator.
5. Add the code below to this file for the declaration and definition of the
FilterCell class:
import  UIKit
class  FilterCell: UICollectionViewCell  {   
@IBOutlet var lblName: UILabel!   
@IBOutlet var imgThumb: UIImageView!
}
extension FilterCell: ImageFiltering  {
func set (image:UIImage, item:FilterItem)  {    
if item.filter != "None" {       
let filteredImg = apply(filter:
item.filter,            originalImage: image)
imgThumb.image = filteredImg       } else
{           imgThumb.image = image       }     
lblName.text = item.name
}        

--- Page 132 ---
override func awakeFromNib()  {
super.awakeFromNib()   
imgThumb.layer.cornerRadius = 9
imgThumb.layer.masksToBounds = true
}
}
6. In the Project navigator, click on PhotoFilter.storyboard.
7. Choose Collection View Cell in the View Controller Scene in the
document outline. Click on the Identity inspector button. Set 'Class' to
FilterCell , under Custom Class .
8. Click on the Attributes inspector button. Assign Filter Cell to Identifier.
9. Click on the Connections inspector button. Link the imgThumb and
lblName outlets to their similar UI elements.
Obtaining Permission to Use the
Photo Library or Camera
Apple specifies that your app must notify the user if it wants to access the
photo library or camera. If you fail to do this, your app will be declined and
not permitted on the App Store. In your project, you will reorganize the
Info.plist file to make your app show messages when accessing the photo
library or camera. Follow the steps below:
1. In the Project navigator, click on Info.plist to show a list of keys. Pass
your mouse over any current key and hit the + button.
2. A field should come into view, permitting you to enter an extra key.
3. Enter the keys below:
NSPhotoLibraryUsageDescription
NSCameraUsageDescription
4. For the value of each key, input a string that explains why you want to
use the photo library or camera to the user.

--- Page 133 ---
5. Create and execute your app. Move to the Restaurant Detail page and
hit the Add Photo button. You should see an alert.
6. Click on 'OK'. You will see the image picker.
7. Choose an image, and the Photo Filter page will show the image and a
record of thumbnails with varying filters added to them. Simply click on a
filter to apply its effects to the image.
Summary
In this chapter, you imported a .plist file, FilterData.plist , holding the
filters you are applying, created the class, FilterItem to keep filter data, and
produced a data manager class, FilterManager to read the .plist file and
inhabit a range of FilterItem instances. Next, you generated a
ImageFiltering procedure with a method to use filters on photos. Then you
produced the PhotoFilterViewController and FilterCell classes to manage
or run the view collection cells and the Photo Filter page or screen. Lastly,
you included code to PhotoFilterViewController to use a chosen filter on
an image.
CHAPTER TWENTY ONE
Comprehending Core Data
In this chapter, you will find out and grab how core data functions. You will
create components of Core Data and authorize an interface between Core
Data components and your app utilizing a data manager class. You will also
learn how to load and save photos and reviews employing Core Data.
Technical Prerequisite
You will continue using the project from the preceding chapter.
Getting Started with Core Data

--- Page 134 ---
Core Data is Apple's technique for storing app data to your gadget or
device. It gives persistence, background tasks, migration, versioning,
undo/redo and view synchronization. You can specify your relationships
and data types utilizing Xcode's data prototype or model editor, and Core
Data will automatically create class descriptions for your data types. Core
Data can then generate and handle object instances based on class
definitions or descriptions.
Core Data offers a set of groups or classes altogether called the Core Data
stack to control and carry on object instances, which are the following:
* NSManagedObjectModel : Defines your app's types, which include their
relationships and properties.
* NSManagedObject : Utilizes your app's types' instances based on data
from NSManagedObjectModel.
* NSManagedObjectContext : Tracks modifications to your app's types'
instances.
* NSPersistentStoreCoordinator: Stores and gets your app's types'
instances from reserves.
* NSPersistentContainer : Builds the store coordinator, model and context
simultaneously.
Enforcing Core Data Parts for your
Application
To enforce Core Data components for your application, you need to
generate a data model for a photo or review. You can achieve that by
producing entities in the data model editor for Xcode.
Generating a Data Model
You will create entities for photos and reviews utilizing data model editor
for Xcode and Xcode will automatically generate the class descriptions.
Let's produce reviews' entity first. Follow the steps below:
1. In the Project navigator, right-click on the Misc folder and select 'New
Group'. Title this group 'Core Data'.
2. Right-click on the 'Core Data' group and select 'New File'.

--- Page 135 ---
3. iOS should be selected already. Enter data in the filter field, and choose
'Data Model'. Hit 'Next'.
4. Title the file and click on 'Create'. You will see the data model in the
Editor area.
5. Click on the 'Add Entity' button:
6. An Entity comes up in the Entities area. This entity's Attributes shows
up next to the entity.
7. Click on the Entity and retitle it Review
8. In the Attributes section, click on the + button to generate an attribute.
Assign name to the Attribute and String to Type .
9. Add the Attributes and Types below:
Attribute Type
customerReviewString
date Date
rating Double
restaurantID Integer 32
title String
date will be set automatically when the Review instance is produced.
10. Include another attribute, uuid, type String.
11. Include a second entity, termed RestaurantPhoto , with the attributes
below. Core Data can't reserve objects of UIImage , so the type of the
photo attribute is set to Binary Data .
Attribute Type
date Date
photo Binary Data
restaurantID Integer 32
uuid String
12. For attribute uuid , make sure you uncheck Optional in the Data Model
inspector.
Now, you have created the entities needed for your app.

--- Page 136 ---
Comprehending how Loading and
Saving works
To save a review with a restaurant identifier, you will update
ReviewFormViewController. The Save button in the Review Form screen
presently prints the review when tapped, to the Debug area. To save or store
reviews, you will alter the method, onSaveTapped(_:) to store a persistent
store review when you tap the Save button. Follow the steps below:
1. Click on ReviewFormViewController.swift and include the property
below to the class ReviewFormViewController before declaring the outlet
to save the restaurant identifier:
var  selectedRestaurantID:Int?
2. Produce a private extension, pass the onSaveTapped(_:) method into it,
and alter it as shown below:
private extension ReviewFormViewController   {   
@IBAction func onSaveTapped(_ sender: Any)  {
var item = ReviewItem()     
item.name = tfName.text     
item.title = tfTitle.text
item.customerReview = tvReview.text      
item.restaurantID = selectedRestaurantID      
item.rating = Double(ratingsView.rating)     
CoreDataManager.shared.addReview(item)      
dismiss(animated: true, completion: nil)
}
}
onSaveTapped(_:) will produce an instance of ReviewItem, allocate data
gotten from the Review Form page to its properties, and summon 
CoreDataManager.shared.addReview(item) to store the review to the
resolute or persistent store.

--- Page 137 ---
Revamping the Photo Filter View
Controller group to keep photos
The program that permits the class, PhotoFilterViewController to store
photos to the persistent store is like the code you executed in the
ReviewFormViewController class for storing reviews. Now, you will
update the class PhotoFilterViewController to save images when you tap
the Save button. Follow the steps below:
1. In the Project navigator, click on PhotoFilterViewController.swift and
include the method below after the initialize() method inside the private
extension:
func checkSavedPhoto()  {
if let img = self.imgExample.image  {  
var item = RestaurantPhotoItem()   
item.photo = generate(image: img,
ratio:         CGFloat(102))
item.date = Date()      
item.restaurantID = selectedRestaurantID
CoreDataManager.shared.addPhoto(item)   
dismiss(animated: true, completion: nil)
}
}
2. You need to set off this method when you tap the Save button. Add the
method below after the onPhotoTapped(_:) method inside the private
extension:
@IBAction func onSaveTapped(_ sender: AnyObject)  {   
self.checkSavedPhoto()
}
3. To allocate the method onSaveTapped(_:) to the Save button, open
PhotoFilter.storyboard. In the Photo Filter View Controller Scene , click

--- Page 138 ---
on the Photo Filter View Controller icon. Open the Connections inspector
and Drag from the onSaveTapped action to the Save button.
You need to move the restaurant identifier to PhotoFilterViewController ,
before you can save.
Showing photos and reviews saved
on the Restaurant Detail screen
All you must do is execute the individual view controllers for the view
collection cells and view. Follow the steps below:
1. Open a new folder in your project and name it Reviews.
2. Right-click on the folder and choose 'New File'.
3. iOS should be selected already. Select Cocoa Touch Class , and click on
'Next'.
4. Structure the file as shown below:
Class : ReviewCell
Subclass : UICollectionViewCell
Also create XIB : Unchecked
Language : Swift
Hit 'Next'.
5. Click on 'Create'. You will see ReviewCell.swift in the Project navigator.
Type the code below between the curly braces:
import UIKit
class ReviewCell: UICollectionViewCell  {    
@IBOutlet weak var lblTitle: UILabel!  
@IBOutlet weak var lblDate: UILabel!   
@IBOutlet weak var lblName: UILabel!    
@IBOutlet weak var lblReview: UILabel!
@IBOutlet weak var ratingsView: RatingsView!
}

--- Page 139 ---
Computing a Restaurant's Overall
Performance
The Restaurant Detail screen's overall rating label shows 0.0, and the view
ratings show 3.5 stars, regardless of the real rating. To include a general
rating, you will obtain the ratings from all the reviews and compute their
average. Let's have a new method in CoreDataManager to achieve this.
Follow the steps below:
1. In the Project Navigator, click on CoreDataManager.swift (inside the
folder, Core Data in the Misc folder). Before the addReview(_:) method,
include the method below:
func fetchRestaurantRating(by identifier:Int) -> Double  {   
let reviews = fetchReviews(by: identifier)  
let sum = reviews.reduce(0, {$0 + ($1.rating ?? 0)})  
return sum / Double(reviews.count)
}
In the above method, all of a particular restaurant's reviews are gotten from
the persistent or resolute store and allocated to reviews .
2. In the Project navigator, click on RestaurantDetailViewController.swift
(inside the folder, RestaurantDetail )
3. Update the method, createRating() as shown below:
func createRating()  {
ratingsView.isEnabled = false  
if let id = selectedRestaurant?.restaurantID {
let value = CoreDataManager.shared
fetchRestaurantRating(by: id)
ratingsView.rating = Double(value)
if value.isNaN {          lblOverallRating.text = "0.0"      }
else {

--- Page 140 ---
let roundedValue = ((value *
10).rounded()/10)         
lblOverallRating.text = "\(roundedValue)"      
}
}
}
Summary
In this chapter, we talked about Core Data and it's different parts or
components. You generated data models, updated the class,
PhotoFilterViewController to store photos. Then you learned how
to show saved reviews on the Restaurant Detail screen. Lastly,
you learned how to compute a restaurant's general rating.

--- Page 141 ---
CHAPTER TWENTY TWO
Introduction to Apple Silicon Macs
In this chapter, you will enable your current iOS apps function well on all
iOS devices.
Technical Prerequisite
You will continue on the modified project from the preceding chapter.
Repairing User Interface Problems
An iOS app is never actually done. There are always ways for you to refine
and improve your app. Upon building and running your app, you all notice
that some of your app's screens require modifications. The Explore and
Locations screen are part. Let's make some changes to the Explore screen
and fix some issues. Follow the steps below:
1. In the Project navigator, click on ExploreViewController.swift inside
the folder, Explore.
2. After the viewDidLoad() method, include a method, viewWillAppear() ,
and include the code below to conceal the navigation controller's gray
navigation bar:
override func viewWillAppear(_ animated: Bool)   {
super.viewWillAppear(animated)
navigationController?.setNavigationBarHidden(true,     an
imated: false)
}
3. To round the view collection cells' corners on the Explore screen, click
on ExploreCell.swift (inside the View folder located in the Explore folder)
in the Project navigator, and include the code below after the declarations of
the outlet:
override func awakeFromNib()  {  

--- Page 142 ---
super.awakeFromNib()     
imgExplore.layer.cornerRadius = 9   
imgExplore.layer.masksToBounds = true
}
4. To adjust the colors of the tab bar buttons and tab bar, click on
AppDelegate.swift in the Project navigator and include a private extension
encompassing the methods below after the conclusive curly brace:
private extension AppDelegate  {   
func initialize()  {        
setupDefaultColors()     }    
func setupDefaultColors()  {
UITabBar.appearance().tintColor = .systemRed        
UITabBarItem.appearance().          setTitleTextAttribut
es([NSAttributedString.Key.foregroundColor:
UIColor.systemRed],for:           UIControl.State.selecte
d)      
UINavigationBar.appearance().tintColor
=          .systemRed       
UITabBar.appearance().isTranslucent = false     }
}
Enabling your Application work
You need to adjust the user interface to function with the iPad before
creating a Mac app from your current iOS app. To see what changes will
need to be made. To know what changes you need to make, you will build
your app and run it on the iPad simulator. Follow the steps below:
1. If the simulator is running, close it. From the list of simulators in the
Scheme menu, select iPad Pro (9.7-inch) and run your app.
2. The simulator will start and you will see it.
As can be seen, the view collection on the Explore screen a occupies the
whole expanse of the screen automatically, and the view collection cells are

--- Page 143 ---
the same size that they were on the iPhone.
Upgrading the App to run on macOS
To make your app run on Mac, you will set the development team for the
app. This depends on the project files you use. Note that this only works or
runs if you're using Xcode 12 and either macOS 11.0 Big Sur or macOS
10.5. You also need a paid or free Apple developer account. Follow the
steps below:
1. In the Project navigator, choose your project.
2. Tick the Mac checkbox in the General pane.
3. Click on Enable .
4. Observe that the checkbox for Mac is not ticked.
Your app will be edited to run on your Mac.
5. Your Mac is set as the run terminal. Create and run your application.
6. If it fails to build, click on the Issue navigator button and view the error
message.7. If it tells you that your project requires a development team, it is
because you need a paid or free developer account for your app to run on
real hardware.
8. Check to confirm that your account has been added to Xcode in the
following:
Xcode | Preferences | Accounts
9. Close the Preferences window. Click on the Signing & Capabilities tab
and choose your free or paid developer account in the Team's drop-down
menu.
10. Build your app again and rerun it. It will run on your Mac.
Summary
In this chapter, you learned how to create a Mac app from a current iOS
app.

--- Page 144 ---
CHAPTER TWENTY THREE
Introduction to SwiftUI
In this chapter, you will learn how to create a SwiftUI app that interprets
model objects, hands them over in a list, and permits navigation to another
screen accommodating a map view.
Technical Prerequisite
You will produce a new Xcode project for this chapter.
SwiftUI Xcode Project Creation
The creation of a SwiftUI Xcode project entails the same steps as a typical
Xcode project, but you will structure it to utilize SwiftUI instead of
storyboards. As will be seen, the user interface is developed entirely in
code, and you will see modifications in the user interface as you adjust your
code.
Follow the steps below to create a new SwiftUI Xcode project:
1. Build a new Xcode project.
2. Click on 'iOS'. Choose the App template, and click on 'Next'.
3. You will see the Choose options for your new project: screen. Structure
this screen as shown below:
Product Name: LetsEatSwift
UIInterface: SwiftUILife
Cycle: SwiftUI App
The other settings should be set already. Ensure all the checkboxes are
unchecked. Hit 'Next' when done.
4. Select a location to store the SwiftUI project and hit 'Create'.
5. You will see your project on the screen, with ContentView.swift chosen
in the Project navigator. ContentView.swift holds code that will produce
your app's initial view.

--- Page 145 ---
6. On the canvas, click on the Review button to set up the preview.
7. Confirm that your app's preview is shown on the canvas. If you can't
view the canvas, choose canvas from the Adjust Editor Options menu to
display it.
8. If you want more space to work, click on the Editor and Navigator
buttons to conceal the Editor and Navigator sections, and drag the Editor
area's border to increase the canvas size.
Restaurant List Screen Building
Let's modify the ContentView structure to show a particular restaurant's
data. Follow the steps below:
1. Click on the Library button. Input text in the filter field. Drag a Text
view or scene to the canvas and place it under the Project's text.
2. Xcode has included code to this text view's ContentView.swift file
automatically. Confirm that your code resembles the following:
struct ContentView: View {  
var body: some View {     
VStack {           
Text("your project name").padding()        
Text("Placeholder")
}
}
}
3. You will utilize The Tap Trailhouse's information, a Boston restaurant, as
sample data. Adjust the views text in the VStack view to display the name
and cuisines provided at the The Tap Trailhouse:
struct ContentView: View {   
var body: some View {      
VStack {        
Text ("The Tap Trailhouse ").padding()       

--- Page 146 ---
Text ("Brewery , Burgers , American ")
}
}
}
4. Confirm that the modifications are shown in the preview.
5. You'll employ a SwiftUI image view to show the restaurant's image.
Adjust your code as shown below to include a photo view to your VStack
view:
struct ContentView: View  {   
var body: some View  {        
VStack {          
Text ("The Tap Trailhouse").padding()           
Text ("Brewery, Burgers, American")        
Image (systemName: "photo")
}
}
}
6. Confirm that your canvas now shows two views, texts and an image
view.
Including Configuring Navigation
and Model Objects
Now, you have a view that can be employed to show a restaurant's details.
You will utilize this view as a SwiftUI list's cell, a repository that gives out
data in a single column. Follow the steps below:
1. Command + click on the HStack view and select Embed in List to show
a list which contains five cells on the canvas.
2. Confirm that your code resembles the following :
struct ContentView: View  {   

--- Page 147 ---
var body: some View  {     
List(0 ..<5) { item in             
Spacer ()           
VStack {             
Text ("The Tap Trailhouse")
.font(.headline)
Text("Brewery, Burgers,
American")                    .                            .font(.subheadline)              
.foregroundColor(.secondary)         
Image(systemName: "photo")            }      
Spacer()      
}   
}
}
As can be seen, the view you generated in the preceding section now
included a list structured to show five items, and you no longer need the
HStack view.
Utilizing SwiftUI and UIKit Views
Jointly
SwiftUI doesn't have an indigenous view map but you can employ the same
view map you utilized on the storyboard to provide the map. You can use
any SwiftUI's view subclass by enfolding it in a SwiftUI view that complies
with the UIViewRepresentable convention or protocol. Let's produce a
personalized view that can demonstrate a map view. Follow the steps
below:
1. Select, 'File', 'New', then 'File' in that order to open the template selector.
2. iOS should be selected already. Click on SwiftUI View in the User
Interface section and hit 'Next'.

--- Page 148 ---
3. Title the newly created file MapView.swift and click on 'Create'.
MapView.swift will come into view in the Project navigator.
4. In the new file, import MapKit and make the MapView format comply
with the UIViewRepresentable convention, as shown below. Do not worry
about the glitch that shows up, you'll rectify that in the upcoming steps:
import  SwiftUI
import MapKit
struct   MapView:  UIViewRepresentable   {
var body: some View {     
Text ("Hello World")
}
}
The UIRepresentable convention is a wrapper that permits you to utilize
any UIKit view in your SwiftUI view ranking or scale.
5. You need two methods to comply with the UIRepresentable protocol: a
method updateUIView(_:context:) that structures it and reacts to any
modifications and a method, makeUIView(context:) that produces an
MKMapView view.
Finishing the Restaurant Detail
Screen
You will produce a new SwiftUI view to portray the Restaurant Detail
screen and include the view map. Follow the steps below:
1. Select 'File', 'New', then 'File' in that order to unlock the template
selector.
2. iOS should be selected already. Click on SwiftUI View in the User
Interface area and hit 'Next'.
3. Title the newly created file RestaurantDetail.swift and click on 'Create'.
RestaurantDetail.swift comes into view in the Project navigator.
4. Declare and define the structures of RestaurantDetail_Previews and
RestaurantDetail as shown below:

--- Page 149 ---
import  SwiftUI
struct RestaurantDetail: View  {     
var  selectedRestaurant: RestaurantItem
var body: some View  {    
VStack {         
MapView (lat: selectedRestaurant.lat long:           
selectedRestaurant.long).frame(height:250)
VStack (alignment: .leading) {
Text (selectedRestaurant.title)           
.font (.largeTitle)                   
.fontWeight (.bold)
Text(selectedRestaurant.subtitle
.font(.headline)
.foregroundColor(.secondary)
Text(selectedRestaurant.address)                       
.font(.headline)        
Text(selectedRestaurant.city)  
.font(.headline)
}.padding()         
Spacer()
}
}
}
struct RestaurantDetail_Previews: PreviewProvider  {   
static var previews: some View {      
NavigationView  {       
RestaurantDetail(selectedRestaurant: testData[0])   
}

--- Page 150 ---
}
}
5. The preview shows a view map above the restaurant text views but
doesn't offer the map. As done prior, click on the Live Preview button.
6. The canvas now shows the Restaurant Detail screen with an offered
map.
Summary
In this chapter, you were briefly introduced to SwiftUI. You learned how to
create an uncomplicated version of your app employing SwiftUI.      
CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR
Introduction to Widgets
In this chapter, you will learn how to create and customize a widget and to
apply widgets for your apps.
Technical Prerequisite
You will continue with the modified project from Chapter 22, Introduction
to Apple Silicon Macs.
Getting Started with Widgets
A widget comes into view as a small pane of information on the Home
Screen for your app. It is meant to give applicable and understandable
content. For instance, if you are at a specific location, a widget could show
the restaurants at that point or location. You launch your app by tapping the
widgets.
Apple gives templates that make it very easy to include a widget to your
app.

--- Page 151 ---
Including a Widget Object to your
App
To include a widget to your project, you'll utilize the template for Widget
Extension . This template holds all the code required to exhibit a widget on
the Home Screen, establish the widget's initial view, and launch your app
when you tap the widget. Follow the steps below:
1. Select 'File', 'New', and 'Target' in that order to unlock the template
selector.
2. iOS should be selected already. Click on Widget Extension in the
Application Extension area then hit 'Next'.
3. Title the extension, and ensure the Include Configuration Intent
tickbox is unticked. Click on 'Finish'.
4. In the dialog box that comes up, click on Activate . This will produce a
scheme or design for your widget that you can utilize to run it in the
simulator for iOS.
5. Confirm that the LetsEatWidgetExtension plot or scheme and the
iPhone grade you are working on are chosen in the Scheme menu.
Set up and run your app. You will spot the widget on your screen showing
the time.
Enabling Timeline Access to your
Widget
To show details in a widget, you'll customize the timeline provider for the
widget. This produces a timeline containing timeline entries . Each entry
states the time and date at which to revise the contents of the widget. You
will use the class, MapDataManager to obtain restaurant details and
produce timeline entries for each restaurant. Follow the steps below:
1. If your app is running, stop it. In the project navigator, click on your
project's swift file inside the widget folder.
2. Click on the Resume button to sample the widget in the canvas. It
exhibits the time at the moment.

--- Page 152 ---
3. Your widget's declaration and definition conforms to the widget
framework. Adjust it as shown below:
@main
struct ProjectNameWidget: Widget  {
let kind: String = "ProjectNameWidget"  
var body: some WidgetConfiguration  {
StaticConfiguration(kind: kind, provider: Provider())  {
entry in
ProjectNameWidgetEntryView(entry: entry)
}
.configurationDisplayName("ProjectNameWidget")      
.description("This widget shows you restaurants in your
area.")   
}
}
4.  You will utilize the class, MapDataManager you generated in Chapter
16 , Introduction to MapKit to give a particular location's restaurants' list to
your widget. To get this class to your widget, in the Project navigator, click
on MapDataManager.swift (situated inside the Model folder in the Map
folder). Click on the File inspector button. Under Target Membership ,
check ProjectNameextension .
Configuring a Widget's View
You will customize your widget to match your map's appearance more
closely. In the Project navigator, click on ProjectName.swift and adjust the
form of ProjectNameEntryView as shown below:
struct LetsEatWidgetEntryView : View {
      var entry: Provider.Entry
      var body: some View {
           ZStack {

--- Page 153 ---
                Color(.darkGray)
                VStack {
                     Text(entry.restaurantTitle)
.font(.title)
                          .foregroundColor(.white)
                          .bold()
                          .minimumScaleFactor(0.5)
                     Text(entry.restaurantSubtitle)
                          .font(.body)
.foregroundColor(.gray)
                          .bold()
                          .minimumScaleFactor(0.5)
                }.padding()
           }
      }
 }
Including a Widget to the Home
Screen
You will now utilize your project's scheme and discern how to include
widgets to your Home Screen. Follow the steps below:
1. From the Scheme Menu, choose your project's scheme and the iPhone
grade you're working on.
2. Set up and run your application. From the Device menu, select 'Home'.
3. Click on and hold any application icon on the simulator's page and select
Edit Home Screen from the menu that appears. All the app icons will start
jiggling.
4. Hit the + button to show the widgets picker screen.
5. From the widget picker screen, select your project's widget.

--- Page 154 ---
6. Select a widget size and hit Add Widget .
7. Place the widget at your desired position and from the Device menu,
select Home to depart the jiggle mode.
You have included a widget to your home screen.
Summary
In this chapter, you executed a widget for your project that displays the
restaurants located in a particular location.

--- Page 155 ---
CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE
Getting Familiar with App Clips
In this chapter, you will learn how to generate, customize and test an
application clip.
Technical Prerequisite
You will continue on the modified project from Chapter 24, Introduction to
Widgets.
Knowing App Clips
An app clip provides a subdivision of your app's practicality when it's
required. It may be activated in numerous ways, such as website visitation,
QR Code scanning, or clicking an NFC tag. When activated, the app clip's
information card comes up, and clicking it launches or starts the app clip
itself. You can then utilize the app clip to fulfil a duty, and you can decide
to download the full app. An app clip and the connected app are jointly
exclusive. After installing the app, the app's app clip will be withdrawn
from your device.
Including an App Clip to your Project
Application clips don't exist individually; each app clip is part of an app. An
application can include more than a clip, with each executing a sole task. To
include an app clip to your project, you will utilize the App Clip target or
mark from the template selector. This produces a new clip for your
application and customizes a new target for it. Follow the steps below:
1. Select, 'File', 'New', and 'Target' from Xcode's menu bar in that order to
open the template selector.
2. iOS should be selected already. Select App Clip in the Application area
and hit 'Next'.
3. Ensure Storyboard is assigned to Interface: and UIKit App Delegate is
assigned to Life Cycle: . Title the target ProjectNameAppClip and click

--- Page 156 ---
on 'Finish'.
4. In the pop-up dialog box, click on Activate . This will generate a scheme
to run your application clip in the iOS simulator.
5. Confirm that the iPhone grade you're working on and your project app
clip's scheme are chosen in the Scheme menu.
Set up and run your application clip. You will spot your app clip showing an
empty view on the screen.
Customizing your App Clip
You will customize your app clip to show the Restaurant Detail screen
when called on. To achieve this, you will split your assets between your app
clip and your app. Use the steps below:
1. Pause your application clip if it's working. In the Project navigator, click
on Main.storyboard in your project app clip folder to show the storyboard
for your app clip in the Editor area.
2. The storyboard is empty now. Click on the Library button and include a
Button object to the View Controller Scene 's view. You'll utilize the
button to show the Restaurant Detail screen.
3. Click on the Auto Layout Align button with the button chosen.
Customize the button's constraints as shown below:
Horizontally in Container : Ticked with the value set to 0
Vertically in Container : Ticked with the value set to 0
When done, click on the Add 2 Constraints button. This will place the
button in the screen's middle.
4. You'll utilize a storyboard reference to connect to the
RestaurantDetail.storyboard file. Click on the Library button and include
an object of Storyboard Reference to the View Controller Scene 's right.
5. Click on the storyboard reference and click on the Attributes inspector
button. Assign RestaurantDetail to Storyboard .
6. Ctrl + Drag from the second button to the storyboard reference, and
select Present Modally in the menu that appears.
A segue will come into view between the storyboard reference and the
button.

--- Page 157 ---
7. Click on the segue. In the Attributes inspector, assign
showRestaurantDetail to Identifier and assign Full Screen to
Presentation .
Your app clip will crash or fail to build if you try to create and run it now.
To fix this, make the resources and files needed by the Restaurant Detail
screen obtainable by the app clip.
Transferring Restaurant Data to the
Restaurant Detail Screen
To imitate getting information from a code for Apple App Clip, you will
include a connected domain to your application clip target, customize your
Run scheme to replicate receiving a URL, include code to the clip to
review the URL for restaurant details, and transfer this information to the
Restaurant Detail screen. However, to achieve this, a paid Apple developer
account is required.
To include a connected domain licence to your application clip, follow the
steps below:
1. In the Project navigator, click on the project name. Choose your app
clip's target. Click on the Signing & Capabilities tab and click on the +
button.
2. From the Capabilities menu, double-click on Associated Domains .
3. The capability, Associated Domains is included in your app clip. In the
Associated Domains area, click on the + button to input a URL.
Summary
In this chapter, you executed an app clip for your app that displays a
particular restaurant's details.

--- Page 158 ---
CHAPTER TWENTY SIX
Examining and Presenting your
App to the App Store
In this chapter, you will learn how to set up and present apps to the App
Store and carry out internal and external examinations for your app.
Technical Prerequisite
A paid Apple Developer account and an Apple ID are needed to conclude
this chapter.
Obtaining an Apple Developer
Account
Follow the steps below to purchase a Sole/Individual Ownership Apple
Developer account:
1. Visit https://developer.apple.com/programs and click on Enrol.
2. Move to the screen's bottom and click on Start Your Enrollment .
3. Type your Apple ID and password when asked.
4. Click on Not Now on the Trust this browser? page.
5. Click on Continue enrolment on the web >.
6. Input your details on the Confirm your personal information page or
screen and hit Continue when completed.
7. Select Individual/Sole Proprietor on the Select your entity typ e page.
Hit Continue .
8. Tick the checkbox at the page's bottom on the Review and Accept page
or screen and hit Continue.
9. Click on Purchase on the Complete your purchase screen.

--- Page 159 ---
10. Follow the displayed directions on the screen to conclude your
purchase. You can now sign in after completing your purchase.
Touring your Apple Developer
Account
Your Apple Developer account includes everything you need to build and
present applications. You can see your membership status, include and sort
your development team's members, examine developer record or
documentation, and more.
First, you will obtain Apple Developer certificates that you will set up on
your Mac. These certificates will be employed to sign your app digitally.
Next, you need to register your application's App ID and the devices you
will be trying out your app. Subsequently, you will develop equipping
profiles that permit your apps to run on your try-out devices and permit you
to present apps to the App Store.
Presenting your App to the App Store
Before you present your application, you have to produce your app's icons
and obtain your app's screenshots. Afterwards, you can set up an Apple
Store listing, create an archive build to be transferred or uploaded, and
conclude the App Store Connect information. Then Apple will assess your
app, and if everything is okay, it will emerge on the App Store.
Generating your App's Icons
Before you submit your application to the App Store, you have to produce
an icon for it. Follow the steps to below create your app's icon:
1. Create your app's icon that is 1,024 x 1,024 pixels.
2. Utilize a website such as https://appicon.com to get all the various icon
sizes and download the icon set.
3. In the Project navigator, click on Assets.xcassets and click on the
AppIcon image set. From the icon set, drag in the icons to the right
positions based on size.

--- Page 160 ---
Generating your App's Screenshots
To generate your app's screenshots, run your application in the simulator
and click on the screenshot button. It will be saved to the desktop.
Use the iPhone 8 Plus and iPhone 11 Pro Max simulators and obtain some
screenshots of each displaying all of your app's various features.
Generating an Apple Store Listing
Now that you have your app's screenshots and icons, you will generate an
Apple Store listing. This enables customers to see your app information
before downloading it. Follow the steps below:
1. Visit https://appstoreconnect.apple.com and choose My Apps .
2. In the screen's top-left, hit the + button then choose New App .
3.  Input your application details:
Platforms : iOS
Name : The name of your app
Primary Language : The language your app uses
BundleID : The bundleID you created earlier
SKU : Any reference number or string that you use to refer to your app
User Access : Full Access
4. Hit Create when done.
The application will now be recorded or listed in your account, but you still
need to upload the app and its information. You need to generate an archive
build to upload your app.
Examining your App
Apple has a service called TestFlight that enables you to give out your apps
to examiners before submitting it to the App Store. You will need to obtain
the TestFlight app, to examine your app. Your examiners can be your team
members (internal examiners or testers) or non-members (external testers).
Examining your App Internally

--- Page 161 ---
Internal testing involves only your team members. Follow the steps below
to test your application internally:
1. Visit https://appstoreconnect.apple.com and choose My Apps .
2. Choose the app that you want to try out.
3. Click on the tab for TestFlight.
4. Click on App Store Connect Users .
5. Tick or check all of the users you want to send test builds to and click on
'Add'. They will get an invitation to test all the builds available.
6. Confirm that your examiners have been added.
Examining your App Externally
External testing is useful if you want many testers for your app and non-
members of your development team do it. Follow the steps below to test
your app externally:
1. Visit https://appstoreconnect.apple.com and choose My Apps .
2. Choose the app that you want to try out.
3. Click on the TestFlight tab.
4. Click on the + button beside Testers & Groups .
5. Enter the test group's name and hit 'Create'.
6.  Click on the + button beside Testers and select Add New Testers .
7. Enter your testers' email addresses and names, and Apple will alert them
when a build is available for testing.
8. Click on the + button or Add Build in the Builds area.
9. Select one of your builds and hit Next.
10. Input Test Information and hit Next .
11. Input What to Test and click on Submit for Review .
You now know how to examine your app builds both internally and
externally.
Summary

--- Page 162 ---
Now, you have concluded the whole process of building an application and
uploading it to the App Store

--- Page 163 ---
About Author
Robert Kissinger is a full stack developer and a tech writer who
takes active interest in reviewing gadgets and guiding beginner
programmers. He has also authored several books on gadgets,
software and websites development.
Robert has a degree in Computer Science and Engineering from the
University of Michigan, USA.