--- Page 2 ---
Verilog:
Frequently
Asked
Questions

--- Page 3 ---
Shivakumar Chonnad
Needamangalam Balachander
Verilog:
Frequently
Asked
Questions
Language, Applications and
Extensions
Springer

--- Page 4 ---
eBook ISBN: 0-387-22899-3
Print ISBN: 0-387-22834-9
Print © 2004 Springer Science + Business Media, Inc.
All rights reserved
No part of this eBook may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, recording, or otherwise, without written consent from the Publisher
Created in the United States of America
Boston
©2004 Springer Science + Business Media, Inc.
Visit Springer's eBookstore at: http://www.ebooks.kluweronline.com
and the Springer Global Website Online at: http://www.springeronline.com

--- Page 5 ---
To our wives, Manjula Chonnad
and jayanthi Balachander
To our children, Akshata Chonnad,
Puja Balachander, and Manya Balachander

--- Page 6 ---
Contents
Dedication
Contributing Authors
Foreword
Preface
Acknowledgments
1
v
xvii
xix
xxi
xxvii
BASIC VERILOG 1
1.1 Assignments 1
1.1.1
1.1.2
1.1.3
1.1.4
What are the differences between continuous and procedural
assignments?
What are the differences between assignments in initial and
always constructs?
What are the differences between blocking and nonblocking
assignments?
How can I model a bi-directional net with assignments
influencing both source and destination?
1
2
3
4

--- Page 7 ---
viii Verilog FAQs : Language, Extensions and Applications
1.2
1.2.1
1.2.2
1.2.3
1.2.4
1.2.5
1.2.6
1.3
1.3.1
1.3.2
1.3.3
1.3.4
1.3.5
1.3.6
1.3.7
1.4
1.4.1
1.4.2
1.4.3
1.4.4
1.4.5
1.4.6
Tasks and Functions
What are the differences between a  task and a function?
Are tasks and  functions re-entrant, and how are they different
from static task and function calls? Illustrate with an
example
How can I override  variables in an automatic task?
What are the  restrictions of using automatic tasks?
How can I call a function like a task, that is, not have a return
value assigned to a variable?
What are the rules governing usage of a Verilog function?
Parameters
How can I override a module’s parameter values during
instantiation?
What are the rules governing  parameter assignments?
How do I prevent selected parameters of a module from
being overridden during  instantiation?
What are the differences between using ‘ define, and using
either parameter or defparam for specifying variables?
What are the pros and cons of specifying the parameters using
the defparam construct vs. specifying during  instantiation?
What is the difference between the specparam and parameter
constructs?
What are derived parameters? When are derived parameters
useful, and what are their limitations?
Ports
What are the di fferent approaches of connecting ports in a
hierarchical design? What are the pros and cons of each?
Can there be full or partial no-connects to a multi-bit port of a
module during its instantiation?
What happens to the  logic after synthesis, that is  driving an
unconnected output port that is left open (that is, no-
connect) during its module instantiation?
What value is sampled by the logic from an input port that is
left open (that is,  no-connect) during its module
instantiation?
How is the connectivity established in Verilog when
connecting wires of different widths?
Can I use a Verilog function to define the width of a multi-bit
port, wire, or  reg type?
5
5
6
9
10
11
12
13
13
17
18
19
20
21
22
22
28
29
31
33
33
21

--- Page 8 ---
ix
2 RTL DESIGN
2.1
2.1.1
2.1.2
2.1.3
2.1.4
2.1.5
2.2
2.2.1
2.2.2
2.2.3
2.2.4
2.2.5
2.3
2.3.1
2.3.2
2.3.3
2.3.4
2.3.5
2.4
2.4.1
2.4.2
Assignments
What logic is inferred when there are multiple assign
statements targeting the same wire? 35
What do conditional assignments get inferred into? 36
What is the logic that gets synthesized when conditional
operators in a single continuous assignment are nested? 36
What value is inferred when multiple procedural assignments
made to the same reg variable in an always block? 37
Why should a nonblocking assignment be used for sequential
logic, and what would happen if a blocking assignment were
used? Compare it with the same code in a combinatorial
block. 39
Tasks and Functions
What does the logic in a function get synthesized into? What
are the area and timing implications of calling functions in
RTL? 42
What are a few important considerations while writing a
Verilog function? 44
What does the logic in a task get synthesized into? Explain
with an example 48
What are the differences between using a task, and defining a
module for implementing reusable logic? 50
Can tasks and functions be declared external to the scope of
module-endmodule? 50
Storage Elements
Summary of RTL templates for different flip-flops types 51
Summary of RTL templates for different Latch types 55
What are the considerations to be taken choosing between
flop-flops vs. latches in a design? 59
Which one is better, asynchronous or synchronous reset for
the storage elements? 61
What logic gets synthesized when I use an  integer instead of a
reg variable as a storage element? Is use of  integer
recommended? 62
Flow-control Constructs
How do I choose between a case statement and a multi-way
if-else statement? 63
How do I avoid a priority encoder in an if-else tree? 64
35
35
42
51
63

--- Page 9 ---
x Verilog FAQs : Language, Extensions and Applications
2.4.3
2.4.4
2.4.5
2.4.6
2.4.7
2.4.8
What are the differences between if-else and the (“?:”)
conditional operator? 65
What is the importance of a default clause in a  case
construct? 66
What is the difference between full_case and parallel_case
synthesis directive? 66
What is the difference in  implementation with sequential and
combinatorial processes, when the final  else clause in a multi-
way if-else construct is missing? 67
What is the difference in using (== or !=) vs. (=== or !==) in
decision making of a flow control construct in a synthesizable
code? 69
Explain the differences and advantages of  casex and casez
over the case statement? 69
2.5 Finite State Machines
2.5.1
2.5.2
2.5.3
2.5.4
2.6 Memories
2.6.1
2.6.2
2.6.3
2.7 General Design Considerations
2.7.1
2.7.2
2.7.3
2.8 Multiple clock Design Considerations
2.8.1
2.8.2
What are the differences between synchronous and
asynchronous state machines? 71
Illustrate the differences between Mealy and M oore state
machines. 71
Illustrate the differences between binary encoding and one-
hot encoding mechanisms state machines. 73
Explain a reversed case statement, and how it can be useful to
infer a one-hot state machine? 74
Illustrate how a multi-dimensional array is implemented. 75
What are the considerations in instantiating technology-
specific memories? 78
What are the factors that dictate the choice between
synchronous and asynchronous  memories? 79
What are some reusable coding practices for RTL Design? . 80
What are “snake” paths, and why should they be avoided? . 81
What are a few considerations while partitioning large
designs? 81
How can I reliably convey control information across clock
domains? 82
What is a safe strategy to transfer data of different bus-widths
and across different clock domains? 84
70
75
80
82


--- Page 10 ---
xi
2.8.3 What are a few  considerations while using FIFOs for posted
writes or prefetched reads that influence the speed of the
design? 84
2.9 Common “Gotchas” in Synthesizable RTL
2.9.1
2.9.2
2.9.3
2.9.4
What will be s ynthesized of a module with only inputs and no
outputs? 86
Why do I see latches in my  synthesized logic? 86
What are “combinatorial timing loops”? Why should they be
avoided? 86
How does the sensitivity list of a combinatorial always block
affect pre- and post- synthesis simulation? Is this still an issue
lately? 87
2.10 Coding techniques for Area Minimization 89
2.10.1
2.10.2
2.10.3
2.10.4
2.10.5
2.10.6
How do the `ifdef, `ifndef, `elsif, `endif constructs aid in
minimizing area? 89
What is “constant propagation”? How can I use constant
propagation to minimize area? 90
What happens to the bits of a  reg which are declared, but not
assigned or used? 92
How does the generate construct help in optimal area? 93
What is the difference between using `ifdef and generate for
the purpose of area minimization? 96
Can the generate construct be nested? 97
2.11 Coding for Better Static Timing Optimization 97
2.11.1
2.11.2
2.11.3
2.11.4
What is a critical path in a design? What is the importance of
understanding the critical path? 97
How does proper partitioning of design help in achieving
static timing? 98
What does it mean to “retime” logic between registers? How
does it effect functionality? 100
Why is one-hot encoding preferred for FSMs designed for
high-speed designs? 100
2.12 Design for Testability  (DFT) considerations 100
What are the main factors that affect testability of a
design? 101
My chip has on-chip tri-state buses. What are the testability
implications, and how do I take care of it? 101
2.12.1
2.12.2
85

--- Page 11 ---
xii Verilog FAQs : Language, Extensions and Applications
2.12.3
2.12.4
2.12.5
2.12.6
2.12.7
Some Flip-Flops in my chip have their resets driven by other
Flip-Flops within the chip. How will this affect the testability,
and what’s the workaround? 102
I have derived clocks in my chip. What are the testability
implications, and what is the workaround for it? 102
My chip is power sensitive, and, hence, there are gated clocks
in it. What are its testability implications and
workaround? 103
What is the implication of a combinatorial feedback loops in
design testability? 103
How does the presence of  latches affect the testability, and
what’s the workaround? 104
2.13 Power Reduction considerations
2.13.1
2.13.2
2.13.3
2.13.4
2.13.5
2.13.6
2.13.7
2.13.8
2.13.9
2.13.10
3 VERIFICATION
3.1 Messaging
3.1.1
3.1.2
What are the various methods to contain power during RTL
coding? 104
Illustrate how the switching of data input to the Flip-Flops
helps in power reduction. 105
What is the drawback of using the enable flip-flop to reduce
the power consumption? 106
Illustrate an example of clock gating to help in reduction of
power. 107
What are the side effects of latched clock gating logic, and
how is it fixed? 109
What are a few other techniques of power saving that can be
achieved during the RTL design stage? 111
What are a few system level techniques, apart from RTL, that
can influence in the reduction of power for the chip? 112
What are a few power reduction techniques that can be
achieved through static timing? 113
What are a few power reduction techniques that can be
implemented during the backend analysis? 113
What are a few power reduction techniques that can be
implemented during b oard design? 114
What are a few considerations while implementing messaging
in a model? 116
What are the different kinds of message severity levels? 117
104
115
115

--- Page 12 ---
xiii
3.1.3 Illustrate an example of how message levels are implemented
in a BFM . 118
3.2 Behavioral Functional Models (BFMs) 120
3.2.1
3.2.2
3.2.3
3.2.4
What is a Bus Functional Model (BFM)? 120
What are a few considerations that go into designing a
BFM? 121
What is a typical flow in designing a BFM? 125
How can BFMs be used to inject intentional errors in the
stimulus? 127
3.3 Bus Monitors 128
3.3.1
3.3.2
3.3.3
What are the main responsibilities of a bus monitor? 128
Illustrate with an example, the design of a bus monitor. 130
What other considerations go into  designing a Monitor? 138
3.4 Random stimulus  generation 138
3.4.1
3.4.2
3.4.3
3.4.4
3.4.5
3.4.6
3.4.7
Explain with an example, how do I generate random numbers
inVerilog? 139
Explain with an example, how do I generate random
stimulus? 140
How do I generate constrained random stimulus using
Verilog? 144
How can I be sure that the constrained random s timulus has
covered all the values in the range without repetition in a
cyclic random fashion? Illustrate this  with an example 146
How can I change th e sequence of  constrained random
stimulus? Illustrate this  with an example 150
What is weighted random stimulus? Illustrate this with an
example 151
What metrics help in def ining the completeness of the random
simulations? 158
3.5 Stimulus generation 159
3.5.1 What are some stimulus generation techniques when the
stimulus is not  reproducible using BFMs? Illustrate these with
specific examples using Verilog 160
3.6 Gate level simulations 164
3.6.1
3.6.2
What is SDF back-annotation, and how is it implemented in
Verilog testbench? 164
What are a few pre-requisites before running gate level
simulations? 165

--- Page 13 ---
xiv Verilog FAQs : Language, Extensions and Applications
3.6.3
3.6.4
What is the difference between unit delay and full timing
simulations? 166
My gate simulation is not passing, and some tests hang. What
are the key points to look for? 168
4 MISCELLANEOUS 171
4.1.1
4.1.2
4.1.3
4.1.4
4.1.5
4.1.6
4.1.7
4.1.8
4.1.9
4.1.10
4.1.11
4.1.12
4.1.13
4.1.14
4.1.15
4.1.16
4.1.17
4.1.18
4.1.19
4.1.20
4.1.21
What is the difference between a vectored and a scalared
net? 171
What is the difference between assign-deassign and force-
release? 172
What is the order of precedence when both  assign-deassign
and force-release are used on the same variable? 172
How can I abort execution of a task or a block of code? 173
What are the differences between the looping constructs
forever, repeat, while, for, and do-while? 175
What is the difference between based and unbased
numbers? 178
What does it mean to “short-circuit” the evaluation of an
expression? 178
What is the difference between the logical (==)  a n d  t h e  case
(===)  equality  operators? 179
What are the differences and similarities between the logical
(<<, >>) and the arithmetic (<<<, >>>) shift operators? 180
What is the  difference bet ween a constant part-select and an
indexed part-select of a vectored net? 181
Illustrate how memory  indirection is achieved in Verilog. 182
What is the logic synthesized when a non-constant is used as
an index in a bit-select? 183
How are string operands stored as constant numbers in a  reg
variable? 184
How can I typecast an expression to control its sign? 185
What are the pros and cons of using hierarchical names to
refer to Verilog objects? 185
Does Verilog support an  operator? 186
What is the main limitation of fork-join in Verilog, and how
is this overcome in SystemVerilog? 186
Can I return from a function without having it disabled? 188
What is strobing? How do I selectively strobe a net? 189
Summarize the mai n differences between  $strobe and
$monitor. 191
How can I selectively enable or disable monitoring? 191

--- Page 14 ---
xv
4.1.22
4.1.23
How can I specify arguments on the Verilog simulator’s
command line? 191
Can the `define be used for text substitution through
variable instead of literal substitution only? 193
5 COMMON MISTAKES 195
5.1 Some common errors that are not detected at compile-time 195
5.1.1
5.1.2
5.1.3
5.1.4
5.1.5
5.1.6
5.1.7
5.1.8
5.1.9
5.1.10
5.1.11
5.1.12
5.1.13
5.1.14
5.1.15
5.1.16
What are some ways a race condition can get created, and
how can these race conditions be a voided? 195
Illustrate how the inf inite loops get created in the looping
constructs like forever, while and for. 197
Illustrate the side-effects of specifying a function without a
range. 198
Illustrate how the errors of passing arguments to a function in
incorrect order is eliminated in Syst emVerilog. 199
Using tri-state logic inside a chip 200
Illustrate the side effects of not having a final else clause in
an if-else construct. 200
What is the side effect of not having a default clause in a case
construct 201
Illustrate example of how unintentional deadlocked situations
can happen during simulation. 202
Having a programmed loop that does not move simulation-
time 203
Illustrate the side effect of leaving an input port unconnected
that influences a logic to an output port. 204
Illustrate the side effect of not connecting all the ports during
instantiation 205
Illustrate the side effect  of forgetting to increase the width of
state registers as more states get added in a state machine. 207
Illustrate the side effect of an implicit 1 bit wire declaration of
a multi-bit port during instantiation 209
Same variable used in two loops running s imultaneously 210
Illustrate the side effects of multiple processes writing to the
same variable. 213
Illustrate the side effect of specifying delays in
assignment’s. 213

--- Page 15 ---
xvi Verilog FAQs : Language, Extensions and Applications
6 VERILOG DURING SIMULATION REGRESSIONS 215
6.1.1
6.1.2
Illustrate a few important considerations on simulation
regressions, and how Verilog can be useful for achieving the
same. 216
What coding constructs of Ve rilog can be used during the
various stages of designing a regression  environment for
simulations? 227
References
Index
233
235

--- Page 16 ---
Contributing Authors
Shivakumar Chonnad is a Staff Engineer at Synopsys Inc. He has been
working in the industry for over 15 years, covering the various stages of
ASIC Design & Verification, from specification to hardware validation.
Shiv currently deals with IP based design and  Verification. Shiv has a
Bachelor’s degree in Electronics and Communications Engineering from the
Karnatak University, India.  Shiv’s areas of pro fessional interest include
Design and Verification of IPs.
Needamangalam Balachander is a CAE Manager at Synopsys Inc. He has
been working in the industry for over 15 years,  covering the areas of
system/board-level design & diagnostics, ASIC Design and Verification, and
currently deals with mixed-signal IP design and support issues. Bala has a
Bachelor’s degree in Electronics and Communications Engineering from the
Indian Institute of Science in Bangalore, India. He  also holds a B.S degree in
Physics. Bala’s areas of professional interest include Formal Verification
methodologies, timing abstractions of mixed-signal IPs, and ATPG issues in
mixed-signal IPs.

--- Page 17 ---
Foreword
The Verilog Hardware Description Language was first introduced in
1984. Over the 20 year history of Verilog,  every Verilog engineer has
developed his own  personal “bag of tricks” for coding with Verilog. These
tricks enable modeling or verifying designs more easily and more accurately.
Developing this bag of  tricks is often based on years of trial and error.
Through experience, engineers learn that one specific coding s tyle works
best in some circumstances, while in another situation, a different coding
style is best.
As with any high-level language, Ve rilog often provides engineers
several ways to accomplish a specific task. Wouldn’t it be wonderful if an
engineer first learning V erilog could start with a nother engineer’s bag of
tricks, without having to go through years of trial and error to decide which
style is best for which circumstance? That is where this book becomes an
invaluable resource. The book presents dozens of Verilog tricks of the trade
on how to best use the Verilog HDL  for modeling designs at various level of
abstraction, and for writing test benches to verify designs. The book not only
shows th e correct ways of using Ve rilog for different s ituations, it also
presents alternate styles, and discusses the pros and cons of these styles.
When I first received a draft of this book to look over, I expected to read
a book that would only be of interest to the beginning Verilog user. I quickly
discovered that the tricks of the trade presented in this book are not just for
the novice. Even engineers with many years of experience with Verilog will
likely find insights on  using Verilog, and additional tidbits that they can add

--- Page 18 ---
xx Verilog FAQs : Language, Extensions and Applications
to their own bag of tricks. Both novice and  experienced Verilog engineers
will also benefit from the many references in the book on using the newest
generation of Verilog, SystemVerilog.
The authors of this book have done a great job of making it easier for all
engineers to become masters of Verilog.
Stuart Sutherland
Verilog, System Verilog and PLI Consultant
Sutherland HDL, Inc.
www.sutherland-hdl.com

--- Page 19 ---
Preface
Verilog has been a popular Hardware Description Language (HDL) since
the mid 80’s. Its popularity has increased with the a ddition of many new
enhancements into it. Some key reasons for the adoption of Verilog as the
language of choice for designers are the simplicity of the language usage and
the availability of high-performance simulators from multiple EDA vendors,
which results in reduced execution time for large regression simulations.
Like any other programming l anguage, experienced users of Verilog are
fully aware of the language’s capabilities, and have amassed a “bag of
tricks”, gathered in the course of execution of multiple projects. Beginners to
the language are often consumed by questions relating to the implications of
coding styles on  synthesis, static timing, power etc. It is important to factor
in these functional and environmental implications as part of the RTL c oding
stage of the ASIC design process. Not doing so could result in expensive
iteration cycles.
This book is for digital designers who use Verilog as the HDL for their
design and verification. This book will also be useful to those who have
learned Verilog, and would like to use the various language-constructs, but
have questions on the capabilities of these constructs. Although the same
functionality can be implemented by coding in many di fferent styles, some
of the questions that arise during coding would be:
Is this the right construct to infer the required logic?
Is this the best way to implement the required functionality?
Does this approach help in meeting the design constraint?

--- Page 20 ---
xxii
By reading this book,  the user is presented with:
Multiple coding styles that are appropriate to specific design constraints
such as area, timing, power, etc.
Examples of logic inferred for different constructs or coding styles
Illustrations of  commonly encountered problems, so that the user can
incorporate the style or approach that helps eliminate the problem aprior
Implications of particular approaches or styles on design constraints.
We assume that the user has a very basic familiarity with the Verilog
HDL. Readers who have a basic or intermediate level of expertise in the
language can also refer to this book to know more implementation details of
using the HDL in  the different c ontexts of design, verification and
implications to synthesis, static timing, etc.
In this book, the authors have delved into many different front end topics
of RTL such as synthesis, area, power, testability, etc. Most issues typically
encountered during these stages have been presented in the form of FAQs.
Whenever there is more than one approach to meet a requirement, the pros
and cons of each approach are presented.
We hope the book will also interest students who are learning Verilog for
the first time. We  believe that  this book provides answers to many questions
that normally pop up as students begin to use the language.
This book deals only with the front end issues, i.e., until completion of
functional verification and  synthesis with estimated w iring information. The
book does not discuss any back-end issues like placement, floor-planning, or
routing. The bac k-end processes are highly customized to the tools that
implement them. Wherever appropriate, the implications of the coding style
that would have an effect on the back-end steps are illustrated. This helps
avoid expensive iterations in revisiting th e golden code, in order to eliminate
these back-end  gotchas.
This book does not aim to teach the Ve rilog language for a novice u ser.
Instead, we endeavour to address the various issues that typically arise in
Verilog based chip design projects. Users who wish to learn Verilog from
scratch may also refer to the Verilog Language Reference Manual (LRM), or
some of the excellent books already  available like “The  Verilog  Hardware
Description Language” by  Thomas & Moorby, and “SystemVerilog for
Design” by Sua rt Sutherland, et al. The details of the syntax and the
constructs, etc. are not explained within the book, and readers can refer to

--- Page 21 ---
xxiii
the LRM for this. In case of any contradiction of the  contents in this book
with the LRM, the content in the LRM is the final authority.
Throughout the book, we have tried to use simple examples that illustrate
the point that is being made regarding the capability of the language. In
certain examples where the illustrated RTL might not have been the most
optimal way to code, we have deliberately illustrated it sub-optimally, to
show what functionality or logic gets inferred out of that style of code. These
simple working examples can be extrapolated and used in larger designs. A
few times, only a snippet of the full RTL is presented, without the obligatory
declarations (such as module, endmodule, input, output ) etc. These are
assumed predefined by the users. Wherever appropriate, we have also
included simplified schematics of the outcome of the synthesized results.
We have verified every RTL example with a simulator and a synthesis
tool. In order  to illustrate some of the capabilities or the limitations in the
language, we have c oded some RTL examples in  particular styles, or using
particular constructs. For the most part however, we have coded RTL
examples in the most timing and area optimal approach.
Although this book does not provide the answers to all the possible
questions that can arise, we hope it will address the most commonly
encountered problems. We believe that this book will help readers make
more informed choices between approaches in achieving functionality and
constraints in their VLSI projects. Based on the feedbacks we receive, and
more findings of interesting issues, we hope to keep this as an ongoing
activity of incorporating more FAQs and their answers in the future editions.
This book is unique, because it addresses complex language issues, along
with guidelines to address the coding, timing and synthesis issues, reliability
of designs, and verification in the form of FAQs. It captures many scenarios
and issues that have been encountered while dealing with complex pieces of
IP during  various stages of the project cycle. It also addresses the three
versions of Verilog that current users must contend with:
Verilog ‘95
Verilog 2001
SystemVerilog 3.1a
Wherever applicable, we have also compared the coding semantics
between the di fferent Verilog versions  from Verilog-95 to SystemVerilog.

--- Page 22 ---
xxiv
The general organization of these topics have been categorized into different
chapters as follows:
Chapter 1 : Basic Verilog  discusses a few important constructs of
Verilog and comparisons of what their implications mean in a Verilog based
environment.
Chapter 2 : RTL Design discusses the variou s RTL design and
synthesis related FAQs. This chapter will be of real interest to the RTL
designers as it discusses the comparison of different c oding constructs and
styles. The chapter  also discusses issues seen during design for area, timing,
testability an d power.
Chapter 3 : Verification  emphasizes using Verilog constructs for
Verification. The va rious issues and considerations for design of Bus
Functional Model’s and Bus Monitors are discussed in this chapter. This
chapter will be of special interest to readers with verification responsibilities.
It also discusses the various mechanisms of random stimulus generation and
examples of the different mechanisms.
Chapter 4 : Miscellaneous  has all the FAQs that do not explicitly fall in
any of the above  chapters of RTL and Verification. It discusses the subtle
and interesting scenarios of using Verilog at a system level.
Chapter 5 : Common Mistakes illustrates most of the commonly made
mistakes in the use of  Verilog for design or verification. The chapter
discusses how the functional i ssues go undetected, even though it goes
through the compile stage without any errors. Any work around’s to prevent
or detect these mistakes have  also been illustrated appropriately.
Chapter 6 : Verilog during Simulation Regressions  illustrates the
different re quirements seen during simulation regression, and how different
constructs of  Verilog can be incorporated within the testbench that will help
during regressions.
Verilog is a registered trademark of  Cadence Design Systems. Since the
above chapters have been categorized to address the different topics like
design and verification separately, some readers may find it suitable to
directly begin with these chapters. The authors, however, recommend
reading from Chapter 1 onwards until the end, to understand different issues
presented through out the design cycle.

--- Page 23 ---
Also, the Table of Contents consists directly of the FAQs themselves.
Therefore, by simply browsing through the Table of Contents, readers can
determine if their particular questions or topics have been dealt with in the
book.
xxv

--- Page 24 ---
Acknowledgments
This book would not have been possible without the help and support of
the management of Synopsys Inc. Access to Synopsys’ tools has been
instrumental in verifying the concepts and examples in this book.
We have been extremely fortunate that this book was reviewed by Stuart
Sutherland of Sutherland HDL Inc. His detailed review of the manuscript
provided expert confirmation of our  understanding of the Verilog language
and the new System Verilog extensions to Verilog.
We gratefully acknowledge the following people who despite  their work
schedules, reviewed the drafts of this book throughout its development and
providing valuable feedback and suggestions.
Warren Savage, Phil Dworsky, Arulmani Krishnan, Vijay
Coimbatore, Kiran Kavoori, Haidar Ahmad, Sourabh Tandon,
Manickam Kandaswamy, Bill Rogers, Veeresh Hullatti
Finally, we would like to express our gratitude toMichael Hackett, Carl
Harris and the staff of Kluwer Academic Publishers, for their
encouragement and support throughout the development of this book.

--- Page 25 ---
Chapter 1
BASIC VERILOG
INTRODUCTION
This chapter addresses frequently asked questions on the basics of the
Verilog hardware description language. This chapter deals with FAQs on
Verilog assignments, tasks, functions, parameters, and ports. These
constructs form a large section of the Verilog code and interconnection in
designs.
1.1 Assignments
The following section discusses the different kinds of  assignments that
are possible in Verilog, and what their features are.
1.1.1 What are the differences between continuous and procedural
assignments?
The following  table captures the di fferences between continuous and
procedural assignments:


--- Page 26 ---
2 Basic Verilog
1.1.2 What are the differences between assignments in initial and
always constructs?
While both initial and always constructs are procedural assignments,
they differ in the following ways:


--- Page 27 ---
Basic Verilog 3
1.1.3 What are the differences between blocking and nonblocking
assignments?
While both blocking and nonblocking assignments are procedural
assignments, they differ in behaviour with respect to simulation and  logic
synthesis as follows:


--- Page 28 ---
4 Basic Verilog
1.1.4 How can I model a bi-directional net with assignments
influencing both source and destination?
The assign statement constitutes a continuous assignment. The  changes
on the RHS of the statement immediately reflect on the LHS net. However,
any changes on the LHS don't get reflected on the RHS. For example, in the
following statement, changes to the rhs net will update the lhs net, but not
vice versa.
System Verilog has introduced a keyword  alias, which can be used only
on nets to have a two-way assignment. For example, in the following code,
any changes to the rhs is reflected to the lhs    , and vice versa.


--- Page 29 ---
Basic Verilog 5
Had the above alias command been assign, the outputs of the above
display outputs would be as follows:
However, with the alias command as it is, the outputs are as follows:
In the above example, any change to either side of the net gets reflected
on the other side.
1.2 Tasks and Functions
This section discusses the different FAQs on  task and  function in
Verilog. The section also  discusses a few advancements on these constructs
in System Verilog.
1.2.1 What are the differences between a task and a  function?
Both tasks and  functions in Verilog help in executing common
procedures from different places in a module. They help in w riting cleaner
and maintainable code, by avoiding replication at different places in a
module. Essentially, functions and tasks provide a “subroutine” mechanism
of reusing the same section of code at different places in a module. This
allows for easier maintenance of the code.
However, the tasks and functions differ in the following aspects:


--- Page 30 ---
6 Basic Verilog
1.2.2 Are tasks and functions re-entrant, and how are they different
from static task and function calls? Illustrate with an
example.
In Verilog-95, tasks and functions were not re-entrant. From Verilog
version 2001 onwards, the  tasks and functions are reentrant.  The reentrant
tasks have a keyword  automatic between the keyword  task and the name of
the task. The presence of the keyword  automatic replicates an d allocates the
variables within a  task dynamically for each task entry during concurrent
task calls, i.e., the  values don’t get overwritten for each task call. Without
the keyword, the  variables are allocated statically, which means these
variables are shared across different  task calls, and can hence get overwritten
by each task call.
The following example illustrates the effect of the keyword  automatic
for re-entrant tasks. This is a non-synthesizable code for the purpose of
illustration only.


--- Page 31 ---
Basic Verilog 7
In the above example,  my_value is a local variable in the  task
modify_value. Whenever this  task is called, the input in_value is
assigned to the local variable after 5 simulation timeunits. Within the  initial-
begin, there is a  fork-join, which launches two parallel processes. One starts
after simulation timeunit #1, and other after #2. The first process assigns a
value of 2 to the output of the task, and the second one assigns a value of 3
to the output of the task. Running the simulation with the above code, but
without the automatic keyword, provides the following display:
The sequence of  events without the keyword  automatic is as follows:

--- Page 32 ---
8 Basic Verilog
1. The launch of the two processes from the fork-join happens from time 0.
2. The first process calls modify_value after #1, and the local variable
my_value is assigned the value 2. This happens at t=1.
3. The second process calls modify_value after #2 and the local variable
my_value is assigned the value 3. This happens at t=2. Note that the
earlier value of 2 assigned to the local variable my_value is now
overwritten with the value 3.
4. After 4 more time units i.e., at t = 1+5=6, the display of the first  task call
becomes active. Since the latest value is now “3”, based on the previous
step, the value of “3” is displayed for  my_value, instead of what was
passed as “2”.
5. Similarly, for the second process i.e., 2+5=7, the display of the second
task call becomes active. Since the latest value is still “3”,  the value of
“3” is displayed for my_value here too.
The critical replacement  happened in step 3 above, wherein the launch of
the process actually overwrote the value of the first process before its
turn to display. This occurred  because without the  automatic keyword, the
variables within the task were static, and shared by all calls to the  task.
Now, with the keyword automatic between the  task and  task name, the
following is the output:
Following the same steps as above, this time, due to the presence of the
keyword automatic, the unique values of the variables are preserved in each
call, and not overwritten by the subsequent  task calls before the variable is
being used.
The same explanation holds  true for recursive  function calls where a
function calls itsef, with the placement of keyword  automatic between
function and the function name.
Note that the keyword  automatic has influence only within the cu rrent
hierarchy of the concurrent  task calls. The same task called within separate
module hierarchy doesn’t overlap, and hence the need for  automatic
construct doesn’t exist for that scenario.

--- Page 33 ---
Basic Verilog
The following table summarizes the differences between a reentrant  task
from a static task call:
1.2.3 How can I override variables in an automatic task?
By default, all variables in a  module are static, i.e., these variables will
be replicated for all insta nces of a module. However, in the case of  task and
function, either the task/function itself or the variables within them can be
defined as static or  automatic. The following explains the  inferences
through different combinations of the  task/function and/or its variables,
declared either as static or automatic:
No automatic definition of  task/function or its variables
This is the Verilog-1995 format, wherein the  task/function and its
variables were implicitly  static. The variables are allocated only once.
Without the mention of the  automatic keyword, multiple calls to
task/function will override their variables.
9
1.


--- Page 34 ---
10 Basic Verilog
static task/function definition
System Verilog introduced the keyword  static. When a  task/function is
explicitly defined as  static, then its variables are allocated only once, and can
be overridden. This  scenario is exactly the same scenario as before.
automatic task/function definition
From Verilog-2001 onwards, and included w ithin SystemVerilog, when
the task/function is declared as  automatic, its variables are also implicitly
automatic. Hence, during multiple calls of the  task/function, the variables
are allocated each time and replicated without any ov erwrites.
static task/function and  automatic variables
SystemVerilog also allows the use of  automatic variables in a  static
task/function. Those w ithout any changes to  automatic variables will
remain implicitly  static. This will be useful in scenarios wherein the implicit
static variables need to be initialised before the  task call, and the  automatic
variables can be allocated each time.
automatic task/function and  static variables
SystemVerilog also allows the use of  static variables in an  automatic
task/function. Those without any changes to  static variables will remain
implicitly automatic. This will be useful in scenarios wherein the static
variables need to be  updated for each call, whereas the rest can be allocated
each time.
1.2.4 What are the restrictions of using automatic tasks?
The following are the restrictions of using  automatic tasks:
Only blocking assignments can be used on automatic variables. Refer to
the earlier FAQ 1.2.2 for an example on this.
The variables in an  automatic task shall not be referenced by procedural
continuous assignments or  procedural force stateme nts. In the following
code, the variable my_value in the task cannot be referenced by an
assign statement.
2.
3.
4.
5.

--- Page 35 ---
Basic Verilog 11
They shall not be traced by system  calls like  $monitor and  $dumpvars
as illustrated in the above example.
1.2.5 How can I call a function like a task, that is, not have a
return value assigned to a variable?
Until Verilog 2001, any function call must return a value to the type reg,
integer, real, time or realtime and the code calling the function must receive
the return value. For example, the following is a syntax error:
The line in the above example is a syntax error, since the call of
my_funct does not have a destination. Only a task can be called without a
destination value.
SystemVerilog has introduced a construct  void to facilitate a voided
function call, that is, there is no destination for the function call. This would
make a function call similar to a  task call. With System Verilog, functions
can also have output and inout arguments. The  following example illustrates
a voided function call:

--- Page 36 ---
12 Basic Verilog
The above example displays the result of  int_result = 7. Some key
observations in the above example are:
The assignment to the  function my_func was not required, since its
return value is  void.
The 32 bit return range between the keyword  function and  my_func
was also not required, since it is now a  void return.
The call of the  function my_func within the  initial-begin-end does not
require a destination, since the return has been voided.
Some other intermediate variable like int_result declared in the
above example at the scope of that module can still be modified within
the voided function.
SystemVerilog als o allows functions with a re turn to be called as a task
by casting the function call to void. For example:
1.2.6 What are the rules governing usage of a Verilog function?
The following rules govern the usage of a Verilog function construct:
A function cannot advance simulation-time, using constructs like #, @.
etc.
A function shall not have nonblocking assignments.
A function without a range defaults to a one bit reg for the return value.

--- Page 37 ---
Basic Verilog 13
It is illegal to declare another object with the same name as the function
in the scope where the function is declared.
1.3 Parameters
The following section discusses a few questions about the usage of
parameters, pros and cons of the different approaches and what’s new in
System Verilog regarding parameters.
1.3.1 How can I override a module’s parameter values during
instantiation?
If a Verilog module uses parameters, there are two ways  to override its
values. Note that only parameters can  be overridden. The localparam and
specparam parameters cannot be overridden.
1.3.1.1 During instantiation
In this method, the new values are assigned inline during module
instantiation. There are two ways to override  during instantiation.
1.3.1.1.1 Assignment by ordered list
In this method, the order in which the parameters are assigned follow the
order in which they are declared within the module. For example, the
module parameter_list contains two parameters, that is, widthand
depth, that have been assigned default values within the module. It is
instantiated in the following module, example_parameter_list, with
examples of these parameters overridden with different values in different
instantiations.

--- Page 38 ---
14 Basic Verilog
The same example above can  be represented in the Verilog 2001 in the
following format, in  which the  parameter declarations between the module
and input/output declaration are now declared before the  module port list.
The restriction of using the above method is:
The parameter ove rride values have to be contiguous,  that is, any
parameter cannot be skipped during override. For example, in the above
code with U2 instantiation, the  parameterwidth and depth cannot be
skipped while trying to override width and num_buses only.

--- Page 39 ---
Basic Verilog 15
Two methods to overcome this restriction are:
Precede the order of declaring the parameters within the module with the
ones that will change, placing the subset that doesn’t change later in the
order. For example, in the above code withU0 andU1 instantiations, the
num_buses was not required to be changed, and was last in the
priority. The default value of 4, assigned to it within the  module, will
hold true in these two instantiations.
Assign values to ALL  the parameters, including the ones that don’t need
to be changed.  In instantiation U2, although only the  num_buses
parameter needed to be changed, but the width and depth
parameter’s still required to be assigned with the same default value as
in the module definition.
Assignment by name
This is a new feature, available from Verilog-2001 onwards. This is a
better approach of overriding the module  parameter by which the parameters
are overridden by explicitly specifying the  parameter name and its
overriding value. This way, the  parameter value is linked to its name, and
not position of declaration.
Using the same module parameter_list as defined above, the
following example shows the same  parameter overriding, this time
specifying by name.
1.3.1.1.2

--- Page 40 ---
16 Basic Verilog
Note that  explicit  parameter names were followed by their overriding
values in the parenthesis. In the case of U2, just specifying the  depth was
sufficient, without having to specify a nything for width parameter.
1.3.1.2 Using defparam
In this method, the  parameter within a  module is accessed by its
hierarchical name from anywhere within the scope of the hierarchy. In the
following example, the lower level module  parameter_list gets
instantiated in the example_defparam module. But the values of width
and depth are overridden using the defparam construct.

--- Page 41 ---
Basic Verilog 17
The following  bullet items summarize the advantages of using the
defparam approach:
The ordered sequence need not be maintained in overriding the
parameter values.
A specific  parameter can be overridden rather  than re-specifying all the
parameters prior to the one that’s being overridden.
Can help with code maintenance by grouping all the defparam ’s
collectively in a single place, which can be compiled with the rest of the
code.
Parameter redefinition at instantiation is the recommended style by most
expert Verilog users. There are several reasons to avoid using defparam for
parameter redefinition. Some of the reasons are:
The defparam statements if not collectively present in one place,
can be buried in any module, anywhere in the design hierarchy,
making code difficult to maintain or reuse (a form of spaghetti
code, which should always be avoided).
Since the  defparam statements can be buried anywhere in the
hierarchy, they can prevent the Verilog language compilers from
being able to do true independent compilation of the modules.
Since multiple  defparam statements can be made to the same
parameter instance, the final value of the parameter in this
situation can (and probably will be) different with different tools.
The defparam statements are not supported in the official IEEE
1364.1-2002 synthesis subset for Verilog
The IEEE 1364 standards committee is considering a proposal to
deprecate defparam in the next version of the Verilog standard,
making the defparam an obsolete construct.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1.3.2 What are the rules governing parameter assignments?
The rules governing the parameter assignments are as follows:
The parameter override at instantiation can be done either by specifying
an ordered list or by name, but not a mix of both. For example, the
following is an incorrect way of specifying both width and depth.

--- Page 42 ---
18 Basic Verilog
While assigning the  parameter during instantiation, once a  parameter
has been assigned a value, there cannot be another assignment to the
same parameter. For example, specifying the  width parameter twice
within the same instantiation is  illegal.
If a parameter is assigned both by a  defparam and in the module’s
instantiation, the  defparam’s assignment takes precedence. In the
following example, the width parameter is instantiated with value 128,
but a defparam to the same  parameter with the value 64 also follows it,
then the  defparam  gets precedence,  and width will  finally  have  the
value 64.
1.3.3 How do I prevent selected parameters of a module from being
overridden during instantiation?
If a particular  parameter within a module should be prevented from
being overridden, then it should be declared using the  localparam construct,
rather than the  parameter construct. The  localparam construct has been
introduced from Verilog-2001. Note that a  localparam variable is fully
identical to being defined as a  parameter, too. In the following example, the
localparam construct is used to specify num_bits, and hence trying to
override it di rectly gives an error message.

--- Page 43 ---
Basic Verilog 19
Note, however, that, since the width and depth are specified  using the
parameter construct, they can be overridden during instantiation or using
defparam, and hence will indirectly override the num_bits values.
In general, localparam constructs are useful in defining new and
localized identifiers whose values are  derived from regular parameters.
1.3.4 What are the differences between using `define, and using
either parameter or defparam for specifying variables?
Both `define  and parameter constructs can be used to specify constants
in the design. For example, the width parameter can be specified either as
a `define or parameter, as:
However, the following are a few differences in using the two constructs:


--- Page 44 ---
20 Basic Verilog
1.3.5 What are the pros and cons of specifying the parameters
using the defparam construct vs. specifying during
instantiation?
The advantages of specifying p arameters during instantiation method are:
All the values to all the parameters don’t need to be specified. Only
those parameters that are assigned the new values need to be specified.
The unspecified p arameters will retain their default va lues specified
within its module definition.
The order of specifying the  parameter is not relevant anymore, since the
parameters are directly specified and linked by their name.
The disadvantage of specifying parameter during instantiation are:
This has a lower precedence when compared to assigning using
defparam.
The advantages of specifying  parameter assignments using defparam
are:
This method always has precedence over specifying parameters during
instantiation.
All the  parameter value override assignments can be  grouped inside one
module and together in one place, typically in the top-level testbench
itself.
When multiple defparams for a single parameter are specified, the
parameter takes the value of the last defparam statement encountered in
the source if, and only if, the multiple  defparam’s are in the  same file. If
there are  defparam’s in different f iles that override  the same parameter,
the final value of the parameter is indeterminate.
The disadvantages of specifying parameter assignments using defparam
are:
The parameter is typically  specified by the scope of the hierarchies
underneath which it exists. If a particular module gets ungrouped in its
hierarchy, [sometimes necessary during synthesis], then the scope to
specify the parameter is lost, and is unspecified.

--- Page 45 ---
Basic Verilog 21
For example, if a module is instantiated  in a simulation testbench, and its
internal parameters are then overridden using hi erarchical defparam
constructs (For example, defparam U1.U_fifo.width = 32;).
Later, when this module is synthesized, the internal hierarchy within U1
may no longer exist in the  gate-level netlist, depending upon the
synthesis strategy chosen. Therefore post-synthesis simulation will fail
on the hierarchical  defparam override.
See the earlier FAQ 1.3.1.2 for additional disadvantages of  defparam and
why this construct should not be used.
1.3.6 What is the difference between the specparam and parameter
constructs?
The specparam is a special kind of parameter that is intended to specify
only timing and the delay values. The key differences in using the
specparam and the  parameter constructs are:
1.3.7 What are derived parameters? When are derived parameters
useful, and what are their limitations?
When one or more parameters are used to define another parameter, then
the result is a derived parameter. The derived parameter can be either of the
type parameter or localparam. In the following exa mple, two parameters,
width and depth, can be used to define a third parameter, num_bits. In
this case, the num_bits takes a value of 32.


--- Page 46 ---
22 Basic Verilog
The advantages of using derived parameters are:
Makes the RTL code reusable
Enables use of the shorter name of  num_bits instead of completely
specifying (width * depth)
The consequence of using derived parameters is that derived parameters
can be  indirectly overridden by overriding  their dependent parameters
through defparam constructs. So,  localparam constructs should be used with
care when defining derived parameters.
1.4 Ports
The following section discusses a few questions about the usage of ports,
pros and cons of the different approaches of port connections, and what’s
new in System Verilog regarding  ports.
1.4.1 What are the different approaches of connecting ports in a
hierarchical design? What are the pros and cons of each?
While instantiating the sub-modules in a given  hierarchy, the port
connections to those modules can be done in one of five ways:
1.4.1.1 Ordered port connection
In this method, the port expressions listed for module instance shall be in
the same order as the ports listed in the  module declaration, that is, the first
element in the list is connected to the first port declared, the second element
to the second port and so on. For example, in the  code below, the upper
module instantiates a lower module, and the ports are implicitly connected,
that is, the connection is based on order and position.

--- Page 47 ---
Basic Verilog 23
1.4.1.2 Named port connection
In this method, the connection between the ports can be done explicitly
by linking the two names for each side of the  connection, that is, the port
declaration name from the module declaration can be linked to the name
used in the instantiating module. The same example as above would be
connected using the named port connection as follows. Note that the order of
port connection is changed. However, it is recommended to keep the same
order for reusability and readability.
The two main advantages of this method are:
It improves readability of the connections without having to refer to the
port list of the instantiated module as the names from both sides are
explicitly specified.
The order of port connections is not relevant anymore since they are
explicitly connected.
Note that the two types of module port connections cannot be mixed,,
that is, all the connections to the ports of a particular module instance shall
be either by order or by name. For example, the following is incorrect:

--- Page 48 ---
24 Basic Verilog
1.4.1.3 Implicit .* port connection
This is a feature available fro m System Verilog only. A new  construct of
specifying “.*” during module instantiation implicitly connects the ports of
the instantiated module with the wires in the instantiating module. The
precondition being the fact that the names and sizes need to be matched
exactly. For example, in the following code, the upper module  instantiates
two lower modules.  U1 and U2 The “.*” is equivalent to  specifying three
connections of in1, in2, and  in3 between the lower  and  upper
modules.

--- Page 49 ---
Basic Verilog 25
The synthesized logic of the above code instantiates the two lower
modules, U1 and U2. The correct port connections are also established for
the ports in1, in2, and in3.
The advantage of the above method is that there is less chance of errors
during instantiation, and it avoids repetition of names that implicitly match.
Wherever exceptions and deviations exist, it needs to be explicitly specified.
In the above, the connection to u_out11, u_out12, u_out21, and
u_out22 were made explicit.
The issue in the a bove method is that the user will not be able to
physically “see” the connections.
1.4.1.4 Implicit .name port connection
This is a feature available from SystemVerilog only. A new construct of
specifying the port name  only once with the “.name” convention, where the
“name” is the port name. This avoids specifying the port name twice when
the port name and signal name are the same. The instance port name and  size
should match the c onnecting variable port name and size during module
instantiation. In the following example, the ports in1, in2 and in3 of both
the instances of lower module don’t have any connecting variable port name.

--- Page 50 ---
26 Basic Verilog
The synthesized logic of the above code instantiates the two lower
modules, U1 and U2. The correct port connections are also established for
the ports in1, in2, and in3.
The advantage of the above  method is that there is less chance of errors
during instantiation, and it avoids repetition of names that implicitly match.
Wherever exceptions and deviations exist, it needs to be explicitly specified.
In the above, the connection to  u_out11, u_out12, u_out21, and
u_out22 were made explicit.
1.4.1.5 Interface port connection
SystemVerilog has introduced a construct interface, which basically
encapsulates a bundle of nets and variables into one group. When there are
numerous ports that need to be connected to each other, it is easier to make
the connections through the  interface construct. This helps create less
verbose and more ma intainable code by grouping all common connections in
just one place. Any future changes to the interfaces can be modified in the
interface definition, and this will propagate to all the instances where this is
being used. The above example is illustrated  using the  interface construct as
follows:

--- Page 51 ---
Basic Verilog 27

--- Page 52 ---
28 Basic Verilog
In the above example, the  top_ins is the interface instantiation that
sufficed the purpose of specifying the port connection of the in1 to in3 ports.
Some of the salient points of the above example are:
The above example could also be extended to connect inter-module
connections, that is, connections to-from U1 andU2.
The interface specification and the explicit  port connections could be
mixed during one instantiation itself.
1.4.2 Can there be full or partial no-connects to a multi-bit port of
a module during its instantiation?
No. There cannot be full or partial no-connects to a multi-bit port of a
module during instantiation. For example, the following instantiation with an
intermediate bit left to float is illegal, and gives a syntax error:
In the case  where there is a genuine situation to not connect  a particular
output, then it must be connected to an unused wire, and continue the
concatenation with the appropriate bits to be connected. For example, in the
above situation, the following two additional declarations, and the
connections shown following it is a legal syntax:

--- Page 53 ---
Basic Verilog 29
Note that a floating input or an unused wire on an output will cause a “z”
propagation into the logic. The outputs will drive values onto the unused
wires, but these wires do no t fanout to other logic, and will be optimized
away by synthesis tools.
1.4.3 What happens to the logic after synthesis, that is driving an
unconnected output port that is left open (, that is, no-
connect) during its module instantiation?
An unconnected output port in simulation will drive a value, but this
value does not propagate to any other logic. In synthesis, the cone of any
combinatorial logic that drives the unconnected output will get optimized
away during boundary optimisation, that is,  optimization by synthesis tools
across hierarchical boundaries.
   In the modulelower1 is instantiated into anupper1 module, and the
same pins are connected all the way to the  top level. When this code is
synthesized, it will produce the logic as shown in figure 1-1.

--- Page 54 ---
30 Basic Verilog
Figure 1-1. No unconnected ports
When out1 is left unconnected during the instantiation of the lower
module, (this port is not going all the way to the top level of u_out 1) as
shown in this figure, then the logic gets optimized with only the AND gate
remaining, and the OR gate getting optimized away.
Similarly, when out2  is  left  unconnected during  the  instantiation  of the
lower module, the OR gate remains driving out1 all the way to the top
level, and the AND gate  gets optimized away.


--- Page 55 ---
Basic Verilog 31
Figure 1-2. Gate eating behind an  unconnected output port
1.4.4 What value is sampled by the logic from an input port that is
left open (that is, no-connect) during its module
instantiation?
By default, an unconnected input port is a floating port, and hence shows
“z” during simulation. The logic following it will also propagate the “z”,
until gated off by an AND gate. The following figure shows the  in1
floating in lower instantiation.
Since in1 was used as logic input to both the gates, and is no more
driving both of them, the logic gets optimized and simplified  into a simple
wire connection between in2 and out2. This connection still maintains the
AND’ing logic required between these two ports, as per its design.
During synthesis, it is recommended to remove the unconnected ports
using the synthesis tool commands, as it could potentially  be undesirable
during back-end processing.


--- Page 56 ---
32 Basic Verilog
Figure 1-3. When one of the inputs is floating
The default value of z for unconnected  input ports can be  changed  using
the compile r directives:
The first  directive causes all  unconnected input po rts to be pulled down
to a logic 0. The second directive causes all unconnected input ports to be
pulled up to  logic  1. The  effect  of the `unconnected_drive directives
can be turned off with the compiler directive `unconnected_drive. For
example:
and


--- Page 57 ---
Basic Verilog 33
1.4.5 How is the connectivity established in Verilog when
connecting wires of different widths?
When connecting wires or ports of different w idths, the connections are
right-justified, that is, the rightmost bit on the RHS gets connected to the
rightmost bit of the LHS and so on, until the MSB of either of the net is
reached. For example,
Note, however, that some simulation and synthesis tools will give a
Warning when  connecting nets or ports of dissimilar widths.
1.4.6 Can I use a Verilog function to define the width of a multi-bit
port, wire, or reg type?
The width elements of ports, wire or  reg declarations require a constant
in both MSB and LSB. Before Verilog 2001, it is a syntax error to specify a
function call to evaluate the value of these widths. For example, the
following code is erroneous before Verilog 2001 version.
In the above example, get_high and get_low are both function calls
of evaluating a constant result for MSB and LSB respectively.
However, Verilog-2001 allows the use of a function call to evaluate the
MSB or LSB of a width declaration.

--- Page 58 ---
34 Basic Verilog
SUMMARY
The chapter discussed a few basic questions on  the usage of Verilog
constructs during assignments and usage in  task, function, port, and
parameter. The chapter discusses the different approach of parameter and
port specifications. A few SystemVerilog enhancements to the  task and
function have also been discussed. The next chapter discusses how the
Verilog constructs are useful under the synthesis context.

--- Page 59 ---
Chapter 2
RTL DESIGN
INTRODUCTION
The chapter aims to address issues of the Verilog HDL that pertain to
RTL design and logic synthesis. The focus is, in particular, on questions of
logic inferences during synthesis, and static timing implications. The chapter
concludes with explorations of power and DFT issues.
2.1 Assignments
This section discusses how the different assignments in Verilog are done,
and what their implications are. The logic inferences of these different
assignments are also discussed in this section.
2.1.1 What logic is inferred when there are multiple assign
statements targeting the same wire?
It is illegal to specify multiple assign statements to the same  wire in a
synthesizable code that will become an output port of the module. The
synthesis tools give a syntax error that a net is being driven by more than
one source. For example, the following is illegal:

--- Page 60 ---
36 RTL Design
However, it is legal to drive a three-state wire by multiple  assign
statements, as shown in the following example:
2.1.2 What do conditional assignments get inferred into?
Conditionals in a continuous assignment ar e specified through the “ ?:”
operator. Conditionals get inferred into a multiplexor. For  example, the
following is the code for a simple multiplexor:
Figure 2-1. Conditionals infer into a multiplexor
2.1.3 What is the logic that gets synthesized when conditional
operators in a single continuous assignment are nested?
Conditional operators in a single continuous assignment can be nested as
shown in the following example. The logic gets elaborated into a tree of
multiplexors.


--- Page 61 ---
RTL Design 37
In the multiplexor units shown, it follows the logic that when sel is
high, the output Z selectsA, else selectsB.
Figure 2-2. Tree of multiplexors inferred from nested conditionals
2.1.4 What value is inferred when multiple procedural assignments
made to the same reg variable in an always block?
When there are multiple non blocking a ssignments made to the same reg
variable in a sequential  always block, then the  last assignment is picked up
for logic synthesis. For example,


--- Page 62 ---
38 RTL Design
Figure 2-3. Multiple ass ignments to the same reg variable
In the example just shown, it is the OR logic that is the last assignment.
Hence, the logic synthesized was indeed the OR gate. Had the last
assignment been the “&” operator, it would have synthesized an AND gate.
Note that the optimised synthesis results match the simulation behaviour.
The IEEE Verilog standard  defines that nonblocking assignments in a
begin… end will be assigned in the order listed. Hence, in simulation only,
the value of the last assignment is seen.
Note, also, that the rules discussed and shown in this section apply when
the variable on the LHS is not used on the RHS of subsequent assignments.
The behaviour and s ynthesis implication for when a variable is used on both
the LHS and RHS is discussed in the next FAQ.
The same would be the case for a combinatorial always block, too. For
example,
Since multiple assignments to the same variable is legal, the user has to
keep track of the statements, as to what is the final assignment required. If
only one among the multiple assignments was to be selected, it would
typically be in an  if-else tree or a  case statement. For example, the above
always block would be represented typically as follows, in which case only
one unique assignment is executed at each clock cycle.


--- Page 63 ---
RTL Design 39
In the above example, there is no ambiguity as  to which  statement gets
selected, as the branching controls are clearly defined.
2.1.5 Why should a nonblocking assignment be used for sequential
logic, and what would happen if a blocking assignment were
used? Compare it with the same code in a combinatorial
block.
As discussed in chapter 1, the main difference between the blocking and
nonblocking assignment is that, in the blocking ass ignment, the RHS
immediately gets assigned to the LHS, whereas for the nonblocking
assignment, the assignment to the LHS is scheduled after the RHS is
evaluated.
The following illustrate the  different scenarios of using blocking and
nonblocking in a sequential code.
2.1.5.1 Using blocking statements in a sequential logic
The following is an exa mple of a Ve rilog module in which th e blocking
assignments have been used in the sequential block.

--- Page 64 ---
40 RTL Design
In the above example, the assignments to the reg1, reg2, reg3,
out1 have been made as blocking assignments. The  synthesized result is a
single FF, with the d input of in1, and q output of reg3, as shown in the
following figure:
Figure 2-4. Logic inference with blocking assignments in sequential block
This is because the intermediate results betweenin1 andout1 were
stored inreg1,reg2, andreg3 in a blocking format. As a result, the
evaluation of the final result  to out1 didn’t require waiting for all the events
of the RHS to be completed. Rather, they were immediately assigned to the
LHS in the order specified. Observe that the signals reg1,reg2, and
reg3 have been optimised away by synthesis.
2.1.5.2 Using nonblocking statements in a sequential logic
The following illustration of code uses the nonblocking assignments in a
sequential block:
In the above example, the assignments to thereg1,reg2,reg3,
out1 have been made as nonblocking assignments. The synthesized result


--- Page 65 ---
RTL Design 41
is the inference of as many FFs as specified in the always block [in this case,
4 FFs].
Figure 2-5. Using nonblocking assignments in sequential logic
This is because the intermediate results betweenin1 andout1 were
stored inreg1,reg2, andreg3 in a nonblocking format. As a result,
the evaluation of the result to each individual reg required waiting for all the
events of the RHS to be completed. In this case, it was the output of the
previous register controlled by theclk event. As a result, the output is a
shift register.
2.1.5.3 Using blocking statements in a combinatorial logic
The following example illustrates the use of blocking statements in
combinatorial logic:
In the above example, the blocking assignments are made in a
combinatorial block. Note the absence of posedge and “<=”, being replaced


--- Page 66 ---
42 RTL Design
with “=”, in the assignments. The logic synthesized out of this is a simple
wire between in1 to out1.
Figure 2-6. Blocking statements in combinatorial block
This is because all the assignments have been immediate, and there is no
event to wait upon.
2.2 Tasks and Functions
Tasks and functions are primarily constructs that help in reusability of
code that is being used in multiple places. Similar to the advantages seen in
software programming,  tasks and  functions help in grouping statements
with a particular intent in one code segment, and, hence, helps in better
readability and  maintenance.
2.2.1 What does the logic in a function get synthesized into? What
are the area and timing implications of calling functions in
RTL?
Since a function does not have any construct in it that advances time, a
function basically infers combinatorial logic. If the logic falls into the
critical path of a design, it is important to write the  function in a timing
optimal fashion.
For example, the following function does an arithmetic operation using
two inputs and a control. Its result is used in another expression,  that calls
the function.


--- Page 67 ---
RTL Design 43
Whether the repeated calls to a function replicate the logic w ithin the
function or it multiplexes the logic within function, depends upon the path
where the function is used. If the calls to a function are used in different
paths, the logic gets replicated. In the above example, all the outputs had
different use of the same function, and, hence, independent logic for each
function call implemented different logic. If out1 and out1 both required
the OR gate functionality, then it would use the common logic of the two
function calls for both the outputs, that is, in effect, theout1 andout2
would be connected to the same OR gate. However, any  constant
propagation techniques (see area optimisation techniques later this chapter
for what constant propagation is) used within the  function could influence
the area.
Note that the above function call can be declared in the Verilog-2001
format, with the keyword  input being part of  function declaration, as
follows:

--- Page 68 ---
44 RTL Design
Just like any other combinatorial logic, when the endpoint of the
function is used as a D input to the flip-flop, then the function gets used to
synthesize the sequential logic, too. For example, in the above code, the
output out1 was a combinatorial output. If it is made a registered output,
then the function output is used to derive the flip-flop, as illustrated in the
following exa mple:
2.2.2 What are a few important considerations while writing a
Verilog function?
The following are a few considerations while writing a Verilog function:
Local variables within a function and the function return value should
be assigned values each time the  function is called. Non initialization
will cause a latch to be formed, as  these variables are assigned every
time upon entry of the function. For example, the if condition within the
following example does not have an else clause. Because the function is
static in simulation, it will behave as latched logic. That is, if sel is
false, the function will return the value of its previous call, as if the
result were latched.  Synthesis, however, still does not infer a latch. It
simply infers a gated function.

--- Page 69 ---
RTL Design 45
In the above  function calls, there are no variables to be initialized, and
the logic inferred is the gating function, as illustrated in this figure:
Figure 2-7. Function variables need to be assigned
Ensure that the width of the return value from a  function is specified
fully, else it will end up with a default of one  bit. For example:


--- Page 70 ---
46 RTL Design
In the above example, the desired output was actually 8 bits, but since the
width of [7:0] was not specified between th e keyword  function and the
function-name, the value returned by the  function call is only the last bit,
that is, bit [0] of  the actual intended  result.
Functions ar e basically used to  synthesize only combinatorial logic,
however, the end result of this  function can be used as a data input to
the flip-flops,  too.
Functions should not include the delay(#) or event control (@, wait)
statements.
Functions may  call other functions, but not other tasks.
A function returns a value when it is called. For more than one re turn
item, there are two ways to deal with it. Before SystemVerilog, this
could be achieved by concatenating the multiple values into the single
return. In the previous example, the outputarith is a concatenation of
multiple outputs that need to be driven by a single function call. The
desired output fields from the result are then derived to drive the
required signals. For  example,

--- Page 71 ---
RTL Design 47
In the above example, the different outputsout1 toout4 were all
concatenated and assigned to the function name. The di fferent fields can be
then extracted out of the wire to which the function drives.
With SystemVerilog, it is possible to have a formal  output and  inout
declaration. The same example in SystemVerilog is as follows:

--- Page 72 ---
48 RTL Design
Parameters and integers can be declared within a  function, but they
become local only to that function, and cannot be used outside the scope
of the function.  In the following example, the width1 parameter
defined within the function double_width is not visible outside its
scope for the $display statement tha t follows later.
2.2.3 What does the logic in a task get synthesized into? Explain
with an example.
Although it is legal to have time advancing or controlling constructs like
@ within a  task, it works only for simulations. The synthesis tools ignore all
timing constructs within a  task. Hence, a simulation and synthesis mismatch
can occur if the functionality depends upon presence of timing control
constructs within a  task. Thus, a task can be used  to synthesize basic
combinatorial logic. However, if the destination of the  task call is a storage
element used within a sequential  block, then a sequential element gets
synthesized. Whether the logic w ithin the  task will keep replicating
whenever it is called or reused depends upon the path where the task is used.
If the task call is for independent paths that can be used concurrently, then
independent logic will be synthesized for each path, and the area grows
linear to the number of tasks called. If the  task is used among common
paths, then the logic in its inputs or  outputs could be reused, depending upon
the path from which the  task is called.

--- Page 73 ---
RTL Design 49
The following is an example of a combinatorial task, namely,
combtask, which performs the task of unary OR’ing the input in1, and
producing it in the output of the task. Note that an intermediate  reg
declaration of int_out1 and int_out2 was required, because  the output
of a task can be received only by a reg and not a wire.
Many synthesis tools give a compilation error if sequential constructs are
present within a task.

--- Page 74 ---
50 RTL Design
2.2.4 What are the differences between using a task, and defining a
module for implementing reusable logic?
We have  already seen in the previous question, that a  task can be used to
call same logic multiple times. Similarly, a  module can also be defined, and
the logic w ithin it will get replicated as many times as it is instantiated. The
following table summarizes the differences between the two approaches:
2.2.5 Can tasks and functions be declared external to the scope of
module-endmodule?
Yes. With SystemVerilog, it is possible to declare the task and function
definitions external to the scope of  module-endmodule. This is not possible
with Verilog-1995 or Verilog-2001, and will give a compilation error. For
example,  in the  following code, the  task modify_value is  declared
outside the scope of the module-endmodule.


--- Page 75 ---
RTL Design 51
Similarly, with SystemVerilog, a  function-endfunction can also be
declared outside the scope of  module-endmodule within the same file. If
these contents are defined in a separate file, it needs to be part of the same
compilation command.
2.3 Storage Elements
There are primarily two kinds of storage elements inferred in logic
synthesis, that is, Flip-flops and latches. This section describes the
implementation and comparison between the two elements.
2.3.1 Summary of RTL templates for different flip-flops types
The storage element of flip-flop or latch inferred from RTL depends
upon the style in which it is written. The following is a quick summary of a
few templates of different register and latch inferences. In  the flip-flop
templates, they infer a positive edge triggered flip-flop. If the keyword
posedge clk  is replaced with negedge clk , then a negative edge
triggered flip-flop is inferred.
1. Simple D Flip-flop
Positive edge triggered, no set or reset, value of Q is unknown at  power
on

--- Page 76 ---
52 RTL Design
In SystemVerilog, the same code would be implemented with always_ff
in place of the always keyword, as f ollows:
The advantage of always_ff over always is that, always_ff indicates that
the designers intent is to model clocked sequential logic. Software tools can
then verify that the blocks sensitivity list and functionality c orrectly
represent the type of logic intended.
2. Asynchronous set FF
Positive edge triggered, active hig h asynchronous set
Replacing the  always keyword  with  always_ff above would implement
the asynchronous FF in SystemVerilog.

--- Page 77 ---
RTL Design 53
3. Asynchronous reset FF
Positive edge triggered, active high asynchronous reset
Replacing the  always keyword with always_ff above would implement
the asynchronous FF in SystemVerilog.
4. Asynchronous set and reset FF
Positive edge triggered, active high asynchronous set and reset

--- Page 78 ---
54 RTL Design
Replacing the  always keyword with  always_ff above w ould implement
the asynchronous FF in SystemVerilog.
5. Synchronous set FF
Positive edge triggered, active high synchronous set
Replacing the always keyword with  always_ff above would implement
the asynchronous FF in SystemVerilog.
6. Synchronous reset FF
Positive edge triggered, active high synchronous reset
Replacing the  always keyword with always_ff above would implement
the asynchronous FF in SystemVerilog.

--- Page 79 ---
RTL Design 55
7. Synchronous set and reset FF
Positive edge triggered, active high synchronous set and reset
Replacing the  always keyword with always_ff above would implement
the asynchronous FF in SystemVerilog.
2.3.2 Summary of RTL templates for different Latch types
1. Simple D Latch
In Verilog-2001, the same latch can be implemented as:

--- Page 80 ---
56 RTL Design
In SystemVerilog, the same latch can  be implemented using the keyword
always_latch, as:
Note that it was not required to  specify anything in the sensitivity list of
the always_latch block, as this procedure determines its sensitivity
automatically. One advantage of the always_latch keyword is that, it
explicitly shows the designer intends to model a latch. Software tools can
then check that the functionality within the procedural block  correctly
represents latched  logic. Another important advantage of  always_latch is
that, it is automatically evaluated once at simulation time 0, even if the sel
input did not change at time 0. This ensures that at the start of simulation,
the latch output is correctly reflecting the latch inputs.
2. Asynchronous set latch
In SystemVerilog, the same always procedure above can be implemented
using the always_latch, instead of the always keyword, without any
sensitivity list.

--- Page 81 ---
RTL Design 57
3. Asynchronous reset latch
In SystemVerilog, the same  always procedure above can be implemented
using the  always_latch, instead of  always keyword, without  any sensitivity
list.
4. Asynchronous set and reset latch
In SystemVerilog, the same always procedure above can be implemented
using the  always_latch, instead of  always keyword, without an y sensitivity
list.

--- Page 82 ---
58 RTL Design
A few salient points to be noted in the above inferences:
In asynchronous set or reset storage elements, the asynchronous input
has higher priority than the data input (hence, it is in the top of the  if-
else tree). Therefore, when an asynchronous input and the data inputs
arrive at the same time, the effect of the  asynchronous input  prevails at
the output.
All the above examples show a single bit implementation of the defined
storage element. By increasing the bit width of the  reg declaration, the
number of flip-flops or latches will be equal to the w idth of the  reg
declaration. For example,
reg [3:0] out1;
This will create 4 of the out1 flip-flops or latches.
There need not be one always block for each flip-flop. Many flip-flops
can be inferred within an  always block. But the restriction in this
approach is that  ALL of the FF definitions within that  always block will
infer the same type of flip-flop as  defined in the sensitivity list of the
always block.
Although normally all the bits of the storage elements are either set or
reset, it is not uncommon to assign va lues of 1’b1 and 1’b0 to the
different bits of the same register during the set or reset condition. For
example, in this 4 bit FF, the reset values of the flops are 4’b1010.

--- Page 83 ---
RTL Design 59
A common coding practice is to use only nonblocking assignments for
inferring flip-flops and latches, and only blocking for  inferring
combinatorial logic.
Using SystemVerilog frees the user from specifying the elements of the
sensitivity list for the latch inferences. It also ensures that the latch
output values are c orrect at the start of simulation. These features would
reduce the possibility of s imulation and s ynthesis mismatches.
2.3.3 What are the considerations to be taken choosing between
flop-flops vs. latches in a design?
Both latches and FFs have their relative advantages and disadvantages in
their implications, as summarized in the table below:
(*) Time borrowing is a mechanism in which a latch based design takes
advantage of the transparency between two back to back latches that are
enabled in order to meet the propagation delay between the two latches. This
is best illustrated by a simple analysis as follows:


--- Page 84 ---
60 RTL Design
Consider two  latches L1 and L2. While both of them have the same
clock frequency, the enables for L1 and L2 are opposite in polarity. The L1
is enabled in the high phase of the clock, while  L2 is enabled in the low
phase of the clock. This connection is shown in the following figure:
Figure 2-8. Illustration of time borrowing in latches
For the purpose of simplifying the analysis, the delay or
delay of L1 and L2 is assumed to be 0ns. The propagation delay of the
combinatorial logic is 7.5ns. If it were a flip-flop based design with the same
rising edge clock in place of c1k1 and clk2, this would be clearly a setup
violation. However, in a latch based design above, since the delay through
latch is 0ns, the input  in1 is latched immediately at the output of L1, and
begins to propagate. The propagation delay enters into the ON time of the
second latch L2, and settles at some point during its ON time. The
propagation delay has caused the logic to borrow time from the second latch,
in order to settle its outputs, and hence is called time borrowing.


--- Page 85 ---
RTL Design 61
2.3.4 Which one is better, asynchronous or synchronous reset for
the storage elements?
The following table summarizes the comparison between using
synchronous and asynchronous reset logic for a design:


--- Page 86 ---
62 RTL Design
2.3.5 What logic gets synthesized when I use an integer instead of a
reg variable as a storage element? Is use of integer
recommended?
An integer can take the place of a  reg as a storage element. An example
to illustrate this is as follows:
In this example, the variable  int_tmp is defined as an  integer, instead
of the reg that it would normally be (the  reg declaration is commented in the


--- Page 87 ---
RTL Design 63
example for illustration). Note that, although the  default width of the  integer
declaration is 32  bits,  the final  result  of the int_tmp registers synthesis
yield is only 4 bits. This is becau se the optimiser in the synthesis tool
removes the unnecessary higher order bits, in order to minimize the area.
Although the use of integer as shown above is a legal construct, it  is not
recommended for the synthesis of storage elements.
2.4 Flow-control Constructs
Verilog has primarily three kinds of flow control constructs, that is,  case,
if-else and “ ?:” conditionals. The “ ?:” construct has already been discussed
earlier FAQ 2.1.2 and 2.1.3. This section primarily illustrates the
implementation details and  questions about case and if-else constructs.
2.4.1 How do I choose between a case statement and a multi-way
if-else statement?
Both case and  if-else are flow control constructs. Functionally in
simulation they yield similar results. While both these constructs get
elaborated into combinatorial logic, the usage scenarios for these constructs
are different.
A case statement is typically cho sen for the following scenarios:
When the conditionals are mutually exclusive and only one variable
controls the flow in the case statement. The case variable itself could be
a concatenation of different signals.
To specify the various state transitions of a finite state machine
Use of casex and casez allows use of x and  z to represent don’t-carebits
in the control expression
A multi way  if statement is typically chosen in the following scenarios:
Synthesizing priority encoded logic
When the conditionals are not mutually exclusive and more general in
using multiple expressions for the  condition expression.
The advantages of using the case over if-else is as follows:
case statements are more readable than  if-else
When used for state machines, there is a direct mapping between the
state machine’s “bubble diagram” and the case description.

--- Page 88 ---
64 RTL Design
In a  case construct, if all the possible cases are not specified, and the
default clause is missing, a latch is inferred. Likewise, for an  if-else
construct, if a final else clause is miss ing, a latch is inferred.
2.4.2 How do I avoid a priority encoder in an if-else tree?
An if-else tree may synthesize to a priority encoded logic. For example,
the following code produces a priority encoder:
In simulation, the if-else-if series is evaluated in the order listed. If in0
and in1 were both true, the in0 branch would be taken, because in0 is
evaluated first. Synthesis tools will create a priority encoded logic in this
example, so that the logic generated will behave the same as the RTL
simulation.
If a priority encoder is not the intention, the logic needs to be synthesized
in parallel. The keyword  unique that is introduced in the SystemVerilog can
be used for this purpose. The  unique keyword indicates  that the order of
decisions is not important. The  if  statement would be the same, with the
unique keyword prepending the first  if, as follows:

--- Page 89 ---
RTL Design 65
This would synthesize into a parallel logic, that is, a multiplexor.
The SystemVerilog standard requires that simulation (or other tools)
report a Warning if they detect that more than one branch could be executed
at the same time. In the preceeding example with unique if, if both in0 and
in1 were both true at the same time, a run-time Warning would be reported.
On a related note, SystemVerilog has also introduced the keyword
priority, which functions opposite to unique, by enforcing priority encoded
logic. When the  priority construct is used, it indicates that the order of
decision making is important. If the  unique statement in the above is
replaced by  priority, then the same priority select logic tree will be
regenerated.
2.4.3 What are the differences between if-else and the (“?:”)
conditional operator?
The following table summarizes the differences between the two flow
control constructs, that is,  conditional “ ?:” and the if-else.


--- Page 90 ---
66 RTL Design
2.4.4 What is the importance of a  default clause in a case
construct?
The default clause in a case statement indicates that when  all other cases
are not met, then the flow can branch to the statements in the default clause.
This gives the synthesis tool an option to pick a branch when no other
condition is satisfied. If the  default clause is mis sing, the logic will have to
remember what the output  was earlier, and hence a latch will get
synthesized. For example, the following  case statement will generate a latch:
In the above, with the two  lines commented, a latch gets synthesized for
out1 register. Un-commenting either the  default clause or the last condition
of 2’b11, or both, will result in the combinatorial logic of a multiplexor to be
synthesized.
2.4.5 What is the difference between full_case and parallel_case
synthesis directive?
The difference between full case and parallel case synthesis directives is
summarized in the table below:

--- Page 91 ---
RTL Design 67
2.4.6 What is the difference in implementation with sequential and
combinatorial processes, when the final else clause in a multi-
way if-else construct is missing?
The results are different, depending upon whether the  if  statement is a
part of a sequential always block or  a combinatorial always block.


--- Page 92 ---
68 RTL Design
In a combinatorial  always block, when  the final  else clause in a multi-
way if-else statement is missing, it will infer a latch. The l atch is inferred
because the register has to remember the value until it is reloaded again. For
example,
In a sequential  always block, if the final  else clause in a multi-way  if-else
statement is missing, it will still go ahead and infer the flip-flop, with the
combinatorial inference of the logic in the D input of the flop. For example,
The above code will infer logic, as shown below. The D input to the flop
is now a simple gated function of the inputs.
Figure 2-9. Logic inference of if statement without final else in a FF


--- Page 93 ---
RTL Design 69
2.4.7 What is the difference in using ( == or !=) vs. (===or !==) in
decision making of a flow control construct in a synthesizable
code?
In Verilog, the (==) operator is called logical equality, and (!=) is called
logical inequality operator. The (===) operator is called case equality, and
(!==) is called case inequality. The following are the differences in using
these constructs in synthesizable code.
2.4.8 Explain the differences and advantages of casex and casez
over the case statement?
The casex operator has to be used when both the high impedance value
(z) and unknown (x) in any bit has to be treated as a don’t-care during case


--- Page 94 ---
70 RTL Design
comparisons. The casez operator treats the (z) operator as a don’t-care
during case comparisons.
In both cases, the bits w hich that are treated as don’t-care will not be
considered for comparison, that is, only bit values other than don’t care bits
are used in the comparison. The wildcard character “?” can be used in place
of “z” for literal numbers.
The following is an  example of a  casex statement
The same example, if written with an if-else tree, would look like:
Using casex or casez has the following coding advantages:
it reduces the number of lines, especially if the number of bits had been
more
makes code look more clear and less cluttered
Simplifies the optimization, as it is clear that the bits with x are to be
ignored.
2.5 Finite State Machines
Finite State Machines or FSMs form an important part of the  control
logic in the designs. This section also discusses the differences a mong the
various types of the FSM coding  styles.

--- Page 95 ---
RTL Design 71
2.5.1 What are the differences between synchronous and
asynchronous state machines?
Synchronous and asynchronous are two fundamental types of state
machines. They differ in the following ways:
2.5.2 Illustrate the differences between Mealy and Moore state
machines.
Both Mealy machine and Moore machine  are two commonly used coding
styles of state machines. The basic block diagram of these two state
machines are shown as follows:


--- Page 96 ---
72 RTL Design
Figure 2-10. Block diagram of a Mealy machine
Figure 2-11.  Block diagram of a Moore machine
The state machines differ in the following ways:


--- Page 97 ---
RTL Design 73
2.5.3 Illustrate the differences between binary encoding and one-
hot encoding mechanisms state machines.
The encoding in state machines are primarily either binary [sometimes
called sequential] encoding or th e one-hot encoding. Both mechanisms
eventually lead to decoding of the states, but their logic implementation,
timing and area implications differ. The differences are  summarized in the
table as follows:


--- Page 98 ---
74 RTL Design
2.5.4 Explain a reversed case statement, and how it can be useful
to infer a one-hot state machine?
The case expression need not necessarily be a variable. When a constant
is used in a  case expression, the value of th e constant expression will be
compared against each of the case item expressions. This is called a reversed
case statement. This coding style fits the one-hot state machine scenario very
well.
In the following code, a on e-hot state-machine is illustrated, using
reversed case statement. Since the case statement expression will cause entry
into the case statements for any value, the first case item that matches will
cause the exit from the case statement.

--- Page 99 ---
RTL Design 75
2.6 Memories
Memories form an important part of the chip design. The memories can
be small enough to form a simple register a rray or as a cache. The presence
of memories is increasing in the chips as the size of the area grows. This
section discusses the implications of  inferring multi-dimensional arrays as
memories in the designs and a few considerations in choosing the memories
from technology vendors.
2.6.1 Illustrate how a multi-dimensional array is implemented.
Static memories can be synthesized by the synthesis tools implementing
the storage element inferred within the array construct. The following is an

--- Page 100 ---
76 RTL Design
example code for synthesizing small synchronous static memories that can
be used like a simple register file within the larger design.
The above code effectively synthesizes 64 FFs  whose inputs  and outputs
will be tapped based on the address values.
Verilog-2001 has introduced multi-dimensional memories. The  same
example above can be extended for three dimensions of  the memory, that is,
x, y and z, as follows:

--- Page 101 ---
RTL Design 77
The multi-dimensional arrays above would eventually ge t synthesized
into (x*y*z*width) = (4*4*4*4) = 256 individual FFs. Placing the
appropriate multiplexes from the Q output of these FFs and gating logics for
the D inputs decide the data in and data out.
Using a hardmacro of memory from a semiconductor vendor has better
timing, area, and power, as its logic is optimally placed, rather than
synthesizing it using discrete logic.
Note that  instantiating a technology specific memory will make the
design non-reusable with a different technology. One of the
recommendations in this inevitable situation is to bring  the pins of the
memory all the way to the top level of the module, and instantiate the design
and the memory in a wrapper, and not within the core of the design. Since
most vendors have similar pin-outs of memory design, the user can also have
a choice to  instantiate the memory from any vendor in the wrapper. The
wrapper can then be instantiated in the  top-level netlist.
Check with your semiconductor vendor for the availability of the  type of
memory that you are interfacing into your system design.

--- Page 102 ---
78 RTL Design
2.6.2 What are the considerations in instantiating technology-
specific memories?
Instantiating technology specific memories are required in  many
applications. Depending upon the application, the choice of memory is based
on the following performance variables:
Area: If the area is the prime concern on the die, then a high-density
memory is required. This is typically targeted for high volume
applications or chips with large on chip memory blocks. The overall
area will also depend upon the process technology of the memory
block.
Frequency: If the speed is the prime concern, then  high-speed
memories are required which operate at high frequencies. Note that
these memories could potentially be larger in area.
Power: This is one of the critical concerns for low voltage and low
power applications of chips in cellular phones, hand held devices,
etc. Also, if the power dissipation becomes high, then the operating
conditions begin to be de-rated, to the extent that the performance of
the overall system becomes lower. It also increases the cost of final
packaging of the chip for dissipation purposes. Note that power
dissipation is tightly coupled with the frequency at which the
memory will be used.
The other design variables in considering the memories are:
Capacity: The capacity of the memory is typically specified in
the resolution of bits. For example, a memory is specified as
512Kbits.
Voltage: Since some memories are designed for specific voltage
ranges, it is important to pick the memory meeting the desired
voltage ranges.
Synchronous or asynchronous : This variable specifies whether
the memory will have a synchronous read/write or an
asynchronous read/write. Which one is to be used primarily
depends upon the presence of a clock element, and the matching
of timing requirements of the memory and the design.
Single port or multi port: This variable  determines wh ether the
storage within the memory is accessed by a single read/write port
or multiple ports. One of the c ritical issues during the use of a
multi-port memory is the resolution on  what happens when

--- Page 103 ---
RTL Design 79
multiple ports are trying to do a write to the same memory
location.
Flip-flop or latch based: This variable determines if the storage
element within the memory is based on a flip-flop or the latch.
The important considerations for this memory are the testability
and power. Note that a FF based design is more testable than a
latch based design.
Scannable or not: With the size of the memory increasing
nowadays, the scannability of the  memory is  an important
criteria. Many manufacturers and vendors are providing the BIST
logic for making the memory scannable.
Just like any other electronic component, the following manufacturing
variables also need to be considered in choice of memories for a mass
production application:
Unit cost: This variable will eventually drive the overall cost of
the chip, board, and the system itself. It matters a lot in a mass
production scenario.
Availability: Availability of the memories will impact the time
to market for the end-product success.
Failure rate: The yield of the memory must be high, and the
failure rate must be low. BIST circuits will be required to be
added within the chip, along with the memories to test them.
The choice of memory will depend upon what the end application is, and
hence requires a good balance in all the above considerations.
2.6.3 What are the factors that dictate the choice between
synchronous and asynchronous memories?
Synchronous memories, as the name suggests, have a clock as one of the
primary inputs. All the writes happen, based on the rising or falling edge of
this clock, when the data meets the setup time requirements. All reads
happen from the Q output of the flops, after the data ready time.
Asynchronous memories don’t have a clock interface. The data writes
and reads typically ha ppen with an enable pin.
The main differences between the two memories are as follows:

--- Page 104 ---
80 RTL Design
2.7 General Design Considerations
This section briefly discusses the general design considerations like
reusability and other factors that need to be considered early in the design
cycle. Reusability of a design is not something that should be deferred until
the end of an implementation.  This needs to be considered early and all the
way during the implementation of the design.
2.7.1 What are some reusable coding practices for RTL Design?
A reusable design mainly helps in reducing the design time of larger
implementations using IPs. The topic of reusability has been very well
discussed in the Reuse Methodology Manual (see References at the end of
this book for details of the book). The following key points summarize the
main considerations during the implementation phase:
Register all the outputs of crucial design blocks. This will make the
timing interface easy during system level integration
If an IP is being developed in both Verilog and VHDL, try to use the
constructs that will be translatable later into VHDL.
Avoid snake paths, as it will make both  debugging tedious and
synthesis inefficient.


--- Page 105 ---
RTL Design 81
Partition the design considering the clock domains and the functional
goals.
Follow lexical and naming conventions that are self-descriptive and
facilitate future  product maintenance.
Avoid instantiation of  technology specific gates
Use parameters instead of hard-coded values in the design
Avoid clocks and resets that are generated internal to the design
Avoid glue logic during top level inter-module instantiations
2.7.2 What are “snake” paths, and why should they be avoided?
A snake path, as the name suggests is a path that tra verses thr ough a
number of hierarchies, and may eventuall y return back to the same hierarchy
from which it originated.
Snake paths must be avoided in a design for the following reasons:
It will constitute a long timing path, and hence, be the surprise
critical path when static timing analysis is done at the top level. It
may not show up during the timing analysis of the unit level blocks if
it is poorly constrained.
The synthesis tools need to put more effort in characterizing the
constraints of the  path across the hierarchies, and the  compile  time
can get higher.
Some tips that can be followed to avoid the snake paths are:
Register the outputs of modules with different  functional objectives.
Partition the design functionally, to avoid long paths across different
hierarchies.
Keep checking for the presence of the snake paths by periodically
running synthesis on the fully integrated RTL, even if it is not fully verified
functionally. This will give early feedback through the timing reports for the
presence of a path traversing across multiple hierarchies.
2.7.3 What are a few considerations while partitioning large
designs?
A large design needs to be  approached in a hierarchical fashion. The
following considerations need to be taken while partitioning these designs:

--- Page 106 ---
82 RTL Design
Functionality:  The functional grouping of the logic within a hierarchy
is the prime criteria during partitioning the design. Typical partitioning
of hierarchies are:
Address and data paths:  This module typically contains the
address and data path registers, which drive the address and data
buses of the primary outputs.
Control logic: This module typically contains Finite State
Machines (FSMs), and the module gets the inputs for the FSMs,
whose outputs drive the controls for the rest of the logic.
Clock domains:  In a multiple clock design, it is  recommended to group
the logic connected in the same clock domain in a single module. When
signals need to  interact with another module with a different clock, it is
recommended to go through a synchronizer module, which takes in the
input from the source clock domain and synchronizes it to the c lock
domain of the destination module.
Area: Having too little logic in a module will create too many
hierarchies, and too much logic w ithin a single module will create issue
of not being able to do fine tune control during floorplanning later
during the backend process.
Verilog doesn’t constitute any limit on the number of  hierarchies, but it is
a good practice to not have too many (lots of leaf level hierarchies of FFs) or
too few (just one huge module!) hierarchies.
2.8 Multiple clock Design Considerations
While each module works well at its unit levels, it is important to
consider the perspective of reliability when the signals from the  design unit
communicate to/from the signals of the other design units. The approach to a
synchronous design is quite helpful, but the presence of multiple clock
domains in a circuit is getting common. The reliability becomes especially
challenging when the signals are communicated across clock domains. This
section discusses a few issues to be considered when signals cross the clock
domains, and how the re liability can be improved.
2.8.1 How can I reliably convey control information across clock
domains?
When control signals are traversing across clock domains, the signal
appears as an asynchronous input at the destination clock domain. Hence,
this signal needs to be synchronized to meet th e setup and hold requirements
of the destination clock domain, so  that the downstream logic can have valid

--- Page 107 ---
RTL Design 83
logic levels. Otherwise, the FF will enter into meta-stable state, in which
case it will not be able to arrive at a valid state in a given amount of time.
The output of a meta-stable FF can be at an intermediate  voltage level, or
may oscillate invalidating logic down the signal path.
One of the common methods is to have  a two-stage synchronizer FFs
between the source and destination clocks. If the first FF enters into a meta-
stable state, due to any race condition between the clk and D inputs, then the
Q value captured in the first flip-flop is an unknown, that is, either a 1 or a 0
(“x” in simulation), depending upon the resolution of the changes in the
inputs.
By having two f lip-flops in series, the second flip-flop is always sure to
capture the  resolved state of the first flip-flop as a stable data, even if the
first one is meta-stable for a time after the rising edge of the clock.
The following is a 2-stage synchronizer. Note that the data is coming
from source clk1 while  the two FFs are  driven by clk2.
Figure 2-12. 2 FF synchronizer
Some chip and IP vendors even have a special optimised cell just for the
synchronization purpose. Although these cells have le sser setup and hold
time requirements, these cells may be larger in area than normal FFs and
also consume more power. Note that  instantiating such technology specific
cells could make the design non-reusable with a di fferent library vendor. In
such a case, it is recommended to have a module defined with the two
synchronizing flip-flops and instantiate them in  the design.
The above synchronizer only takes care of the level signals long enough
to be sampled by the next rising edge of the destination clock. In the case of
a pulsed signal  transmission, with widths that could be less than the
destination clock frequency, the above synchronizer logic is not helpful. The


--- Page 108 ---
84 RTL Design
readers are encouraged to read about goo d design implementation in the
following reference, titled,  “Crossing the abyss: asynchronous signals in
synchronous world”, that can be found in the following URL
http://www.reed-
electronics.com/ednmag/article/CA310388?pubdate=7%2F24%2F2003
2.8.2 What is a safe strategy to transfer data of different bus-
widths and across different clock domains?
When data is to be transferred across different bus  width and different
clock domains, a FIFO (First In First Out) is an ideal component. If the bus
width between the write (the  side which  pushes the data into the FIFO) and
read (the side which  pops the data from the FIFO) sides are di fferent, then it
becomes an asymmetrical FIFO. Many IP and chip vendors have
asymmetrical and dual  clock FI FOs in their libraries. An  entity diagram of a
typical asymmetrical and dual clock FIFO is shown in the following figure:
Figure 2-13. Assymmetrical width FIFO
The flags in the FIFO above are typically the full, e mpty, almost-full and
almost-empty. The thresholds for these FIFOs can either be set as an input
signal or as an instantiating parameter. The widths of the wr_data and
rd_data busses  are  different,  but are  usually related by an  integral
multiple (that is, one width is an integral multiple of the other).
2.8.3 What are a few considerations while using FIFOs for posted
writes or prefetched reads that influence the speed of the
design?
FIFOs are typically used in numerous data transfer applications for
performance and sustenance reasons. One of the main applications of FIFOs
is to post write transactions and to prefetch the data r eads.


--- Page 109 ---
RTL Design 85
The advantages of using the FIFOs for posted writes or prefetched reads
are:
FIFOs in general help as a temporary storage buffer, which stores the
data written from the write path until it is popped out by the consumer.
Thus, in an application like a bridge across two protocol buses with
different frequencies, FIFOs help in completing the bus cycles of a faster
host sooner. This allows other masters in the host bus to use the bus
more efficiently.
The performance of write data transfer from a bridge that is faster is a lot
better when it stores the data in the FIFO, as it doesn’t have to be held
up by a slower slave thr ough wait  states during the  individual beats of
the data transfer.
The disadvantage of using the FIFOs for posted writes or prefetched
reads are:
Suppose the originating master posts the data into the FIFO, and
assumes the data transfer to have  happened to  the destination slave, and
the slave now issues an ERROR. It has to be communicated back to the
master, since it assumes the data transfer to  have taken place. Typically,
in SoC environments, it is taken care of by issuing a high priority
interrupt to the host or the originating master.
If the originating master aborts a read transaction late in  the cycle when
the read prefetch has  already taken place, there is a possibility of a stale
data remaining in the read FIFO. When such a condition occurs, the read
FIFO may need to be flushed before a new read transaction.
In order to ensure data coherency between a read followed by write
situation, all reads to the same slave address space must be blocked until
the previous write transaction is completed. This is typically monitored
by watching the empty signal of the FIFO.
In general, FIFOs are very useful to reduce bus latencies and functionally
necessary when the bus widths are asymmetrical.
2.9 Common “Gotchas” in Synthesizable RTL
This section explains how and why certain unintentional “gotchas” occur
after coding.

--- Page 110 ---
86 RTL Design
2.9.1 What will be synthesized of a module with only inputs and no
outputs?
A module with only inputs and no outputs will synthesize into a module
with no logic, since there is nothing to be synthesized as an output.
2.9.2 Why do I see latches in my synthesized logic?
There is more than one reason why latches could be seen in synthesized
logic. This information is typically present in the elaboration log file of the
synthesis tool.
The if-else clause in the always block to which the latch is
associated doesn’t have a final else clause.
The reg declaration of the variable  doesn’t have any value
assigned upon entry to the combinatorial  always block if the
variable is used in an if statement without the else clause.
There could be no default clause of a case construct that is not
complete or the variables assigned within the  case were not
assigned a default value before entering the case statement.
2.9.3 What are “combinatorial timing loops”? Why should they be
avoided?
Combinatorial timing loops are hardware loops in which the output of
either a gate or a long combinatorial path is fed back as an input to the same
gate or to another gate earlier in the combinatorial path. These paths are
generally created unintentionally when a variable from one combinatorial
block is used to drive a signal that is used in the same combinatorial block
from which the variable was derived. This typically happens in large size
combinatorial blocks, wherein it is difficult to  visually track that a loop is
getting created.
These combinatorial feedback loops are undesirable for the following
reasons:
Since there is no clock edge in between to break the path, the
combinatorial loops will infinitely keep oscillating and triggering a
square wavefo rm, whose duty cycle is dependent upon the sum of
ON delays and OFF delays across the combinatorial path. For
example, the following code is a combinatorial loop:

--- Page 111 ---
RTL Design 87
This will cause the out1 to feed in combinatorially back as one of
the inputs.
These loops cause a problem in testability, since they can inhibit the
propagation of the logic forward.
Combinatorial loops can be caught quite early by one of the following
means:
Periodic use of linting tools throughout the development process.
This is by far the best and easiest  way to catch and  fix loops early in
the design cycle.
During functional simulation, the desired output behavior doesn’t
appear in the output, or the simulation doesn’t proceed ahead at all,
because the simulator is hung.
If the loop is undetected during simulation, many synthesis tools have
suitable reporting  commands, which detect the presence of a loop.
Note that synthesis tools proceed with the static timing analysis by
breaking the timing arc of the loop for critical path analysis.
2.9.4 How does the sensitivity list of a combinatorial always block
affect pre- and post- synthesis simulation? Is this still an issue
lately?
With Verilog-1995, between s ynthesis and simulation, it is important to
have all elements that are in the RHS of the statements, or used within
conditional statements, to be part of the sensitivity list of a combinatorial
always block.
While the synthesis tools go ahead and make use of the nets that are not
in the sensitivity list, simulation will ignore change on  those nets during
logic evaluation. As a result, the behavior seen during functional simulation
and post synthesis is different.
Typically, text editors like emacs with a Verilog language mode have
been able to automatically infer the right nets, and automatically add it into
the sensitivity list. Linting tools will provide error messages during parsing
of the RTL code.
From Verilog-2001 onwards, this is not an issue anymore. The  language
now has an implicit event_expression list, which adds all nets and variables

--- Page 112 ---
88 RTL Design
read by procedural and timing control statements into the  sensitivity list. The
event_expression is indicated by @(*). For example, in the following
combinatorial block, all elements of the RHS are in the sensitivity list, as
required by Verilog-1995.
The same in Verilog-2001 can be  written in two ways, as:
or
The same code in SystemVerilog can be represented using the
always_comb procedure, as follows:
Note that the code is now simpler, relinquishing the user from  keeping
track of the sensitivity list. It is much more maintainable and readable, too.
The key advantage of using the  always_comb procedure over the implicit
sensitivity list of @(*) is that the former is  executed right from time 0 like an
assign statement, whereas the latter waits for an event to trigger its
activation. The simulation and synthesis tools figure out the elements of
sensitivity list automatically. Check with your simulation and synthesis tool
vendor for the  support of SystemVerilog and this construct.

--- Page 113 ---
RTL Design 89
2.10 Coding techniques for Area Minimization
This section describes some of the tec hniques using RTL coding and
parameterized approach for providing optimal area requirement for a soft IP.
Rather than have the entire logic, which may not be useful for all the
different users, the area optimization of  unwanted logic will be useful in
large SoCs. Removing unwanted area not only reduces silicon area, but also
reduces switching activity, and, hence, the power, too.
2.10.1         How do the `ifdef, `ifndef, `elsif, `endif constructs aid in
minimizing area?
The proper use of compiler directives like `ifdef, `ifndef, etc. can help in
minimizing the area during post elaboration and during logic optimization.
Since the use of c ompiler directives is a compile time operation, it is a static
decision for the  session of simulation and during synthesis.
The following is an exa mple of how the compiler directives can be used
for minimizing the area of a logic design.
Note that the use of compiler directives is legal to pick instantiations of
modules itself, and, hence, can be helpful to pick a module with appropriate
area size. For example, in the following code, the compiler directive is used
to pick the correct type of counter, that is, ripple counter or carry lookahead,
counter depending upon the directive.

--- Page 114 ---
90 RTL Design
In the above example, the `ifndef was used to illustrate the absence of a
`define  for CLA. Note that the `define for CLA has  been commented  out. If
it gets uncommented, then the carry lookahead adder in stantiation gets
selected.
Hence, in this approach, the selection of the appropriate “section” of code
during parsing and elaboration decides the final area of implementation.
2.10.2 What is “constant propagation”? How can I use constant
propagation to minimize area?
Constant propagation is a very effective technique for area minimization,
since it forces the  synthesis tools to optimize the logic in both forward and
backward directions. Since the area minimization is achieved using
constants, this technique is called constant propagation. An example of
constant propagation is shown below:

--- Page 115 ---
RTL Design 91
Note that create_logic is a  parameter within the module,  that controls the
logic backwards from both the outputs out1 and out2. It could also
control the logic forward from the inputsin1 andin2 by adding internal
wires to either select the direct inputin1 or the 1’b0. An example of how
the forward constant  propagation works is as follows:
When this parameter is 0, it forces the logic zero in the assign statements,
it results in logic zero propagation in either direction. As a result, no logic
gets enabled and the  logic is optimized in synthesis. When thi s parameter is
1, the logic is synthesized.
Note that d ifferent techniques to override  the parameter will also work,
that is, the constant propagation will be effective, even with parameter
override.
Hence, the default value of the parameter can be set to 1, and be
overridden to 0, by different parameter overriding techniques, when required
to minimize the area.
SystemVerilog has also introduced a new construct  const which declares
a variable as a constant. The const construct can be used to enforce constant
propagation, just like other constants like parameter. For example,  the same
example above can be applicable by replacing the  parameter with  const, as
follows:

--- Page 116 ---
92 RTL Design
The output with the  const construct above is exactly the same as when a
parameter is used.
2.10.3 What happens to the bits of a reg which are declared, but not
assigned or used?
When any of the bits of a  reg declaration is unused, the logic
corresponding to those bits gets optimized away. For example, in  the
following code, the bits 2:1 are  unused, although  the int_tmp is declared
to be [3:0]. This code will synthesize the logic for bits [3] and [0], and no
logic for bits [2 :1].

--- Page 117 ---
RTL Design 93
2.10.4 How does the  generate construct help in optimal area?
Verilog-2001 generate can be useful in area optimisation techniques.
This construct m ust be coded within a module scope. Unlike the ` define
based approach, this construct allows the use of a variable, declared using
the genvar construct, to control the logic generated.
The generate construct can be used in two ways: either with afor loop
within the  generate-endgenerate  scope, or using the  conditional  if-else
construct, or the conditional  case construct within the  endgenerate. The
“generate for” usage helps in precisely instantiating the right amount of logic
in a reusable design. The “generate if ”usage determines whether the logic
should get generated at all. The amount of logic is precisely controlled using
the construct and its variable.
This is best illustrated using examples, as follows. The first is the use of
an if-else clause within the  generate-endgenerate constructs. The analogy is
very similar to the use of `ifdef, as discussed earlier in FAQ 2.10.1. Note that
the genvar construct is not required in this c ase.

--- Page 118 ---
94 RTL Design
In the above example, depending upon the resolution of the value of the
parameter xor_logic, either the XOR gate or the AND gate gets
generated. Although this is a very simple use of this construct, the same
analogy can be extended for multiple statements through the use of begin-
end statements. The parameter can be overridden, using defparam construct,
too. Note that even instantiations can be  controlled in the if-or else clause.
The second way to use the  generate construct is with  for loops. The
variable used in the for loop has to be a genvar declaration. The variable is
then used in a for loop which is instantiating the exact number of modules
required.
The “AND_BLOCK” block ide ntifier is required for any heirarchical
names generated by the concatenation of the block identifier and the variable
value as  {generate_block_identifier, genvar_value}. In this case, the
hierarchical names generated were:

--- Page 119 ---
RTL Design 95
These generated names can be used in hierarchical path names, just as in
a hierarchical design. The above example saves a lot of code for explicit
instantiations, especially if the variable size is large. Also, it allows good
control on how many  of these need to be instantiated by  the parameter width.
Thus, precise area control can be achieved. Note that this simple anding
module can be extended  for more complex hierarchies, too.
The third way to use the  generate construct is through the  case statement
within the  generate-endgenerate scope. This allows selective branching to
take place through the  case statement, and, hence, controlling which of the
sections of the code to be finally ‘generated’. An example of the conditional
selection of a module instantiation through a case statement is as follows:

--- Page 120 ---
96 RTL Design
A few important points of the above example are:
The case condition “operation” has to be a constant, or a  genvar
variable in order to make a definitive decision during the conditional
instantiation. Otherwise, it is a syntax error, since the tools will
encounter this as an unknown value during elaboration. Hence, the
approach is useful in parameterised designs.
Depending upon the value of operation  above, the output either gets
anded, ored, or xored. But, eventually only one of them will happen.
This is useful in scenarios where a selective implementation needs to
be instantiated, and the instantiation of that module can be selectively
controlled.
2.10.5 What is the difference between using `ifdef and generate for
the purpose of area minimization?
As discussed in the earlier questions, both `ifdef and generate constructs
can be used for the purpose of area minimization. The  difference between
the two in using these constructs for area minimization is summarized in the
following table:

--- Page 121 ---
RTL Design 97
2.10.6 Can the generate construct be nested?
No. The generate construct cannot be nested. It is a sy ntax error to try to
nest the generate-endgenerate construct.
However, the  if, case, and  for constructs within the  generate-
endgenerate can be nested. The constructs can also be used within one
another, too, that is,  if within case, for within if etc.
You can also use multiple non-nested generate-endgenerate constructs
within the module.
2.11 Coding for Better Static Timing Optimization
When a design gets compiled into a netlist, the  various elements of the
delays in the path, like the  cell delay, routing delay, etc., contribute in
deciding the overall performance of the chip. The timing impact of the
design should be factored very early in the design process, during functional
partitioning and coding of the design. It will be too late to consider timing
impacts later in the functional verification cycle.
This section discusses a few topics on the different factors impacting the
static timing of the design.
2.11.1 What is a critical path in a design? What is the importance of
understanding the critical path?
A critical path is the path through a circuit that has the least slack. It is
not necessarily the longest path in the design. There can be more than one


--- Page 122 ---
98 RTL Design
critical path in a design. In fact, all paths whose difference between the
arrival time and required time at the endpoint is negative (, that is, negative
slack) is a violating path.
Understanding and identifying the critical path in a design is important
for the following reasons:
It helps fix the static timing problems, especially when the  endpoint is a
D input to a flip-flop, and the critical path delay is violating the setup
time requirement for the flop.
Shortening the critical path delay  obviously improves frequency and,
hence, the performance of the logic.
If the critical path is identified early in the design flow, then appropriate
functional changes can be done early on in the project to terminate the path
to the D input of a flop at an appropriate point in the path. This point has to
be carefully c hosen, considering the  side effects in latency and static timing
that would arise due to  the staging of the path through a flop.
If the source of the c ritical path is from a primary input, it is
recommended to register the input. Although this could add to the latency,
this strategy will eventually help in improving  the frequency  of operation.
2.11.2 How does proper partitioning of design help in achieving
static timing?
Partitioning a de sign correctly helps in multiple stages of the design, all
the way until the backend flow. The best approach for partitioning is to plan
the partitioning of the de sign before writing HDL code. It is important to
keep these considerations early on, to avoid hierarchical, port, or logic
changes late in the design. The following are some of the criteria for design
partitioning:

--- Page 123 ---
RTL Design 99
1.
2.
3.
4.
Logical partitioning: The partitioning of the modules with close
logical associativity is a very common approach. This way, it is both
easy to debug and modular in approach. Typically, the partitioning
logic boundaries are datapaths (register’s and glue), control (FSMs),
memories and I/O . Logistically, it also helps with having multiple
team members do thorough unit level verification, and it helps with
better design management and version control. All combinatorial
logic associated with the same clock domain should  also be closely
within the same module. Inter-module partitions can restrict logic
optimization by synthesis tools. Hierarchical boundaries prevent any
combining of related logic. Typically, a module size should be
around 5K gates.
For synthesis tools to consider resource sharing and  freedom to
optimize, all relevant resources need to be within one level of
hierarchy. If the resources are not within one level of  hierarchy,
synthesis tools cannot make tradeoffs to determine whether or not
the resources should be shared.
It is during the logical partitioning that the designer has the freedom
to decide upon the registering of the outputs between critical inter-
module hierarchies. This will immensely reduce the possibilities of
long combinatorial paths and combinatorial snake paths in the
design, and, hence, better static timing implication.
Special function logic, like the pads, I/O drivers, clock generation
and boundary scan should be at separate logical hierarchies.
Any on-chip memories, like S RAMs or DRAMs should be placed at
the top level. This will make the physical design i nteraction and
floorplanning tasks more effective by better timing analysis.
Goal based partitioning: Partitioning based on different design goals
of speed and area will eventually help the tools do a good job.
Modules with d ifferent goals can be specified wit h their respective
constraints during the synthesis for the tools to do a good job.
Clock domain partitioning: Partitioning the logic according to same
clock domain plays an important role in synthesis, static timing
analysis, and scan insertion. The inter-clock false paths can be
defined within a single synchronizer module, and the entire module
is now with a single clock domain.
Reset based partitioning: If a particular SoC has multiple resets, then
it is a good idea to consider reset based par titioning, too. This helps
all the storage elements within the module to wake up gracefully at
the same time.

--- Page 124 ---
100 RTL Design
2.11.3 What does it mean to “retime” logic between registers? How
does it effect functionality?
Retiming is the process of relocating registers across logic gates, without
affecting the  underlying combinatorial logic structure. This process is
achieved by borrowing logic from one time frame and lending it to the other,
while maintaining the design behavior. When you  have a pipelined design,
for example, in a datapath of a design, then retiming is a technique for
reducing the critical path within the pipeline.
Retiming has benefits as follows helps in balancing the paths between the
pipeline stages
Retiming also has potential restrictions as follows:
Note that,  although retiming can be used to reduce the critical path
between the pipeline registers, it cannot be used to reduce the latency of
the design.
A retimed design may not be formally equivalent to the original de sign.
2.11.4 Why is one-hot encoding preferred for FSMs designed for
high-speed designs?
Since there is one explicit FF per  stage of a one-hot encoded state
machine, there is no need of output state dec oding. Hence, the only
anticipated delay is the  clock to q delay of the FF. This makes the one-hot
encoding mechanism preferable for high-speed operation.
2.12 Design for Testability (DFT) considerations
Design for Testability or DFT techniques are design efforts that need to
be considered upfront during the design phase, to  ensure that  the design
under test is eventually testable. This process could increase the area in the
expense of increasing the fault coverage. By proper DFT  considerations
upfront, the test generation/development time and  the time with the tester
can be reduced. While there could be a few pins that get increased for better
fault coverage, it provides better observability and controllability, which are
the key considerations for good testability.
The following FAQs discuss a few factors that can effect the testability
and fault coverage of a design, and what the DFT techniques are.

--- Page 125 ---
RTL Design 101
2.12.1 What are the main factors that affect testability of a design?
The following are some of the main factors affecting the testability and
fault coverage of a design:
Presence of tri-state buses in the design
Reset of a FF driven by the output of  another FF
Presence of derived clocks in the design
Presence of gated clocks in the design
Presence of latches in the design
Each of the above issues are discussed in the following FAQs.
2.12.2 My chip has on-chip tri-state buses. What are the testability
implications, and how do I take care of it?
Normally, tri-state buses shouldn’t be present within the chip, as they
consume more power. However, if the tri-state buses are present inside a
chip, care should be taken to avoid bus contention, that is, driving different
values at the same time. It affects the pow er, since the bus c onflict will drain
huge currents, and  cause damage to the chip. To avoid bus c ontention during
the scan te sting phase, the enable to the tri-state buffer should be
controllable, that is, by AND’ing it with the scan enable signal. In normal
mode, the scan_en_n signal is de-asserted (logic 1), to allow the control
to flow through, but in test mode, the drivers are disabled to avoid
contention. The c ontrol inputs to these enables are assumed to be originated
from the outputs of FFs. This is shown in the following figure:
Figure 2-14. Tri-state and DFT
Verilog sample code for these buffers is illustrated in the following:


--- Page 126 ---
102 RTL Design
2.12.3 Some Flip-Flops in my chip have their resets driven by other
Flip-Flops within the chip. How will this affect the testability,
and what’s the workaround?
Normally, the asynchronous set or reset of a FF is controlled by the
primary reset input pin. Sometimes it becomes inevitable to have the output
of one FF to drive the asynchronous set/reset of another FF. In that case,
during the scan testing, if the driving FF gets a pattern such that it  resets the
driven FF, it will destroy its data. To prevent this, the reset should be OR’ed
with a test_mode test mode signal. The following figure illustrates this
mechanism:
Figure 2-15. Reset and DFT
The test_mode primary input is disabled (in this case 1’b0) during
normal operations. However, during testing, the test_mode signal is
asserted to 1’b1, thus making the asynchronous reset deactivated. This will
avoid corruption of FF2 output when a predictable pattern is being sent from
FF1 to FF2.
2.12.4 I have derived clocks in my chip. What are the te stability
implications, and what is th e workaround for it?
Derived clocks are generated by clock dividers through Flip-Flops or
PLLs in a chip. Since these are derived from within the chip, there should be
a control input from the  primary pins, to avoid the Flip-Flops capturing data
when they are not supposed to.


--- Page 127 ---
RTL Design 103
In this case, a multiplexor needs to be added in the clock path, with the
control being the test_mode, and the inputs to the multiplexor being the
regular clock and derived clock. That way, the final clock to the Flip-Flops
is controllable between the derived clock in the normal mode and the regular
clock in the test mode. Note that the test_mode signal doesn’t change
dynamically, and, hence, it is okay to have a multiplexor in the clock path.
Note, too, that anytime a switch in the clock is done, all the Flip-Flops need
to be reset, to have a known sta rting value, and avoid spurious capture of
data in their data lines.
The following diagram illustrates the implementation:
Figure 2-16. Multiplexor in clock path using derived clocks
2.12.5 My chip is power sensitive, and, hence, there are gated clocks
in it. What are its  testability implications  and workaround?
Gated clocks are inevitable in some designs to save power. Since the
clock now passes through combinatorial logic, the gated clock is no longer
controlled from a primary input, making  it impossible to scan in the data.
The workaround is to  logically OR a test_enable pin to the  enabling
pin of the AND gate that gates the clock. Look into a FAQ 2.13.5 in this
chapter for more details of implementing this workaround.
2.12.6 What is the  implication of a combinatorial feedback loops in
design testability?
The presence of feedback loops should be avoided at any stage of the
design, by periodically checking for it, using  the lint or synthesis tools. The
presence of the feedback loop causes races and hazards in the design, and


--- Page 128 ---
104 RTL Design
leads to unpredictable logic behavior. Since the loops are delay-dependent,
they cannot be tested with any ATPG algorithm. Hence, combinatorial loops
should be avoided in the logic.
2.12.7 How does the presence of latches a ffect the testability, and
what’s the workaround?
Since the enable to a latch isn’t the regular clock going to the rest of the
Flip-Flops in the  design, its output is not  controllable directly from a primary
input. In order to bring  controllability to the la tch, the enable to the latch
needs to be OR’ed with a primary input pin like test_mode, as shown in
the following  figure.
Figure 2-17. Latch with OR’ed test enable
This way, the latch can be forced to  become transparent when the test
data needs to be forced into it.
2.13 Power Reduction considerations
Power reduction is a critical requirement in design of chips that are used
in battery-operated devices. The more power a chip uses, the hotter it
operates, slower it runs. The reliability of the chip decreases at higher
temperatures. This section discusses how RTL can be used to influence the
power dissipation within a chip, and what issues need to be considered when
coding for the power saving.
2.13.1 What are the various methods to contain power during RTL
coding?
Any switching ac tivity in a CMOS circuit creates a momentary cu rrent
flow from VDD to GND during logic transition, when both N and P type
transistors are ON, and, hence, increases power consumption.


--- Page 129 ---
RTL Design 105
The most common storage element in the designs being the synchronous
FF, its output can  change whenever its data input toggles, and the clock
triggers. Hence, if these two elements can be asserted in a controlled fashion,
so that the data is presented to the D input of the FF only when required, and
the clock is also triggered only when required, then it will reduce the
switching activity, and, automatically the power. The following bullets
summarize a few mechanisms to reduce the power consumption:
Reduce switching of the data input to the Flip-Flops.
Reduce the clock switching of the Flip-Flops.
Have area reduction techniques within the chip, since the number of
gates/Flip-Flops that toggle can be reduced.
The following FAQs discuss in depth how each of the above can be
implemented in RTL.
2.13.2 Illustrate how the switching of data input to the Flip-Flops
helps in power reduction.
In a circuit where the Flip-Flops need to be updated very rarely compared
to the frequency of the clock, then it is appropriate to update the FF only at
that time, and avoid the switching of its output all other times. This can be
achieved through an enable FF, as shown in the following figure:
Figure 2-18. Using enable FF for power saving
If the control input c omes from a state machine which can track exactly
when this FF has to be enabled to capture the new input data, then the enable
to the multiplexor can switch the multiplexor towards the input data.


--- Page 130 ---
106 RTL Design
Otherwise, it will be feeding the previous stable output from Q into the data
input of the FF.
An illustration of Verilog RTL that implements the enable FF is
illustrated as  follows:
The above style can be incorporated in the designs by following a coding
convention for the flip-flops. But, this technique alone  is not sufficient as a
power reduction technique, as it has a drawback which is discussed in the
next FAQ 2.13.3.
2.13.3 What is the drawback of using the enable flip-flop to  reduce
the power consumption?
Although the switching of  the data is reduced using enable Flip-Flops,
the clock input to the Flip-Flops is still running to a large number of other
Flip-Flops.
One side effect of the enable FF method is that it will introduce logic into
the setup time of the D input, and  possibly add to the delay, if the D input
was the endpoint of a critical path.
The other side effect is that the area increases if these Flip-Flops happen
to be the storage elements of a large bank of registers.

--- Page 131 ---
RTL Design 107
2.13.4 Illustrate an example of clock gating to help in reduction of
power.
Clock gating is a common mechanism to save power. This technique
reduces the switching activity of the output of the FF by:
eliminating the need for reloading the same value in the register
during multiple clock cycle.
Reducing the clock network power dissipation.
The most common method of clock gating is through the use of a latch
and a gate. The following figure illustrates the  implementation of this
mechanism:
Figure 2-19. Using latch for clock gating
When the clk is in its low phase, the latch is enabled. The control input,
which actually decides whether to gate the clock or not, is now propagated
through the clock to  its Q output. Here, if the control input is high, the Q of
the latch is high during the low phase, and remains so until the next low
phase of the clk. This keeps the AND gate enabled. In the mean time, when
the clk arrives, it gets propagated to the gated clock net. This happens
cleanly, without any glitches, because the latch output is stable for sufficient
time to meet the Flip-Flops setup requirements. When the control input goes
low, it negates the AND gate and, hence, prevents the clk from being
propagated to the gated clock net. This makes the gated clock net to be at 0
without any switching activity.
A simple Verilog code that illustrates the above logic is illustrated as
follows. Note  that the implementation of this strategy in large designs is best
done through the synthesis tools w ithout having to  manually implement this
strategy in the designs containing a large number of FFs.


--- Page 132 ---
108 RTL Design
The main reason for using a latch is to prevent the glitches on the
gated_clk net since its changes happen during  the low  phase  of the clock.
Although the above illustration is shown for only one FF, the gated clock
can actually be driven to all the remaining Flip-Flops in its  clock domain.
Also, the gating element has been an AND gate, depending upon the polarity
of the enable to the latch and the low phase of the clock for a rising edge.
This gate can change, depending upon any changes to these two polarities,
that is, the logic level to enable the latch, and the edge of the clock, whether
it is rising or falling.
The logic shown within the dashed box will require being instantiated
multiple times, depending upon how  many branches the main clock tree has.
Depending upon the buffering, clock skew, and loading, many such
instances could be placed on each branch of the clock tree or at the root
level.

--- Page 133 ---
RTL Design 109
2.13.5 What are the side effects of latched clock gating logic, and
how is it fixed?
Although the use of clock gating through latches is a good way to save
power, it introduces the problem of testability, as illustrated. Due to the
latch, the c ontrollability of the gated clock signal is reduced, that is, the
gated clock signal is now in the mercy of the control input only. During
testability, if this signal is low, then it disables the propagation of the clock
itself.
To resolve both the above issues, additional logic needs to be added to
enhance the testability. One way to increase the controllability of the gated
clock is to introduce a control point in the input of the latch, so that the latch
is “ON” during scan testing. This is illustrated in the fol lowing figure:
Figure 2-20. Using latch for clock ga ting
Based on the OR gating above, the scan enable signal will override the
control input, such that the output of the latch enables the AND gate to
propagate the clk net into the input of the Flip-Flops.
A simple Verilog code that illustrates the above implementation is as
follows. Note that synthesis tools can implement this logic illustration
automatically, for all the FFs in a large design, rather than having to do
manually.


--- Page 134 ---
110 RTL Design
Sometimes there have been situations that the test tools used in the
foundries don’t support the control before the latch and require it to be
present after the latch. Since such a requirement comes from the foundry, the
above circuit can be easily cha nged to position the OR gate after the latch, as
shown below:
Figure 2-21. Latch controllability after the output
A simple Verilog code illustrating the above is as follows:


--- Page 135 ---
RTL Design 111
2.13.6 What are a few  other techniques of power saving that can be
achieved during the RTL design stage?
The following design considerations during RTL coding help in the
reduction of power within the logic:
Run high frequency signals through as few intermediate logic levels as
possible. This way, only those cells which need to be run at high
frequency switch, and the rest of the logic can run at a relatively lower
frequency. This would require multi clock design within the chip,
preferably where the clocks are integral multiples of each other. The safe
approach would be to route one master clock into the chip, and generate
its sub clocks within the chip.
Only use as many Flip-Flops as required to store the data values, that is,
if only 4 bits of a 32 bit register are going to be used, it is not required to

--- Page 136 ---
112 RTL Design
register the remaining 28 bits. Normally the additional unused FFs will
be optimized away by the synthesis tools.
Gate the inputs using a select line. For example, the address lines from a
CPU are continuously changing, and may not all the time refer to your
device. In that case, it is better to gate the rest of the logic following the
address lines with a signal like chip-select, which will hence reduce
unnecessary switching activity. The chip select can be generated from
one central address decoder. A lthough this decoder is switching all the
time, it helps in the unnecessary switching in  lots of other logic
distributed elsewhere.
Choose Gray coding for state machines instead of binary encoding:
Since only one bit changes at any Gray transition, the number of Flip-
Flops switching, and the  switching in the logic that it drives, is reduced.
Note that this would potentially  require more Flip-Flops than the binary
encoded approach. Hence, for  the most frequent transition arcs, use Gray
coded transitions. Focus the gray coding efforts on common return to
zero state transitions.
Choose a multiplexor instead of on chip tri-state buses: The biggest issue
of on chip tri-state buses is the bus contention. Since there is a high
possibility of one buffer beginning to drive the  interconnect before the
other has finished, there is a small window in which potentially opposite
polarities are driven.  This causes a transient short circuit on the internal
bus. The choice of a multiplexor a voids the bus contention, but it could
potentially add to the number of gates and logic path.  Consider
registering the inputs that come from these long paths. Tri-state buses
also require internal pull up resistors and higher current signal drivers.
2.13.7 What are a few system level techniques, apart from RTL,
that can influence in the reduction of power for the chip?
Having discussed a few techniques of saving power through RTL in the
above FAQs, the following are a few system level variables that can
influence power reduction:
Reducing operating voltage: Since power consumed is directly
proportional to the square of the voltage, operating at a lower voltage is
one way of saving power. Many of the semiconductor vendors have
libraries that are designed specifically for low power. However, note that

--- Page 137 ---
RTL Design 113
there could be side effects in the static timing when the low power
libraries are used.
Reducing operating frequency: Since the power consumed is directly
proportional to the frequency, design technique of operating at a lower
frequency, but increased bus widths to maintain the data rate
performance requirements should be considered. For example, the rate
of data transfer of a 32 bit bus at 100MHz is the same as a 64 bit bus at
50MHz. Note that there will be additional design corners that get
introduced as the widths increase, especially in non aligned byte transfer
scenarios.
Running the I/O voltage different from the core voltage: In this
technique, the I/O ring of cells are working at a different voltage from
the rest of the core cells. This achieves interfacing to the signals external
to the chip with a different voltage re quirements than the core. It also
isolates the core from output-transition noise.
Lower the capacitance of the routing network , especially for high
frequency signals.
2.13.8 What are a few power reduction techniques that can be
achieved through static timing?
Power reduction can be achieved in all stages of the chip process, that is,
RTL techniques of gate clock, synthesis tool optimizing away unused logic,
reducing capacitance of the routing network during backend, and also
through good static timing. The following are a few considerations on how
the power can be reduced through static timing:
Control clock skew between logic gate inputs.
Ensure that flip-flop i nputs meet setup and hold time requirements, to
avoid extended output settling transitions caused by metastability.
2.13.9 What are a few power reduction techniques that can be
implemented during the backend analysis?
The following are a few parameters within the chip that can significantly
influence the overall power consumption, which can be taken care of during
the backend phase:

--- Page 138 ---
114 RTL Design
Have shorter routes for power and timing sensitive logic: Since the
capacitance of a routing net is a function of the  length, width and
impedance of the route, a long route typically has higher capacitance
than the shorter alternative. Since dynamic power consumed is directly
proportional to the  capacitance, that is, lower capacitance
means lesser power. This would mean the logic blocks need to be closer
to each other.
Reduce excessive loading: Heavily loaded nets cause higher capacitance
and higher power consumption.
2.13.10 What are a few power reduction techniques that can be
implemented during board design?
The following are a few techniques that can reduce power consumption
at a board level
Reduce the chip interconnection dynamic power by limiting the
number of I/O pins, the loading on  each, pin and the average
frequency at which each pin toggles.
Minimize the trace lengths between the chips output and other
device inputs.
SUMMARY
This cha pter discussed how the various Verilog constructs get inferred
during synthesis, and the static timing implications. The chapter also
discussed a few techniques on area reduction, and issues on testability and
power.

--- Page 139 ---
Chapter 3
VERIFICATION
INTRODUCTION
The chapter aims to address the usage of Verilog constructs for
Verification purposes. The topic of ve rification is vast, and this chapter
touches four aspects of the verification phase. The chapter begins with a
discussion on  messaging, which is the mechanism of communicating from
the test environment to the  users. The chapter then discusses the importance
of monitor in the environment, as a block that will check and report for
errors that can be mi ssed, if the checking were to be done by humans. The
chapter then proceeds to discuss  the Bus Functional Model’s (BFMs)
purpose, and how it can be used for s timulus creation. The chapter concludes
with the discussion on how the  random stimulus generation can be achieved,
using the Verilog constructs.
3.1 Messaging
Messaging is a mechanism to convey useful information in the form of
messages during the simulation run. These messages can be used to c onvey a
wide range of severity levels, from simple information to  critical failure. In
general, keeping the user informed  of the proceedings during a session of
simulation is a necessary requirement while developing the models. Note
that these messages are implemented using non-synthesizable constructs.

--- Page 140 ---
116 Verification
3.1.1 What are a few considerations while implementing messaging
in a model?
Messaging, although it sounds simple, forms an important  criteria during
the design of a verification model. The following are a few considerations
that need to be incorporated during its implementation within a model:
Identifying the level of a message in terms of criticality: Note
that all messages are not equally important. Given this feature,
all the messages to be conveyed need to be identified into
different m essage levels. Some messages are only informative,
and can fall into the INFO category of messages. Some other
messages are cr itical, and fall into the FATAL category. Look at
the next FAQ for more details on the levels.
Controllability of the message: All the messages need not be
displayed to the users all the time. The user must have a
mechanism to enable or disable the different levels of the
messages. This will avoid the cluttering of the log files with too
many informational messages, which might be trivial to the user,
and end up missing something important. The controllability of
the messages is typically achieved using a configuration
command within the models. Note that this controllability is
typically global, that is, the messages are either enabled or
disabled across all the models, and it is rarely mad e selective.
Timestamp of occurrence:  The timestamp of when the message
occurs will be useful to begin debugging at  that timestamp.
Message identification: All the messages should have  some
kind of ID or identification. This will be useful in two ways, that
is, all messages can be documented in the user manual using this
ID, and the unique ID of the message will be useful means of
communicating across different members, rather than sending the
full string of the message. Another requirement while framing
the message ID is to prepend the acronym of the module from
which this message is being generated. For example.:
HBFM_PKTBGN: INFO: Beginning a new packet at
t=105ns
The above message indicates the following information:

--- Page 141 ---
Verification 117
That it is printed from the Host Bus Functional Model
(HBFM).
It is of the severity level (INFO).
The unique ID is “PKTBGN”, informing the beginning
of a new packet.
The string is “Beginning a new packet”.
It happens at timestamp 105ns
The user can simply use the operating sysyetm grep command over the
log file to identify INFO m essages, or PKTBGN to see how many packets
were initiated.
Language domain of  the message:  The domain at which this
message is being constructed is also an important decision. Some
messages are simple enough to be constructed within the HDL
using the print/display function system call. For example,:
Sometimes these messages are implemented as a PLI call with
the displaying function written in C language. In the following
example,my_display is a PLI routine.
Note above that all the different information of ID, level, string
and timestamp are arguments to the user defined system call to
display the messages.
3.1.2 What are the different kinds of message severity levels?
As discussed in the earlier FAQ  3.1.1, message levels are simply
different hierarchies of message identification, based on criticality. These
levels are chosen to avoid  the user’s getting overwhelmed with too many
messages that may not be of critical interest. These levels vary from user to
user, in terms of what is defined as cr itical.
Typically, the following are the different levels of messaging:

--- Page 142 ---
118 Verification
INFO: The message associated  in this level is simply an
informational string. This level is typically used to convey the
beginning or end of a sequence.
WARNING: This message level indicates something  unusual
happening. The level doesn’t stop the simulation session from
proceeding ahead, but warns the user of an unexpected behavior.
ERROR: This message level indicates something is  wrong. This
message level is displayed before an erroneous scenario, and the
simulation could be terminated after some time soon.
FATAL: This message level  indicates a  catastrophic situation,
and warrants the termination of the simulation. This message
level may not have the privilege of running the simulation ahead
for a few more ticks. This message is typically displayed  when
there is a catastrophic functional scenario or a showstopper.
As required for the project, more message levels can be defined to
augment the above basic list.
3.1.3 Illustrate an example of how message levels are implemented
in a BFM.
The following is an example of how the messages are implemented in the
Verilog HDL. Although each message c ould simply be a  $display  system
call, it is recommended to follow a more structured approach of using a
Verilog task. The advantage of using task is that, since the messages will be
in numerous places distributed in  different models, it will be tedious to
change in all these places if a modification in the format of the message is
required. Cha nging it in one  task would reflect globally in all places it is
used.:

--- Page 143 ---
Verification 119
The output of the above will be as follows:
Since the above module test_msg  is a generic one, it can be
instantiated and used in several other modules as follows:


--- Page 144 ---
120 Verification
As evident in the above example, the string size is limited to the values in
the reg definition. In the above case, a maximum of 6 characters can be
specified for the mod_name variable. The size limitation can be overcome
by two ways:
By parameterizing the size itself, rather than using fixed values. This
gives users the flexibility to specify the sizes of the strings.
SystemVerilog has a  string construct as a mechanism to specify
variables. The  string variables can be specified string values
directly, and automatically size themselves to the size of the string,
instead of the hardcoded  byte mechanism; as specified above. The
value can then  be displayed using %s in the  $display  command.
3.2 Behavioral Functional Models (BFMs)
This section discusses Bus Fun ctional Models (BFM). The BFMs contain
the tasks/methods at the executor level, which perform the various
operations like read, write, etc., at di fferent abstraction levels. The  BFMs
can also have the fac ility for initialization, configuration, reporting, etc.
3.2.1 What is a Bus Functional Model (BFM)?
BFM is all of the following:
Models d ifferent levels of abstraction of the system to be modeled
(example, a serial communication protocol).
At the lowest level of  abstraction (example, at the symbol-level
or at the serial bit-stream abstraction), it is clock-cycle accurate.

--- Page 145 ---
Verification 121
At higher levels of abstraction, it need not  be necessarily clock-
cycle accurate.
It provides visibility into its c ommunications pro cesses at each
level of abstraction.
It provides visibility into all of its “tunable” parameters.
It can be commanded  to perform specified sequences of
communications at any level.
It can be commanded to modify any of its “tunable” parameters.
It can be used to build up higher levels of software (example,
device drivers).
In a typical verification environment, the BFM plays a role of helping
produce the stimulus to the DUT, as illustrated in the following figure. This
figure is a simplified version of a BFM  implementation, and doesn’t
illustrate the details of execution flow. At the user level, the  constraints and
the commands can either be parsed through a parser or can be through
`include.
Figure 3-1.  A BFM in a typical verification environment
3.2.2 What are a few considerations that go into designing a BFM?
A Bus Functional Model is a key module within the verification system.
Architecting the BFM for  the testbench scenarios where it will be used is an
important planning task.
The following are a few considerations during the des igning of a BFM
that could be classified as “must-do” requirements.


--- Page 146 ---
122 Verification
1. If the protocol or the functionality for which the BFM is being
designed can be categorised into hierarchies, it is highly
recommended to have implementation that can map to this hierarchy.
The Universal Serial Bus (USB) protocol is a classic example of such
a requirement. Since the protocol specifies functionality that can be
categorised into bit level, packet level, transaction level, and transfer
level protocols, it will be appropriate to map the tasks within the
BFM commands to map this level of hierarchy. This would not only
avoid repetition of the functionality of the various layers, but it
would also make it highly reusable.
2. Depending upon the layer of  the command, that is, whether it is a
transaction or transfer level command, there must be provision for
built-in self-check capability. The  users instantiating the BFM
shouldn’t need to build the self-check from the outside. Any
violations detected during this self-check must be  clearly notified to
the users. Fo r example, the  read_transfer commands  should
have the automatic data check provision within it.
In the above example,  the expected_data is compared against  the
data obtained during the read transfer.
3. There must be provision to specify all the key variables within the
BFM either as a `include  file or as user defined configure
Verilog task. These variables decide what features within the BFM
need to be implemented, and what should be the values that override
the defaults, etc. For example,
4. All the key configurable variables must have  defaults, so that even if
the user doesn’t want to change any of them, the BFM should
gracefully work in these default conditions. These variables can be
initialized using the  initial construct, or, in  SystemVerilog, the
initialization can be  done in-line, along with the declaration of the
variable. For example,

--- Page 147 ---
Verification 123
Note that in Verilog-2001, in-line initialisation will cause a
simulation event at time 0. An enhancement in SystemVerilog is that
the in-line variable initialization doesn’t cause a simulation event,
and, hence, provides a deterministic way of initialization of these in-
line variables.
5. Each of the BFM task call should involve a status output. This will
be useful for implementing an optional flow control mechanism that
can alter the flow of testing. The pseudo-code for such is as follows:
6. There must exist provision for the user to specify filtering of the
messages from the BFM using message levels. This can be in the
form of commands that configure  the severity of the messaging
levels. For example,:
This will display only those messages that are more severe than
ERROR’S to be displayed. This will help to avoid too much clutter in
the messages.
7. If the functionality within the BFM task requires waiting on an event,
there must be a timeout mechanism, in case an event or signal
assertion from the DUT doesn’t arrive. The non-occurrence of the
event should be notified as either a WARNING or  ERROR to the
higher-level modules an d shouldn’t end up in causing a hang in
simulation. A snippet of code for the timeout detection is as follows:


--- Page 148 ---
124 Verification
8. All the inputs to the tasks/commands within the BFM  should be
checked for its legal ranges. If the values are out of range, the  users
should be notified of the input illegal value and the legal range. The
execution of the task would normally ERROR out with the m essage.
The illegal inputs shouldn’t cause a chain of functionally incorrect
sequence of events. For example, in the following task, each input
value is verified  against its minimum and maximum values. It is
recommended to have parameters for the extremes of the ranges,
since it can be modified by the user.
Note that, in the above example, the checks for only the in1 input
have been illustrated. The same can be extended for the rest of the
inputs in this task.
9. There must be provision for the user to provide some kind of ID to
the BFM, so that, in a multiple instance scenario, the source of the

--- Page 149 ---
Verification 125
messages can be  uniquely identified. An example of how the BFM
ID can be used  has been illustrated in the earlier examples of
messaging.
10. The values of all the final assignments to the key variables should be
displayed to the user, as an acknowledgement of the user’s
constraints being accepted. This serves two purposes:
a.
b.
It provides information on what these values were before the
simulation run, and
confirms the assignments of the constraints.
3.2.3 What is a typical flow in designing a BFM?
The architecting and designing of a BFM for a verification system is an
important task, to be planned carefully. The requirements that specify the
design of the BFMs could be quite unique to each system. The following are
a few steps that will be useful during the design of the BFMs and meet these
diverse requirements of the BFMs for the various verification systems.
At a core level of the BFM, that is, where the functionality of the BFM is
being defined, the following are the recommended steps:
1. Specify the abstraction level at which the BFM is planned to be
used. At the interface level, it needs to be decided whether the BFM
has to be clock cycle accurate in handshaking to the DUT.
2. Specify the  user level configuration parameters that influence the
operation of the BFM. Typically, the static parameters, that is, the
ones that don’t change throughout the simulation, are defined by the
user in a file. The parameters that influence the simulation on an
ongoing basis are  typically defined through the configure
commands.
3. Specify the hierarchy of the commands when they are  functionally
dependent on a hierarchical fashion. The content and mechanism to
pass information back and forth between these hierarchies need to be
defined. This way, the division of functionality within these
hierarchies also gets defined.

--- Page 150 ---
126 Verification
4.
5.
6.
Specify the commands/calls that the user will be able to call within
this BFM. The task names, inputs/outputs/inouts fo r these tasks need
to be defined.
Specify the d etails of the messages that the BFM s convey. The
details of the message string, debug levels, severity level, and token
of the string need to be planned. This needs to be done with the tasks
and methods that are planned to be within the BFM.
Specify the interface ports that these BFMs use to interact with the
DUT and the timing relationships  that need to be maintained for the
ports with regard to the tasks/methods.
7. Develop the code within these tasks. This forms the “meat” of the
BFMs. It will be useful to indicate the timestamp of the entry for
these tasks. Try confining this content to the functionality only, and
defer an y timing checks or requirements outside this core as a
wrapper.
The above constitute the most basic steps. The users may need to
customize the above based on the requirements in the project. At the usage
level, the following steps need to be planned and implemented:
1. Determine whether these tasks will be interpreted from  a file
through a parsing mechanism, or an  `include mechanism, or an
automatic stimulus generation mechanism. Accordingly, this  could
require the development of a file parser. The parsing mechanism
helps in i dentifying the user defined typos/errors upfront, before it is
detected too late in the simulation runtime. But, this should not be
the only way these task calls should be accessed. The provision to
access these commands in a hierarchical fashion should be available
for either directed testing, or  random simulation, or reactive test
generation sequence, too. In the automatic stimulus generation
scheme (for example, in the random testing or reactive stimulus
generation) the next command is not known a priori until the
response for the current  command is obtained on the fly.
2. All the configurable parameters need to have defaults defined w ithin
the BFM. If the user doesn’t specify explicitly any parameter, then
these defaults will a pply. In a typical implementation, these de faults
can be specified using the  parameter construct with an initial value
assignment.

--- Page 151 ---
Verification 127
3. Before the simulation proceeds, the values of key parameters that
influence the simulation need to be displayed. This will help the user
to ensure that the simulation is on the  right track. Any incompatible
combination of parameter values should immediately be flagged and
simulation terminated, according to its severity.
4. The user must have a provision whether to log the BFM messages
into a file or not. In large regressions, this will be useful for not only
the disk space, but also the runtime of the regression.
5. To avoid user errors, all the parameters and the input values must
check for valid ranges. Invalid ranges must be flagged as an error
and the simulation must be terminated immediately.
3.2.4 How can BFMs be used to inject intentional errors in the
stimulus?
From a user-level abstraction, this can be done via appropriate user level
commands that the BFM provides. Internally, the BFM should be
constructed such that it is capable of injecting errors into selected portions of
its stimulus generation logic, when commanded to do so. Usually, internal
to the BFM, error injection is handled as separate  layers, one for each
abstraction level, each working “below” the layer that is capable of
conducting regular operations. This error injection layer will be activated
upon setting of the appropriate interna l flags (which are, in turn, set by
appropriate user commands). Once activated, the error injection layer will
intercept all stimulus produced by the layer above it, inject the appropriate
errors (as commanded by the user), and pass the stimulus to  the processes of
the next abstraction level.
With this approach, intentional errors can be injected into any level of
abstraction of the system being modelled. This is particularly powerful
when used in conjunction with constrained-random stimulus generation
capabilities.
One of the key requirements during the  intentional error injection is to
keep the user and the test environment, informed of the intentional error and
the expected response. Otherwise, it will create false alarms during the
simulation run or d ebug phase.

--- Page 152 ---
128 Verification
3.3 Bus Monitors
A bus monitor, as its name suggests, is a module that monitors or tracks
the transactions going through the bus. The code for a monitor is  a substitute
for human monitoring, which is typically prone to errors. For example, in the
following figure, the bus monitor is  placed between the host bus and the
DUT.
Figure 3-2. Bus monitor for a host bus
As seen from the above figure, the bus monitor typically has all the bus
signals as inputs only. The outputs it typically drives are non-bus related,
that is, sidebands for informing critical status as hardware signals. The bus
monitor is behavioural code that is instantiated wherever the bus is being
connected.
3.3.1 What are the main responsibilities of a bus monitor?
The main responsibilities of a bu s monitor are as illustrated below:
Protocol Checking: This is by far the most important responsibility
in the bus monitor. Since the bus monitor tracks all the activities
happening on the bus, it must monitor the bus to tr ack:
violations of the bus protocol
any X or Z values in the signals to be monitored
design latencies between  necessary signals
monitor timing violations of setup/hold, etc. Note that this is
not strictly a protocol check.


--- Page 153 ---
Verification 129
Anytime any of the above checks fails, the appropriate message
should be displayed to the user, and any associated sideband output
signal should be asserted. Typically, these checks are implemented,
based on the rules governing the protocol compliance. It is a good
practice to manually comb through the specification of the host bus,
and extend these rules for additional checks that will benefit the
verification activity.
Transaction logging: Since the bus monitor is already keeping track
of the bus activity, it will be helpful to the user to log the bus
activity as useful information. The logging must consist of the
following:
Message with the timestamp of critical activity, like the
beginning of the transaction, address, details of the
transaction type,  data written/read, and the transaction
termination type. These messages c ould be either verbose,
or simply indicate the logic levels of the address, data, and
control signals. If verbose, it is a good idea to have controls
on the message levels, based on configurable parameters.
Facility to log the activity into a file or st dout or both.
Since the messages within the m onitor are unique to its
instance, in a multiple instance scenario, a provision should
exist to specify a unique identifier for each instantiation. For
the user to know from which  monitor a particular message
came, it would be useful to prepend the  message with the
instantiation ID of the monitor. The monitor can be defined
such that the instantiation ID is a  parameter. The user can
then override this parameter for each instance, with unique
values.
Sideband signals:  Typically, it is considered that a bus monitor
consists mainly of inputs. While this is true for the primary bus
signals that the monitor is c onnected to, it is sometimes useful to
convey to the testbench on some important information in the form
of hardware sideband signals. This will help in immediate actions
being taken at the testbench. The presence of sideband signals is an
optional requirement, and specific to the needs of the monitor. One
typical sideband signal is the status bus, which has enc oded in it the
various responses that logic in the  testbench can i nfer, and possibly
terminate the simulation. If there isn’t provision for sideband signals
for status outputs, then there must be a provision within the monitor
to provide tracking  information to a higher-level module,

--- Page 154 ---
130 Verification
instantiating the monitor. This could be as simple as a  reg variable
of status, that can be accessed using the hierarchical access, instead
of being a port. This flag will be useful to terminate the simulation.
3.3.2 Illustrate with an example, the design of a bus monitor.
The monitor needs to be carefully designed considering, the functionality
and the ease of use in a testbench environment. The following example
illustrates how a bus monitor is being designed for an example application
interface, although the underlying principle can be extended for more
complex host buses. The interface and timing di agram for the bus monitor
are as follows:
Figure 3-3. Interfacing an application bus monitor
The example application interface shown above, contains numerous types
of transactions indicated by the type[2:0] bus. For the purpose of
illustration, only a burst write transaction  portion is implemented in the
monitor. This  application interface is a hypothetical interface, and does not
represent any proprietary interface.
The timing diagram of a burst transaction is shown in the following
figure. The protocol for the write burst is as follows:
The transaction  begins with the sampling of  start_xfr signal
with respect to clk, and must be asserted for only one clock.


--- Page 155 ---
Verification 131
If rnw=0, it is a write transaction, else if rnw=1 , it is a read. The
rnw must remain in its state throughout the burst, and is allowed to
change only during the next start_xfr.
The type of transaction is indicated by thetype [2:0] output bus,
and remains valid throughout the burst.
The datao output bus is allowed to change only when dack is
sampled. The data must otherwise remain constant.
The dack is a data acknowledge signal from the application, and
can insert wait states when not ready  to accept the data.
Figure 3-4. Timing diagram of a burst write
The requirements in designing an application bus monitor for the above
portion of the protocol are as follows. More specific requirements can be
added, as per the functionality.
1. Identify the checks for the protocol:
There are numerous combinations of scenarios that can occur in this
simple protocol that need to be monitored. However, for  this
illustration, the following three simple rules will be checked in this
monitor:
During start_xfr sampling, all control signals other than
datao must not be X or Z. If any of  them is X or Z, it is an


--- Page 156 ---
132 Verification
error. If any bit of datao is X or Z,  there must  be a
warning.
Between start and end of a burst, the type and rnw signals
should never change. Otherwise, it is an error and terminates
the simulation.
The addr range must be within the min and max limits
configured by the  user. Oth erwise, it is an error and
terminates the simulation.
2. Identify the messages, message levels, display format/template, and
the message IDs. These should correspond to the list of checks
identified to be monitored. The following are the message levels,
messages, and the IDs to be implemented for this monitor:
3. Identify the user configurable parameters for the monitor.
This particular monitor has three user configurable parameters, that
is,
addr_min : This parameter defines the lower valid value of
theaddr bus.
addr_max : This parameter defines the upper valid value of
theaddr bus.
4. Identify the need and role of sideband signal outputs
This monitor has a single output sideband signal status [3:0],
which contains information useful for the top level testbench to
know at any given time as to what the status of the transaction is.
The following are few encoding sequences in the status bus:
4’b0000 : OKAY. No problems
4’b1000 : ERROR. Terminate simulation


--- Page 157 ---
Verification 133
All other values can be used for conveying any other information to
the testbench.
With the above description as a specification to the  bus monitor, the
following is an example code of implementation.

--- Page 158 ---
134 Verification

--- Page 159 ---
Verification 135

--- Page 160 ---
136 Verification

--- Page 161 ---
Verification 137

--- Page 162 ---
138 Verification
A few salient points regarding the above monitor implementation are:
The above monitor example can be enhanced by adding more checks,
based on the specifications of the tests that the monitor is supposed to
check
The example hasn’t implemented the debug  severity levels for
messages, that is, messages from what level need to be displayed to
the users. The users are encourage to add severity levels to messages.
The above simple illustration may need to be implemented in
multiple files/tasks, based on how many checks need to be
implemented and the  list of features to be monitored.
3.3.3 What other considerations go into designing a Monitor?
While designing a bus monitor, the  following are a few useful features
that need to be considered during specification and implementation:
In a multiple  instance scenario, there must be provision to indicate
each monitor instance’s unique ID, so that the messages displayed
can be unique, in order to know which instance displayed the
message.
There must be provision within the monitor to specify the message
debug level that filters the messages accordingly.
A provision must exist to specify all the variables in the moni tor,
either in the form of a `include, or as user definable
configure commands.
3.4 Random stimulus generation
Random stimulus generation or random  simulation uses stimulus
sequences to the DUT that are random in nature. Note that it is the sequence
that is random. The stimulus for the random simulation is usually machine
generated, unlike the  directed tests, which are generated by the verification
team members. It is important to run the random simulation for the
following obvious reasons:

--- Page 163 ---
Verification 139
Since humans specify the directed test plans, it would be too idealistic to
assume a perfectly c omplete test plan,  foreseeing all the possible
scenarios that the DUT would be subjected to in real life.
The stimulus sequence generation by humans is time consuming,
compared to the machine generated sequence.
The randomness is used to depict real life scenarios, which doesn’t
necessarily follow the sequence tested mostly in the directed tests.
Since the random testing covers a wider span of test scenarios, inc luding
the hard to reach corners (, that is, beyond what is expected from
humans), the coverage of functional te sting is much larger than the
directed sequence.
Although setting up a random based simulation environment up front will
take longer time for the first successful transaction/test to be up and running,
the returns of planning this environment is still worth considering in the long
run. Deferring the random testing for the end of directed testing c ould bring
up surprises that would detect major architectural changes required late in
the design cycle.
3.4.1 Explain with an example, how do I generate random
numbers in Verilog?
Verilog has an useful system function, namely $random, which basically
returns a 32 bit random number every time it is called. The range can also be
constrained, by using the modulus operator (%). An example demonstrating
this is as follows:

--- Page 164 ---
140 Verification
The output of the above simulation run provides output as follows. Note
that the system function call $unsigned  was used to get the 32-bit formatted
unsigned equivalents of the generated random numbers.
Note that since the unsigned version was used, the numbers look quite
large. For shorter ranges, the specific bit ranges of [3:0] could be used to get
numbers within desired ranges.
SystemVerilog has the construct  rand to declare  random variables, and a
randomize command which returns a random number of the variable.
Another construct, named constraint can be used to specify the constraints
of the returning value.
3.4.2 Explain with an example, how do I generate random
stimulus?
The $random system call, as illustrated in the  previous question can be
used for generating a random stimulus sequence. While it is quite
straightforward to get a random number,  mapping this into a functional
stimulus is the tricky part. A mechanism to typecast the  random number

--- Page 165 ---
Verification 141
obtained into a meaningful stimulus is required. The following example will
illustrate how the random stimulus sequence could be generated by using the
tasks/methods of a Bus Functional Model (BFM). The background of the
BFM is as follows:
The BFM has three tasks, for  write, read and
read_modify_write commands.
Each command in the BFM has arguments of addr ,data, and
byte_enables, which specify the address to be read/written,
the write/expected data, and the byte enables for the field. For
simplicity, the address and data is assumed to be 32 bits, and the
byte_enable to be 4 bits.
The random stimulus generation is required to do the following:
The maximum number of transactions generated out of this
random simulation must be user specifiable.
There should be a random number of wait states (between 0 and
5) between the transactions.


--- Page 166 ---
142 Verification


--- Page 167 ---
Verification 143
The following is the output of the above code:

--- Page 168 ---
144 Verification
The following are a few salient points of the above code:
The number of transactions for execution can be changed during
instantiation of the rand_stim module by overriding the default
parameter num_trans value of 10.
In the above, the sequence generator and the tasks of the BFM are
illustrated at the same  level. The  random sequence generator could
be a module that  infers the tasks/methods of the BFM from a
different level of hierarchy too, and hence, facilitating the functional
partitioning better.
There were no other statements than  $display  within the tasks, since
it was purely for illustration. These tasks in real life would have the
necessary statements within the write, read, and rmw tasks.
There would also be a signal like the clock, which will move the
simulation time as per the protocol. In the above code, #5 was used
as a constant time between transactions.
The tasks should preferably be automatic, which enables re-entrance
usage of the tasks by multiple sources concu rrently. Also, avoid use
of any global variables that could be modified by these tasks.
Since each task is blocking in na ture, the next task would begin only
after the completion of the previous one.
Typically, before th e terminal value of num_trans transactions is
reached, there could be a need to terminate the simulation or exit the
for loop. This can be achieved by the use of either disable statement
or the break statement (available in SystemVerilog).
3.4.3 How do I generate constrained random stimulus using
Verilog?
In the example in the previous FAQ, the code is sufficient enough to
produce the address for the full 32 bit range. Sometimes, it is useful to

--- Page 169 ---
Verification 145
constrain the stimulus of the random address range for the te sting purposes.
For example, the address range needs to be within 0x4000 to 0xa000.
In such scenarios, the code should be generic enough to cater to the user
specified min and max ranges of each variable that’s to be constrained. The
above example can be updated to demonstrate how this can be achieved. The
same tasks of write, read, and rmw will be used for illustration here.
The only lines changed are explained in the following.
The changes to the earlier code are as follows:
The base address is set to be themin_addr variable.
The constr_range range was chosen to be between 0 and
(max_addr - min_addr). This itself becomes the oFlip-Flopset
to the base address.
The { $random} now gives the positive values between the 0 and the
range of (max_addr - min_addr).
The output with the above changes is as follows:

--- Page 170 ---
146 Verification
Note that now the addresses are well within the desired range of  0x4000
and 0xa000. The  above mechanism can be used to constrain the other
variables, like the  byte  enables, data etc., for the s timulus generation. For
example, the range for the number of clocks to be idle can also be
constrained between min and max values.
For the user interface, it is recommended to group the min and max
values of the variables into a separate file. This can either be included using
the`include, or  placed  in a  separate parameter  file.  That way,  the  user  is
only required to change the values within this file, and then run the
simulation. One thing to also be considered in r obust code is that, if no
values are specified by the user, then some default values should apply to
these min and max values of the variables.
In SystemVerilog, the  constraint construct in can be used to specify the
bounded ranges for the random variables.
3.4.4 How can I be sure that the constrained random stimulus has
covered all the values in the range without repetition in a
cyclic random fashion? Illustrate this with an example.
One of the limitations in the above-constrained range is that, even though
the transaction sequence was random, there was a high possibility that the
same values could get repeated. This would still be  meaningful, but
unnecessary. Th e simulation session could be repeating the same scenario
over and over again. This could add more simulation cycles to  achieve the
functional coverage goals.
One way to resolve this  would be to have a mechanism by which we
could get a random  sequence, but still unique so that we are able to hit all the
values intended in one session, guaranteed.
The following is a reusable behavioural code that will generate a unique
value every time it is called. The only post processing that needs to be done
is to type-cast this to a meaningful variable, whether it is a transaction type
or address/data/byte-enable  value.
The example inputs the  number of variables involved in the random
stimulus range. Although the unique values returned are between 0 and
num_values-1, this can act as an offset to a base value, if the range is

--- Page 171 ---
Verification 147
between two po sitive numbers. As re quired, the positive numbers can then
by type-cast into a me aningful outcome of the transaction, as explained
earlier FAQ 3.4.2.


--- Page 172 ---
148 Verification

--- Page 173 ---
Verification 149
The output of the above s imulation run is:
The following are the salient points of the observations:
Notice that, for all the iteration values between 0 till ( num_values-1),
all the values were unique.
When you  replay, that is, simulate this code any number of times, the
same sequence repeats although the sequence by itself is random in
nature, that is, the sequence is pseudo-random.
The while loop will automatically stop when all the unique values have
been ‘hit’, thus guaranteeing ‘touching’ all values of the variables within
the range with the minimal number of random calls. This ensures that all
the values h ave been  cyclically  touched. This improves the functional
coverage efficiency, since fewer  calls are required.
The usage scenario of this task can be further improved by encapsulating
this into a  module, and instantiating the same for other variables like
data, byte enables etc.

--- Page 174 ---
150 Verification
These returned values can now be type-cast to either task calls, or as
randomised inputs to other task calls, as illustrated in the earlier example.
SystemVerilog has the  randc constraint, which implements the above
functionality of randomly cycling through all the values in a random
permutation of their declared range. The same functionality above can be
implemented in SystemVerilog with much fewer lines of code.
3.4.5 How can I change the sequence of constrained random
stimulus? Illustrate this with an example.
Notice in the approach used in the previous FAQ, that the sequence is
pseudo-random, that is, the sequence repeats exactly the same way, any
number of times we run the session. This is because the $random  system
task has a default value of a seed within it. The examples earlier  simply used
the same default seed value.
Suppose we wanted a di fferent sequence other than the 2,3,1,5,4,0 as
obtained earlier, then how should the user influence this? The solution is to
simply use a different seed value, explicitly specified by the user, so that the
rest of the sequencing will get generated based on this seed.
Rather than repeating the entire example again, if the following changes
are done to the get_uniq_id module, then the module begins to return
unique values based on a seed, specified by the user.
Add a provision of a parameter in the file, which the user can
override, that is,
Change therand_index  initialization without the seed, to the one
with seed, that is, change the line
In the test_get_uniq_id, the provision  for the user to override the
seed value needs to be specified through a parameter override during
instantiation, that is,
Change the line:
to
to

--- Page 175 ---
Verification 151
When the simulation is run with different seed values, the following
are the sequences obtained:
Notice that, with different seed values, the sequencing is fully different.
Thus it can be mapped into different transactions for obtaining a different
sequence of transactions for different seeds.
3.4.6 What is weighted random stimulus? Illustrate this with an
example.
Note that, in the examples in the previous FAQ, the sequence of random
numbers were indeed pseudo-random, that is, each random call produced a
sequence deterministically.
If this approach were used in a transaction based protocol scenario, then
each random  sample would provide a deterministic sequence of the
transactions to  follow.  For  example,  in the read, write,  and rmw
example earlier, there would definitely be one occ urrence of  read or
write or rmw command each time.
Suppose there was a scenario in which the rmw command were to occur
20% of time, the write  command were to occur 30%  of time, and the
remaining 50% was for read transactions, how could this be achieved?
Specifying this probability of occurrence would be useful, to reflect the real
life scenario of transactions the DUT would be subjected to.
The following paragraphs explains the above scenario, that is, in a given
stimulus sequence of 10 samples, the read would occur only 5 times, the
write only 3 times and the rmw only 2 times. Note that the actual sequence
would be random among themselves, but s till maintain the relative


--- Page 176 ---
152 Verification
probability of occurrence between them. This example implementation can
be generalised or extended for more transaction types
In the illustrations before, the random s timulus could be obtained in
different ways, either unconstrained, or constrained for unique,  or repeatable
values. Suppose we have a requirement wherein a particular model was to
returns different kind of responses, but each response has a particular
weightage. For example, a particular slave model was to respond with
probabilities of 40% Okay, 10 % Error, 30% Disconnect and 20% Abort
responses, and these were to be in a random sequence. This kind of random
stimulus, whose pattern occurs with a different  probability based on the
weightage in a given distribution, is called  weighted random stimulus.
The following example illustrates how the different percentages of the
responses can be achieved in a very generic fashion. The  background for this
example is as follows:
The weight_rand module has an input get_nxt_response,
which, when sampled, returns a response at the next clock. This
implementation has four response types: Okay, Error, Disconnect
and Abort.
For a given sequence of stimulus, the probability of the response
type for a given response is a percentage of the weight for that
response divided by the total weight of all responses. That means,
the sum of the weights need not necessarily be 100. It could be
Okay=10, Error=25, Disconnect = 30, and Abort  = 15. In this case,
the sum is not 100, but the percentage of Okay response is
10/(10+25+30+15), that is, 1/8 (12.5%), the percentage of Error is
25/80 (31.25%) and so on.
The example code that implements the above is illustrated as follows:

--- Page 177 ---
Verification 153

--- Page 178 ---
154 Verification

--- Page 179 ---
Verification 155

--- Page 180 ---
156 Verification
The testbench that instantiates the a bove is illustrated below:

--- Page 181 ---
Verification 157
Running the above with weights of Abort=2, Disconnect=3, Okay=4, and
Error=1, the outputs during different iterations are as captured in the
following table:
Some of the salient points regarding the above illustration are:
The above example illustrates four response types. This can,
however, be modified easily for more/less response types. The
probability of the response will be based on the weightage that the
response type has in totality with the rest of the weights.
The example auto-clears itself when one set of response samples are
done, where one set is the total of all the weights. The next iteration
starts with a totally different starting point, but still adds up to be the
same as specified in the weights, in the  next set of iterations.
The weightage in this illustration is static, that is, the weights are
decided during the instantiation of the module. This can be made to
dynamic, by making new ports as inputs to this module, which will
specify the weightage, instead of parameter. Typically this is not
modified until the current sets of transactions are completed.


--- Page 182 ---
158 Verification
The simulation can be extended for many more samples are
required, and the distribution is uniform as the time progresses.
SystemVerilog has the  dist construct, that implements the above
functionality of weighted distribution of the random variables.
3.4.7 What metrics help in defining the completeness of the
random simulations?
The random  simulations keep producing different stimuli, based on the
seed value to begin with. The completeness of the random simulation is a
difficult question to answer. However, the following metrics help to improve
the confidence level upon completion of the random simulations:
1. Ensure that the constraints are different for each of the seeds to be run.
The constraints must cover both breadth and depth in the simulation.
The following is an example table to illustrate how the breadth and
depth is reached for each feature of the product. Note that this example
has only a very few examples of the constraint variables. These could be
more in number for the specific project being worked.
2.
3.
Make sure that the random simulations with the c onstraints decided have
been run with different seed values. This will help to ensure that the
trajectory taken by the random sequence generator is reasonably
different each time, to activate different functional paths.
It is recommended to run a set of seeds with the directed constraints as
illustrated in the above table, and another set of seeds with the
constraints also randomized.


--- Page 183 ---
Verification 159
4.
5.
6.
7.
If the DUT has parameters that influence the functionality of the
implementation, then the above two steps need to be repeated for the
different conf igurations with varied parameter combinations, too. This
will ensure that the di fferent sets of parameters that influence the DUT
functionality also get verified.
If there are dual clock FIFOs in the design that deal with data
synchronization between the two different clock domains, you need to
ensure running all the above with different c lock frequencies. Typically
this variance is a subset of the DUT parameter combinations. This will
cause the FIFO flags, like full and  empty, to change with different
latencies, allowing any design assumptions that depend upon these
latencies to be checked. If the frequency of both sides of the FIFO is
assumed to have a relationship with any one side being faster than the
other, then all the three ratios of clk1>clk2, clk1=clk2 and clk1<clk2
frequencies should be run.
Some approaches have a limit for the number of transactions
successfully completed as the criterion. In that case, the limit on the
number of transactions should be increased, until no problems/issues are
observed until one or two weeks of wall clock time. While this step
improves the confidence, it might still happen that the random
sequencing has not hit a hidden issue yet. This approach does not give a
measure of the functional space the simulation has covered and has a
high possibility of repeating similar scenarios over and over again.
If the verification environment has a functional coverage metric, then the
random simulation needs to be run until these functional coverage
metrics have been met. This approach is more measurable, and takes
shorter time, than the above method of running for a long time.
3.5 Stimulus generation
In an ideal verification environment, any transaction scenario should be
recreatable by the BFM. Sometimes, the logic to recreate a previously
unanticipated stimulus sequence could either take a long time, or is too
tedious to be implemented. This section discusses the different techniques of
generating the stimulus for the DUT without use of any BFM, and how the
same can be achieved, using the constructs in Verilog. Note that, eventually,
it is important to have the recreation mechanism within the BFM for not

--- Page 184 ---
160 Verification
only controllability, but also as a part of permanent testcase recreation in the
regression suite.
3.5.1 What are some stimulus generation techniques when the
stimulus is not reproducible using BFMs? Illustrate these
with specific examples using Verilog.
The following are a few techniques of generating the stimulus for the
DUT. Each method has its pros and cons, and the method chosen has to be
appropriate to th e usage scenario.
1. Vector replaying : This technique is sometimes useful to replay the
stimulus from a file in the form of 1’s and 0’s as an input to the
DUT. This will be useful when the stimulus is unable/tedious to be
reproduced using the conventional methods of commands of a BFM.
An example of how this is used is illustrated as follows:

--- Page 185 ---
Verification 161
Theinputs .vec  file contains the following:
The output of the above code produces:
To capture this vector file for replay, the mechanism indicated in the
following code snippet can be used:

--- Page 186 ---
162 Verification
Some of the critical factors to be considered during the vector replay
mechanism are:
When there are inout ports in the port list of the vector playback
mechanism, it is important to avoid a conflict/contention for the inout
ports. It is useful to capture the state of the output-enable involving
the inout ports during the vector replay.
Sometimes, the stre ngths of signals are also involved during the
vector-playback. In that case, additional ports of information need to
be communicated, based on the strengths at different instances of the
simulation session. A gasket or wrapper needs to be written that will
infer the strength values and drive the signal strength accordingly.
2. Force/Release commands:

--- Page 187 ---
Verification 163
Sometimes, it is not possible to recreate a problem using the BFM
infrastructure that the  product has. One  of the ways  to recreate the problem
is through the use of  force and  release commands in  Verilog. These
commands, as they indicate, will force the specified value to a net or
variable until it is released.
In the following example, the wire w1 mimics the behavior of an
incorrectly functioning internal net in a test environment which is always
being driven to 0. The force command on that net was timed, so as to see its
assertion of correct values, and then released back.
The above code displays:
Some other salient features of theforce and release mechanism are:
When the target variable of the force command is a wire, that is, the
left hand side of a procedural c ontinuous assignment, the target will
get re-established back to a value being driven after the  release
command. Hence, w1 is back to 0 after the release.

--- Page 188 ---
164 Verification
When the target of the force command is a reg or other variable type,
the target will retain the forced value after the  release until  another
assignment is made to the variable.
The force and release commands can be implemented over internal
nets, using h ierarchical paths from the testbench onwards. In the
above example, it could have been  U1.U2.U3.w1, instead of the
top level net w1.
Although the above example illustrates w1  as a procedural
continuous assignment, using a  wire, the same code works with w1
being a procedural assignment, like a  reg variable, that is, the force
command works on both  reg and  wire variables. One difference
being that the display of w1 in the third line would s till retain the
value of 2, since it is a procedural assignment, remembering what
was assigned to it last u ntil the next procedural assignment, as
follows:
The force command cannot be applied on variables within an
automatic task, since they get  de-allocated at the end of  task
execution. It can, however, be used on variables within a  static task.
3.6 Gate level simulations
This section discusses a few questions that arise prior to, and during gate
level simulations. A gate level simulation consists of replacing the RTL
DUT in the testbench with a synthesized ne tlist. The ga te level  simulations
are typically run before signing off the netlist for fabrication. The gate level
simulations are typically longer in time, compared to the RTL level
simulations, due to more nodes and events toggling in the netlist.
3.6.1 What is SDF back-annotation, and how is it implemented in
Verilog testbench?
SDF annotation is the process to annotate timing information from a
Standard Delay Format (SDF) file into the design using the Verilog
$sdf_annotate system task. The SDF file c ontains the timing  values for
specify path delays, specparam values, timing check constraints, and
interconnect delays. These timing values are usually based on the ASIC
vendors’ characterization of their technology library.

--- Page 189 ---
Verification 165
An example of an SDF backannotation is:
Some of the characteristics of the sdf_backannotation implementation
are:
Since the SDF annotation is an ordered process, that is, the
contents of the SDF file are annotated in the order they are
specified, the SDF constructs can be overridden by specification
from a later annotation.
More than one SDF file can be annotated. Each call to the
$sdf_annotate annotates the timing information from the SDF
file specified in the command.
Different regions of a design can be annotated from different
SDF files by specifying the regions’ hierarchy scope as the
second argument to the  $sdf_annotate command. In the example
above, the topmost module has been annotated. It could,
however, be specified for the individual hierarchies beneath, as
U_top.U1, U_top.U2, etc. It is then necessary to have the
individual SDF files for each of these hierarchies.
The scale factor for the minimum, typical, and maximum values
are 1.0:1.0:1.0 by default. This can be changed in the
$sdf_annotate command, to modify the min:typ:max constants.
3.6.2 What are a few pre-requisites before running gate level
simulations?
Before running any gate level  simulations, the following are a few points
to be verified, to avoid the iterations and issues seen during gate simulations:
1.
2.
Ensure that the synthesis constraints were subjected to the extremes of
the operating conditions. This is to avoid setup and hold violations. A
clean run on Static Timing Analysis (STA) should be a pre-requisite
before running a full timing gate simulation.
Ensure that the assertion and de-assertion of all inputs to th e DUT netlist
in the testbench reflect the constraints to which the synthesis was done.
This includes the reset signal, too. Unrealistic input delays to the DUT

--- Page 190 ---
166 Verification
3.
4.
5.
will cause excessive delays to the timing path, and hence, cause
functional mismatches during simulations.
It may be necessary to a nnotate the SDF delays  of the design into the
simulation. Typically, the SDF file is created out of the synthesis tool
that generated the netlist, too. The SDF file contains the critical timing
information of the design. This  timing information will maintain the
timing requirements of setup and hold delays during simulation.
The operating condition under which the gate simulation should be done
can be specified in the SDF file. This can also be tuned to reflect much
closer to the reality.
Ensure that all the inputs to the netlist are initialized to a known value
(sometimes required to be initialized  at time=0).  This will avoid
unintentional unknown (X) propagation through the netlist.
3.6.3 What is the difference between unit delay and full timing
simulations?
Unit delay simulation is typically don e either during the RTL or gate
level simulations. Unit delay mode is used to debug basic design
functionality. When simulated in this mode, all the delay specifications on
gates, switches and continuous assignments are set to a delay of 1 simulator
time unit. Unit delay simulation is  enabled by the  `delay_mode_unit
compiler directive. Many simulators can  also enable unit delay simulation,
using the+delay_mode_unit invocation switch.
It is important to note that unit delay  simulation is not a part of the
Verilog standard. While most Verilog simulators do support unit delay
simulation capabilities, it  might not lead to identical results in  all simulators.
The following example illustrates the`delay_mode_unit directive:

--- Page 191 ---
Verification 167
When the above code is simulated without the `delay_mode_unit
directive, the output from $monitor is as follows:
With the`delay_mode_unit directive, the output is as follows:
The key points to note here are:
The final assignment to the variable b happens at time 5 instead of
9.
Only the delay in the continuous assignment has  been collapsed to 1
timeunit, whereas the procedural assignment delay of #4 has been
maintained.
The unit delay simulation typically helps to check for any race
conditions between the signal transitions with respect to the clock.
Unit delay mode does not do a good job of reflecting potential timing
problems in real hardware like setup or hold problems.
The unit delay simulation is slower than RTL, but faster than full
timing gate simulation, since there are fewer events to be r esolved,
compared to full timing gate simulation.
Full timing gate simulation is carried out in the full timing mode of the
simulator. This mode simulates the effects of timing on the design logic. It
uses the delay equations specified in the technology file. The actual pin-to-
pin delays within the cells literally constitute the delay of the timing path. A
sanity run of full timing gate simulation is useful because:

--- Page 192 ---
168 Verification
It checks for the critical timing par ameters, like setup and hold times for
storage elements
It verifies any discrepancies between the simulation and  synthesis
models of the cells.
The issue with full timing gate simulation is the run time. It will run
longer than the RTL or unit delay simulation, since there are lot more events
to be tracked by the simulator. The trend now is to  do a combination of
formal verification between the RTL and the  gate netlist and the static timing
analysis of the netlist.
3.6.4 My gate simulation is not passing, and some tests hang. What
are the key points to look for?
Gate simulations are sometimes run to  see any timing effects that exist
due to the min/max operating conditions. There are some times when the
gate simulations do not functionally work equivalent to the RTL simulation.
Some of the reasons are:
1.
2.
3.
4.
Variables are not specified correctly in the RTL sensitivity list.
Conservative modeling in the cells may introduce Xs in the outputs,
especially in the scenarios of setup and hold violations. This w ould
cause a chain of events that would make the simulation hang.
Incorrect constraint used during synthesis may cause the delay using
the netlist to  actually c ross a clock period, and cause functionally
incorrect behavior.
A functionally inc orrect response, due to bad logic in the netlist
The net result of the above factors  is that the  DUT during simulation
doesn’t respond in a functionally correct manner. The following are a few
tips to be considered during gate simulation problems:
1.
2.
3.
Run the RTL through linting tools, to make sure that there aren’t any
sensitivity list problems, and analyze the report of the linting tool
carefully, to see there are no serious issues.
During the synthesis compilation, look at the elaboration and
compilation log file to see if there were any unusual warning / e rror
messages from the synthesis tool about unconnected ports or floating
logic being optimized away.
Ensure that the constraints used during the synthesis actually reflect
the best and worst case operating conditions,  clock uncertainty, clock
latency, wireload models, etc. Basically, the constraints have to reflect

--- Page 193 ---
Verification 169
4.
5.
close to the real life operating condition of the chip for which the
netlist is being verified. If these constraints are not met, it is not
recommended to proceed to full timing gate simulation.
If the static timing analysis (STA) in the above met the constraints
without any violations, the functional issue can be isolated as either a
timing or, a bad logic problem. The timing issue can be resolved by
normalizing the delays within the individual gates into one timescale
tick through the unit delay simulation. Many simulators  support the
`delay_mode_unit directive, or the  +delay_mode_unit switch for
unit delay simulation.
Even with unit delay simulation, if the problem  persists, then it could
either be a functionally incorrect model of the cell, or a bad logic
problem during synthesis. Functional problems in the cells could
result. due to incorrect modeling of the User Defined Primitives
(UDPs) in the cell library, causing race conditions. Running a formal
comparison between the RTL and  the netlist can isolate the compare
points where there are failures.
SUMMARY
This chapter discussed details about the topics of verification. The
chapter began with implementation of messaging, which is the mechanism
of communication to the users. The next topic was the design of monitors
and their usefulness. An example monitor code was also provided. BFMs
were discussed next, which form the  substance of the test environment. The
last topic was stimulus generation through BFMs either by directed or
random fashion. Examples were discussed for the different illustrations.

--- Page 194 ---
Chapter 4
MISCELLANEOUS
INTRODUCTION
This chapter lists various questions that may come up during the course
of using the  Verilog HDL. These FAQs are not in any particular order or
category.
4.1.1 What is the difference between a vectored and a scalared net?
Both scalared and vectored are Verilog constructs used on multi-bit nets
to specify whether or not  specifying bit and part select of the nets is
permitted. For example,

--- Page 195 ---
172 Miscellaneous
4.1.2 What is the difference between assign-deassign and force-
release?
The assign-deassign and force-release constructs in Verilog have similar
effects, but differ in the fact that  force-release can be applicable to  nets and
variables, whereas  assign-deassign is applicable  only to variables.
The procedural  assign-deassign construct is intended to be  used for
modelling hardware behaviour, but the construct is not synthesizable by
most logic synthesis tools. The  force-release construct is  intended for
design verification, and is  not synthesizable.
4.1.3 What is the order of precedence when both assign-deassign
and force-release are used on the same variable?
The force statement overrides the value of assign statement until it is
released. The following example illustrates the same:

--- Page 196 ---
Miscellaneous 173
The above code produces the following output:
As evident from the above, the  force command has overridden the
assigned value earlier and relinquished it back to its assigned value after the
release command.
4.1.4 How can I abort execution of a task or a block of code?
The Verilog  disable statement will be able to abort the execution of a
task or block of code. Disabling a block of code would be useful in scenarios
like:
Executing a “break” command within a loop, to skip the rest of them
loop iterations, and exit the loop
Terminating a task before its completion
Note that the disable statement is used with a block name. For example,
In the above example, “block1” and “block2” are the block names. As
the statements get executed, when the  disable statement is h it, the remaining

--- Page 197 ---
174 Miscellaneous
statements in block2, that is, statements 5 and 6 don’t get executed. They are
skipped, and the execution resumes from statement 7.
The only restriction on using the  disable statement is that it cannot be
used in a function, as it would invalidate the function and its return value. It
can, however, be used in a  task.
SystemVerilog also introduces the  break command to exit the loop. This
is more graceful than the  disable statement as illustrated in the following
example:
If the current iteration needs to be skipped on certain conditions,
SystemVerilog has added a command continue which will directly jump to
the end of the loop. For example, in the following code, the loop would be
skipped for all odd values of the variable i.

--- Page 198 ---
Miscellaneous 175
The output of this test program displays:
4.1.5 What are the differences between the looping constructs
forever, repeat, while, for, and do-while?
The statements  forever, repeat, while, and for are the looping statements
supported in Verilog-2001 and the  do-while construct is introduced in
SystemVerilog. These  statements fundamentally differ in how many times
the statements within the  begin-end scope of the loop is executed. The
following bullets  summarize these differences:
forever: Executes the statements within its begin-end block forever,
without any variable to control it until the simulation session
terminates. Fo r example,:
Note that a forever loop cannot be terminated via a disable statement.
repeat: Executes statements within its  begin-end block a  fixed
number of times that is evaluated  once at the beginning of the loop.
For example:

--- Page 199 ---
176 Miscellaneous
Note above that the var1 has to be within brackets, as (var1).
Without the brackets, it is a syntax error. Since the variable size is a
constant that needs to be fixed a priori before entering the  repeat
loop, the possibility of an infinite loop through the repeat construct
doesn’t occur. The  disable statement can be used to exit the loop
prematurely.
while: Executes the statements within its  begin-end block
indefinitely,  until its expression becomes false. The loop expression
will also evaluate to false if it has a X or Z value in it. For example,
The above code can potentially end up being an infinite loop, if there
is no statement to falsify the expression of the  while loop. The
disable statement can be used to exit the loop prematurely.
for: Executes the statements within its begin-end block, based on
the number of times its variable is  modified, in st eps, until the
variable evaluates to X or Z or false.

--- Page 200 ---
Miscellaneous 177
The above code displays the values of i as 0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7. Note that
for loop also has a potential of entering into an infinite loop, if the
expressions don’t get falsified over a period of time. The disable
statement can be used to exit the loop prematurely.
Unlike the repeat loop, the loop variable can be manipulated within
the for loop. For example, in the above code, if the statement “i = i +
1” within the begin-end block is uncommented, then the display will
be of values 0,2,4,6. This capability could, if used incorrectly, also
be a cause for entering an infinite loop. Thus, modifying the loop
variable in a for loop is not a best practice, and should be strongly
discouraged.
Another unique feature of for loop is that it is the only looping
construct supported by the many synthesis tools. The statements
within the for loop are replicated, once for each value of the looping
index. For this reason, the bounds of for loop need to be fully
deterministic when the code is read by a logic synthesis tool.
do-while: Executes the statements within its begin-end block,until
the variable within the while statement evaluates to X or Z or false.
The expression is evaluated at the end of the loop.

--- Page 201 ---
178 Miscellaneous
The key advantage of the  do-while statement is that it guarantees the
execution of the loop statements at least once before reaching the
end of the loop. Hence, this avoids the duplication of the loop body
outside the  start of the loop before checking the entry of a normal
while loop.
4.1.6 What is the difference between based and unbased numbers?
Based numbers are those which have a base identifier preceding the
actual number. For example, 4’habcd represents a number with a
hexadecimal base. An unbased number has no base specified before it, and
represents a simple integer. For example, the integer 23 is an unbased
number, since it has no base specification preceding it.
4.1.7 What does it mean to “short-circuit” the evaluation of an
expression?
Verilog s upports numerous operators that have rules of associativity and
precedence. In some of the expressions, the result of the expression can be
evaluated early on, due to the pr ecedence and influence to override the rest
of the expression. In  that case, the entire expression need not be evaluated.
This is called short-circuiting and expression evaluation.
For example:
In the expression above, the result of the test (in1 > in2) is ANDed
with the re sult of If the result of(in1 > in2) is false
(1'b0), then tools can already determine that the result of the AND
operation will be 0. Thus, there is no ne ed to evaluate and rest
of the equation is short-circuited.

--- Page 202 ---
Miscellaneous 179
4.1.8 What is the difference between the logical (==) and the case
(===) equality operators?
The “ ==” operator specifies logical equality and the “ ===” equality
represents the case equality. The “  = = ” logical equality operator is used to
model hardware, where comparisons to high-impedance or unknown values
would yield ambiguous results (an unknown or X in simulation). In other
words, if any of the operands of the “ ==” operator contain X or Z, then the
result is ambiguous and is an “X”. For example,
Since at least one of the operands, a, contains X in one of its bits, the
result is X and in this case, the message “reached else” is displayed. Note
that in this example, even though it appears that both a and b appear to be
equal, the presence of a X in either will result in a mismatch during the
comparison operation.
The “= = = ” case equality operator is intended for verification, w here it
is important to test if a value is high-impedance or unknown. If any of the
operands of “ ===” contain X or Z bits, their comparison is still considered
during evaluation and a Boolean result is reached, that is, the result is a
1'b1 or a 1'b0. For example,
In the above, “reached if” is displayed. The example works the same if X
is replaced with Z.

--- Page 203 ---
180 Miscellaneous
4.1.9 What are the differences and similarities between the logical
(<<, >>) and the arithmetic (<<<, >>>) shift operators?
The logical s hift operators are (<< and >>). The logical shift operator has
been present from Verilog-1995. The  arithmetic shift o perators are (<<< and
>>>), which were introduced with Verilog-2001.
Three of them, that is, logical left shift (<<), arithmetic left shift
(<<<) and  logical shift right(>>) operators, shift the bits left/right by
the number of bit positions specified by the right operand, and the
vacated bits are filled with zeros.
The arithmetic right shift op erator (>>>) will fill the vacated bits
with 0 if the left op erand is unsigned, and the most significant bit if
the left operand is signed.
The following example illustrates all the above facts:

--- Page 204 ---
Miscellaneous 181
4.1.10 What is the difference between a constant part-select and an
indexed part-select of a vectored net?
The constant part-select and indexed part-select are two types of
addressing the contiguous bits of a vectored net/reg, or any multi-bit variable
declaration.
The constant part  select, as the name suggests, has a constant definition
for its upper and lower bounds. For exa mple,
where both msb and1sb must be constant expressions, that is, they have
fixed values during compile time itself.
In the case of indexed part select, as th e name suggests, the width of the
part select (the right  operand) must be constant, but the starting or ending
point of the part select (the left operand)can vary. For example,:

--- Page 205 ---
182 Miscellaneous
Note the “ +:” and “-:” syntax in the above usage. The + : indicates that
the part select bit numbers will incrementfrom the value of the left operand
up to the width  specified by the right operand (which must be constant). The
- : indicates that the part select of the bit numbers will decrementfrom the
value of the left operand up to the width specified by the right op erand
(which must be con stant). For the purpose of understanding this better, the
general expressions used for analysis are:
variable[base +: offset] and
variable [base -: offset]
to arrive at the variable [physical_msb: physical_lsb].
The following table  summarizes the context and usage scenarios:
4.1.11 Illustrate how memory indirection is achieved in Verilog.
Indirection is a mechanism where a pointer is passed as a value of an
argument to memory. This is very commonly used in software. In  Verilog,
the address of a memory location can be specified as an expression,  too. One


--- Page 206 ---
Miscellaneous 183
way to specify this is in the form of the value of another location in the same
memory. For example, in the following:
suppose the value of my_memory[10]  = 16’h1a00, then the result of
new_value is as good as specifying as  my_memory[16’h1a00]. Hence,
the memory indirection can be achieved.
4.1.12 What is the logic synthesized when a non-constant is used as
an index in a bit-select?
A multiplexor is synthesized when a non-constant is  used as an index in a
bit-select. The following is an example:
The above RTL code will get synthesized into a multiplexor with 8 bits
of data_in and 3 bits of select, as follows. Typically, the  synthesis
tools will try to pick up an 8:1 multiplexor from the target library. If it is not
available, the multiplexor gets synthesized, using logic gates.
Figure 4-1. A multiplexor generated out of non-constant bit  select


--- Page 207 ---
184 Miscellaneous
4.1.13 How are string operands stored as constant numbers in a  reg
variable?
Strings are stored as ASCII characters in 8 bit fields. For example, the
ASCII characters for lower case a-z are 8’h61 to  8’h7a. Hence, the  reg
declaration that uses these fields needs to accommodate the correct number
of bits with 8 bits  for each character.
Since the ascii characters are stored as 8 bit fields, modifying these bits
would change the value being displayed. The following exa mple illustrates
this.
SystemVerilog allows the definition of variables as  string. This is a very
flexible mechanism of not only initialising these variables with a
dynamically a llocated array of characters, but also includes a set of
associated functions which return the length of the string, character
manipulation, case conversion etc.

--- Page 208 ---
Miscellaneous 185
4.1.14 How can I typecast an expression to control its sign?
The sign of an expression can be controlled by typecasting with two
system functions namely $signed and $unsigned. These functions evaluate
the expression to return the type of sign as requested. For example,
As illustrated above, casting is very beneficial in the  middle of
compound operations.
4.1.15 What are the pros and cons of using hierarchical names to
refer to Verilog objects?
Verilog allows the access of variables by using hi erarchical paths. For
example, the status net at the top level can be assigned directly with the
value, as seen in the hierarchy underneath:
The advantage of using hierarchical names is:
It is easy to debug the internal signals of a design, especially if they
are not a part of the top level pinout.

--- Page 209 ---
186 Miscellaneous
The disadvantages of using hierarchical names are:
Sometimes, during synthesis, these hierarchical names get
ungrouped or dissolved  or renamed, depending upon the synthesis
strategy and switches used, and hence, will cease to exist. In that
case, special switches need to be added to the synthesis c ompiler
commands, in order to  maintain the hierarchical naming.
If the Verilog code needs to be translated into VHDL, the
hierarchical names are not translatable.
4.1.16
 Does Verilog support an operator?
Yes. Verilog s upports the operation by using two astrices, back to
back. This operator was added with the Verilog-2001 release. For exa mple,
A value of 2 would mean out1 = in1 * in1 , that is, the value getting
multiplied to itself. Simulation, however, works for powers other than 2, as
well.
4.1.17 What is the main limitation of fork-join in Verilog, and how
is this overcome  in SystemVerilog?
The main limitation of  fork-join construct in Verilog is that it is static,
that is, the execution of the code beyond the join is suspended until all the
processes within the fork-join are completed. For example, in the following
code, the last $display statement gets executed only after 10 time units,
although the process 1 is completed in 5 time units:

--- Page 210 ---
Miscellaneous 187
The above code produces the following display outputs:
SystemVerilog adds two new keywords for joining parallel processes:
join_any  and  join_none.
When the  join in the code a bove is replaced by  join_any, then the
following display outputs are produced:
Notice that the  fork-join_any exits after the first process gets completed,
that is, at 5 time units.
When the  join in is replaced by  join_none, then the following display
outputs are produced:

--- Page 211 ---
188 Miscellaneous
Notice that the fork-join_none exits after spawning both the processes
and not waiting for any of them to be completed, that is, exits at at 0 time
units.
The join_any and join_none constructs of SystemVerilog do not hold the
fork process until all of its process are necessarily completed.
4.1.18 Can I return from a function without having it disabled?
It is illegal to disable a function in Verilog-1995 an d 2001. However,
SystemVerilog has introduced a keyword  return, that skips the rest of the
lines of the function, and returns back to the block that called the  function.
For example, in the following code, the function would return back, if in1
is greater than in2.
The above code would produce the output displays of:

--- Page 212 ---
Miscellaneous 189
4.1.19 What is strobing? How do I selectively strobe a net?
Strobing is a facility defined in  Verilog by which simulation data on
selected nets or variables can be captured  at the end of the current simulation
time instant, after all the events scheduled for this time have occurred, and
just before the simulation time is advanced. In Verilog, strobing is facilitated
by the $strobe system call. Syntactically, this system call is very similar to
the $display  system call. An example of the  $strobe system call follows:
Functionally, the $strobe system call creates internal monitoring events
of its arguments, which are re-enabled at every user-specified time-step.
Variants of $strobe  include  $strobeh  (hexadecimal formatted),  $strobeo
(octal formatted), $strobeb  (binary formatted). All of these system calls
print their results on the  standard output device. For printing the strobed
outputs to a specific file, instead of the standard output, there exist the file-
specific variants of these system calls: $fstrobe, $fstrobeb, $fstrobeh, and
$fstrobeo. The syntax of these calls takes on an additional argument for the
file-handle. For example:
In addition to  $strobe,  Verilog has an additional system call, called
$monitor, which is used for taking snapshots of signal changes during
simulation. Like $strobe,  the  $monitor  system call also creates internal
monitoring-events of its arguments. However, unlike $strobe, a $monitor

--- Page 213 ---
190 Miscellaneous
call cannot  create other simulation eve nts. For example, we  can create a
time-event (that is, simulation event) for a $strobe:
In this example, the values of the argument signals of  $strobe are printed
out to the  standard output at every posedge of the clock signal.
However, $monitor effectively, “stands by itself”. Example:
In this example, every change on the rx_active and rx_data
signals causes $monitor  to print out the changes to the sta ndard output
device.
From this example, it is clear that a  $monitor  call for a given set of
arguments should be issued  only once  in a simulation.If  $monitor is called
more than once, then the most recent invocation overrides all previous calls.
In the following example, on the signals tx_valid and tx_data will be
monitored:

--- Page 214 ---
Miscellaneous 191
Finally, as with $strobe, there are variants of the $monitor system call as
well: $monitorh, $monitoro, $monitorb, $fmonitor, $fmonitorh,
$fmonitoro, and  $fmonitorb,  with the exact same mea nings as
corresponding with $strobe.
4.1.20 Summarize the main differences between $strobe and
$monitor.
The differences between $strobe  and  $monitor  are summarized in the
following points:
$strobe can be used to create new simulation events, simply by
encapsulating the $strobe system call within a simulation construct
that moves simulation time, such as @(posedge clock), @(negedge
clock),@(any_signal) etc.There can exist multiple $strobe  system
calls at the same time, with identical or different arguments.
$monitor stands alone. A given set of arguments of  $monitor form
their own unique sensitivity list. Only one  $monitor  call can be
active at any time. Each call to  $monitor  replaces any previous
call(s) to $monitor.
4.1.21 How can I selectively enable or disable  monitoring?
$monitor can be selectively enabled or disabled by the  $monitoron and
the $monitoroff system calls, respectively. The $monitoron and $monitoroff
system calls affect only the most recent call to $monitor.
4.1.22 How can  I specify arguments on the Verilog simulator’s
command line?
User defined command line arguments to the Verilog simulator are
usually pr eceded by a “+ ”, and are generally referred to as “plusargs”. For
example, a Verilog command line may look like this:
Here, the plusargs are MYGPA and MYSCHOOL. The values assigned
to these plusargs are “ 4.0” for MYGPA and “ geek_factory ” for
MYSCHOOL.
Verilog defines system-tasks for determining

--- Page 215 ---
192 Miscellaneous
which plusargs are defined :  $test$plusarg
what is the value assigned to each plusarg:  $value$plusarg
Continuing with the above example:
Therefore, we can use  $test$plusargs in a Verilog testbench to query if
particular plusargs were defined on the command line.
After knowing which plusargs were defined on the command line, the
value assigned to each plusarg can be queried as well, using the
$value$plusarg system task.
Again, continuing with the previous exa mple:
would result in
Similarly, the following snippet of code:
would result in
In other words,  $value$plusargs is analogous to the sprintf() function in C.

--- Page 216 ---
Miscellaneous 193
4.1.23 Can the `define  be used for text substitution through
variable instead of literal substitution only?
Typically the ` define text macro has been used for literal text
substitution only. For example,
In the above example,`width is literally replaced by 8 wherever it is
used. This was the usage syntax in Verilog-1995. However, from Verilog-
2001 onwards, the text substitution can also work, taking in variables, and
still do text substitution as required. For example,
In the above example, wherever the `pos_clk will be called, it will be
substituted by @(posedge clk), with the clk being the argument
passed to the text macro.
Note : During text substitution, it is im portant to pay attention to the white
spaces, too. For example, in the ' define  in above example, if a white space
exists between pos_clk and (in1), the replacement wouldn’t work.
SUMMARY
This chapter discussed miscellaneous topics that couldn’t be allocated
into the rest of the chapters. These topics are spread across the different
sections of the Verilog la nguage.

--- Page 217 ---
Chapter 5
COMMON MISTAKES
COMMON VERILOG CODING MISTAKES
This chapter describes different e rrors that aren ’t detected during the
compile time, but show up either as functional problems or as run-time
problems during simulations. The list presented is by not exhaustive, but it
captures most of the common mistakes seen during the  development phase.
Each of these mistakes is illustrated with an example, and possible
workarounds to avoid these from occurring.
5.1 Some common errors that are not detected at
compile-time
These are the mistakes that are not detected during the compile time, that
is, it is a legal syntax of Verilog, but it ends up being either functionally
incorrect, or causes hang during simulations, due to deadlock  or live-lock,
etc.
5.1.1 What are some ways a race condition can get created, and
how can these race conditions be avoided?
Race condition happens when two variables are being assigned values at
the same event time. Race conditions also happen due to incorrect coding
style of using the blocking  assignments in clocked processes. The
destination variables wouldn’t have been scheduled to be updated due to the
bad coding styles resulting in incorrect values being updated, hence, causing

--- Page 218 ---
196 Common Mistakes
a race between the source and destination variables. The receiving/retrieving
agent, which could be another variable, or a function, like $display,  using
this variable, would display the value as per its scheduling resolution. In the
following example, the same variable is initialised in two blocks:
The above code displays either a 0 or 1 for the variable “a ", and it
typically follows the value that was last assigned to it. In general, this is
heavily dependent on the implementation of the simulator. The value of “b"
might be shown as X or 0 or 1, depending on the event ordering of the
simulator.
One of the recommendations is to avoid driving variables from multiple
sources. If a variable needs to be a function of information from multiple
processes, then the assignment to the variable must  happen in  one place,
with the  control variables on the RHS  of the assignment.
The other recommendation is to assign the variable in-line.  Beginning
with Verilog-2001, there is a convenient way to initialise the variable from
in-line during the declaration itself. For example, the variablea, above, can
be initialised in only one place as:

--- Page 219 ---
Common Mistakes 197
The SystemVerilog standard further enhances the above initialisation
procedure, such that all the in-line initialisations are guaranteed to happen
prior to the execution of any events before any simulations begin. See also
FAQ 5.1.15 for  additional side effects related to race condition.
5.1.2 Illustrate how the infinite loops get created in the looping
constructs like forever, while and for.
Infinite loops are one of the common things that cause a hang in a
simulation. If the loops don’t have a finite end value for the looping variable,
then the loop never terminates. The following are common examples:
Note that the above  while loop only exits if some other process changes
done to be 0. If this never happens, then the loop never terminates, but is
syntactically c orrect.
The fix for the critical loops is to add a check within the for loop for a
way to disable the loop when the loop variable exceeds a limit. Other way is
to add a watchdog timer parallel to the for loop in a fork-join. This would
stop the simulation if the loop doesn’t get terminated in a specific number of
iterations or a specific amount of time.
With SystemVerilog, an assertion statement can be used instead of
having to write a watc hdog timer.


--- Page 220 ---
198 Common Mistakes
Note that the a bove for loop wouldn’t terminate since the termination
condition of i >= 0 is always met. The fix for this is similar to the
addition of watchdog timer or use of the assertion feature in  SystemVerilog.
Note that the $display statement above is never reached since the forever
statement never gets completed. This makes the forever statement to be the
last statement in any procedural block. The statements after the forever loop
should be added into a different procedural block.
5.1.3 Illustrate the side-effects of specifying a function without a
range.
It is common to use the function to assign a value. A mistake can happen
if a range for the function return is not specified. If a range is not specified,
Verilog will assume a 1 bit return value. If a multi-bit return value was
calculated in the function, only the least significant bit is returned. In the
following example, the value of the correct result is  7 if the range of [31:0] is
specified in the function definition. Without a range, however, only the least
significant bit of the value is returned, which is 1.

--- Page 221 ---
Common Mistakes 199
There would not be any compilation errors for the function definition. It
is a runtime functional e rror. To correct the error, the function should be
declared with a range of sufficient size for the re turn value, such as:
5.1.4 Illustrate how the errors of passing arguments to  a  function
in incorrect order is eliminated in SystemVerilog.
The arguments to a  function call have to be exactly in the same order as
the input  arguments defined in the  function. Passing arguments in an
incorrect order to a  function call, would result in  incorrect functionality,
although it is syntactically correct. For example, in a  function call, two of
the inputs, say, in1 andin2 could result in incorrect functionality if the
variables that call the function were not passed in the right order.
SystemVerilog has an enhancement to  function’s that eliminates this
ambiguity, by bringing in a feature to both  task and function calls, wherein
the arguments to the  function can be passed explicitly by name, rather than
implicitly by order. In the following code, the arguments of the  function call
are connected to their right source and destinations, although the order in
which they have been passed are not in the same order the  function
definition has been declared.

--- Page 222 ---
200 Common Mistakes
The result of the above function call, by passing arguments by name, is
the same as it was with implicit order of arguments to the  function call.
Hence, this  eliminates possibilities of in-advertant errors during  function
calls.
5.1.5 Using tri-state logic inside a chip
The presence of internal tri-state logic is a c ritical consideration for
power sensitive  products. Normally a multiplexor should be used in place of
tri-state logic. However, if the tri-state logic remains in the RTL, it is not an
error for compilation. Synthesis tools sometimes warn the users. The linting
tools also  detect this condition, and report this to the user.
5.1.6 Illustrate the side effects of not having a final else clause in an
if-else construct.
In a combinatorial block, not having a final  else clause would result in a
latch when synthesized. This is a fully legal construct in Verilog, and would
compile without error. For  example,

--- Page 223 ---
Common Mistakes 201
In the above code, there is no  else clause in the c ombinatorial block and
would result in a latch when synthesized. Many synthesis and linting tools
detect and report this very well. If the latch is not to be inferred, then an else
block is required.
If the intent is to produce a latch, any synthesis and lint warnings are
false. The warnings can be avoided by using the  always_latch keyword in
SystemVerilog as follows:
5.1.7 What is the side effect of not having a default clause in a case
construct
This is another common reason for the cause of un-intentional latches.
The default case is necessary if all the cases are not fully specified. For
example,

--- Page 224 ---
202 Common Mistakes
The presence of the default statement will initialise theout1 variable
for all definitions of case items that are not be specified. Good linting tools
specify the presence of the latches, and the synthesis elaboration log file also
needs to be checked for the presence of latch inference.
5.1.8 Illustrate example of how unintentional deadlocked situations
can happen during simulation.
When there are interactions between two processes in a han dshake
interface form, it is important to ensure that the implementation doesn’t
allow itself to become deadlocked. The deadlock situation is one in which
one process is waiting for the other process to enable it, which in turn will
enable the source process. The code could be a syntactically correct
implementation, and  still have a deadlock situation. The scenario can happen
in both synchronous and asynchronous designs. A simple asynchronous
example has been illustrated in the following, to demonstrate how  deadlock
occurs.

--- Page 225 ---
Common Mistakes 203
In the above example, the displays of variable a and b being detected
will never get asserted, since the variable a has been initialised to 0. In the
above example, if the variable a gets initialised to 1, then all the displays get
asserted. The above example is an illustration of the deadlock scenario,
which can be difficult to capture in a larger implementation.
SystemVerilog eliminates the race condition with always_comb, which
automatically triggers once at time 0, after all pending time 0 assignments
are executed.
5.1.9 Having a programmed loop that does not move simulation-
time
When any form of loop executes without any delay in be tween iterations,
the code w ithout a defined termination criteria would make the simulator
hang at that loop. The delay can be either through a ( posedge clk), or #
delay constructs. The simulation time also doesn’t move ahead, due to this
issue since there is no advancement of time. For example, in the following,
the while loop runs in 0 time delay bet ween iterations forever,  and would
cause a hang.
These kind of zero delay loop is only a problem if another process is
reading the variables assigned in the loop. In the above example, the
variables assigned in the loop might not have a chance to propagate to the
DUT. This causes a write-write .. write-read race condition. This scenario
typically occurs in a testbench.
One of the common workarounds to detect such unintentional hang
scenarios is by introducing a check in difference in tim e between iterations

--- Page 226 ---
204 Common Mistakes
just before the end of the loop. If the time didn’t advance, then the loop
should be exited. The following is an extension of the above example with
the time check between the itera tions of the loops:
Having checks like the a bove in loops that are suspiciou s of being hung
will help in easy debugging.
5.1.10 Illustrate the side effect of leaving an input port unconnected
that influences a logic to an output port
Leaving an input pin floating will cause a `bz to be propagated during
functional simulation. Durin g synthesis, it will cause the gate optimiser to
optimise away the logic that propagates be yond a floating input. For
example,

--- Page 227 ---
Common Mistakes 205
The above logic w ould get synthesized, such that the u_in1 is not
connected to any logic within its hierarchy, andin1 is directly connected to
out2 in thelower hierarchy, (sinceout2 is an or’ing function ofin1
with ‘nothing’).
5.1.11 Illustrate the side effect of not connecting all the ports during
instantiation
Unconnected input ports evaluate to a ‘z’. If the input port is used in if
conditions with logical equality operator (==), then the condition evaluates
to a logical false. For example,

--- Page 228 ---
206 Common Mistakes
The above example will display “Reached else”, since there was nothing
connected to port en. Most of the simulators issue a warning message if
input ports are unconnected or left floating.
The above mis-connections can be detected thr ough a monitor module
that would be pee king at all the inputs and outputs of the DUT. An example
snippet of code to detect the floating inputs and outputs is:

--- Page 229 ---
Common Mistakes 207
Note that the check for floating input is done once through an  initial
block, since the state of the input is not expected to change dynamically. If
the scenario of intentionally floating the input is  necessary, then the above
code needs to be placed in an  always block. The above monitor module can
be instantiated within the mod1_top module as:
With theen input left floating in the testbench, the display outputs of the
above are:
5.1.12 Illustrate the side effect of forgetting to increase the width of
state registers as more states get added in a state mac hine.
Normally the width of the state register is the closest power of 2, that is,
for a 5 state state-machine, the state register would be  [2 : 0] or 3 bits wide.
The state variables would be from 3’b000 to 3’b111.
As the number of states in the state machine increase and go past 3’b111,
the width of the state variable also needs to be increased to [3:0], etc.
Suppose the additional states were having values like 4’b1000, 4’b1001, etc.,
and the width of the state register remained at [2:0]. This w ould erroneously
truncate to 3’b001 for the state value of 4’b1001, and to 3’b101 for the state
value of 4’b1101.
It is syntactically correct to have a smaller w idth of the state variable
register and larger values of the state variables, and would not cause any
error during compilation. But,  this would lead to func tionally incorrect
results. Some of the good linting tools would catch this type of problem.
SystemVerilog has a new feature of enumerated state variables that will
help in resolving this issue. The keyword  enum is used for this purpose,
which both assigns and increments the new variables added into this. The
following example illustrates the use of this feature:

--- Page 230 ---
208 Common Mistakes

--- Page 231 ---
Common Mistakes 209
In the above example, the state variables current_state  and
next_state are declared through enum. Without any assignments, the
simulator and synthesis tools will assign the values linearly, incrementing
with value of idle=0, read=1, write=2, wa it4rdy=3, etc. As more states get
added to this, the values simply increment.
5.1.13 Illustrate the side effect of an implicit 1 bit wire declaration
of a multi-bit port during instantiation.
This is a c ommon problem seen during connecting blocks with multi-bit
port sixes. Since Verilog has the feature to define implicit 1 bit wires during
port connections, the multi-bit port will be connected to single bit wires. It is
a WARNING and not ERROR during compilation for most of the
simulators. If the WARNING messages are turned off, or if there are too
many of these WARNING messages, this issue can go  undetected at the
simulator level, and become an error during functional simulation. For
example,

--- Page 232 ---
210 Common Mistakes
This issue is detected as an ERROR by the s ynthesis tools. Also, some of
the editors, like EMACS, can be  commanded to declare the intermediate
wires of the correct width.
SystemVerilog provides enhancements that can prevent this i mplicit 1-bit
wire error. The implicit named port connection during mod ule instantiations
will not permit connections where the net is a different size than the port.
5.1.14 Same variable used in two loops running simultaneously
Sometimes accidentally, a loop variable is used in two different blocks
(often the for loops), and would be modified in both places. Although this is
syntactically correct, it w ould cause functional problems. For example, in
the following code, the same variable, “i ”, is being modified in two
different loops, which could be difficult to detect in large pieces of code:

--- Page 233 ---
Common Mistakes 211
The output of the above code produces displays as:
Note that the iteration from 0-8 is shared between the two loops. In a few
rare occasions, this could be a genuine requirement in behavioural coding, in
which case the user needs to verify that the intended functionality is
correctly met.
However, SystemVerilog has a good feature of  declaring the variable
within the  for loop so that the variable is  local to that loop only. The same
for loop in the above example, in SystemVerilog would be:

--- Page 234 ---
212 Common Mistakes
The output of the above SystemVerilog code would produce all the 8
iterations from both loops as follows:
Some of the considerations in using a variable declaration within the for
loop are:
The local declarations of the variables within the  for loop cause the
variable to have  automatic properties, that is, will not be overwritten
when used in multiple loops, as illustrated in above example.
The loop variable is visible only within the  for loop, and not outside
it. If the variable needs to be accessed outside the for loop, it must be
declared explicitly outside the  loop

--- Page 235 ---
Common Mistakes 213
5.1.15 Illustrate the side effects of  multiple processes writing to the
same variable.
When the same variable is assigned in two different processes, it not only
creates race conditions during simultaneous a ssignments, it becomes non-
synthesizable. Most of the simulators allow  compilation to proceed, since it
is syntactically correct. For example,
Most of the linting tools are able to detect this, and is also a compilation
error seen during synthesis.
5.1.16 Illustrate the side effect of specifying delays in assignment’s.
Specifying any kind of delay before an assignment, or within an
assignment, in a blocking or nonblocking procedural assignment is ignored
by synthesis tools. If the functionality depends upon the presence of the
delay, then a mismatch in functional simulation will be seen between the
model and the synthesized netlist. For exa mple,

--- Page 236 ---
214 Common Mistakes
Since the above construct is syntactically legal, the synthesis tools will
issue a WARNING and not an ERROR.
SUMMARY
This chapter discussed the common functional mistakes that happen
during the coding using Verilog. Most of these errors go undetected, as they
will be syntactically correct, and, hence, get past the compilation. While
many of these are un-intentional errors, a preview of these scenarios will
help the readers towards de bugging more easily in the different stages of the
project cycle. Any workarounds that could help in avoiding these  mistakes
have also been discussed.

--- Page 237 ---
Chapter 6
VERILOG DURING SIMULATION
REGRESSIONS
INTRODUCTION
This chapter discusses using Verilog for regression. testing In particular,
we discuss the requirements for pre-release regression testing, and the issues
encountered during such regression simulations. As the design sizes continue
to grow, so does the complexity of verification an d the regression runtime.
We discuss some special constructs of Verilog that help in  meeting some of
the needs of pre-release regression simulations. In most cases, Verilog alone
is not sufficient in constructing the  regression infrastructure. Regression
environments are  typically wrapped in programming languages like C, and
scripting languages like Perl, TCL, make or csh. Scripting languages
typically constitute the control/logistical flow of the regression environment.
This chapter discusses specifically how these logistics can be  aided in
implementing the release infrastructure efficiently, and how the c onstructs in
Verilog help in achieving the same.
The development of a good regression environment is not something that
can be deferred until the end of code development and  testing. It is an
essential infrastructure that needs to be built right at the architectural
definition phase. This way, the changes done during the development phase
can also make use of this infrastructure to validate the  changes.

--- Page 238 ---
216 Common Mistakes
6.1.1 Illustrate a few important considerations on simulation
regressions, and how Verilog can be useful for achieving the
same.
While the regression environment is  quite unique to each product, the
following are a few generic requirements that are useful for a release
simulation:
1. The user must have provision to turn off the waveform dumps during
the regression. This will not only save disk space, but also improve
the overall runtime. In Verilog, this can be controlled by a variety of
ways, as illustrated in the following:
During the c ommand invocation, the following needs to be
appended at the end:
In the above me thod, either the  waveforms of all the
variables from/below the hierarchy from where the
$dumpvars command is invoked are recorded, or there is no
waveform recording at all. If the waveforms need to be
dumped at specific hierarchical  levels, this can be controlled
by specifically mentioning the hierarchy in the first argument
of the $dumpvars  command. For example,
This specifically dumps all hierarchies of U1 at and under
testtop only, and no other modules.
a. Controlling the dump operation via a command line
argument. This can be implemented through the `ifdef
compiler directive and the  $dumpvars system task. An
example to illustrate the same is:
b.

--- Page 239 ---
Common Mistakes 217
This specifically dumps all hierarchies at testtop only,
that is, level 1, and none below level 1.
Note that more than one  module can  be mentioned after the
first argument, for specifying additional hierarchies to be
dumped.
The value of the depth can also be passed from the  command
line argument, using the Verilog  $value$plusargs construct.
An example of how to use this is explained later this chapter.
In the above me thod, the dumping of the waveform happens
right from time  0 onwards, until the end of simulation.
Sometimes it is necessary to capture the waveform only for a
small window of simulation. This could be the duration in
the zone of interest in the entire simulation. Verilog provides
a mechanism to capture a specific window, too, using the
$dumpon and $dumpoff commands, as illustrated in the
following example:
c.

--- Page 240 ---
218 Common Mistakes
If the dump file is viewed through a waveform viewer, it will
be evident that there  was no dumping until time unit 50, and
after 150, until the end of simulation.
This approach is useful for one other purpose, too, as
follows:
In long simulation runs, the user  is interested to see the
dump only for a few transactions/scenarios before the
erroneous time stamp. During the next  iteration of
debugging, it is useful to specify the  $dumpon  at a
timestamp a few appropriate transactions before the
timestamp of the bug/error scenario in simulation. The
bug/error timestamp will be known during th e previous
iteration. This will help in loading the dump files  faster
in the waveform viewers, rather than the large dump
files.
This approach also helps in creating smaller dump files
for debugging and, hence,  lessen disk s pace.
Many times, in order to update the product
specifications, that is,  either the functional specification
or the user documentation, it is necessary to add timing
diagrams. In that case, the transactions can be run on the
DUT, and the VCD dump can be captured for the zone
of window, depicting the transaction scenario with the
signals of interest. This can capture the waveform for
that specific simulation time, and be useful for the
waveform capturing into the product specifications.
During regressions, it is necessary  to store the dump files of
the runs  optionally. For example, if a test PASSED in a self-
checking testbench, it is very unlikely that the dump file is
further required for debugging purposes, other than viewing
the waveform for an explicit check. In that case, it is not
required to have the dump file of a passing test, which would
unnecessarily occupy large disk space. In such a case, the
dump file can then be conditionally deleted, or retained if the
test did not pass. This feature can be made configurable
d.

--- Page 241 ---
Common Mistakes 219
through specially implemented configuration commands, or
by passing specific arguments from command line.
The provision to generate or not generate the log files (transcripts of
the simulation run) should be controllable at the command invocation
level, or by specifying this in as a specialized configuration
command, or as a parameter in an ` include before the simulations
begin. Just like the waveform dump files scenario explained above,
the log files sometimes take a lot of disk space and runtime. These
factors will not be significant if one or two tests are run. But these
add up when there are several thousand tests to be run. The following
are a few ways to control the dumping of the log file:
2.
For command invocation, the mechanism is exactly the same
as described in the above description for the dumping of
waveform. This mechanism is usually the most convenient.
a.
b. For non-command invocation control, the facility to dump or
not dump could be controlled by a user defined configuration
commandconfigure, which is basically a Verilog task for
the user. For example,
This can be used within the messaging commands to use
$display  or  $fdisplay, depending upon whether the
log_file_dumping is false or true. For example,
The provision to  add/modify/delete the tests must be possible to be
done easily by the user, and preferably modifying just one file.
Typically, during the development phase, the regressions can fail on
a particular tests. In that case, the test in frastructure should have the
facility to run just a single test case, or a subset of testcases, with
ease, typically by just modifying the list of testcases from a file. The
3.

--- Page 242 ---
220 Common Mistakes
other way could be to specify all the subset of tests to be run in the
command line argument itself. While the latter is okay for a smaller
number of te sts, with small names of the tests, it may not work in
many shells with limited capacity of the char acters on the command
line. When the file approach is used for a group of tests, a special file
parser is required for this purpose, and invokes  the tests mentioned in
each line.
An example of the file parser approach is discussed in FAQ 6.1.2 of
this book.
If multiple CPUs are present, then the provision to schedule these
optimally for the regression purposes should be used. This is not a
Verilog feature, but a useful functionality done by  batch-scheduling
software. This way, the sessions get queued on multiple CPUs and
each CPU is used optimally, to complete a given sub-task of the full
run. Batch-scheduling software is also useful when the  number of
licenses of the tools is limited, and requires the jobs to be sequential,
based on availability of the licenses.
The provision to  display the results of the full regression must be
available to the user at any time during the regression. This should
not be considered a post-processing task at the end of a long
simulation. This will help in  providing the user feedback early on if
there is a problem in the regression. This will help decide to
terminate the regression, if it is not worthwhile to proceed further.
The resolution of the results should be at a single test level, and can
be until the last test  completed. Some of the key features to be
displayed are:
4.
5.
Hostname of the machine where the test was run
Number of tests passed
Number of tests fa iled
Number of tests timed out
Seed value of the test run (in case of random testing)
Date/time test started
Date/time test ends
Total number of tests run
List the tests passed/failed/timeout into separate files
If Failed, what was  the string of failure, that is,  data
mismatch?
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.

--- Page 243 ---
Common Mistakes 221
Which was the source/destination that encountered the
failure, that is, whether the DUT  was involved, or was the
error between agents involved in a traffic test without DUT?
Runtime taken for each test and an accumulated summary
If memory is critical, then the  memory required for the tests
k.
m.
The mechanism to display the summary can be done through a Perl
script or csh script, or even through Verilog, through  the file I/O
capabilities. The file parsing/interpreting mechanism  discussed in the
earlier sections can be useful for this. As an extension, it would be
useful to display the result in a HTML format, which will be useful
for all interested team members for viewing the results through a web
browser.
l.
Sometimes it is useful to pass the name of the test as an a rgument to
the simulation session. This will be useful to print the test name
during some print messages, or to create the log file based on the
name of the test. The Verilog $value$plusargs command line inputs
can be used for this purpose. Thi s system function searches the
command line argument for certain patterns, and assigns the value to
the pattern into a variable within the testbench. Note that you can
give multiple such command line inputs, and the unique string will
assign the destination variable. For  example,
6.
When the above module is simulated with the c ommand line input of:
the output produced is:

--- Page 244 ---
222 Common Mistakes
Similar to the above, multiple such arguments can be  communicated
into the testbench environment. The command line arguments can be
passed from a wrapper script that launches these tests.
Note that, if the sufficient number of  $value$plusargs are not defined
in the testbench, the excess arguments will be ignored. That is, if the
testbench code has implemented checks for 4 plusargs, and additional
plusargs are mentioned in the command line, they get ignored by the
testbench.
All the inputs to the regression  should be checked  before the launch
of the long regression. These inputs could be any or all of the
following variables:
7.
Parameter values for the regression have to be specified. These
values can be specified through  $value$plusargs, as explained
earlier, or through the parameter files. If a specific parameter is
not specified, then a default value should apply.
Presence of sufficient number of tool licenses to launch single or
parallel runs. This check needs to be done by the launching
script, whether it is in PERL or TCL or csh.
Checking availability of system memory for the regression. This
check needs to be done by the launching script, whether it is in
PERL or TCL or csh.
Checking availability of disk space, considering the outputs of
the log and dump files that gets produced during the regression.
This check needs to be done by the launching script, whether it is
in PERL or TCL or csh.
Since the product could be  implemented in multiple platforms too, it
is necessary to involve the scripts for multiple platforms, like Solaris,
Linux, HP-UX, etc. As a first order requirement, simulation  scripts
should be platform-independent to the extent possible. If platform-
specific constructs are used in scripts, then these should be multiply
customized for all the supported platforms. The script should be
intelligent enough to detect the platform on which it is being run.
Sometimes, the version number of the Operating System (OS) also
matters, as also the necessity for certain patches. The script should
automatically detect the platform and the version number, and do
everything appropriate to the particular platform of  execution.
8.

--- Page 245 ---
Common Mistakes 223
If the design has multiple parameters, it is required to run the
regression across multiple parameters, which influence the
functionality of the DUT dramatically. Examples of such parameters
include varying bus widths, varying clock frequency ratios between
externally accessible clock doma ins, endian of the data path, widths
and depths of FIFOs used, etc.  The scripts  should have the capability
to cycle through all legal combinations of parameters, and run
simulations for each combination.
There should be facility within the regression to switch between
automatic command generation, using random stimulus generation,
and executing  specific sequences of  commands, using a directed
flow. This should preferably be controlled by a single flag, through a
specialized user defined task like configure. For example,
This will cause the automatic command generation through random
command stimulus generation until all its constraints are met. The
flag can be set to `false by  default.  The  objective  of  this
mechanism is that there should eventually be only one testbench that
switches between the directed and random command generation with
ease. The user shouldn’t have to maintain tw o testbenches, that is,
one for random stimulus generation only, and one for directed
stimulus generation flow.
During regressions when all other messages except ERROR/FATAL
are disabled during the runtime, it is useful to get some “heartbeat”
message, to know that the simulation is still in progress, and not
stuck at some point. This needn’t be for every transaction, but it is
found to be good enough if a heartbeat is seen, for example, every 10
transactions. At such instants, it would be useful to optionally display
a message like:
9.
10.
11.
A simple logic to implement the above is illustrated below:

--- Page 246 ---
224 Common Mistakes

--- Page 247 ---
Common Mistakes 225
A few salient points regarding the above example are:
The value of timeout can be changed through the parameter to
the appropriate acceptable limit.
In the above example, the heartbeat rate is 10 transactions. It can
also be easily changed to 20, or 50, or to any preferred value.
12. A constant monitoring by the various bus monitors in the testbench
should be incorporated. The monitors can communicate to the
testbench by assertion of an output port, or by setting of a flag in the
testbench, or by the testbench having access to these flags within the
monitors. In the following example, two different monitors, with
instance names U1 and U2, are monitoring the bus activity in the
testbench with their output portsstatus:

--- Page 248 ---
226 Common Mistakes
The outputs of the multiple monitors are OR’ed to assert a critical
error_det signal in the testbench. This can cause the s imulation to
terminate with a  $finish, as illustrated in  this simple example:
The error messages should be ide ntifiable, whether it is c aused by an
intentional error, or not. Many times, post processing of the log files
is done, to search/grep for strings like ERROR. In order to
distinguish between an intentional error and a real error, there should
be suitable string displayed out before the launch of the intentional
error. This will help in isolating any false alarm during the post
processing of these error messages. The assertion of the global error
flags or signals, as explained earlier, can be gated with the
unintentional error criteria.
It is useful to inform the user, through INFO messages, as to where
these values can be changed, and which module caused the exit of
simulation. When the regressions are run during the development
phase, it is likely that some tests will hang. There should be some
kind of logic to detect this hang situation, and have a graceful exit in
the form of a TIMEOUT. This has been illustrated in the example
above.
13.
14.
15. If more than one copy of licenses of the simulation tool is present, it
is useful to  plan the regression, such that the execution happens in
different di rectories. Typically, the launch of the simulation happens
from a common directory like the .../sim (or its equivalent directory
name in your  project). Trying to run multiple runs from the same
directory could cause dump, log, or any other output files to be
overwritten. In order to avoid such potentials of overwriting to

--- Page 249 ---
Common Mistakes 227
happen, it is good to design the execution of the runs from different
directories. This will help in multiples simulation runs to take place
in parallel.
6.1.2 What coding constructs of Verilog can be used during the
various stages of designing a regression environment for
simulations?
Verilog has the  following c onstructs built-in, which help in the
regressions:
$readmemh/$readmemb : These constructs help in loading memory
data from a file. These constructs will be useful during
microprocessor simulations, or in  supplying vectors for a DUT, or
simply customized commands encoded into the various fields of the
line. Examples to illustrate the above have been discussed earlier in
an earlier FAQ 3.5.1 in the Verification chapter.
Sometimes, a file parsing is required, to know the arguments from
certain lines of a file. Instead of writing a PLI just for this purpose,
the Verilog language  provides the  $fscanf  system task inbuilt. This
function scans the lines that it reads sequentially, until a carriage
return is obtained, and assigns the values of the arguments to the
destination variables. Each argument is typically separated by a white
space within the input file. This is a very easy way to specify the tests
to be run within a file, along with its associated arguments.
For example,  in the  following  code,  the infile.txt is a file
containing three fields. The arg1 is a decimal variable, arg2 is
string, and arg3 is hexadecimal. The $fscanf task scans this file, all
the way until the EOF is reached, and  currently displays what it sees.
It can be modified further into the different simulation launching
sessions.
1.
2.

--- Page 250 ---
228 Common Mistakes
Suppose the infile.txt file contained the following:
The following would be the output of the above code:
In the same way as illustrated above, the arg1,2,3 variables can
actually be used internally for test launching and initialisation purposes.
Some e nvironments use a “reference-file” based approach for the
vector comparison for PASS/FAIL criteria of a release regression.
This is typically useful for a multi-simulator product regression. This
method is useful, since it is HDL independent output for comparison
of the responses across the simulators of Verilog. The  $fstrobe
command can be used for this purpose. An example to illustrate this
is as follows:
3.

--- Page 251 ---
Common Mistakes 229

--- Page 252 ---
230 Common Mistakes
The output of  the above code produces the file out_vec_f ile,
with contents as:
The disadvantage of the  vector-based approach is the fact that the
vectors do not carry information of  functional correctness. It is useful
if the vectors have been inspected a priori by some other method, and
declared to be “golden”. Another disadvantage of this method is the
following: If a design is changed during the course of its life-cycle
(as for example, for bug-fixes or enhancements), then, depending on
the nature of the changes, the originally captured golden vectors may
no longer be  valid. They would need to be  re-captured, re-inspected
and re-certified to be “golden”. The vector doesn’t carry in formation
of functional correctness, except for clock cycle accurate
reproduction of response, provided it has been ver ified once before.
When the same testbench is being used for multiple configurations of
the DUT, that is, for running RTL  simulations, Gate level
simulations, or the behavioural model simulation, the instantiation of
the DUT must be easily selectable from the command line itself. This
can be achieved by the use of the command line argument of
$value$plusarg. An example to illustrate this is as follows:
4.

--- Page 253 ---
Common Mistakes 231
During the simulation invocation command line, the following can be
appended:
% <simulation invocation> +define+RTL
% <simulation invocation> +define+GATE
Note that the Gate level simulations could be slow, due to the
presence of system timing check commands, like  $setup  or  $hold,
built in within the s imulation models of the cells of the technology
library. If running the gate-level simulation is a requirement, some
Verilog simulators have switches that will ignore these timing checks,
and only the functional simulations are run, to make sure the logic is
okay. The timing checks are now being done more through Static
Timing Analysis (STA).
SUMMARY
This chapter discussed how the Verilog constructs could be used for the
product simulation regression purposes. The different Verilog constructs that
influence the simulation during invocation and runtime have been illustrated.
The chapter also discussed how the simulation session can influence the log
and the dump file generation.

--- Page 254 ---
References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10. http://www.eedesign.com/editorial/1997/test9708.html
IEEE Std 1364-2001, Language Reference Manual (LRM)
IEEE Std 1364.1-2002 Standard for Verilog Register Transfer Level
Synthesis 2002
SystemVerilog 3.1a Language Reference Manual
SystemVerilog Synthesis User Guide : Version V2003-12 Dec 2003 from
Synopsys Inc
The Verilog Hardware Description Language, Edition by Donald
Thomas and Philip Moorby
Reuse Methodology Manual by Michael Keating and Pierre Bricaud,
third edition
Verilog 2001: A Guide to the New Features of the Verilog Hardware
Description Language by Stuart Sutherland
Writing Testbenches: Functional Verification of HDL Models, Second
Edition by Janick Bergeron
Verilog HDL Synthesis : A P ractical Primer by J Bhasker

--- Page 255 ---
Index
$display
$dumpoff
$dumpon
$dumpvars
$fscanf
$monitoroff
$monitoron
$readmemh
$sdf_annotate
$signed
$strobe
$test$plusarg
$unsigned
$value$plusarg
?:
`define
`elsif
`endif
`ifdef
`ifndef
<<<
69
48
217
217
216
227
191
191
227
164
185
189
192
185
192
63,65
19
89
89
89, 96
89
180
69
69
>>> 180
A
alias
always
always_comb
always_ff
always_latch
Area Minimization
arithmetic shift
assign
Assignment by name
Assignments
Asynchronous memories
Asynchronous reset
Asynchronous reset FF
Asynchronous reset latch
Asynchronous set and reset FF
Asynchronous set and reset latch
Asynchronous set FF
Asynchronous set latch
Asynchronous state machines
4
2
88
52
56, 57
89
180
4
15
35
79,80
61
53
57
53
57
52
56
71
!==
==
===

--- Page 256 ---
236 Index
automatic 6
B
Based numbers
between flop-flops vs. latches
binary encoding
Blocking assignments
blocking statements
break
bus contention
Bus Functional Model’s
bus monitor
178
59
73
3
39, 41
174
101, 112
120
128
C
case
case equality
case inequality
casex
casez
Clock domains
Clock gating
combinatorial
combinatorial loops
common mistakes
conditional assignments
connecting wires of  different
widths
const
constant part-select
Constant propagation
constrained random  stimulus
Continuous assignment
Critical path
63
69
69
69
69
82
107
48
104
195
36
33
92
181
90
144
1
97
D
D Flip-flop
D Latch
deadlock
deassign
default
defparam
51
55
202
172
66
16
Derived clocks
derived parameters
Design for Testability
disable
dist
do-while
102
21
100
173
158
175
E
enum 207
F
FIFO
Finite State Machines
Flip-flop
floating input
for
force
forever
full or partial no-connects
Full timing gate simulation
full_case
function
84
70
59
204
175
163
175
28
167
66
5, 42
G
gate level simulations
Gate level simulations
Gated clocks
generate
genvar
gotchas
governing parameter
Gray coding
165
164
103
93
93
85
17
112
I
if-else
Implicit .* port con nection
Implicit .name port connection
indexed part-select
Indirection
Infinite loops
63
24
25
181
182
197

--- Page 257 ---
Index 237
initial
integer
interface
Interface port connection
2
62
26
26
L
Latch
latched clock gating
latches
localparam
logical equality
logical inequality
Logical partitioning
logical shift
59
109
86
13, 18
69
69
99
180
M
Mealy machine
Memories
Messaging
module
Moore machine
multi-dimensional array
multiple assign
71
75
115
50
71
75
35
N
Named port connection
nonblocking assignment
Nonblocking assignments
nonblocking statements
23
39
3
40
O
one-hot-encoding
ordered list
Ordered port connection
override variables
73
13
22
9
P
parallel_case
Parameters
partitioning
66
13
81
Ports
posted writes
power
Power reduction
prefetched reads
priority encoder
Procedural assignment
22
85
104
104
85
64
1
R
Race condition
randc
Random simulation
reduction of power
reentrant
Reentrant task
regression
regression environment
release
repeat
Retiming
return
reusable design
reusable logic
reversed case
RTL templates
195
150
138
111
6
9
215
215
163
175
100
188
80
50
74
55
S
scalared
sensitivity list
severity levels
snake path
specparam
state register
static
Static memories
Static task
Stimulus generation
Storage Elements
string
synchronizer
Synchronous memories
171
87
117
81
13,21
207
9
75
9
159
51
184
83
79, 80

--- Page 258 ---
238 Index
Synchronous reset
Synchronous reset FF
Synchronous set and reset FF
Synchronous set FF
Synchronous state machines
61
54
55
54
71
T
task
Time borrowing
timing loops
5, 48
59
86
U
unbased number
unique
unit delay simulation
178
64
166
V
vectored
void
171
11
W
weighted random stimulus
while
152
175