--- Page 2 ---
CONTENTS IN DETAIL
TITLE PAGE
COPYRIGHT
DEDICATION
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
INTRODUCTION
Who Is This Book For?
What This Book Isn’t
What’s in the Book?
What You’ll Need
Online Resources
1
MEET THE FPGA
A Brief History of FPGAs
Popular FPGA Applications
Comparing Common Digital Logic Components
FPGAs vs. Microcontrollers
FPGAs vs. ASICs
FPGAs vs. Microcontrollers vs. ASICs
Verilog and VHDL
Summary
2
SETTING UP YOUR HARDWARE AND TOOLS
Choosing an FPGA Development Board
Requirements for the Book

--- Page 3 ---
Setting Up Your Development Environment
iCEcube2
Diamond Programmer
Project #1: Wiring Switches to LEDs
Writing the Code
Creating a New iCEcube2 Project
Adding Pin Constraints
Running the Build
Connecting Your Development Board
Programming the FPGA
Summary
3
BOOLEAN ALGEBRA AND THE LOOK-UP TABLE
Logic Gates and Their Truth Tables
AND Gates
OR Gates
NOT Gates
XOR Gates
NAND Gates
Other Gates
Combining Gates with Boolean Algebra
The Look-Up Table
Project #2: Lighting an LED with Logic Gates
Writing the Code
Building and Programming the FPGA
Summary
4
STORING STATE WITH THE FLIP-FLOP
How a Flip-Flop Works
The Clock Signal
A Flip-Flop in Action
A Chain of Flip-Flops
Project #3: Blinking an LED
Writing the Code
Adding Constraints
Building and Programming the FPGA
Combinational Logic vs. Sequential Logic
The Dangers of Latches
Resetting a Flip-Flop
Look-Up Tables and Flip-Flops on a Real FPGA
Summary

--- Page 4 ---
5
TESTING YOUR CODE WITH SIMULATION
Why Simulation Matters
FPGA Simulation Tools
The Testbench
Writing a Testbench
Running a Testbench and Viewing Waveforms
Project #4: Debouncing a Switch
Measuring Time on an FPGA
Writing the Code
Creating the Testbench and Simulation
Building and Programming the FPGA
Self-Checking Testbenches
Initial Signal Conditions
On-FPGA Debugging
Verification
Summary
6
COMMON FPGA MODULES
Multiplexers and Demultiplexers
Implementing a Multiplexer
Implementing a Demultiplexer
The Shift Register
Delaying Data
Converting Between Serial and Parallel Data
Creating a Linear Feedback Shift Register
Project #5: Selectively Blinking an LED
Writing the Code
Trying Another Way
Comparing the Two Approaches
Random Access Memory
A RAM Implementation
RAM on an FPGA
FIFO: First In, First Out
Input and Output Signals
A FIFO Implementation
Summary
7
SYNTHESIS, PLACE AND ROUTE, AND CROSSING CLOCK
DOMAINS
Synthesis

--- Page 5 ---
Notes, Warnings, and Errors
Non-synthesizable Code
Place and Route
Constraints
Timing Errors
Crossing Clock Domains
Crossing from Slower to Faster
Crossing from Faster to Slower
Using a FIFO
Addressing Timing Errors
Summary
8
THE STATE MACHINE
States, Transitions, and Events
Implementing a State Machine
Using Two always or process Blocks
Using One always or process Block
Testing the Design
State Machine Best Practices
Project #6: Creating a Memory Game
Planning the State Machine
Organizing the Design
Using the Seven-Segment Display
Coding the Top-Level Module
Coding the State Machine
Testing the Memory Game
Adding the Pin Constraints
Building and Programming the FPGA
Summary
9
USEFUL FPGA PRIMITIVES
How to Create Primitives
Instantiation
The GUI Approach
The Block RAM
Features and Limitations
Creation
The Digital Signal Processing Block
Analog vs. Digital Signals
Common DSP Tasks
Features
Creation

--- Page 6 ---
The Phase-Locked Loop
How It Works
Creation
Summary
10
NUMBERS AND MATH
Numerical Data Types
Representing Signed vs. Unsigned Values
Taking the Two’s Complement
Sizing Signals Appropriately
Converting Between Types in VHDL
Performing Mathematical Operations
Addition
Subtraction
Multiplication
Multiplication by Powers of 2
Division
How FPGAs Implement Math Operations
Working with Decimals
Adding and Subtracting with Fixed Point
Multiplying with Fixed Point
Summary
11
GETTING DATA IN AND OUT WITH I/O AND SERDES
Working with GPIO Pins
I/O Buffers
Electrical Characteristics
Faster Data Transmission with Double Data Rate
SerDes
Parallel vs. Serial Communication
Self-Clocking Signals
How SerDes Works
Summary
A
FPGA DEVELOPMENT BOARDS
The Nandland Go Board
The Lattice iCEstick
The Alchitry Cu
Switching Between Boards

--- Page 7 ---
B
TIPS FOR A CAREER IN FPGA ENGINEERING
The Resume
The Interview
The Job Offer and Negotiation
Summary
GLOSSARY
INDEX
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 8 ---
GETTING STARTED WITH
FPGAS
Digital Circuit Design, Verilog, and
VHDL for Beginners
by Russell Merrick
San Francisco
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 9 ---
GETTING STARTED WITH FPGAS. Copyright © 2024 by Russell Merrick.
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage or
retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the copyright owner and the publisher.
ISBN-13: 978-1-7185-0294-9 (print)
ISBN-13: 978-1-7185-0295-6 (ebook)
Publisher: William Pollock
Managing Editor: Jill Franklin
Production Manager: Sabrina Plomitallo-González
Production Editor: Jennifer Kepler
Developmental Editor: Nathan Heidelberger
Cover Illustrator: Gina Redman
Interior Design: Octopod Studios
Technical Reviewer: Mike D. Smith
Copyeditor: Rachel Head
Proofreader: James M. Fraleigh
Figure 9-3 was re-created based on an image by Mike Toews, used under the CC BY-SA 3.0 license,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Analog_digital_series.svg.
For information on distribution, bulk sales, corporate sales, or translations, please contact No Starch
Press® directly at infofnostarch.com or:
No Starch Press, Inc.
245 8th Street, San Francisco, CA 94103
phone: 1.415.863.9900
www.nostarch.com
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Merrick, Russell, author.
Title: Getting started with FPGAs : digital circuit design, Verilog, and VHDL for
beginners / by Russell Merrick.
Description: San Francisco, CA : No Starch Press, [2024] | Includes index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2023011303 (print) | LCCN 2023011304 (ebook) | ISBN 9781718502949
(paperback) | ISBN 9781718502956 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Field programmable gate arrays. | Digital electronics. | Verilog
(Computer hardware description language). | VHDL (Computer hardware description
language).
Classification: LCC TK7895.G36 M47 2024 (print) | LCC TK7895.G36 (ebook) | DDC
621.39/5—dc23/eng/20230419
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023011303
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023011304
No Starch Press and the No Starch Press logo are registered trademarks of No Starch Press, Inc.
Other product and company names mentioned herein may be the trademarks of their respective

--- Page 10 ---
owners. Rather than use a trademark symbol with every occurrence of a trademarked name, we are
using the names only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no
intention of infringement of the trademark.
The information in this book is distributed on an “As Is” basis, without warranty. While every
precaution has been taken in the preparation of this work, neither the author nor No Starch Press, Inc.
shall have any liability to any person or entity with respect to any loss or damage caused or alleged to
be caused directly or indirectly by the information contained in it.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 11 ---
For everyone who has supported me on this journey.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 12 ---
About the Author
Russell Merrick grew up near Boston, Massachusetts, and graduated from
the University of Massachusetts in 2007 with a degree in electrical
engineering. Later he earned a master’s in electrical engineering. He has
worked in the defense industry at BAE Systems and L-3 Communications,
in aerospace at a satellite propulsion startup called Accion Systems, and
most recently in commercial electronics at a fitness wearable company
called WHOOP. Russell has been creating content for FPGA developers at
https://nandland.com and the accompanying YouTube channel since 2014,
helping them get a solid footing in their digital design pursuits. He has three
children and one very supportive wife.
About the Technical Reviewer
Mike D. Smith is the founder and principal designer at Bold Circuits LLC,
which provides full-service electronic design services to the commercial,
military, and research markets. He has over 20 years of industry experience
and specializes in system-level electronics design, high-speed digital
design, PCB layout, and FPGA development. Mike has a BS in electrical
engineering and a BA in German from the University of Rhode Island and
an MS in computer engineering from the University of Massachusetts, with
a computing and embedded systems hardware and architecture
concentration. He teaches a senior course in practical PCB design at the
University of Rhode Island and serves as a consulting technical director to
their ELECOMP Capstone Design Program, providing technical advisory
services to industry-sponsored senior design teams.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 13 ---
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
There are so many people who have helped make this book a reality in
small and large ways. Throughout my career, I’ve had mentors who have
guided me and pushed me to become better at my craft. There’s nothing
more rewarding than working with someone who is smarter than you are, so
go find people who make you feel stupid in comparison. Try to glean
anything you can from them. Look at their code, ask dumb questions, and
you’ll improve.
I’d like to thank everyone who has supported me in my Nandland
pursuits—those who have liked, commented, or subscribed to videos on my
YouTube channel; purchased a Go Board; or supported my Patreon. You’ve
built up my confidence and helped me stay motivated to keep cranking out
FPGA content for years and years.
I never imagined that writing a book would be as lengthy a process as it
turned out to be. Many thanks to my editor, Nathan Heidelberger, who has
had the biggest impact on the quality of this book. Nathan doesn’t have an
engineering background, but he was able to give me valuable feedback
from an outsider’s perspective when concepts were unclear. Similarly, I’m
grateful to my technical reviewer, Mike D. Smith, a coworker and friend
from my BAE Systems days. His attention to the technical explanations
ensured that this book would be accessible and, equally importantly,
accurate.
Finally, I’d like to thank my family for allowing me the (significant)
time required to write this book. Many nights and weekends have been
impacted, so to my wife, Christine, I would like to say thank you for always
being supportive and encouraging. I couldn’t have done this without your
help.

--- Page 14 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 15 ---
INTRODUCTION
In my first job out of college as an
entry-level electrical engineer, I once
worked on an old design that had a timer circuit on it.
Using a simple resistor and capacitor, the circuit
would wait for 50 milliseconds (ms) to elapse, then
trigger an action. We needed to change that 50 ms
timer to 60 ms, but this small change required a
monumental effort: we would have to physically
remove the capacitors and resistors from hundreds of
circuit boards and replace them with new ones.
Fortunately, we had a team of field programmable gate array (FPGA)
designers who came to the rescue. With their help, we were able to
implement the same functionality inside an FPGA. Then, in a matter of
minutes, we could change code to set the timer to any arbitrary value we
wanted, without having to touch a soldering iron. This faster pace of
progress excited me, and I quickly got hooked on FPGAs.
Eventually I transitioned to working with FPGAs full-time, and it was
around then that I started reading and responding to FPGA-related
questions on Stack Overflow. Often these questions came from FPGA
beginners who were confused about basic concepts. I saw the same types of
questions asked again and again, and realized there wasn’t a single place
where people could learn about FPGAs in a simple, easy-to-understand
way. Sure, there were many online references for Verilog and VHDL, the

--- Page 16 ---
two most popular FPGA programming languages, but there was relatively
little information on what those languages were actually doing. What
components are really being created within your FPGA when you write a
certain line of code? How are things being wired up? What does it mean to
run operations in parallel versus serially?
Rather than continuing to answer the same questions over and over, I
started my own website, https://nandland.com, where I began writing
longer articles about FPGAs. As traffic grew, I started making YouTube
videos as well. I even created my own FPGA development board to provide
hands-on experience for beginners. In all these endeavors, my goal has been
to demystify FPGAs while making the information approachable and
engaging for those just starting out. Writing this book has allowed me to
delve even deeper into the subject, to build a solid foundation for anyone
interested in exploring the exciting world of FPGA design.

--- Page 17 ---
Who Is This Book For?
I’ve tried to make this book as accessible as possible so that a broad range
of people will be able to read and understand the material. The intended
audience is anyone who is curious about how digital programmable logic
works and how FPGAs can be used to solve a wide variety of problems.
Maybe you’re a college student who encountered FPGAs in a class and was
left intrigued but confused, or someone in the electronics industry who has
been exposed to FPGAs at work. Perhaps you’re a tinkerer or hardware
hacker, or a software developer interested in programming at a much lower
level than you’re used to. This book is very approachable for all of these
groups.
I’m assuming you’ve had at least some exposure to a conventional
programming language, like Python, C, or JavaScript. It will be helpful if
you understand concepts like functions, conditional statements (if…else),
loops, and other basic programming techniques. You don’t need any prior
experience with Verilog or VHDL, however; this book will introduce the
basics of these languages.
FPGAs lie at the intersection of hardware and software, so having some
interest in electronics is helpful. We’ll sometimes discuss concepts like
voltage and current within the FPGA. Here again, it will be useful if you’ve
had some basic introduction to these terms, but it won’t be required to get
value out of those sections.

--- Page 18 ---
What This Book Isn’t
This book isn’t intended to teach you every facet of Verilog or VHDL. As I
said earlier, there are many online resources if that’s your goal. Instead, my
aim is to teach you how FPGAs work so you can understand what your
Verilog or VHDL is doing, and thus make more intelligent choices about
your designs. That said, we will look at a large amount of code throughout
the book. All of it is thoroughly explained, so you won’t need prior
experience with these programming languages to follow along. You’ll gain
a strong base of Verilog and VHDL knowledge as you read, and the
confidence to augment that knowledge through independent study.
The book includes various projects that you’ll be able to carry out on
real hardware using the iCE40 line of FPGAs from Lattice Semiconductor.
I’ve focused on these comparatively cheap, simple FPGAs to make the
hands-on parts of the book as accessible as possible. More expensive
FPGAs have many extra bells and whistles; they’re very cool, but they can
be overwhelming for beginners. iCE40 FPGAs are still highly capable, but
with fewer of these high-end features available. As such, this book won’t
explore sophisticated features like SerDes and hard-core processors in a
hands-on way, nor will we dwell on the more complicated FPGA tools
required to use them. We will discuss some of these features at a high level,
however, so you’ll gain the background knowledge to work with them if
you choose to upgrade to a fancier FPGA.
What’s in the Book?
This book combines high-level discussion, detailed code examples, and
hands-on projects. Each code listing is shown in both Verilog and VHDL,
so whichever language you want to use for FPGA development, you’ll be
able to follow along. There’s also an extensive glossary at the end of the
book for your reference. Here’s what you’ll find in each chapter:
Chapter 1: Meet the FPGA   Introduces FPGAs and talks about their
strengths and weaknesses. Being an engineer is about knowing which
tool to use in which scenario. Understanding when to use an FPGA—
and when not to—is crucial.

--- Page 19 ---
Chapter 2: Setting Up Your Hardware and Tools   Gets you set up
with the Lattice iCE40 series of FPGAs. You’ll download and install
the FPGA tools and learn how to run them to program your FPGA.
Chapter 3: Boolean Algebra and the Look-Up Table   Explores one
of the two most fundamental FPGA components: the look-up table
(LUT). You’ll learn how LUTs perform Boolean algebra and take the
place of dedicated logic gates.
Chapter 4: Storing State with the Flip-Flop   Introduces the second
fundamental FPGA component: the flip-flop. You’ll see how flip-flops
store state within an FPGA, giving the device memory of what
happened previously.
Chapter 5: Testing Your Code with Simulation   Discusses how to
write testbenches to simulate your FPGA designs and make sure they
work correctly. It’s hard to see what’s going on inside a real physical
FPGA, but simulations let you investigate how your code is behaving,
find bugs, and understand strange behaviors.
Chapter 6: Common FPGA Modules   Shows how to create some
basic building blocks common to most FPGA designs, including
multiplexers, demultiplexers, shift registers, and first in, first out
(FIFO) and other memory structures. You’ll learn how they work and
how to combine them to solve complex problems.
Chapter 7: Synthesis, Place and Route, and Crossing Clock
Domains    Expands on the FPGA build process, with details about
synthesis and the place and route stage. You’ll learn about timing errors
and how to avoid them, and how to safely cross between clock domains
within your FPGA design.
Chapter 8: The State Machine   Introduces the state machine, a
common model for keeping track of the logical flow through a
sequence of events in an FPGA. You’ll use a state machine to
implement an interactive memory game.
Chapter 9: Useful FPGA Primitives   Discusses other important
FPGA components besides the LUT and the flip-flop, including the
block RAM, the DSP block, and the phase-locked loop (PLL). You’ll

--- Page 20 ---
learn different strategies for harnessing these components and see how
they solve common problems.
Chapter 10: Numbers and Math   Outlines simple rules for working
with numbers and implementing math operations in an FPGA. You’ll
learn the difference between signed and unsigned numbers, fixed-point
and floating-point operations, and more.
Chapter 11: Getting Data In and Out with I/O and SerDes   
Examines the input/output (I/O) capabilities of an FPGA. You’ll learn
the pros and cons of different types of interfaces and be introduced to
SerDes, a powerful FPGA feature for high-speed data transmission.
Appendix A: FPGA Development Boards   Suggests some FPGA
development boards that you can use for this book’s projects.
Appendix B: Tips for a Career in FPGA Engineering   Outlines
strategies for finding an FPGA-related job, in case you want to pursue
FPGA design professionally. I’ll make suggestions on how to build a
good resume, prepare for interviews, and negotiate for the best-possible
job offer.
What You’ll Need
Although not strictly required, I recommend having a development board
with a Lattice iCE40 FPGA so you can complete the book’s hands-on
projects. There’s nothing more satisfying than learning about a concept and
then being able to implement that concept on real hardware. Chapter 2
discusses what to look for in a development board and exactly what you’ll
need for the book’s projects in more detail. Briefly, the development board
should have a USB connection and peripherals like LEDs, push-button
switches, and a seven-segment display. Appendix A describes some
development boards that will work.
The software tools for working with iCE40 FPGAs run best on
Windows. If you don’t have a Windows computer, I recommend running
the tools inside a Windows virtual machine. We’ll discuss installing these
tools in Chapter 2.
Online Resources

--- Page 21 ---
The code presented in this book is available online via a GitHub repository.
You can access it at https://github.com/nandland/getting-started-with-fpgas.
You’ll also find more information and FPGA project ideas online at https://
nandland.com.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 22 ---
1
MEET THE FPGA
An FPGA, short for field
programmable gate array, is a highly
capable type of integrated circuit, an electronic
circuit in a single package. The field programmable
part of the name indicates that FPGAs can be
reprogrammed when in the field (that is, without
having to return them to the manufacturer). The gate
array part indicates that an FPGA is made up of a
two-dimensional grid featuring a large number of
gates, fundamental units of digital logic that we’ll
discuss in depth in Chapter 3.
The name is actually a bit of an anachronism. The reality is that some
FPGAs aren’t field programmable, and most are no longer just an array of
simple gates. In fact, they’re much more sophisticated than that. Despite
these exceptions, the name has stuck over the years, and it highlights a
unique characteristic of FPGAs: their incredible flexibility. An FPGA’s uses
are limited only by the designer’s imagination. Other digital programmable
devices, such as microcontrollers, are designed with a specific set of
capabilities; you can only do something if that feature is built in. By

--- Page 23 ---
contrast, an FPGA’s array of gates (or the more modern equivalent) is like a
blank slate that you can program, and reprogram, and reprogram to do
almost anything you want, with fewer restrictions. This freedom doesn’t
come without trade-offs, however, and FPGA development demands a
unique set of skills.
Learning how to work with FPGAs requires a different style of
thinking from traditional computer programming. Traditional software
engineering, like programming in C, for example, is serial: first this
happens, then this happens, and finally this happens. This is because C is
compiled to run on a single processor, or CPU, and that CPU is a serial
machine. It processes one instruction at a time.
FPGAs, on the other hand, work in parallel: everything is happening at
the same time. Understanding the difference between serial and parallel
programming is fundamental to working with FPGAs. When you can think
about solving a problem using parallel methods, your overall problem-
solving skills will increase. These skills will also translate to other, non-
FPGA applications; you’ll begin to see problems differently than if you
were only thinking about them serially. Learning how to think in parallel
rather than serially is a critical skill for becoming an FPGA engineer, and
it’s one you’ll develop throughout this book.
FPGAs are a lot of fun to work with. When you create an FPGA design
using Verilog or VHDL (more on these languages later in this chapter),
you’re writing code at the lowest possible level. You’re literally creating the
physical connections, the actual wires, between electrical components and
input/output pins on your device. This allows you to solve almost any
digital problem: you have complete control. It’s a much lower level of
programming than working with a microcontroller that has a processor, for
example. For this reason, learning about FPGAs is an excellent way to
become familiar with hardware programming techniques and better
understand how exactly digital logic works in other applications. You’ll
gain a newfound respect for the complexities of even the simplest integrated
circuits once you start working with FPGAs.
This first chapter sets you up for diving deeper into FPGAs by
providing some background information. We’ll briefly cover the history of
FPGAs, from their initial creation in the 1980s through today, and explore
some of their common uses. We’ll also consider how FPGAs compare to

--- Page 24 ---
other common digital components, such as microcontrollers and
application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs). Finally, we’ll discuss the
differences between Verilog and VHDL, the two most popular languages
for working with FPGAs.
A Brief History of FPGAs
The very first FPGA was the XC2064, created by Xilinx in 1985. It was
very primitive, with a measly 800 gates, a fraction compared to the millions
of gate operations that can be performed on today’s FPGAs. It was also
relatively expensive, costing $55, which adjusted for inflation would be
around $145 today. Still, the XC2064 kicked off an entire industry, and
(alongside Altera) Xilinx has remained one of the dominant companies in
the FPGA market for more than 30 years.
Early FPGAs like the XC2064 were only able to perform very simple
tasks: Boolean operations such as taking the logical OR of two input pins
and putting the result onto an output pin (you’ll learn much more about
Boolean operations and logic gates in Chapter 3). In the 1980s, this type of
problem required a dedicated circuit built of OR gates. If you also needed to
perform a Boolean AND on two different pins, you might have to add
another circuit, filling up your circuit board with these dedicated
components. When FPGAs came along, a single device could replace many
discrete gate components, lowering costs, saving component space on the
circuit board, and allowing the design to be reprogrammed as the
requirements of the project changed.
From these humble beginnings, the capabilities of FPGAs have
increased dramatically. Over the years, the devices have been designed with
more hard intellectual property (IP), or specialized components within the
FPGA that are dedicated to performing a specific task (as opposed to soft
components that can be used to perform many tasks). For example, hard IP
blocks in modern FPGAs let them interface directly with USB devices,
DDR memory, and other off-chip components. Some of these capabilities
(like a USB-C interface) would simply not be possible without some
dedicated hard IP to do the job. Companies have even placed dedicated
processors (called hard processors) inside FPGAs so that you can run
normal C code within the FPGA itself.

--- Page 25 ---
As the devices have evolved, the FPGA market has undergone many
mergers and acquisitions. In 2020, the chip-making company AMD
purchased Xilinx for $35 billion. It’s plausible that this purchase was a
response to its main competitor Intel’s 2015 acquisition of Altera for $16.7
billion. It’s interesting that two companies focused predominantly on CPUs
decided to purchase FPGA companies, and there’s much speculation as to
why. In general, it’s thought that as CPUs mature, dedicating some part of
the chip to FPGA-like reprogrammable hardware seems to be an idea worth
pursuing.
Apart from Xilinx and Altera (which from here on I’ll be calling by
their parent company names, AMD and Intel, respectively), other
companies have carved out their own niches within the FPGA market. For
example, Lattice Semiconductor has done well for itself making mostly
smaller, less expensive FPGAs. Lattice has been happy to play on its own in
this lower end of the market, while letting AMD and Intel slug it out at the
higher end. Today, the open source community has embraced Lattice
FPGAs, which have been reverse-engineered to allow for low-level
hacking. Another medium-sized player in the FPGA space, Actel, was
acquired by Microsemi in 2010 for $430 million. Microsemi itself was
acquired by Microchip Technology in 2018.
Popular FPGA Applications
In their modern, highly capable and flexible form, FPGAs are used in many
interesting areas. For example, they’re a critical component in the
telecommunications industry, where they’re often found in cell phone
towers. They route internet traffic to bring the internet to your smartphone,
allowing you to stream YouTube videos on your bus ride to work.
FPGAs are also widely used in the finance industry for high-frequency
trading, where companies use algorithms to automatically buy and sell
stocks incredibly quickly. Traders have found that if you can execute a
stock purchase or sale slightly quicker than the competition, you can gain a
financial edge. The speed of execution is paramount; a tiny bit of latency
can cost a company millions of dollars. FPGAs are well suited to this task
because they’re very fast and can be reprogrammed as new trading

--- Page 26 ---
algorithms are discovered. This is an industry where milliseconds matter,
and FPGAs can provide an advantage.
FPGAs are used in the defense industry as well, for applications like
radar digital signal processing. FPGAs can process received radar
reflections using mathematical filters to see small objects hundreds of miles
away. They’re also used to process and manipulate images from infrared
(IR) cameras, which can see heat rather than visible light, allowing military
operatives to see people even in complete darkness. These operations are
often highly math-intensive, requiring many multiplication and addition
operations to happen at parallel—something that FPGAs excel at.
Another area where FPGAs have found a niche is in the space industry:
they can be programmed with redundancies to hedge against the effects of
radiation bombardment, which can cause digital circuits to fail. On Earth,
the atmosphere protects electronics (and people) from lots of solar
radiation, but outer space doesn’t have that lovely blanket, so the
electronics on satellites are subjected to a much harsher environment.
Finally, FPGAs are also getting interest from the artificial intelligence
(AI) community. They can be used to accelerate neural nets, another
massively parallel computational problem, and thus are helping humans
attack issues that weren’t solvable using traditional programming
techniques: image classification, speech recognition and translation,
robotics control, game strategy, and more.
This look at popular FPGA applications is far from exhaustive. Overall,
FPGAs are a good candidate for any digital electronics problem where high
bandwidth, low latency, or high processing capability is needed.
Comparing Common Digital Logic Components
Despite how far they’ve come since their early days and the wide range of
applications they’re used for, FPGAs are still a relatively niche technology
compared to other digital logic components like microcontrollers and
ASICs. In this section, we’ll compare these three technologies. You’ll see
why FPGAs are a good solution for some problems but not others, and how
they have tough competition from other devices, especially
microcontrollers.

--- Page 27 ---
FPGAs vs. Microcontrollers
Microcontrollers are everywhere. If you aren’t an embedded software
engineer, you may not realize how many toys, tools, gadgets, and devices
are controlled with small and inexpensive microcontrollers: everything
from TV remote controls to coffee makers to talking toys. If you’re an
electronics hobbyist, you might be familiar with the Arduino, which is
powered by a small microcontroller from Atmel (now Microchip
Technology, the same company that owns what used to be Actel). Millions
of Arduinos have been sold to hobbyists around the world. They’re cheap,
fun, and relatively easy to work with.
So why are microcontrollers everywhere, but not FPGAs? Why isn’t
there an FPGA controlling your coffee maker or making your Elmo doll
come to life? The main reason is cost. The consumer electronics industry,
which uses the largest number of microcontrollers overall, is incredibly
sensitive to cost. Consumers like you and I want the least expensive
products we can possibly buy, and the companies that make those products
will shave off every penny possible to make that happen.
Microcontrollers come in seemingly endless varieties, with each one
designed for a very specific purpose. This helps companies drive costs
down. For example, if your product needs one analog-to-digital converter
(ADC), two USB interfaces, and at least 30 general purpose input/output
(GPIO) pins, there’s a microcontroller with exactly those specifications.
What if you realize you only need one USB interface? There’s probably a
different microcontroller with those specifications, too. With such variety,
there’s no need to pay for extra features. Companies can find a
microcontroller with the bare minimum of what they need, and save money
in the process.
FPGAs, on the other hand, are much more general. With a single
FPGA, you might create five ADC interfaces and no USB interface, or
three USB and no ADC interfaces. You pretty much have a blank slate at
your disposal. As you’ll learn, however, FPGAs need to have many internal
wires (called routing) to support all these different possibilities, and all that
routing adds cost and complexity. In many cases, you’ll end up paying more
for extra features and flexibility that you don’t need.

--- Page 28 ---
Another contributing factor to cost is quantity. If you buy 10 million
microcontrollers, which is not unrealistic in the field of consumer
electronics, you’ll pay less per chip than you would if you only bought
100,000. FPGAs, meanwhile, are typically produced and sold in relatively
low quantities, so they cost more per unit. It’s a bit of a chicken-and-egg
situation, where FPGAs could be less expensive if there were more of them,
but for there to be more of them, they would have to be less expensive. If
the costs were the same as with microcontrollers, would there be more
FPGAs in use? I think it’s likely that there would be, but FPGAs are also
more complicated to use, so that works against them as well.
Since microcontrollers are designed for specific purposes, they can be
very easy to set up. You can get a basic design up and running on a
microcontroller in a few hours. By contrast, you need to program everything
inside the FPGA, and this is very time-consuming. Although there are some
hard IP blocks to get you started, the majority of the device is
programmable logic—that blank slate we talked about—that you need to
design yourself. Writing all the code to do what you need also takes longer
in a language like Verilog or VHDL than C, which is commonly used to
program microcontrollers. With C, you’re writing code at a higher level, so
you can do more with a single line. With Verilog and VHDL you’re writing
at a much lower level: individual gates and wires are literally being created
with your code. You can think of low-level programming like working with
individual LEGO bricks and high-level programming like working with
preconstructed LEGO sets. This adds complexity, which adds time, which
also increases costs. Engineers want the simplest solution, and most often a
microcontroller is simpler than an FPGA.
Another factor to consider is how much power the device consumes.
Many electronic devices run off batteries, and it’s critical to maximize their
lifetime by making the devices as low-power as possible. The more power
they use, the more often you’ll have to change the batteries, which is
something nobody wants to do. Again, since a microcontroller is designed
for a specific use, it can be optimized to draw incredibly little power,
enabling a single AAA battery to power a Bluetooth mouse for months, for
example. FPGAs, with all their routing resources, are simply unable to
compete with microcontrollers in terms of power consumption. That’s not

--- Page 29 ---
to say you can’t use an FPGA in a battery-powered application, but head-to-
head the microcontroller will win that battle every time.
Summarizing, microcontrollers almost always dominate in terms of
cost, ease of use, and power consumption. So why would anyone use an
FPGA over a microcontroller? There are other factors to consider, such as
speed and flexibility, and here the tables turn in favor of the FPGA.
When I say speed, I mean two things: bandwidth and computations.
Bandwidth is the rate of data transfer across a path. FPGAs can have
incredibly large bandwidth, much more than any microcontroller could ever
attain. They can process hundreds of gigabits per second with no trouble at
all. This might be useful, for example, when driving multiple 4K displays.
FPGAs are often used in video editing hardware that requires enormous
amounts of bandwidth to keep up with the data streams. Their high
bandwidth allows them to move tremendous amounts of data from various
external interfaces (USB-C, Ethernet, ADCs, memories, and more) at very
fast rates.
As for computational speed, the number of mathematical computations
an FPGA can perform in a second dwarfs anything a microcontroller can
do. A microcontroller usually has just one processor, and with all
computations going through the same processor, the number of
computations that can be performed each second is limited. An FPGA, on
the other hand, can run many computations in parallel. For example, you
can run hundreds of multiplication operations at the same time, something
that simply isn’t possible with a microcontroller. This might be useful when
running large mathematical filters on data, which often involve many
multiplication and addition operations occurring at very fast rates.
The other major benefit of an FPGA is its flexibility. I said
microcontrollers come in endless varieties, but of course, this is a slight
exaggeration. If your design has some particularly exotic requirement—say,
if it needs 16 ADC interfaces—there might not be any microcontroller in
the world that will meet your needs. FPGAs are much less limited. As I’ve
mentioned, an FPGA is like a blank slate that can be programmed to do
almost anything, providing you with tremendous flexibility to tackle a wide
range of digital logic problems.
When you have an engineering problem, you need to choose the best
tool possible to solve it. Often a microcontroller works very well, but

--- Page 30 ---
occasionally it simply won’t work due to speed or flexibility issues. In those
situations, an FPGA is a good candidate. However, there’s also another kind
of device worth considering: an ASIC.
FPGAs vs. ASICs
An ASIC is a type of integrated circuit designed for a particular use. Unlike
an FPGA, which can suit any number of uses, an ASIC is designed to be
really good at one thing. You might think that it would always be better to
have the flexibility of an FPGA, but there are trade-offs to consider. We’ve
already compared FPGAs to microcontrollers in terms of cost, ease of use,
power, speed, and flexibility. Let’s now compare FPGAs and ASICs along
those same lines.
ASICs are incredibly expensive to make in low quantities because they
have a large nonrecurring engineering (NRE) cost: you need to pay a lot of
money up front to a semiconductor foundry (or fab) to get that first ASIC
chip. Often the NRE on an ASIC design can run into the millions of dollars.
Whether or not you choose to design an ASIC highly depends on how many
chips you’ll need. If you’re making low quantities of something, even into
the tens of thousands, it’s unlikely you’ll ever be able to recover the up-
front cost of an ASIC. If you need millions of chips, however, then an ASIC
starts to become an attractive option, since each chip after the first one is
very cheap (often under $1). Compare that to an FPGA, where a single chip
often costs more than $10, and you start to see that FPGAs just don’t make
financial sense in large volumes. Generalizing, in smaller quantities FPGAs
usually win against ASICs, but in larger quantities they can’t compete as
well.
An area where FPGAs always win out over ASICs is in terms of ease
of use. The process of designing an ASIC is very complicated. Plus, you
need to make sure your design is free of bugs before you go to the fab to
make the chip, or you’ll have wasted your NRE. Most FPGAs, on the other
hand, can be fixed in the field (hence field programmable), so even if you
find a bug after shipping your product to customers, you can update the
code and remedy the issue. That’s simply not possible with an ASIC.
Therefore, you must spend significant engineering time and effort verifying
that your ASIC design is as bug-free as possible before getting it fabricated.

--- Page 31 ---
There’s actually an entire discipline called verification engineering that
does just this, something we’ll explore in more detail in Chapter 5.
One large benefit to an ASIC is that it can be optimized for low power.
ASICs are finely tuned for their specific application; they have what they
need and no more. Meanwhile, recall that an FPGA has a significant
number of wires and interconnections, which give it its flexibility but mean
it uses more power. A further advantage ASICs have over FPGAs is that
they can use fabrication techniques that optimize them for low power at the
transistor level. For a real-life example, when Bitcoin was new, people were
using their home computers (CPUs) to mine it. This draws a lot of power
per Bitcoin mined. Eventually, people realized that FPGAs could be
programmed to mine Bitcoins, using less power than CPUs. Electrical
power is expensive, so mining Bitcoins with FPGAs was more profitable.
Further down the line, people realized that ASICs could mine Bitcoins even
faster and using even less power than FPGAs. It became worth the up-front
cost to create an ASIC dedicated to Bitcoin mining, because the cost
savings from the lower power consumption were so significant. Today,
Bitcoins are mined almost exclusively with ASICs.
When it comes to speed, FPGAs and ASICs both have large bandwidth
and can move lots of data around. They’re also both very capable at math
operations, particularly multiplication and addition, and both can do those
operations in parallel. ASICs have a small edge in this category: because
they’re built specifically for one purpose, they can often run a bit faster than
FPGAs.
FPGAs, on the other hand, offer significantly more flexibility than
ASICs. Having flexibility in what your design can do is very valuable,
especially if you’re working on a project that isn’t clearly defined. Unlike
ASICs, which are fixed, FPGAs can be reprogrammed over and over again,
with features and functionality added or removed. Additionally, ASICs take
a long time to design, make, and verify, but you can get started with an
FPGA right away, so the speed of progress can be faster.
In general, ASICs win against FPGAs on cost when the volumes are
very high, but not when they’re low. They beat FPGAs on power
consumption and have a slight edge on speed, but they lose to FPGAs on
flexibility and ease of use. In reality, though, ASICs and FPGAs often go
hand in hand. When a company wants to design an ASIC, it will typically

--- Page 32 ---
start by designing a prototype with an FPGA, and then produce the ASIC.
This method allows engineers to work with the hardware sooner and gain
confidence in the product, prior to spending millions of dollars on a custom
chip. The engineers can work through the bugs in the Verilog or VHDL
code using the FPGA prototype, and fix issues when it’s inexpensive and
simpler to do so. This code isn’t throwaway code either, since the same
Verilog or VHDL used on an FPGA can be used to create an ASIC.
FPGAs vs. Microcontrollers vs. ASICs
That was a lot to take in, so let’s briefly summarize what we’ve just
discussed about FPGAs, microcontrollers, and ASICs. Table 1-1 provides
an overview of where each type of device sits on the scale across different
parameters. There are always exceptions, but the table provides a good
generalization.
Table 1-1: Comparing an FPGA vs. a Microcontroller vs. an ASIC
FPGA Microcontroller ASIC
Cost (low quantities) Moderate Cheap Expensive
Cost (high quantities) Moderate Cheap Cheap
Speed Fast Moderate Fast+
Power Moderate Low Low
Flexibility High Low None
Ease of use Medium Easy Difficult
Cost is often the dominant factor in why a microcontroller or an ASIC
is chosen over an FPGA for large-volume applications. They’re simply
cheaper, and that counts in industries that are highly sensitive to cost. When
performance is the most important consideration and the high initial cost
and level of complexity are acceptable, ASICs are often preferred. The
sweet spot for FPGAs is applications that are low volume but require high
speed in terms of either bandwidth or computations, or require a very
flexible and unique design (like having 16 ADCs to interface to).
Ultimately, FPGAs, microcontrollers, and ASICs are three tools in the
engineer’s toolbox. When looking at the requirements of your particular
problem, you’ll need to decide which of these tools provides the best

--- Page 33 ---
solution. You wouldn’t use a hammer to turn a screw; knowing which tool
to use for which application is critical to becoming a strong engineer. The
act of examining multiple possibilities and selecting a technical solution is
often referred to in engineering as a trade study.
I love FPGAs, but when I look at a technical problem, often the right
solution is a microcontroller: they’re easy to use and inexpensive. A
microcontroller isn’t always the right solution, though. Sometimes you need
more speed, or the problem is one that microcontrollers just aren’t designed
for. Selecting the right tool for your problem will make solving the problem
much more enjoyable. And as you’ll hopefully see, working with FPGAs is
certainly enjoyable! It’s like working with LEGO or building a house in
Minecraft. Using simple, low-level building blocks, you can create
something wonderfully complex.
Verilog and VHDL
As I’ve mentioned, there are two main languages for working with FPGAs
(and ASICs): Verilog and VHDL. These languages are known as hardware
description languages (HDLs) because they’re used to define the behavior
of digital logic circuits. Though syntactically Verilog and VHDL may look
similar to traditional programming languages, it’s important to realize that
HDLs are a different beast entirely. When you write your FPGA code with
an HDL, you’re working directly with wires, logic gates, and other discrete
resources on the FPGA, whereas when you code with a traditional
programming language you don’t have that same low level of control over
your device. Understanding the logic behind your Verilog or VHDL code
and knowing what FPGA components you’re instantiating with that code is
a critical skill for a digital designer, and something we’ll return to
throughout the book.
FPGA beginners often wonder if it’s better to learn Verilog or VHDL.
There’s no right answer; it really depends on your situation. To help you
make that decision, let’s compare and contrast the two languages to identify
some reasons why you might select one over the other.
NOTE

--- Page 34 ---
All the code examples in this book will be shown in both Verilog and VHDL,
back-to-back, so whichever language you choose, you’ll be able to follow
along.
VHDL stands for VHSIC Hardware Description Language, and
VHSIC, the acronym within an acronym, stands for Very High-Speed
Integrated Circuit. In full, VHDL is the Very High-Speed Integrated Circuit
Hardware Description Language—quite a mouthful! It was developed by
the United States Department of Defense (DoD) in 1983 and borrows many
features and syntax from another DoD-developed language called Ada.
VHDL, like Ada, is strongly typed.
If you’ve never worked with a strongly typed language, it can be a bit
challenging at first. Strong typing forces the designer to be very explicit
with their code. For example, in a weakly typed language like Python or C,
you can add a variable defined as an integer to a variable defined as a float
without any problem. A strongly typed language like VHDL, however,
would never allow something like this. When adding two numbers in
VHDL, their widths (number of bits) and types need to match exactly, or
the syntax checker will throw some cryptic error. Until you understand the
strong type checking that the language is performing, it can be cumbersome
to get what you need done as a beginner. When sorting out these issues in
VHDL, you often need to create intermediary signals of the correct type, or
use lots of type conversions throughout your code. This is one of several
reasons VHDL often requires much more typing (on your keyboard, that is)
than Verilog to perform the same functionality. If you want to use VHDL, it
helps to be a fast typist.
Compared to VHDL, Verilog looks more similar to a software language
like C, which makes it easier for some people to read Verilog code and
understand what it’s doing. Also, Verilog is weakly typed. It allows you to
write code that’s wrong, but more concise. It would have no problem
adding a float to an integer, even if the result of that addition might be
incorrect.
Another interesting point of comparison is that Verilog is case sensitive
but VHDL is not. This means that a variable called RxDone isn’t the same as
a variable called rxDone in Verilog, but VHDL treats them as the same. It
might seem odd that strongly typed VHDL isn’t case sensitive while weakly

--- Page 35 ---
typed Verilog is, but that’s just the way history turned out. In my
experience, Verilog’s case sensitivity can create issues that are hard to
diagnose. You might think two signals are the same, but the code sees them
as different due to a capitalization discrepancy.
Ultimately, none of these points is the most important factor, though.
You should choose between Verilog and VHDL based on which language
you’re more likely to use in school or at work. If your university uses
Verilog, learn Verilog! If companies where you might want to work use
VHDL, learn VHDL! The breakdown of who uses VHDL versus Verilog is
highly dependent on where in the world you’re living. If you compare
VHDL and Verilog using Google Trends, you can start to get a pretty good
idea of which language you should be learning first.
When you look at the overall search volumes for the two terms
throughout the world, you’ll find that “Verilog” tends to have more searches
than “VHDL.” Maybe that’s because it’s used more often, or maybe people
have more trouble with Verilog and need to look up solutions online more
than they do with VHDL. In any case, it’s more revealing to break down the
trends on a country-by-country basis. Figure 1-1 shows some examples.
Figure 1-1: Verilog vs. VHDL search volumes in selected countries
India and the United States have the largest volumes of Google
searches for the two terms, but while VHDL and Verilog appear to be
roughly equal in popularity in India, Verilog is slightly more popular in the

--- Page 36 ---
United States than VHDL. In fact, I know from personal experience that in
the United States the defense industry favors VHDL, while the commercial
industry favors Verilog. Notice that in Germany and France, VHDL is
significantly more popular than Verilog. If you are from either of these two
countries, I would highly recommend learning VHDL first! Conversely, in
China and South Korea Verilog is much more popular than VHDL, so
adjust your priorities accordingly.
In general, VHDL and Verilog are equally capable languages. You
should choose which language to learn based on what suits your location
and circumstances.
Summary
This chapter introduced you to FPGAs and provided you with an overview
of their history and common applications. We compared FPGAs with
microcontrollers and ASICs and saw where each type of integrated circuit
really shines. You learned that FPGAs excel at applications that aren’t cost
sensitive, but where high speed, maximum flexibility, or unique interfaces
are required. Finally, we looked at the two most popular hardware
description languages used to work with FPGAs, Verilog and VHDL, and
discussed how to choose the right language for you and your situation.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 37 ---
2
SETTING UP YOUR HARDWARE AND TOOLS
This chapter walks you through the
process of choosing an FPGA
development board and setting up the associated
software tools that you’ll need to translate your
Verilog or VHDL code into physical circuits on your
FPGA. You’ll learn about the features to look for in a
board, download and install the tools you need to
work with it, and test them out by designing your
first FPGA project to target your development board.
This project will also give you an overview of the
main steps in the FPGA development process.
An FPGA development board isn’t strictly required to use this book.
You can still learn from the projects without a board, and you can always
test your Verilog or VHDL code by running it through a free online FPGA
simulator tool like EDA Playground (a topic we’ll cover in Chapter 5).
However, there’s something satisfying about writing some code,
programming it to a development board, and seeing the results in action—
even when it does something as simple as blinking an LED. For this reason,

--- Page 38 ---
I highly recommend that you have an FPGA development board on hand
when learning about FPGAs.
Choosing an FPGA Development Board
An FPGA development board (or dev board) is a printed circuit board
(PCB) with an FPGA on it that allows you to program the FPGA with your
Verilog or VHDL code and test it out. The board may also have peripherals
on it that are connected to the FPGA, such as LEDs, switches, and
connectors for linking the FPGA to other devices. FPGA development
boards range from devices the size of a pack of gum that cost less than $100
to laptop-size devices that cost thousands of dollars. With such a wide range
of options, there are many factors you should consider when choosing a
development board, including price, ease of use, and enjoyability:
Cost
For an FPGA beginner, I recommend starting off with an inexpensive
development board. Larger, more expensive boards often have many
extra features, like SerDes and DDR memory, that are unnecessary and
potentially overwhelming for new users. You can always invest in one
of these more sophisticated boards as your skills mature and you grow
out of your first board.
Simplicity
The board you start out with and the software required to work with it
should be simple to use. It’s challenging enough to learn how an FPGA
works; if you also have to learn how to use a complicated design tool,
the process becomes even more difficult. I recommend focusing on
boards built around Lattice Semiconductor’s iCE40 family of FPGAs,
since these FPGAs are compatible with a lightweight and simple set of
software tools: iCEcube2 and Diamond Programmer. These programs
are streamlined to do the minimum required to build your FPGA,
without all the bells and whistles of more advanced programs. You’ll
learn how to use both of them in this chapter.
Fun
An FPGA development board should be fun to use, with peripherals
like LEDs, push buttons, and seven-segment displays that you can take

--- Page 39 ---
advantage of in different projects. Some cheaper boards cut costs by
removing peripherals; they just have an FPGA and nothing else. FPGA
development is much more fun and interesting when you can interface
the FPGA with other devices.
Keep these factors in mind as you consider the development boards
available on the market.
Requirements for the Book
You’ll get the most value out of this book if you follow along with the
projects and program your own development board. To go through the
projects exactly as written, you’ll need your development board to have the
following features (Appendix A lists a few boards that meet these
requirements, or can meet them with a few modifications):
Lattice iCE40 FPGA
iCE40 FPGAs have emerged as the best option for FPGA beginners.
They’ve been available for many years at affordable prices, while
providing enough resources to support interesting projects. The iCE40
architecture is relatively simple, with few distracting bells and whistles,
so you can focus on what’s important. As I mentioned earlier, iCE40
FPGAs are compatible with the free, easy-to-use iCEcube2 and
Diamond Programmer software tools, which we’ll explore in this
chapter. The iCE40 family is also compatible with open source FPGA
tools, if you want to avoid proprietary software altogether.
USB
Your development board should have a USB interface to power and
program the board. This way, all you need is one USB cable and you’re
ready to go. Older FPGA development boards often require an external
programmer (a separate piece of hardware that can itself cost hundreds
of dollars), so make sure simple built-in USB programming is possible
with the board you choose.
LEDs
The book’s projects assume that your board has four LEDs. These are a
convenient way to get output from the FPGA. For example, our first
project later this chapter will involve lighting up the LEDs, which

--- Page 40 ---
allows you to get immediate feedback that you’ve successfully
programmed the FPGA. There’s nothing more satisfying than getting
that first LED to light up!
Switches
For each of the four LEDs, you’ll need a corresponding push-button
switch. These switches provide input to the FPGA, allowing you to
easily change the state of the board.
Seven-Segment Display
Your board will need one seven-segment display to implement the
memory game project in Chapter 8. This kind of display provides a fun
way to output data. Lighting up individual LEDs is one thing, but
lighting up numbers and letters on a seven-segment display is much
more engaging.
If your development board doesn’t meet all these requirements, don’t
worry: you can still work through this book’s projects with a few
adjustments. For example, if you’d prefer to work with a board built around
a different kind of FPGA, you can. As we’ll discuss in later chapters, there
are advanced features that vary from one FPGA to another, but the code for
this book’s projects is general enough that it should work on any modern
FPGA. That’s part of the beauty of Verilog and VHDL: they’re FPGA-
agnostic.
Do be aware that if you aren’t working with an iCE40 FPGA, however,
you’ll need to use a different set of software tools than the ones discussed in
this chapter. Each FPGA company provides its own tools specifically aimed
at its FPGAs. For example, AMD (Xilinx) has Vivado, and Intel (Altera)
has Quartus. If your board has an FPGA from one of these companies, look
online for resources about using the appropriate software.
If you don’t have all the necessary peripherals for the projects in this
book, you have a few options. First, you can modify the projects’ Verilog or
VHDL code to use fewer LEDs and switches. This will work in most cases,
although the memory game project in Chapter 8 will be less satisfying the
fewer LEDs and switches you use.
Alternatively, many FPGA development boards, including some of the
boards discussed in Appendix A, have connection points for wiring up your

--- Page 41 ---
own peripherals. In particular, look for a development board with a Pmod
(peripheral module) connector. Pmod is a standard connector made famous
by Digilent for attaching accessory boards with extra peripherals— not just
the ones used in this book, but also devices like temperature sensors,
accelerometers, audio jacks, microSD cards, and more. If you’ve ever
worked with Arduino Shields, it’s the same concept. If your board has a
Pmod connector, that will greatly expand the range of projects you can
work on with your FPGA.
Setting Up Your Development Environment
To use the iCE40 FPGA on your development board, you’ll need to install
two software tools on your computer: iCEcube2 and Diamond Programmer.
These free tools from Lattice Semiconductor are designed specifically for
working with iCE40 FPGAs. This section walks you through the process of
setting them up. If you’re on Windows, you’ll have the easiest time, since
the tools are designed for the Windows operating system. For Linux or
macOS users, I recommend creating a Windows virtual machine on your
computer, then running the Lattice tools in that. There are many tutorials
online for setting up a Windows virtual machine using VirtualBox or a
similar product.
iCEcube2
iCEcube2 is Lattice’s free integrated development environment (IDE) for
turning the VHDL or Verilog code you write on your computer into a file
that the FPGA can be programmed with. It’s much easier to use than other
IDEs like Vivado, Quartus, or even Lattice Diamond (not to be confused
with Diamond Programmer), Lattice’s tool for working with more
sophisticated FPGAs. Their compatibility with iCEcube2 is part of what
makes iCE40 FPGAs an especially good choice for beginners. Those other
programs are all several gigabytes in size and extremely complicated. They
have many bells and whistles, most of which you won’t need when you’re
getting started. By contrast, iCEcube2 is more streamlined, making it a
more straightforward tool for learning about FPGAs.
To download and install iCEcube2, follow these steps:

--- Page 42 ---
1.  Visit https://latticesemi.com/icecube2 or search the internet for
“iCEcube2 download.”
2.  Find the download link for the latest Windows version of iCEcube2,
whether you’re running Windows natively or in a virtual machine. If
you’re a Linux user, you may be tempted to download the Linux
version instead, but I wouldn’t recommend it. That version is buggy;
you might have success, or you might not.
3.  When you click the download link, you’ll be asked to create an account
on the Lattice website. You must create an account to get a license for
this tool. Make sure to use a real email address, as they’ll email you the
free license. Once you create an account, you should be able to
download the software.
4.  As the software is downloading, find the iCECube2 Software Free
License link on the download page and click it to request a license.
5.  You’ll need your computer’s MAC address to obtain the license. To
find it on Windows, open a command prompt by clicking the Start
button and searching for “cmd.” Then enter ipconfig /all at the
command line. You should see something like this:
C:\> ipconfig /all 
--snip-- 
Ethernet adapter Local Area Connection: 
   Connection-specific DNS Suffix  . : 
   Description . . . . . . . . . . . : Intel(R) Ethernet Con
nection I217-V 
   Physical Address. . . . . . . . . : 38-D3-21-F5-A3-09 
   DHCP Enabled. . . . . . . . . . . : Yes 
   Autoconfiguration Enabled . . . . : Yes
6.  Your MAC address is the 12-digit hexadecimal number next to
Physical Address. Copy this into the Lattice license request form and
submit the form to have a license file sent to your email address.
7.  Launch the iCEcube2 installer once it finishes downloading and point it
to your license file.

--- Page 43 ---
NOTE
If you already installed iCEcube2 before obtaining the license, you can use
the program LicenseSetup.exe in the same folder where you installed the
tool to point it at your license file.
When it’s done installing, launch iCEcube2. The main window will
look something like Figure 2-1.
Figure 2-1: The iCEcube2 main window
Click around to get a feel for the program. We’ll explore it in more
detail later in this chapter with a project that will take you through the entire
FPGA build process.
Diamond Programmer
Diamond Programmer is a free standalone programming tool from Lattice
that takes the output of iCEcube2 and uses it to program your FPGA via
your development board’s USB connection. More sophisticated software
tools like Vivado and Quartus have a built-in programmer, so you don’t
need to download a separate program. It’s unfortunate that iCEcube2
doesn’t have one built in, but such is the life of an iCE40 FPGA designer!
Here’s how to install Diamond Programmer:
1.  Go to https://latticesemi.com/programmer or search the internet for
“lattice diamond software” to locate the download page.

--- Page 44 ---
2.  The Diamond Programmer page has many download links to choose
from. Find and click the link for the latest version of Programmer
Standalone 64-bit for Windows.
WARNING
Be sure to download Programmer Standalone and not the Programmer
Standalone Encryption Pack. The latter isn’t needed.
3.  Diamond Programmer doesn’t require a license, so simply run the
installer once it downloads.
You’re now ready to dive into your first FPGA project, where you’ll
learn how to work with these tools and program your FPGA.
Project #1: Wiring Switches to LEDs
In this project, you’ll get familiar with the build process by creating a
simple FPGA design: when you press one of the push-button switches on
your FPGA development board, one of the LEDs should light up. The
project assumes that you have four switches and four LEDs, so you’ll
design and program your FPGA to wire up each switch to one of the LEDs.
(As mentioned earlier, you can adapt the project to use fewer switches and
LEDs if needed.) Figure 2-2 shows a diagram of what we want to do.
Figure 2-2: The Project #1 block diagram
On the left we have the board’s four switches, labeled SW1 through
SW4. By default, these will be open (not connected), meaning the
corresponding input pin of the FPGA will have a low voltage when the
switch isn’t pressed, due to an onboard pull-down resistor. When you press

--- Page 45 ---
a switch down, the FPGA will see a high voltage present at the input pin
connected to that switch. On the output side we have four LEDs, labeled D1
through D4. We want to create an FPGA that will connect the switches and
LEDs such that, for example, when the user presses SW1, the D1 LED
illuminates. We’ll literally be creating a physical wired connection between
the SW1 input and the D1 output using our FPGA. In other words, with
FPGAs you’re programming at such a low level that you’re creating wires
between pins, throughout your device.
To implement this project, we’ll go through four main steps. These
steps, summarized in Figure 2-3, form the main phases of the FPGA build
process.
Figure 2-3: The FPGA build process
You’ll familiarize yourself with the steps at a high level through this
project. Then you’ll expand your knowledge of each step throughout the
book. The four steps are:
1.  Design. In this step, you write the Verilog or VHDL code that describes
how the FPGA will function. You might also write tests to ensure that
your code will work as you intend, a concept we’ll discuss in Chapter 5.
2.  Synthesis. The synthesis process is what turns your code into low-level
components that perform the actual functionality on your FPGA. It’s
similar to how a compiler in a programming language like C turns your
C code into Assembly instructions. In this book, we’ll use iCEcube2 as
a synthesis tool.
3.  Place and route. This process will take your synthesized design and
map it to the physical layout of your specific FPGA. It will wire up
(route) the connections between components, including connecting the
input and output pins to the inner FPGA components. Creating links

--- Page 46 ---
between pins and signals in your code is one of the purposes of the
physical constraints file. You’ll see how to write a constraint file in this
project. iCEcube2 handles the place and route step at the same time that
it handles synthesis.
4.  Programming. This is where you take the output of the previous steps
and load it onto your physical FPGA. The programming file literally
creates wired connections between pins and FPGA components, and
within the FPGA itself. This project will simply create wires between
pins, but in future projects we’ll use other FPGA components as well.
The programming step happens within Diamond Programmer.
All the projects in this book will follow this same basic process. As you
work on later projects, refer back to this section if you need a refresher on
using iCEcube2 and Diamond Programmer.
Writing the Code
Let’s design an FPGA that links the switch inputs to the LED outputs using
Verilog or VHDL. Hopefully by this point you’ve chosen which language
you want to learn; I suggest focusing on just one for now, but you can
always pick up the other later. All of this book’s code examples are shown
in both languages, so you can compare and contrast the code as well.
I’ve had success writing FPGA code with Visual Studio Code (VS
Code), a free tool from Microsoft. You can download extensions that will
enable Verilog or VHDL syntax highlighting and other useful features, like
the ability to tie to GitHub repositories directly from the code editor. You
could also write your code directly in iCEcube2, but I wouldn’t recommend
it, as it doesn’t have syntax highlighting.
Whatever tool you choose, enter the following Verilog or VHDL code
and save it on your computer. Take note of the filename and location, as
you’ll need it later. All of the code in this book is also available in the
book’s GitHub repository, https://github.com/nandland/getting-started-with
-fpgas.
Verilog

--- Page 47 ---
❶ module Switches_To_LEDs 
❷  (input  i_Switch_1, 
  input  i_Switch_2, 
  input  i_Switch_3, 
  input  i_Switch_4, 
❸ output o_LED_1, 
  output o_LED_2, 
  output o_LED_3, 
  output o_LED_4); 
❹ assign o_LED_1 = i_Switch_1; 
  assign o_LED_2 = i_Switch_2; 
  assign o_LED_3 = i_Switch_3; 
  assign o_LED_4 = i_Switch_4; 
endmodule
VHDL
library ieee; 
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all; 
❶ entity Switches_To_LEDs is
  port ( 
  ❷ i_Switch_1 : in std_logic; 
     i_Switch_2 : in std_logic; 
     i_Switch_3 : in std_logic; 
     i_Switch_4 : in std_logic; 
  ❸ o_LED_1    : out std_logic; 
     o_LED_2    : out std_logic; 
     o_LED_3    : out std_logic; 
     o_LED_4    : out std_logic); 
end entity Switches_To_LEDs; 
architecture RTL of Switches_To_LEDs is 
begin 
❹ o_LED_1 <= i_Switch_1; 
   o_LED_2 <= i_Switch_2; 
   o_LED_3 <= i_Switch_3; 
   o_LED_4 <= i_Switch_4; 
end RTL;

--- Page 48 ---
Let’s consider broadly how this code is structured, since all our projects
will follow this same general format. The design for an FPGA is
encapsulated inside one or more modules (in Verilog) or entities (in
VHDL). These modules/entities define the interface to a block of code. The
interface has signals, which can be inputs or outputs. At the highest level of
your FPGA, these signals will connect to physical pins on your device,
thereby creating the interfaces to other components, such as switches and
LEDs.
To create a module in Verilog, you use the module keyword and
provide a descriptive name—in this case, Switches_To_LEDs ❶. Inside the
module, the first thing you do is declare all the input ❷ and output ❸
signals, enclosed in a set of parentheses. Then comes the code for what you
want the module to actually do, which we’ll discuss in detail momentarily,
followed by the endmodule keyword.
Looking at the VHDL version, the first thing you might notice is that
it’s a bit longer than the Verilog version. This is typical; VHDL generally
takes more typing to accomplish the same task compared to Verilog. Some
of the extra length comes at the very beginning of the listing, where we
specify which VHDL library and package we’ll be using. In this case, we
use the std_logic_1164 package from the ieee library. We need this to get
access to the std_logic data type, which is commonly used to represent
binary values (0, 1) within your FPGA. Get used to including this library
and package. You’ll need it for every VHDL design you create.
Whereas in Verilog you declare the inputs and outputs and code the
actual logic of the module as part of the same code block, in VHDL you do
this with two separate code blocks. This is another reason why the VHDL
version is longer. First, you use the entity keyword to declare the VHDL
entity ❶, giving it a name and specifying its inputs ❷ and outputs ❸. Then,
in a separate code block, you use the architecture keyword to declare the
architecture of the entity, which is the code that defines the entity’s
functionality. You’ll almost always have a single entity/architecture pair in a
VHDL file, with the entity describing the input/output interface and the
architecture describing the functionality.
Now that we’ve covered the structure of the code, let’s look at the
specifics. In both the Verilog and VHDL versions, we define the four input

--- Page 49 ---
signals ❷ corresponding to the four switches: i_Switch_1, i_Switch_2,
i_Switch_3, and i_Switch_4. In Verilog, these inputs will be defined as 1
bit wide (a single 0 or 1) by default, whereas in VHDL we explicitly define
them as std_logic, which is a 1-bit-wide data type. We similarly define the
four outputs, o_LED_1, o_LED_2, o_LED_3, and o_LED_4, for the four LEDs
❸. Notice that I like to precede my input signal names with i_ and my
output signal names with o_. This helps me to keep track of which direction
each signal is going in.
NOTE
You can define your inputs and outputs in any order, but it’s customary to
put inputs first.
Finally, we define the logic of the design—the code that actually does
the work—by assigning the inputs to the outputs ❹. For example, we take
the value on input i_Switch_1 and assign it to the output o_LED_1. When
the FPGA is built, this will create a physical wire between these two pins.
In Verilog we use the assign keyword, which requires the = for the actual
signal assignment. In VHDL, we can just use the <= assignment to create
the wire between the input and the output.
Creating a New iCEcube2 Project
Once you have the coding done, it’s time to bring the design into iCEcube2
so you can build it. Open iCEcube2 and select File New Project. You’ll
be taken to a window asking for information about your FPGA board, as
shown in Figure 2-4. Let’s review the settings in this window.

--- Page 50 ---
Figure 2-4: The iCEcube2 New Project window
For the Project Name, give your project whatever name you like, and
for the Project Directory, choose where on your computer you want it
saved. Next, you need to tell the tool which FPGA you’re using. It needs to
know how many resources the FPGA has, which pins go where, and
everything about how it works to properly turn your code into something
compatible with your specific device. To do this, select iCE40 from the
Device Family drop-down, then choose your FPGA’s specific device name
and package from the Device and Device Package drop-downs. For
example, if you were using the Nandland Go Board (one of the boards
discussed in Appendix A), you would choose HX1K for the device and
VQ100 for the package, then select 3.3 from the topBank, leftBank,
bottomBank, and rightBank drop-downs. This tells the tool that all the pins
on the device operate at 3.3 volts. Everything else in the window can
remain at the default settings. Click Next when you’re done.
NOTE

--- Page 51 ---
You’ll use these same settings for every single project, so you can refer back
to this section each time you create a new project.
You’ll be taken to another dialog that prompts you to add the Verilog or
VHDL source file that you created previously. Go ahead and add your file,
or click Finish to skip this step for now. If you choose to skip adding your
file from the dialog, you can do so later by expanding the Synthesis Tool
menu on the left side of the main iCEcube2 project window, right-clicking
Design Files, and selecting Add Files, as shown in Figure 2-5.
Figure 2-5: Adding Verilog or VHDL source files to your project
This Design Files menu also makes it possible to add additional files to
an existing project after it’s been created, or to remove and replace files that
you’ve added previously.
Adding Pin Constraints
The next step in the build process is to add the pin constraints to your
project. These constraints, which you declare in a .pcf (physical constraints
file) file (sometimes referred to as pin constraint file), tell the tool which
signals in your Verilog or VHDL code will be connected to which physical
pins on your FPGA. This information is critical to the place and route stage
of the build process, when the output of the synthesis process is mapped to
the physical resources on your FPGA. The tool needs to know which pins
are connected to the switches and LEDs so all the wires in the design can be
routed to where they need to go.
Each FPGA manufacturer has its own keywords for writing constraints.
To declare a pin constraint for Lattice’s iCEcube2, you use the set_io
keyword, followed by the name of one of the signals in your design,

--- Page 52 ---
followed by the corresponding pin number on the FPGA itself. Here’s an
example of what the physical constraint file should look like for this
project, but keep in mind that the actual pin numbers will vary depending
on your development board. As an example, these pin numbers would work
for the Nandland Go Board:
# LED pins: 
❶ set_io o_LED_1 56 
set_io o_LED_2 57 
set_io o_LED_3 59 
set_io o_LED_4 60 
# Push-button switches: 
set_io i_Switch_1 53 
set_io i_Switch_2 51 
set_io i_Switch_3 54 
set_io i_Switch_4 52
Each line maps one of the signals in our code to one of the pins on the
FPGA. For example, we set the Verilog/VHDL signal o_LED_1 to be
connected to pin 56 on the FPGA ❶. The signal names you use in the
physical constraint file must match the signal names in your Verilog/VHDL
code exactly. If the names don’t match, the tool won’t know which signal
goes to which physical pin on the device.
NOTE
Notice that comments in the physical constraint file are preceded with a #
symbol—an octothorpe, pound sign, or hashtag, depending on your age.
When setting your pin constraints, you’ll need to look at the reference
schematic for your FPGA development board. The schematic contains the
wiring diagram for the circuit board. It tells you which pin of the FPGA is
connected to which LED, button, connector pin, or other device. Learning
how to read this basic schematic information is a critical skill for an FPGA
designer, as setting pin constraints is a common task.
To add the physical constraint file to your project, find the P&R Flow
section in the menu on the left side of the iCEcube2 project window,

--- Page 53 ---
expand Add P&R Files, and right-click Constraint Files. Then click Add
Files and select your .pcf file. Once you do this, you’ll see the file listed
under Constraint Files.
Forgetting to add a physical constraint file is a common mistake when
working with FPGAs. If you don’t add one, the tool won’t warn you about
it. Instead, they’ll just connect the signals in your code to randomly chosen
pins on your device. This will almost certainly be wrong, and your design
won’t work as you expect.
Running the Build
You’re now ready to run the build in iCEcube2. To do this, simply click
Tool Run All. This will execute both the synthesis and place and route
processes, creating the FPGA image file that you’ll use to program the
FPGA. iCEcube2 generates a report for each of these steps, visible under
the Reports section. You’re welcome to explore these reports to see what
type of information they contain; we’ll dive into the details in future
chapters.
Connecting Your Development Board
You now need to connect your board to your computer to program the
FPGA. Take a minute to make sure this connection works and that your
computer recognizes the device. With the board unplugged, open up Device
Manager in Windows and expand the Ports (COM & LPT) section. Now go
ahead and plug in the board via USB. You should see two devices labeled
“USB Serial Port (COMX)” pop up, as shown in Figure 2-6. The specific
COM port index numbers don’t matter. If this works for you, then your
board is connected to your computer and you’re ready to go.

--- Page 54 ---
Figure 2-6: Viewing the board connection in Device Manager
If you don’t see the USB serial ports in Device Manager, there are a
few troubleshooting techniques to try. First, check if your board has a
power LED for indicating when it’s on. If it does, but that LED isn’t
illuminated, you don’t have power, so check that the USB cable is firmly
plugged into the board and into your computer. If the LED is illuminated,
then the next most likely issue is the USB cable itself. Some Micro-USB
cables are “charge only,” meaning they don’t have the wires that allow for
data transfer. Get another cable that you know works to transfer data to and
from a computer.
Programming the FPGA
The final step in the process is to program your design to your FPGA using
Diamond Programmer. An FPGA development board typically features an
integrated circuit that turns its USB connection into the SPI interface, which
Diamond Programmer uses to program a flash memory chip installed on the
board. Once that’s done, the FPGA will boot up from the flash, and you’ll
see the fruits of your labor!
With your board connected, open up Diamond Programmer to get
started. You’ll be greeted with the dialog shown in Figure 2-7. Click OK to
create a new project.

--- Page 55 ---
Figure 2-7: The Diamond Programmer dialog
Once you click OK, the tool will try to scan the board to automatically
identify which FPGA is connected. It will fail. That’s fine; we can manually
tell Diamond Programmer which FPGA to target from the next screen,
which is shown in Figure 2-8.
Figure 2-8: The Diamond Programmer device selection screen
Set the Device Family to iCE40 and choose your specific FPGA from
the Device drop-down, as shown in Figure 2-8. Next, double-click the field
under Operation. You’ll be greeted with a new window, shown in Figure 2-
9. Note that you may need to change the access mode to SPI Flash
Programming to see the contents shown here.

--- Page 56 ---
Figure 2-9: The Diamond Programmer Device Properties window
This window lets you tell Diamond Programmer how to program your
FPGA. In the Device Operation section, set the access mode to SPI Flash
Programming. For the SPI Flash Options section, you’ll have to consult
the programming guide for your development board to determine which SPI
flash device is used. For the Go Board, for example, you’d set the family to
SPI Serial Flash, the vendor to Micron, and the device to M25P10, as
shown in Figure 2-9.
Finally, in the Programming Options section, click the three dots next
to the Programming File box and choose the .bin file to program to the
FPGA. This is the file you generated using iCEcube2, located in the
/<Project_Name>_Implmnt/sbt/outputs/bitmap/ subdirectory inside the
directory where you saved your iCEcube2 project. Leave all the other
settings on their defaults, and click OK to close this window. Now you’re
ready to program.
Open the Design menu and select Program. If everything was done
correctly, you should see INFO — Operation: successful after a few

--- Page 57 ---
seconds. This means that your SPI flash has been programmed and your
FPGA is running! Try pushing each switch on your board. You should see
the corresponding LED light up when the button is held down.
Congratulations, you’ve built your first FPGA project!
NOTE
I recommend saving your Diamond Programmer project so you can reuse
the settings for the other projects in the book. All you’ll have to do is select
a different .bin file to program to the FPGA.
If the programming fails, you might get a CHECK_ID error like this:
ERROR — Programming failed. 
ERROR — Function:CHECK_ID 
Data Expected: h10   Actual: hFF 
ERROR — Operation: unsuccessful.
If you see this error, go to the Cable Settings section in the right pane
of Diamond Programmer and change your port from FTUSB-0 to FTUSB-
1, as shown in Figure 2-10.
Figure 2-10: Troubleshooting a CHECK_ID error
Once you make the change, try to program your device again. This
time it should work.
Summary
In this chapter, you created an FPGA development environment and learned
how to work with a development board. Through your first project, you
learned about the main steps in the FPGA development process: design,
where you write code for the FPGA using Verilog or VHDL; synthesis,

--- Page 58 ---
where you translate that code into FPGA components; place and route,
where you map the synthesized design to the resources on your specific
FPGA; and programming, where the design is physically transferred to the
FPGA. We’ll explore these concepts in more detail later in the book, but as
you work through other projects, remember that you can refer back to this
chapter if you need a refresher on the basics of using your FPGA tools.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 59 ---
3
BOOLEAN ALGEBRA AND THE LOOK-UP
TABLE
Boolean algebra is a field of
mathematics and logic essential to
understanding how to work with devices like FPGAs.
In Boolean algebra, the input and output values are
all true or false, which we can equate with 1s and 0s,
or high and low voltages. Instead of operations like
multiplication and division, Boolean algebra has
operations such as AND, OR, and NOT. Each of
these operations takes in some number of 0s and 1s
as input, evaluates them, and produces a 0 or 1 as an
output. Algebra class would have been much simpler
if it had been about Boolean algebra!
You may have encountered Boolean operations in other programming
languages, such as C or Python. For example, you might want your program
to write to a file only if the user chooses to do so and the filename is valid.
Similarly, inside an FPGA, you’ll often want to check multiple inputs to
determine the state of an output. Let’s say you want to turn on an LED
when either of two switches is pressed. An FPGA can make this happen

--- Page 60 ---
using an OR operation: if either one switch or the other (or both) provides a
1 as an input, the FPGA provides a 1 as an output to the LED, and the LED
lights up.
Boolean algebra makes tasks like this possible. But more importantly,
Boolean algebra describes all the underlying operations on data in your
FPGA. String together enough Boolean operations and you can do math,
store data, and more. You can do a surprising amount by manipulating 1s
and 0s.
In this chapter, we’ll explore how to represent simple Boolean
operations with logic gates, and we’ll see how these gates can be combined
into more complicated Boolean equations. Then we’ll explore how FPGAs
actually perform logic operations by combining the functionality of
different logic gates into a single device called a look-up table. As you’ll
see, look-up tables are one of the most important components in an FPGA.
Logic Gates and Their Truth Tables
When designing FPGAs, we represent simple Boolean operations with logic
gates, devices that take in electrical signals as inputs, perform a Boolean
operation on them, and produce the appropriate electrical signal as an
output. There are different logic gates corresponding to all the different
Boolean operations, such as AND, OR, NOT, XOR, and NAND. Each of
these logic gates can be described with a truth table, a table that lists all the
possible input combinations for a Boolean algebra equation and shows the
corresponding outputs.
We’ll discuss some common logic gates and examine their truth tables
next. But first, it’s important to understand what the 1s and 0s in the truth
tables we’ll be looking at actually mean. Inside an FPGA, digital data is
represented by voltages: 0 volts for a 0, and some higher-than-zero voltage,
called the core voltage, for a 1. The core voltage depends on the specific
FPGA, but often is around 0.8 to 1.2 volts. When we talk about a signal
being high, we mean that the signal is at the core voltage and represents a
data value of 1. Likewise, a low signal is at 0 volts and represents a data
value of 0. With this in mind, let’s look at some logic gates.
AND Gates

--- Page 61 ---
An AND gate is a logic gate whose output is high when all its inputs are
high. We’ll use the example of a two-input AND gate, but AND gates can
have any number of inputs. For a two-input AND gate, the output is high
when input A and input B are both high, hence the name AND gate. Table
3-1 shows the truth table for this AND gate. Notice that the output is a 1
only when both inputs are a 1.
Table 3-1: Truth Table for a Two-Input AND Gate
Input A Input B Output Q
0 0 0
0 1 0
1 0 0
1 1 1
In a truth table, the rows are usually arranged in increasing decimal
order, based on the inputs. In the case of the AND truth table, the first row
shows when input A = 0 and input B = 0, which is represented as b00,
which means 00 in binary, or 0 in decimal. Next comes b01 (decimal 1),
then b10 (decimal 2), then b11 (decimal 3). If the AND gate had additional
inputs, then there would be more rows in our truth table that we would have
to fill out. In the case of a three-input AND gate, for example, there would
be eight rows, going from b000 to b111, or 0 to 7 in decimal.
NOTE
The output of a logic gate is denoted with a Q. This convention comes from
the English mathematician Alan Turing, who used the letter Q to denote
states in his famous Turing machines. The Q stood for quanta, which is a
discrete state (such as 0 or 1), rather than something that can have a
continuous range of values.
Each logic gate has a distinctive symbol for use in schematics. A two-
input AND gate is drawn as shown in Figure 3-1. The symbol depicts the
inputs A and B going into the gate on the left, and the output Q emerging on
the right.

--- Page 62 ---
Figure 3-1: The AND gate symbol
As we continue our exploration of logic gates, most of the gates we’ll
look at will have two inputs and one output. As with AND gates, it’s
possible that these other types of gates could have additional inputs, but for
simplicity we’ll stick to the two-input versions. (The exception is the NOT
gate, which can only have one input and one output.) For brevity, I’ll omit
the words two-input from this point forward when referring to a given logic
gate.
OR Gates
An OR gate (Figure 3-2) is a logic gate whose output is high when either of
the inputs is high; that is, when either input A or input B is high.
Figure 3-2: The OR gate symbol
Table 3-2 shows the truth table for an OR gate.
Table 3-2: Truth Table for an OR Gate
Input A Input B Output Q
0 0 0
0 1 1
1 0 1
1 1 1
Notice that when both inputs are high, the OR gate’s output is high as
well. All that matters to an OR gate is that at least one of the inputs is high,
which is also the case when both inputs are high.
NOT Gates

--- Page 63 ---
A NOT gate (Figure 3-3) has a single input and a single output. This kind of
gate simply inverts the input (the output is not the input), so it’s also known
as an inverter.
Figure 3-3: The NOT gate symbol
Notice the bubble at the tip of the triangle in the NOT gate symbol,
which indicates inversion. It also appears in the NAND gate, which we’ll
look at later, and can even appear on some inputs. The truth table for a NOT
gate is shown in Table 3-3.
Table 3-3: Truth Table for a NOT Gate
Input A Output Q
0 1
1 0
As the truth table indicates, whatever the input value to the gate is, the
output is the opposite.
XOR Gates
The output of an XOR gate (pronounced “ex-or,” short for exclusive or) is
high when either of the inputs is high, but not both. In other words, the gate
checks for exclusively one or the other input being high. The symbol for an
XOR gate is shown in Figure 3-4.
Figure 3-4: The XOR gate symbol
The symbol looks like that of an OR gate, but the extra line on the left
side of the gate sets it apart. Table 3-4 shows the XOR gate’s truth table.
Table 3-4: Truth Table for an XOR Gate

--- Page 64 ---
Input A Input B Output QInput A Input B Output Q
0 0 0
0 1 1
1 0 1
1 1 0
Though this type of gate might not seem particularly useful at first
blush, it comes up more often than you might expect. For example, XOR
gates are used for generating a cyclic redundancy check (CRC), a way to
validate data to verify the integrity of transmitted information.
NAND Gates
A NAND gate (short for not and) has the opposite output of an AND gate.
You can infer this from the NAND gate’s schematic symbol, shown in
Figure 3-5: it looks exactly like an AND gate, except with a bubble on the
output to indicate an inversion.
Figure 3-5: The NAND gate symbol
The output of the NAND gate is thus the same as an AND gate, but
inverted. If both input A and input B are high, output Q will be low. In all
other cases, output Q will be high. This is shown in the truth table in Table
3-5.
Table 3-5: Truth Table for a NAND Gate
Input A Input B Output Q
0 0 1
0 1 1
1 0 1
1 1 0

--- Page 65 ---
NAND gates are commonly used in USB flash drives, solid state drives
(SSDs), and other types of data storage devices. They also inspired the
name of my website, https://nandland.com.
Other Gates
We’ve explored the most common types of logic gates here to give you an
idea of how they work, but this isn’t an exhaustive list. There are other
types as well, such as NOR (short for not or) and XNOR (exclusive not or)
gates. Additionally, as mentioned previously, though we focused on the
two-input versions here, all of these gates (with the exception of NOT) can
have more than two inputs. This section was just intended to get you
comfortable with the standard logic operations from Boolean algebra. Next,
we’ll explore how these operations can be combined to make more
complicated expressions.
Combining Gates with Boolean Algebra
You’ve seen how individual logic gates work. However, often you’ll want
to write code that’s more complex than just a single logic operation. The
good news is that you can chain together multiple logic gates to represent
more elaborate Boolean equations, and use Boolean algebra to determine
the outcome.
In Boolean algebra, each logic operation has its own symbol. One
common set of symbols is shown in Table 3-6. For example, * represents an
AND operation, and + represents an OR operation. These symbols make it
easier to write more elaborate Boolean algebraic equations.
Table 3-6: Boolean Algebra Symbols
Symbol Meaning
* AND
+ OR
′ NOT
^ XOR
Boolean algebra also has its own order of operations. To solve a
Boolean equation, first you evaluate NOTs, then ANDs, and finally ORs.

--- Page 66 ---
As in conventional algebra, you can use parentheses to bypass the order of
operations; anything in parentheses will be evaluated first.
You now know everything you need to write and evaluate Boolean
equations with more than one logic operation, such as Q = A * B + A′. In
plain language, you’d read this as “The output Q equals A and B or not A.”
Table 3-7 shows the truth table for this equation.
Table 3-7: Truth Table for A * B + A′
Input A Input B Output Q
0 0 1
0 1 1
1 0 0
1 1 1
Figure 3-6 shows the circuit equivalent of this equation, created by
combining logic gates.
Figure 3-6: The circuit diagram for A * B + A′
As you can see, we still have only two inputs, but because those inputs
go through three different logic operations, the possible outputs of our truth
table are more interesting than they were for individual logic gates. Let’s
consider what happens with this equation when both inputs are 0, the first
row of our truth table. The equation has no parentheses, so first we look at
NOT A, which evaluates to 1. Then we perform the AND operation of A
and B, which evaluates to 0. Finally, we OR the results of both of those
expressions, giving us an output of 1. Considering the other possible inputs,
you should see that any time A is 0, or any time A and B are both 1, the
output Q will be 1. Otherwise, the output will be 0.
While this example featured two inputs, it’s possible to have Boolean
equations with any number of inputs. Each input increases the number of
rows in the truth table by a factor of 2: for one input there are two truth

--- Page 67 ---
table rows, for two inputs there are four rows, for three inputs there are
eight rows, and so on. In mathematical terms, for n inputs, there are 2n truth
table rows.
To demonstrate, let’s consider an example equation with three inputs: Q
= A + (C * B′). Note that the parentheses indicate that the operation C AND
NOT B occurs prior to the OR operation. In fact, that follows the regular
Boolean algebra order of operations, but the parentheses make the equation
a little easier to read. The truth table with three inputs is shown in Table 3-
8.
Table 3-8: Truth Table for A + (C * B′)
Input A Input B Input C Output Q
0 0 0 0
0 0 1 1
0 1 0 0
0 1 1 0
1 0 0 1
1 0 1 1
1 1 0 1
1 1 1 1
The corresponding circuit is shown in Figure 3-7.
Figure 3-7: The circuit diagram for A + (C * B′)
To generate this truth table, first we should perform the operation
inside the parentheses. This is C AND NOT B. Within the parentheses, the
highest precedence is the inversion applied to B, which is then ANDed with
C. In all, the part of the equation in parentheses evaluates to high when C is
high and B is low, and since the remainder of the equation is an OR

--- Page 68 ---
operation, we also know that the overall output will be high when C is high
and B is low. This case occurs on the second line of the truth table. It also
occurs on the fifth line of the truth table, so we can fill those in with a 1.
Finally, consider the A on the other side of the OR operation. When it’s
high, as in the last four lines of the truth table, the output will be high. We
can fill in the remaining lines with a 0 to complete the truth table.
Combining logic operations to perform more complicated functionality
is common throughout programming. In FPGAs, this same capability is
possible by chaining together simple logic gate functions.
The Look-Up Table
So far we’ve been learning about individual logic gates, but it might
surprise you to find out that these logic gates don’t physically exist inside
an FPGA. There isn’t a bank of AND gates and OR gates that you can just
pull from and wire together to create your Boolean algebra logic. Instead,
there’s something much better: look-up tables (LUTs). These are devices
that can be programmed to perform any Boolean algebra equation you can
think of, regardless of the specific logic gate(s) involved. If you need an
AND gate, a LUT can do it. If you need an XOR gate, a LUT can do that
too. A single LUT can also evaluate an equation involving multiple logic
gates, like the ones we considered in the previous section. Any truth table
you can think of, a LUT can produce. This is the power of the look-up
table.
NOTE
Early programmable logic devices like Programmable Array Logic (PAL)
did actually have banks of AND and OR gates. With FPGAs, these have
been superseded by the more capable LUTs.
LUTs are classified by the number of inputs they can accept. For
example, there are two-, three-, four-, five-, and even six-input LUTs on the
newest FPGAs. Most LUTs produce a single output. Figure 3-8 shows what
a three-input LUT (often referred to as LUT-3) looks like.

--- Page 69 ---
Figure 3-8: A three-input LUT
This LUT is a blank slate that can be programmed to perform any
Boolean algebra operation with three inputs and one output. For example,
look back at the circuit drawn in Figure 3-7 to represent the Boolean
equation Q = A + (C * B′). Drawing the circuit for that equation required
three logic gates—a NOT gate, an AND gate, and an OR gate—but we can
replace those three gates with our single three-input LUT. The same LUT
could also be programmed to represent the equation Q = (A + B + C)′, or Q
= (A + B)′ * C.
What happens if we have a Boolean algebra equation with more than
three inputs? That’s just fine, as LUTs can be chained together to perform
very long sequences of logic. In fact, the typical FPGA contains hundreds
or even thousands of LUTs, all ready to be programmed to carry out
whatever logic operations you need. This is why look-up tables are one of
the two most important components to understand inside of an FPGA: they
perform the logical operations of your code. The other key component is the
flip-flop, which we’ll talk about in the next chapter.
Although we’ve been drawing truth tables and logic gate diagrams
here, in the real world you’ll rarely define FPGA operations this way.
Instead, you’ll write code. Often, the code you write is at a higher level than
individual logic gates: you might write code to compare two numbers, or
increment a counter, or check if a condition is true, and the synthesis tools
then break down that code into the necessary Boolean logic operations and
assign those operations to LUTs. However, the purpose of this book is to
teach you how FPGAs work so you understand them, and at a fundamental
level, FPGAs work by performing Boolean algebra. Once you know how
FPGAs work, you’ll be able to use Verilog or VHDL with a deeper
understanding of what you’re creating with your code. This will help you
create efficient and reliable FPGA designs.

--- Page 70 ---
LOGIC MINIMIZATION
You’ll often hear about logic minimization techniques such as De Morgan’s law, Karnaugh
maps, and the Quine–McCluskey algorithm in connection to Boolean algebra. These are
mathematical tricks to simplify Boolean algebra equations to take up fewer computing
resources. I feel that knowing the ins and outs of these techniques isn’t necessary to begin
learning about FPGAs, however. Yes, LUTs are limited and should be used optimally, but there
are entire software tools responsible for minimizing logic resource usage for you. Specifically,
synthesis tools, which we’ll discuss in more detail in Chapter 7, perform this task so you don’t
have to. I’ve spent weeks of my life learning about Karnaugh maps and performing Quine–
McCluskey by hand, and I can tell you that I’ve never needed to use this knowledge as a
professional FPGA engineer. All you need to do is write the VHDL or Verilog and let the
software tools work their magic.
Project #2: Lighting an LED with Logic Gates
You’re now ready to combine everything you’ve learned about Boolean
logic and look-up tables in a real-world example on your FPGA
development board. This project should illuminate an LED, but only when
two switches are pushed at the same time. In other words, you’re using your
first LUT by implementing an AND gate. Figure 3-9 shows the block
diagram for this project.
Figure 3-9: The Project #2 block diagram
This project turns the entire FPGA into one single AND gate. This
might be overkill for a very capable FPGA, but it’s an excellent way to
visualize how a LUT works in the real world. Table 3-9 shows the truth
table corresponding to the project.
Table 3-9: Truth Table for Project #2
SW1 SW2 D1

--- Page 71 ---
SW1 SW2 D1
0 0 0
0 1 0
1 0 0
1 1 1
This truth table looks exactly like the one we created for the AND gate,
but the column labels have been replaced to represent two switches and an
LED on your development board. As expected, the output D1 is only high
when inputs SW1 and SW2 are both high.
Writing the Code
Implementing an AND gate uses very few resources: three connections
(two input and one output) and a single LUT. Let’s look at the Verilog and
VHDL to get that LED to light up:
Verilog
module And_Gate_Project 
 (input i_Switch_1, 
  input i_Switch_2, 
  output o_LED_1); 
❶ assign o_LED_1 = i_Switch_1 & i_Switch_2; 
endmodule
VHDL
library ieee; 
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all; 
entity And_Gate_Project is 
  port ( 
    i_Switch_1 : in std_logic; 
    i_Switch_2 : in std_logic; 
    o_LED_1    : out std_logic); 
end entity And_Gate_Project; 
architecture RTL of And_Gate_Project is 

--- Page 72 ---
begin 
  ❶ o_LED_1 <= i_Switch_1 and i_Switch_2; 
end RTL;
We begin by defining our inputs as i_Switch_1 and i_Switch_2, and
our output as o_LED_1. Then we continuously assign the output with the
AND of the two inputs ❶. In Verilog the symbol for an AND operation is &,
whereas in VHDL and is a reserved keyword.
Building and Programming the FPGA
You’re now ready to run your Verilog or VHDL through the build process
discussed in Chapter 2. The synthesis tool will generate a report outlining
the resource utilization on your FPGA. Here’s the most interesting part of
the report:
--snip-- 
Resource Usage Report for And_Gate_Project 
Mapping to part: ice40hx1kvq100 
Cell usage: 
SB_LUT4         1 use 
❶ I/O ports: 3 
I/O primitives: 3 
SB_IO          3 uses 
I/O Register bits:                  0 
Register bits not including I/Os:   0 (0%) 
Total load per clock: 
Mapping Summary: 
❷ Total  LUTs: 1 (0%)
This report tells us that three I/O ports (input/output ports, or pins,
meaning connections to the outside world) on the FPGA have been used to
implement our circuit design ❶ and, most importantly, that we’ve used a
single LUT ❷. That (0%) on the last line is indicating the resource
utilization on the FPGA. On this particular FPGA there are over 1,000
LUTs available for usage, and we’re only making use of 1 of them. Since

--- Page 73 ---
the synthesis report is showing one LUT with 0 percent resource utilization,
the tool must be doing some rounding down here (1 / 1,000 = 0.1).
Go ahead and program your development board, and notice that the
LED only illuminates when the two switches are held down together. The
LUT is working!
Feel free to change the code around to implement a different Boolean
operation than AND. For example, you could create an OR gate or an XOR
gate using the | or ^ symbols in Verilog, or the or or xor keywords in
VHDL. You could also try stringing together several operations to make the
LED light up based on whatever crazy Boolean algebra equation you can
think of, or try adding in more switch inputs or more LED outputs to
implement more complicated truth tables. You can check that the synthesis
tools are really generating the correct LUTs based on your code by writing
out your own truth table using the switches as inputs and the LED as the
output, then testing all possible switch combinations to see if they work as
expected.
Summary
In this chapter you’ve learned about one of the two most important
components of an FPGA: the look-up table. You’ve seen how a LUT can
implement any Boolean algebra equation with a given number of inputs,
from simple logic gates like AND, OR, NOT, XOR, and NAND to more
complex equations that combine these gates. In the next chapter, we’ll focus
on the other crucial FPGA component: the flip-flop.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 74 ---
4
STORING STATE WITH THE FLIP-FLOP
Alongside the look-up table, the other
main component in an FPGA is the flip-
flop. Flip-flops give FPGAs the ability to remember,
or store, state. In this chapter, we’ll explore how flip-
flops work and learn why they’re important to the
functioning of FPGAs.
Flip-flops make up for a shortcoming of look-up tables. LUTs generate
output as soon as they’re provided input. If all you had to work with was
LUTs, your FPGA could perform all the Boolean algebra you might want,
but your outputs would be determined solely based on the current inputs.
The FPGA would know nothing about its past state. This would be very
limiting. Implementing a counter would be impractical, since a counter
requires knowledge of a previous value that can be incremented; so would
storing the result of some math operation as a variable. Even something as
critical as having a concept of time is impractical with just LUTs; you can
only calculate values based on the now, not on anything in the past. The
flip-flop enables these interesting capabilities, which is why it’s critical to
the operation of an FPGA.
How a Flip-Flop Works

--- Page 75 ---
A flip-flop stores state in the form of a high or low voltage, corresponding
to a binary 1 or 0 or a true/false value. It does this by periodically checking
the value on its input, passing that value along to its output, and holding it
there. Consider the basic diagram of a D flip-flop shown in Figure 4-1. D
flip-flops are the most common type of flip-flop in FPGAs, and they’re the
focus of this chapter. (I’ll drop the D in front of flip-flop going forward.)
Figure 4-1: A diagram of a D flip-flop
Notice that the component has three inputs on the left and one output
on the right. The top-left input, labeled D, is the data input to the flip-flop.
It’s where data, in the form of 1s or 0s, comes in. The bottom-left input,
labeled with what looks like a greater-than (>) sign, is the clock input,
which synchronizes the performance of the flip-flop. At regular intervals,
the clock input triggers the flip-flop to take the value from the data input
and pass it to the output (labeled Q in the diagram).
The middle-left input, labeled En, is the clock enable. As long as the
clock enable is high, the clock input will continue to trigger the flip-flop to
update its output. If the clock enable input goes low, however, the flip-flop
will ignore its clock and data inputs, essentially freezing its current output
value.
To better understand how a flip-flop operates, we need to look more
closely at the signal coming in to the clock input.
FLIP-FLOP COMPONENT TERMINOLOGY
The component presented in Figure 4-1, a flip-flop with a clock enable pin, isn’t always called a
flip-flop. FPGA manufacturers such as AMD and Intel do in fact use that terminology in their
reference information, but a more technically accurate name is a clocked D latch. It’s not
valuable getting into the details about why one name is better than another; instead, for the
purposes of this book, we’ll use the real-world terminology that the FPGA manufacturers use
and refer to these components as flip-flops.

--- Page 76 ---
The Clock Signal
A clock signal, often just called a clock, is a digital signal that steadily
alternates between high and low, as shown in Figure 4-2. This signal is
usually provided via a dedicated electronic component external to the
FPGA. A clock is key to how FPGAs operate: it triggers other components,
such as flip-flops, to perform their tasks. If you think of an FPGA as a set of
gears, the clock is like the big gear that turns all the other gears. If the main
gear isn’t spinning, the others won’t spin either. You could also think of the
clock as the heart of the system, since it keeps the beat for the entire FPGA.
Every flip-flop in the FPGA will be updated on the pulse of the clock’s
heartbeat.
Figure 4-2: A clock signal
Notice the vertical lines in the clock signal diagram, where the signal
jumps from low to high or high to low. These abrupt changes in the signal
are called edges. When the clock goes from low to high, it’s called a rising
edge, and when it goes from high to low, it’s called a falling edge. Flip-
flops are conventionally triggered on each rising edge of the clock:
whenever the clock signal changes from low to high, the flip-flop updates
its output to match its data input.
NOTE
It’s possible to trigger a flip-flop with the falling edges of a clock, but this is
much less common than using the rising edge.
Every clock has a duty cycle, the fraction of time that the signal is high.
For example, a signal with a 25 percent duty cycle is high one-quarter of the

--- Page 77 ---
time and low three-quarters of the time. Almost all clocks, including the
one shown in Figure 4-2, have a 50 percent duty cycle: they’re half-on,
half-off.
A clock also has a frequency, which is the number of repetitions from
low to high and back again (called a cycle) in a second. Frequency is
measured in hertz (Hz), or cycles per second. You may be familiar with
your computer’s CPU frequency, which can be measured in gigahertz
(GHz), where 1 GHz is 1 billion Hz. FPGAs don’t often run quite that
quickly. More commonly, FPGA clock signals run in the tens to hundreds of
megahertz (MHz), where 1 MHz is 1 million Hz. As an example, the clock
on the Go Board (discussed in Appendix A) runs at 25 MHz, or 25 million
cycles per second.
Another way to describe a clock’s speed is to refer to its period, the
duration of a single clock cycle. You can calculate the period by finding 1 ÷
frequency. In the case of the Go Board, for instance, the clock period is 40
nanoseconds (ns).
A Flip-Flop in Action
A flip-flop operates on the transitions of its clock input. As mentioned
previously, when a flip-flop sees a rising edge of the clock, it checks the
state of the data input signal and replicates it at the output—assuming the
clock enable pin is set to high. This process is called registering, as in, “the
flip-flop registers the input data.” Thanks to this terminology, a group of
flip-flops is known as a register, and by extension, a single flip-flop can
also be called a one-bit register. One flip-flop by itself is able to register a
single bit of data.
To see how registering works in practice, we’ll examine a few example
inputs to a flip-flop and their corresponding outputs. First, consider Figure
4-3.
Figure 4-3: An example of flip-flop behavior

--- Page 78 ---
This figure shows three waveforms: the top one (Clk) represents an
FPGA’s clock signal, the middle one (D) is the data input of a flip-flop, and
the bottom one (Q) is the flip-flop’s output. Let’s assume the clock enable is
high, so the flip-flop is always enabled. We can see the waveforms across
three cycles of the clock; the rising edge of each clock cycle is indicated
with the numbers 1, 2, and 3. In between the first and second rising edges of
the clock, the D input goes from low to high, but notice that the output
doesn’t immediately go high when the input does. Instead, it takes a bit of
time for the flip-flop to register the change in the input. Specifically, it takes
until the next rising clock edge for the flip-flop output to follow the input.
The flip-flop looks at the input data and makes the output match the
input only at the rising edge of the clock, never between edges. In this case,
at the rising edge of the second clock cycle, the output Q sees that D has
gone from low to high. At this point, Q takes on the same value as D. On
the third rising edge, Q again checks the value of D and registers it. Since D
hasn’t changed, Q stays high. Q also registered D at the rising edge of the
first clock cycle, but since both D and Q were low at that point, Q didn’t
change.
Now consider Figure 4-4, which shows how a flip-flop responds to
another example scenario.
Figure 4-4: Another example of flip-flop behavior
Here we again see a flip-flop operating over several cycles of the clock.
Again, let’s assume the flip-flop is always enabled. Between the clock’s
first and second rising edges, input D goes from low to high. On the second
rising edge, Q sees that D has gone high, so it toggles from low to high as
well. On the third rising edge, Q sees D has stayed high, so it stays high,
too. Between the third and fourth rising edges, D goes low, and the output
similarly goes low on the fourth rising edge. On the last rising edge, D is
still low, so Q stays low as well.

--- Page 79 ---
The previous examples have all assumed the clock enable input is high.
Let’s now show what happens when the flip-flop’s clock enable isn’t always
high. Figure 4-5 shows the exact same Clk and D waveforms as Figure 4-4,
but instead of the clock enable remaining high the whole time, it’s only high
at the third rising edge.
Figure 4-5: Flip-flop behavior with the clock enable signal
With the clock enable (En) now in play, a completely different output Q
is generated. Q no longer “sees” that D has gone high on clock cycle two,
since the clock enable is low at that point. Instead, Q only changes its
output from low to high on clock cycle three, when the clock enable is high.
On clock cycle four, D has gone low, but Q doesn’t follow D. Instead, it
stays high. This is because the clock enable has gone low at that point,
locking the output in place. The flip-flop will no longer register any
changes on D to Q.
These examples demonstrate flip-flop behavior, showing how a flip-
flop’s activity is coordinated by a clock. Additionally, we’ve seen how
turning off the clock enable pin allows flip-flops to retain state, even when
the input D is changing. This gives flip-flops the ability to store data for a
long time.
A Chain of Flip-Flops
Flip-flops are commonly chained together, with the output from one flip-
flop going directly into the data input of another flip-flop. For example,
Figure 4-6 shows a chain of four flip-flops. For simplicity, let’s assume
these are always enabled.

--- Page 80 ---
Figure 4-6: A chain of four flip-flops
The four flip-flops, labeled test1 through test4, are chained such that
the output of test1 goes to the input of test2, the output of test2 goes to
the input of test3, and so on. All four flip-flops are driven by the same
clock. The clock synchronizes their operation: with each rising edge of the
clock, all four flip-flops will check the value on their input and register that
value to their output.
Suppose the test1 flip-flop registers a change at its input. Figure 4-7
illustrates how that change will propagate through the flip-flop chain, all the
way to the output of test4.
Figure 4-7: A change of input propagating through the flip-flop chain
The figure shows waveforms for the clock signal, the input and output
of the test1 flip-flop (test1_d and test1_q, respectively), and the output
of each subsequent flip-flop. On the first clock cycle rising edge (labeled 1),
test1_d is low, so test1_q stays low as well. It’s not until the second rising
clock edge that the first flip-flop “sees” that the input has changed to high
and registers that to its output. The test1 flip-flop’s output is also the input

--- Page 81 ---
to the test2 flip-flop, but notice that the output of test2 doesn’t
immediately change to high when the output of test1 does. Instead,
test2_q changes one clock cycle later, on the third rising clock edge. Then,
on the fourth rising edge, we see test3_q go high, and finally on the fifth
rising edge test4_q goes high and stays high.
By adding three flip-flops behind test1, we’ve delayed the output by
three clock cycles as the signal propagates through the chain. Each flip-flop
in the chain adds a single clock cycle of delay. This technique of delaying
signals by adding a chain of flip-flops is a useful design practice when
working with FPGAs. Among other things, designers may chain flip-flops
to create circuits that can delay or remember data for some amount of time,
or to convert serial data to parallel data (or vice versa).
OTHER KINDS OF FLIP-FLOPS
In this chapter we’re focusing on the D flip-flop. If you’ve taken a digital electronics course in
college, there’s a good chance your professor spent time talking about other types of flip-flops
as well, including the T flip-flop and the JK flip-flop. In practice, however, you’re unlikely to
need to know anything about these other types of flip-flops to use an FPGA, as most FPGAs are
made with D flip-flops. For this reason, I won’t burden you with information about how the
other kinds of flip-flops work, although it’s important to acknowledge that they exist.
Project #3: Blinking an LED
Now that you know how flip-flops work, we’ll make use of a couple of
them in a project where the FPGA must remember information about its
own state. Specifically, we’re going to toggle the state of an LED each time
a switch is released. If the LED was off before the switch is released, it
should turn on, and if the LED was on, it should turn off.
This project uses two flip-flops. The first is for remembering the state
of the LED: whether it’s on or off. Without this memory, the FPGA would
have no way of knowing whether to toggle the LED each time the switch is
released; it won’t know if the LED is on and needs to be turned off, or off
and needs to be turned on.
The second flip-flop allows the FPGA to detect when the switch is
released. Specifically, we’re looking for the falling edge of the switch’s
electrical signal: its transition from high to low. A good way to look for a

--- Page 82 ---
falling edge in an FPGA is to register the signal in question by passing it
through a flip-flop. When the input value of the flip-flop (that is, the
unregistered value) is equal to 0 but the previous output value (the
registered value) is equal to 1, then we know that a falling edge has
occurred. The falling edge of the switch is not to be confused with the rising
edge of the clock; we’re still using the rising edge of the clock to drive all
of our flip-flops. Figure 4-8 shows the pattern to look for.
Figure 4-8: Falling edge detection using flip-flop
Here, i_Clk is the clock signal; i_Switch_1 represents the electrical
signal from the switch, which passes into a flip-flop; and r_Switch_1 is the
flip-flop’s output. At the circled rising clock edge, we can see that
i_Switch_1 is low, but r_Switch_1 is high. This pattern is how we can
detect the falling edge of a signal. One thing to note is that while
r_Switch_1 does go low on the rising clock edge, when the logic evaluates
the state of r_Switch_1 at that same rising clock edge, it will still “see” that
r_Switch_1 is high. Only after some small delay will the output of
r_Switch_1 go low, following the state of i_Switch_1.
This project will also require some logic between the two flip-flops,
which will be implemented in the form of a LUT. This will be your first
glimpse of how flip-flops and LUTs work together in an FPGA to
accomplish tasks. Figure 4-9 shows an overall block diagram for this
project.

--- Page 83 ---
Figure 4-9: The Project #3 block diagram
The output of one of the switches on your development board (SW1)
goes into the FPGA, where the falling edge detection logic is implemented.
The output of this logic drives one of the board’s LEDs (D1). Now we’ll
look at how to implement this design.
Writing the Code
We can write our LED-toggling code using Verilog or VHDL:
Verilog
module LED_Toggle_Project( 
  input  i_Clk, 
  input  i_Switch_1, 
  output o_LED_1); 
❶ reg r_LED_1    = 1'b0; 
  reg r_Switch_1 = 1'b0; 
❷ always @(posedge i_Clk) 
  begin 
  ❸ r_Switch_1 <= i_Switch_1; 
  ❹ if (i_Switch_1 == 1'b0 && r_Switch_1 == 1'b1) 
     begin 
     ❺ r_LED_1 <= ~r_LED_1; 
     end 
  end 
  assign o_LED_1 = r_LED_1; 
endmodule
VHDL

--- Page 84 ---
library ieee; 
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all; 
entity LED_Toggle_Project is 
  port ( 
     i_Clk      : in  std_logic; 
     i_Switch_1 : in  std_logic; 
     o_LED_1    : out std_logic 
  ); 
end entity LED_Toggle_Project; 
architecture RTL of LED_Toggle_Project is 
❶ signal r_LED_1    : std_logic := '0'; 
  signal r_Switch_1 : std_logic := '0'; 
begin 
❷ process (i_Clk) is 
  begin 
     if rising_edge(i_Clk) then 
     ❸ r_Switch_1 <= i_Switch_1; 
     ❹ if i_Switch_1 = '0' and r_Switch_1 = '1' then 
        ❺ r_LED_1 <= not r_LED_1; 
        end if; 
     end if; 
  end process; 
  o_LED_1 <= r_LED_1; 
end architecture RTL;
We begin by defining two inputs (the clock and the switch) and a single
output (the LED). Then we create two signals ❶ : r_LED_1 and
r_Switch_1. We do this using the reg keyword (short for register) in
Verilog, or the signal keyword in VHDL. Ultimately these signals will be
implemented as flip-flops, or registers, so we prefix their names with the
letter r. It’s good practice to label any signals that you know will become
registers r_signal_name, as it helps keep your code organized and easy to
search.
Next, we initiate what’s known as an always block in Verilog or a
process block in VHDL ❷. This type of code block is triggered by changes
in one or more signals, as specified by the code block’s sensitivity list,
which is given in parentheses when the block is declared. In this case, the

--- Page 85 ---
block is sensitive to the clock signal, i_Clk. Specifically, this block will be
triggered any time the clock changes from a 0 to a 1; that is, at each rising
clock edge. Remember, when you use a clock to trigger logic within your
FPGA, you’ll almost always be using the clock’s rising edges. In Verilog,
we indicate this with the keyword posedge (short for positive edge, another
term for rising edge) within the sensitivity list itself: always @(posedge
i_Clk). In VHDL, however, we only put the signal name in the sensitivity
list, and specify to watch for rising edges two lines later, with if
rising_edge(i_Clk) then.
Within the always or process block, we create the first flip-flop of this
project by taking the input signal i_Switch_1 and registering it into
r_Switch_1 ❸. This line of code will generate a flip-flop with i_Switch_1
on the D input, r_Switch_1 on the Q output, and i_Clk going into the clock
input. The output of this flip-flop will generate a one-clock-cycle delay of
any changes to the input. This effectively gives us access to the previous
state of the switch, which we need to know in order to detect the falling
edge of the switch’s signal.
We next check to see if the switch has been released ❹. To do this, we
compare the current state of the switch with its previous state, using the
flip-flop we just created ❸. If the current state (i_Switch_1) is 0 and the
previous state (r_Switch_1) is 1, then we’ve detected a falling edge,
meaning the switch has been released. The and check will be accomplished
with a LUT.
At this point, perhaps you’ve noticed something surprising. First we
assigned i_Switch_1 to r_Switch_1 ❸, then we checked if i_Switch_1 is 0
and r_Switch_1 is 1 ❹. You might think that since we just assigned
i_Switch_1 to r_Switch_1, they’d always be equal, and the if statement
would never be true. Right? Wrong! Assignments in an always or process
block that use <= don’t occur immediately. Instead, they take place on each
rising edge of the clock and therefore are all executed at the same time. If at
a rising clock edge i_Switch_1 is 0 and r_Switch_1 is 1, the if statement
will evaluate as true, even as r_Switch_1 is simultaneously switching from
a 1 to a 0 to match i_Switch_1.

--- Page 86 ---
Now we’re thinking in parallel instead of serially! We’ve generated
assignments that occur all at once, instead of one at a time. This is
completely different from traditional programming languages like C and
Python, where assignments occur one after the other. To further drive this
point home, you could move the assignment of r_Switch_1 to the last line
of the always or process block, and everything would still work the same.
Formally, we call the <= assignment a non-blocking assignment, meaning it
doesn’t prevent (“block”) other assignments from taking place at the same
time. In Chapter 10, we’ll revisit this concept and compare non-blocking
assignments with blocking assignments.
Once we’re inside the if statement, we toggle the state of the LED ❺.
Doing so generates the second flip-flop used in this project. We take the
current value of r_LED_1, invert it, and store the result back into the flip-
flop. That might sound impossible, but it’s perfectly valid. The output of the
flip-flop will pass through a LUT, acting here as a NOT gate, and then be
fed back into the flip-flop’s input. This way, if the LED was on it’ll turn off,
and vice versa.
Adding Constraints
Once the code is ready, it’s time to run the tools to build the FPGA image
and program your board. First, since this project uses a clock, you need to
add a constraint telling the FPGA tool about the clock’s period. The clock
period tells the timing tool how much time is available to route wires
between flip-flops. As clock speed increases, it gets harder for the FPGA to
meet timing, or achieve all the desired tasks within each clock cycle. For
slower clocks, with frequencies on the order of tens of megahertz, you
shouldn’t have any problems meeting timing. In general, it’s only when you
deal with clocks that are faster than 100 MHz that you may start to run into
timing issues.
The clock period will vary from one development board to another, and
can be found in your board’s documentation. To tell Lattice iCEcube2 about
the clock period, create a new text file with a .sdc file extension containing
something like the following:

--- Page 87 ---
create_clock  -period 40.00 -name {i_Clk} [get_ports {i_Cl
k}]
This creates a clock with a 40 ns period (25 MHz frequency) and
assigns that constraint to the signal called i_Clk in your design. This
constraint will work for the Go Board, as an example, but if your board has
a different clock period, replace 40.00 with the appropriate value.
Right-click Constraint Files under Synthesis Tool and select the .sdc
file to add it to your project in iCEcube2. Remember from Chapter 2 that
we previously had a single .pcf constraint file telling the tools which signals
to map to which pins. Now we have an additional constraint file just for the
clock. Both are critical for getting your FPGA to work correctly.
We also need to update the .pcf file to include the pin corresponding to
the new clock signal. On the Go Board, for example, the clock is connected
to pin 15 of the FPGA, so you would need to add the following pin
constraint:
set_io i_Clk 15
Check the schematic for your development board to see which pin has
the clock as an input, and replace the 15 as appropriate.
Building and Programming the FPGA
You’re now ready to run the build. When you do this, the tools will generate
some reports. The synthesis report should look something like this:
--snip-- 
Resource Usage Report for LED_Toggle_Project 
Mapping to part: ice40hx1kvq100 
Cell usage: 
SB_DFF 2 uses 
SB_LUT4 1 use 
I/O ports: 3 
I/O primitives: 3 
SB_GB_IO 1 use 
SB_IO 2 uses 

--- Page 88 ---
I/O Register bits: 0 
❶ Register bits not including I/Os: 2 (0%) 
Total load per clock: 
 ❷ LED_Toggle_Project|i_Clk: 1 
Mapping Summary: 
❸ Total LUTs: 1 (0%)
This report tells us that we’re using two register bits ❶, meaning our
design includes two flip-flops. This is exactly what we expected. The report
also shows that we’re using one LUT ❸. This single LUT will be able to
perform both the AND and NOT operations required in the code. Notice,
too, that the tools identified the signal i_Clk as a clock ❷.
Now let’s look at the place and route reports, which you can view in
iCEcube2 by going to P&R Flow Output Files Reports. There are two
reports here. The first is a pin report, which tells you which signals were
mapped to which pins. You can use this to confirm that your signals were
mapped correctly. The second is the timing report. It has a section labeled
“Clock Frequency Summary” that should look something like this:
--snip-- 
 1::Clock Frequency Summary 
========================================================== 
Number of clocks: 1 
Clock: i_Clk | Frequency: 654.05 MHz | Target: 25.00 MHz | 
--snip--
This section tells you if the constraint file was accepted correctly. Here
we see that the tools have found our clock, i_Clk. The Target property
indicates the tools have recognized a 25 MHz constraint placed on the clock
(your number will vary, depending on your development board), while the
Frequency property tells us the maximum frequency at which the FPGA
could theoretically run our code successfully. In this case, we could run this
FPGA at 654.05 MHz and it would still be guaranteed to work correctly.
That’s quite fast! As long as the Frequency property is higher than the
Target property, you shouldn’t have any issues running your code. A
problem would show up here in the form of a timing error, which happens

--- Page 89 ---
when the target clock speed is greater than the frequency that the tools can
achieve. In Chapter 7, we’ll take a deeper look at what causes timing errors
and how to fix them.
Now that you’ve successfully built the FPGA design, you can program
your board and test the project. Try pushing the switch several times. You
should see the LED toggle on or off each time the switch is released.
Congratulations, you’ve got your first flip-flop working!
However, you may notice something strange going on. The LED may
not appear to change its state with each release. You might think that the
FPGA isn’t registering the releases of the switch, but in fact the LED is
toggling two or more times with each release, so quickly that your eyes
don’t see it. The cause is related to the physical workings of the switch
itself. To solve this issue, the switch needs to be debounced. You’ll learn
what this means and how to do it in the next chapter.
Combinational Logic vs. Sequential Logic
There are two kinds of logic that can take place inside an FPGA:
combinational logic and sequential logic. Combinational logic is logic for
which the outputs are determined by the present inputs, with no memory of
the previous state. This kind of logic is achieved with LUTs, which you’ll
recall generate their output based only on their current inputs. Sequential
logic, on the other hand, is logic for which the outputs are determined both
by present inputs and previous outputs. Sequential logic is achieved with
flip-flops, since flip-flops don’t immediately register changes on their
inputs to their outputs, but rather wait until the rising edge of the clock to
act on the new input data.
NOTE
You may also see combinational logic and sequential logic referred to as
combinatorial logic and synchronous logic, respectively.
It might not be obvious that a flip-flop’s output depends on its previous
output, so let’s explore an example to make this more concrete. Suppose the
flip-flop is enabled, its input is low, its clock is low, and the output is low.
Then suddenly the input goes high, then back low again quickly. What will

--- Page 90 ---
the output do? Nothing! It stays low, since there was no clock edge to
trigger a change. Now, what happens if that same flip-flop has the same
initial conditions, except the output is high? In this case, of course, the
output will stay high. But if we only looked at the inputs (D, En, and Clk),
we would be unable to predict the output state. You need to know what the
output of the flip-flop was (its previous state) to determine the flip-flop’s
current state. That’s why a flip-flop is sequential.
Knowing if your code is going to instantiate LUTs (combinational
logic) or flip-flops (sequential logic) is critical to being a good FPGA
designer, but sometimes it can be hard to tell the difference. In particular, an
always block (in Verilog) or process block (in VHDL) can define a block
of either combinational logic or sequential logic. We’ll consider examples
of each to see how they differ.
First, here’s an example of a combinational implementation in Verilog
and VHDL:
Verilog
always @ (input_1 or input_2) 
  begin 
    and_gate <= input_1 & input_2; 
  end
VHDL
process (input_1, input_2) 
begin 
  and_gate <= input_1 and input_2; 
end process;
Here we’ve created an always or process block with a sensitivity list
(the signals in the parentheses) that includes two signals: input_1 and
input_2. The code block performs an AND operation on the two signals.
This block of Verilog or VHDL code will only generate LUTs; it won’t
generate any flip-flops. For our purposes, flip-flops require a clock input,

--- Page 91 ---
and there is no clock. Since no flip-flops are generated, this is
combinational logic.
Now consider a slight modification to the examples just shown:
Verilog
always @ (posedge i_Clk) 
  begin 
    and_gate <= input_1 & input_2; 
  end
VHDL
process (i_Clk) 
begin 
  if rising_edge(i_Clk) then 
    and_gate <= input_1 and input_2; 
  end if; 
end process;
This code looks very similar to the previous examples, except now the
always or process block’s sensitivity list has changed to be sensitive to the
signal i_Clk. Since the block is sensitive to a clock, it’s now considered
sequential logic. This block will actually still require a LUT to perform the
AND operation, but in addition to that the output will utilize a flip-flop,
since the clock is gating the output from updating all the time.
While all the examples in this section are valid code, I’m going to
make a suggestion, especially for FPGA beginners: when writing your
code, only create sequential always blocks (in Verilog) or process blocks
(in VHDL). The way to do this is to ensure that the block’s sensitivity list
only has a clock in it. (A clock and a reset is OK too, as we’ll discuss later
in the chapter.) Combinational always blocks and process blocks can get
you into trouble: you can generate a latch by accident. We’ll explore latches
in the next section, but basically, they’re bad. Additionally, I find code is
more readable if you know that every time you come across an always
block or process block, it will always be generating sequential logic.

--- Page 92 ---
As for combinational-only logic, write it outside of an always block or
process block. In Verilog, the keyword assign is useful. In VHDL, you
can simply use the <= assignment to create combinational logic.
The Dangers of Latches
A latch is a digital component that can store state without the use of a
clock. In this way, latches perform a similar function as flip-flops (namely,
storing state), but the method they use is different since there’s no clock
involved. Latches are dangerous and can be inadvertently generated when
working with combinational code. In my career, I’ve never once generated a
latch on purpose, only by accident. It’s highly unlikely that you’d ever
actually want to generate a latch either, so it’s important to understand how
to avoid them.
You always want your FPGA designs to be predictable. Latches are
dangerous because they violate this principle. FPGA tools have a very
difficult time understanding the timing relationship of a latch and how other
components connected to it will perform. If you do manage to create a latch
with your code, the FPGA tools will scream at you with warnings about the
fact that you’ve done a horrible thing. Please don’t ignore these warnings.
So how can this happen? A latch is created when you write a
combinational process block or conditional assignment (in VHDL) or a
combinational always block (in Verilog) with an incomplete assignment,
meaning the output isn’t assigned under all possible input conditions. This
is bad and should be avoided. Table 4-1 shows an example of a truth table
that would generate a latch.
Table 4-1: A Truth Table That Creates a Latch
Input A Input B Output Q
0 0 0
0 1 1
1 0 1
1 1 Undefined

--- Page 93 ---
This truth table has two inputs and one output. The output is 0 when
both inputs are 0, and it’s 1 when input A is 0 and input B is 1, or when
input A is 1 and input B is 0. But what happens when both inputs are 1? We
haven’t explicitly stated what will occur. In this case, the FPGA tools
assume that the output should retain its previous state, much like a flip-flop
is capable of doing, but without the use of a clock. For example, if the
output is 0 and both inputs go high, the output will stay 0. If the output is 1
and both inputs go high, the output will stay 1. This is the behavior that a
latch creates: the ability to store state without a clock.
Let’s take a look at how this truth table could be created in Verilog and
VHDL. Don’t write code like this!
Verilog
❶ always @ (i_A or i_B)
begin 
  if (i_A == 1'b0 && i_B == 1'b0) 
     o_Q <= 1'b0; 
       else if (i_A == 1'b0 && i_B == 1'b1) 
         o_Q <= 1'b1; 
       else if (i_A == 1'b1 && i_B == 1'b0) 
         o_Q <= 1'b1; 
  ❷ // Missing one last ELSE statement! 
end
VHDL
❶ process (i_A, i_B) 
begin 
  if i_A = '0' and i_B = '0' then 
    o_Q <= '0'; 
  elsif i_A = '0' and i_B = '1' then 
    o_Q <= '1'; 
  elsif i_A = '1' and i_B = '0' then 
    o_Q <= '1'; 
❷ -- Missing one last ELSE statement! 

--- Page 94 ---
  end if; 
end process;
Here, our always or process block is combinational because there’s no
clock in the sensitivity list ❶ or the block itself, just two inputs, i_A and
i_B. We mimic the incomplete truth table assignment of the output o_Q
using conditional checks. Notice that we don’t explicitly check the
condition where i_A and i_B are both 1. Big mistake!
If you were to try to synthesize this faulty code, the FPGA tools would
generate a latch and warn you about it in the synthesis report. The warning
would look something like this:
@W: CL118 :"C:\Test.v":8:4:8:5|Latch generated from always b
lock for signal 
o_Q; possible missing assignment in an if or case statement.
The tools are pretty good. They tell you that there’s a latch, they tell
you which signal it is (o_Q), and they tell you why it might be occurring.
To avoid generating a latch, we could add an else statement ❷, which
will cover all remaining possibilities. As long as the output is defined for all
possible inputs, we’ll be safe. An even better solution, however, would be
not to use a combinational always or process block at all. I discourage the
use of combinational always or process blocks precisely because it’s easy
to make this mistake of omitting an else statement. Instead, we can use a
sequential always or process block. Here’s what that looks like:
Verilog
❶ always @ (posedge i_Clk) 
begin 
  if (i_A == 1'b0 && i_B == 1'b0) 
    o_Q <= 1'b0; 
  else if (i_A == 1'b0 && i_B == 1'b1) 
    o_Q <= 1'b1; 
  else if (i_A == 1'b1 && i_B == 1'b0) 

--- Page 95 ---
    o_Q <= 1'b1; 
end
VHDL
❶ process (i_Clk) 
begin 
  if rising_edge(i_Clk) then 
    if i_A = '0' and i_B = '0' then 
      o_Q <= '0'; 
    elsif i_A = '0' and i_B = '1' then 
      o_Q <= '1'; 
    elsif i_A = '1' and i_B = '0' then 
      o_Q <= '1'; 
   end if; 
  end if; 
end process;
We now have a sequential always or process block, because we’re
using a clock in the sensitivity list ❶ and within the block itself. As a result,
o_Q will create a flip-flop rather than a latch. Flip-flops don’t have the same
unpredictable timing issues that latches do. Remember that the flip-flop can
utilize its en input to retain a value. The flip-flop’s en input will be disabled
when i_A and i_B are both high. This will retain the flip-flop’s output with
whatever state it had previously, performing the same behavior as the latch,
but in a safe, predictable way.
One side effect of switching to a sequential always or process block is
that it now takes a single clock cycle for the output to be updated. If it’s
critical that this logic be combinational—with the output updating as soon
as one of the inputs changes, with no clock delay—then you need to ensure
that the output is specified for all possible input conditions.
There’s one other way to generate latches in VHDL. VHDL has the
keyword when, which can be used in a conditional assignment. Verilog has
no equivalent syntax, so this code snippet is for VHDL only:

--- Page 96 ---
o_Q <= '0' when (i_A = '0' and i_B = '0') else 
       '1' when (i_A = '0' and i_B = '1') else 
       '1' when (i_A = '1' and i_B = '0');
This code exists outside of a process block, and again we haven’t
explicitly stated what o_Q should be assigned to when i_A and i_B are both
1, so the FPGA tools will infer a latch here. The latch will enable the output
to keep its previous state, but that’s likely not what we intended. Instead, we
should be specific with our code and ensure that we have an else condition
that sets o_Q for all possible inputs.
Resetting a Flip-Flop
Flip-flops have an additional input that we haven’t discussed yet, called
set/reset, or often just reset. This pin resets the flip-flop back to an initial
state, which could be 0 or 1. Resetting flip-flops is useful when the FPGA
first powers up and initializes. For example, you might want to reset your
flip-flops that control a state machine to the initial state (we’ll discuss state
machines in Chapter 8). You might also want to reset a counter to some
initial value, or reset a filter back to zero. Resetting flip-flops is one method
to ensure your flip-flops are in a specific state prior to operation.
There are two types of resets: synchronous and asynchronous.
Synchronous resets occur at the same time as the clock edge, whereas
asynchronous resets can occur at any time. You might trigger an
asynchronous reset with a button press external to the FPGA, for example,
since the button press can come at any point in time. Let’s look at how to
code a reset, starting with a synchronous one:
Verilog
❶ always @ (posedge i_Clk) 
begin 
❷ if (i_Reset) 
     o_Q <= 1'b1; 
❸ else 
--snip--

--- Page 97 ---
VHDL
❶ process (i_Clk) 
begin 
  if rising_edge(i_Clk) then 
  ❷ if i_Reset = '1' then 
       o_Q <= '1'; 
  ❸ else 
--snip--
Here we have an always or process block with a normal sensitivity
list; it’s only sensitive to changes of the clock ❶. Inside the block, we first
check the state of i_Reset ❷. If it’s high, then we reset the signal o_Q to 1.
This is our synchronous reset, since it’s happening on the edge of the clock.
If i_Reset is low, we proceed with the else branch of the block ❸, where
we’d write whatever code we want to be executed under normal operating
(non-reset) conditions.
Notice that in this example we’re checking if the reset is high.
Sometimes resets can be active low, however, which is usually indicated by
_L or _n at the end of the signal name. If this were an active low reset, we
would check for the signal being 0 rather than 1.
Now let’s take a look at an asynchronous reset:
Verilog
❶ always @ (posedge i_Clk or i_Reset) 
begin 
❷ if (i_Reset) 
     o_Q <= 1'b1; 
❸ else 
--snip--
VHDL

--- Page 98 ---
❶ process (i_Clk, i_Reset) 
begin 
❷ if (i_Reset = '1') then 
     o_Q <= '1'; 
❸ elsif rising_edge(i_Clk) then 
--snip--
Notice that we’ve added i_Reset into the always or process block’s
sensitivity list ❶. Now, rather than checking the clock state first, we check
the reset state first ❷. If it’s high, then we perform whatever reset
conditions we want, in this case setting o_Q to 1. Otherwise, we proceed
normally ❸.
The choice between synchronous and asynchronous resets should be
documented in the user guide for your specific FPGA—some FPGAs are
optimized to handle one or the other. Additionally, resets can create strange
bugs if they’re not treated properly. Therefore, I strongly recommend
consulting the documentation to make sure you’re resetting flip-flops
correctly for your device.
Look-Up Tables and Flip-Flops on a Real FPGA
Now you understand that LUTs and flip-flops exist on FPGAs, but they
may still seem a bit abstract. To get a more concrete picture, let’s look at
how LUTs and flip-flops are actually wired together in a real FPGA. The
image in Figure 4-10 is taken from the datasheet for the Lattice iCE40
LP/HX family of FPGAs, the type of FPGA compatible with iCEcube2.
Datasheets are used throughout the electronics industry to explain the
details of how a component works. Each FPGA will have at least a few
unique datasheets with different pieces of information, and more
complicated FPGAs can have dozens of them.

--- Page 99 ---
Figure 4-10: LUTs and flip-flops in a real FPGA
Every FPGA, whether from Lattice, AMD, Intel, or whoever else, will
have an image very similar to Figure 4-10 in its specific family datasheet.
This particular image shows the basic building block of Lattice iCE40
FPGAs, which Lattice calls the Programmable Logic Block (PLB). Each
FPGA company has its own unique name for these basic building blocks;
for example, AMD calls them Configurable Logic Blocks (CLBs), while
Intel uses Adaptive Logic Modules (ALMs). We’ll look at the details of how
the PLB from Lattice works as an example.
Looking at the left side of the image, we see there are eight logic cells
in each PLB. The right side shows a zoomed-in version of a single logic
cell. Inside it, notice that there’s a rectangle labeled LUT4. This is a four-
input look-up table! There’s also a dark gray box labeled DFF. This is a D
flip-flop! The LUT and the flip-flop truly are the two most critical
components inside an FPGA.

--- Page 100 ---
This diagram is telling us that at the most fundamental level there’s one
LUT and one flip-flop inside each logic cell, and there are eight logic cells
in a PLB. The PLB is copy-pasted hundreds or thousands of times inside
the FPGA to provide enough LUTs and flip-flops to do all the required
work.
On the left side of the DFF component (the flip-flop), notice the same
three inputs we originally saw in Figure 4-1: data (D), clock enable (EN),
and clock (>). The fourth input at the bottom of the component is the
set/reset (SR) input we discussed in the previous section.
As you’ve seen, the clock enable input allows the flip-flop to keep its
output state for multiple clock cycles. Without the En input, the output
would just follow the input with one clock cycle of delay. Adding the En
input lets the flip-flop store a state for a longer duration.
The last thing to notice in the diagram is the carry logic block, shown
above and to the left of the LUT4. This block is mostly used to speed up
arithmetic functions, such as addition, subtraction, and comparison.
While reviewing this diagram gave us an interesting look inside an
FPGA and highlighted the central role of the LUT and the flip-flop, it isn’t
critical to memorize every detail of the PLB’s architecture. You don’t need
to remember all the connections and how each is wired to its neighbor. In
the real world, you write your Verilog or VHDL, and the FPGA tools take
care of mapping that code onto the FPGA’s resources. This is particularly
useful if you want to switch from one type of FPGA to another (say, from a
Lattice to an AMD). The beauty of Verilog and VHDL is that the code is
generally portable; the same code works on different FPGAs, provided they
have enough LUTs and flip-flops to do what you want.
Summary
In this chapter you learned about the flip-flop, which, along with the LUT,
is one of the two most important components in an FPGA. You saw how
flip-flops allow FPGAs to keep state, or remember past values, by only
registering data from the input to the output on the positive edges of a clock
signal. You learned how logic driven by flip-flops and clock signals is
sequential, in contrast to the combinational logic of LUTs, and you got your
first glimpse of how flip-flops and LUTs work together through a project

--- Page 101 ---
toggling an LED. You also learned how to avoid generating latches and how
to reset a flip-flop to a default state.
In future chapters, as you build more complex blocks of code, you’ll
become more familiar with how flip-flops and LUTs interact and see how
you can use just these two kinds of components to create large,
sophisticated FPGA designs. You’ll also see the role flip-flops play in
keeping track of counters and state machines.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 102 ---
5
TESTING YOUR CODE WITH SIMULATION
There are two ways to find the bugs
that will inevitably arise in an FPGA
design. The first is to program the FPGA, run it, and
see what happens. This is called finding bugs on
hardware. The other way is to use a computer to
inject test cases into your FPGA code to see how the
code responds before you actually program the
FPGA. This is called finding bugs in simulation.
For very simple projects, such as the ones we’ve explored so far in this
book, jumping straight to programming the FPGA without any kind of
simulation may be a reasonable approach (and it’s the one we’ve taken up
to this point). However, as your FPGA designs grow more complicated,
finding bugs on hardware becomes incredibly difficult. In nearly all cases,
it’s significantly easier to find bugs in simulation. After thoroughly
simulating and debugging a design, there’s nothing more satisfying than
finally programming your FPGA and having everything work perfectly the
first time.
In this chapter, you’ll learn how simulation works and see why it’s an
essential step in the FPGA design process. We’ll explore a free simulator
tool and I’ll introduce the testbench to show how you can write test code to
stress your design. You’ll try out these concepts by adding a debounce

--- Page 103 ---
circuit to the LED-toggling project from the previous chapter (Project #3)
and simulating the design. Finally, we’ll take a look at verification, which is
a more formal and rigorous process for testing out FPGA and ASIC
designs.
Why Simulation Matters
Simulation is important because your FPGA is essentially a black box, as
shown in Figure 5-1. When you program the FPGA, you’re able to change
the inputs and see how the outputs respond, but you’re unable to see the
details of what’s going on inside the box itself. You can’t follow the
individual variables and data signals as they flow inside your FPGA.
Figure 5-1: What’s in the box?
If something goes wrong inside that black box (and it will), and the
output isn’t what you expect, figuring out the problem is very difficult. The
solution is to use a computer to simulate the inner workings of the black
box in a way you can follow. Simulation effectively opens up the black box
of your FPGA so you can see what’s going on inside.
Let me give you an example of how useful this can be. In a past job, I
had a coworker who was trying to fix a problem with his FPGA design. For
some reason the data was getting mixed up inside the FPGA. He spent
weeks using oscilloscopes and logic analyzers to send data off the FPGA so
he could try to find where the issue was coming from. At one point I asked
him if he had simulated the design at all. He had not: he didn’t have any
experience with simulation and didn’t feel he could take the time out to
learn. I checked his code out of revision control and put together a
simulation for it, and within a few hours had found the problem.
Simulating your design allows you to stress it to see how it reacts. In
this case, I was able to re-create the exact failure in simulation and fix the
issue very quickly. Ironically, in the time my coworker had spent attempting

--- Page 104 ---
to debug the problem on hardware, he could easily have learned how to do
the simulation himself. It’s an even more attractive option when you
consider that once you know how simulation works, you can use that
knowledge again and again.
FPGA Simulation Tools
There are several popular FPGA simulation tools available. FPGA build
tools often have a simulation tool bundled with them, in one large
downloadable package; FPGA companies know that their designers want to
run simulations, and they want to make it easy to do that. These tools are
usually free and convenient, but they can be many gigabytes in size and
their complexity can be overwhelming for beginners.
An alternative solution to the large FPGA tools is to use a standalone
simulator. The benefit to this is that if you switch from Intel (Altera) to
AMD (Xilinx), for example, you don’t need to learn a whole new tool; your
simulator can stay the same. There are two popular standalone simulation
tools that I generally recommend: ModelSim and EDA Playground.
ModelSim is probably the most popular commercial simulator. It can be
downloaded and installed on Windows and Linux. A full license is
expensive, costing around $2,000, but a free version with limited features is
available.
EDA Playground, by contrast, is a freely available web-based
simulator. I recommend using it when you’re first learning about FPGA
design for a few reasons. First, it’s free. Second, since it’s web-based,
there’s no download required. Finally, EDA Playground allows you to share
your code with others via a web link. For the purposes of this book, we’ll
focus on this tool.
To get started with EDA Playground, first navigate to https://
edaplayground.com. To run simulations and save your progress, you’ll need
to create an account and log in. Once you do so, you should see a screen
like the one in Figure 5-2.

--- Page 105 ---
Figure 5-2: The EDA Playground main screen
Notice that there are two main code windows. The window on the
right, titled design.sv, is where the FPGA design code you want to test goes.
This code is typically called the unit under test (UUT) or device under test
(DUT). The window on the left, called testbench.sv, is where you write
testbenches, code that will exercise your FPGA design during simulation.
We’ll discuss how testbenches work in the next section.
By default, EDA Playground is configured for SystemVerilog/Verilog
designs, which is why the two window labels have .sv (SystemVerilog) file
extensions. If you wish to reconfigure EDA Playground for VHDL, select
VHDL in the drop-down menu under Testbench + Design on the left side of
the window.
SYSTEMVERILOG
SystemVerilog is a superset of Verilog, meaning it has all the features of Verilog and more.
Anything you write with Verilog will also work with SystemVerilog. SystemVerilog is often
used in simulation, even of VHDL designs. There are a few reasons for this. For one,
SystemVerilog offers many high-level language features, such as classes and interfaces, that
make creating your testbench code easier and make that code more reusable across projects. In
addition, it provides comprehensive support for assertions, which is a significant advantage
when creating simulations. In VHDL and vanilla Verilog, assertions are much more limited.

--- Page 106 ---
Before you can run code in EDA Playground, you’ll need to select a
simulator tool. This is the actual product that will run your code. You can
play around with different tools listed in the drop-down menu under Tools
& Simulators to see if you prefer one over another. In general, I find that
they behave similarly, though some are exclusively for Verilog or VHDL.
I’ve had good luck using Mentor Questa or Aldec Riviera.
Another neat feature of EDA Playground is the Examples section of the
toolbar. Here, you can explore sample testbenches that have been made
freely available. You can see how they work and modify them for your own
experiments, and perhaps gain some insights into clever ways to write your
own code.
The Testbench
The purpose of a testbench is to exercise your UUT in a simulation
environment so you can analyze it and see if it’s behaving as expected. The
testbench code instantiates the UUT. As you can see in Figure 5-3, the
testbench provides all the required inputs to the UUT and monitors all the
outputs.
Figure 5-3: A testbench exercises a UUT so you can analyze it.
If your UUT has a clock as an input, for example, the testbench will
need to generate that clock and feed it in to the UUT. Similarly, if there’s a
data interface into your UUT, the testbench will likely need to generate
some sample data to supply to that interface. The testbench monitors all the
outputs from the UUT, allowing it to see how the UUT responds to the
input data. During the simulation, you’ll also be able to dive into the UUT
itself to see how all of its internal signals are behaving in response to the
testbench’s inputs. You can monitor every element of your design—every
register, clock, wire, memory, and so on—and make sure they’re all
behaving as intended.

--- Page 107 ---
Writing a Testbench
Let’s take a look at a simple example by writing a testbench for the AND
gate project from Chapter 3 (Project #2). First, to review, here’s the original
project code that we want to test:
Verilog
module And_Gate_Project 
 (input i_Switch_1, 
  input i_Switch_2, 
  output o_LED_1); 
assign o_LED_1 = i_Switch_1 & i_Switch_2; 
endmodule
VHDL
library ieee; 
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all; 
entity And_Gate_Project is 
  port ( 
    i_Switch_1 : in std_logic; 
    i_Switch_2 : in std_logic; 
    o_LED_1    : out std_logic); 
end entity And_Gate_Project; 
architecture RTL of And_Gate_Project is 
begin 
  o_LED_1 <= i_Switch_1 and i_Switch_2; 
end RTL;
Enter the module or entity’s code into the design.sv or design.vhd
window on the right side of EDA Playground. To test the code completely,
we want to exercise it to make sure that the output behaves as intended with
all possible input combinations. In this case, the total range of input
combinations is pretty small: since there are two inputs, there are just four
possible combinations to test in order to fully exercise the UUT. We’ll
create a testbench in Verilog and VHDL to instantiate the UUT and test it

--- Page 108 ---
by passing in each of the four input combinations. Enter the following code
into the testbench.sv or testbench.vhd window in EDA Playground:
Verilog
❶ module And_Gate_TB();
  reg r_In1, r_In2; 
  wire w_Out; 
❷ And_Gate_Project UUT 
  (.i_Switch_1(r_In1), 
   .i_Switch_2(r_In2), 
   .o_LED_1(w_Out)); 
❸ initial 
    begin 
    ❹ $dumpfile("dump.vcd"); $dumpvars; 
       r_In1 <= 1'b0; 
       r_In2 <= 1'b0; 
       #10; 
       r_In1 <= 1'b0; 
       r_In2 <= 1'b1; 
       #10; 
       r_In1 <= 1'b1; 
       r_In2 <= 1'b0; 
       #10; 
       r_In1 <= 1'b1; 
       r_In2 <= 1'b1; 
       #10; 
       $finish(); 
    end 
endmodule
VHDL
library IEEE; 
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all; 
use std.env.finish; 
❶ entity And_Gate_TB is

--- Page 109 ---
end entity And_Gate_TB; 
architecture behave of And_Gate_TB is 
  signal r_In1, r_In2, w_Out : std_logic; 
begin 
❷ UUT : entity work.And_Gate_Project 
  port map ( 
    i_Switch_1 => r_In1, 
    i_Switch_2 => r_In2, 
    o_LED_1    => w_Out); 
❸ process is 
  begin 
    r_In1 <= '0'; 
    r_In2 <= '0'; 
    wait for 10 ns; 
    r_In1 <= '0'; 
    r_In2 <= '1'; 
    wait for 10 ns; 
    r_In1 <= '1'; 
    r_In2 <= '0'; 
    wait for 10 ns; 
    r_In1 <= '1'; 
    r_In2 <= '1'; 
    wait for 10 ns; 
    wait for 10 ns; 
    finish; 
  end process; 
end behave;
First, notice that this is the first time we’ve seen a Verilog module or
VHDL entity that has no inputs or outputs declared ❶. This is because this
testbench doesn’t connect to any external signals; as you saw earlier, in
Figure 5-3, the testbench itself provides the inputs.
Inside the module/entity, we instantiate the UUT ❷. We connect the
inputs of the UUT to r_In1 and r_In2, signals that we declare in the
testbench. These signals will be the stimuli provided to see how the UUT
responds. We’ll be monitoring the output, w_Out, to see how it reacts to
changing inputs. I like to use the w_ prefix on signal names to represent

--- Page 110 ---
wires, or interconnections within the FPGA. Remember, we want to make
sure the AND gate is working as expected.
We start driving the stimuli (inputs) within an initial block in Verilog
or a process block in VHDL ❸. This block will start at the beginning of
the simulation and will execute from top to bottom in sequence. We send
each of the four possible input combinations to the UUT, one after the other.
Using delay statements, we add a 10 ns pause between each input
combination to allow time for the simulation to update the w_Out signal
after each change. In Verilog we use the #10 delay feature, and in VHDL
we use wait for 10 ns;. As you’ll see later in this chapter, these time-
based delays—indeed, any reference to the passage of time—are non-
synthesizable, meaning they would not work on an actual FPGA; however,
they work perfectly well in simulation.
In the Verilog version, note that EDA Playground requires the
$dumpfile directive ❹. This allows the simulator to generate waveforms,
which we’ll cover in the next section. This line isn’t required in VHDL.
Running a Testbench and Viewing Waveforms
Running a testbench generates waveforms, or visual representations of the
signals in your test environment, showing you how they change over time.
Waveforms are a powerful tool for investigating failures in an FPGA design
during simulation; the more you work with FPGAs, the more time you’ll
spend staring at waveforms. EDA Playground makes examining waveforms
easy with its built-in waveform viewer, EPWave.
Let’s run our AND gate testbench and view the resulting waveform in
EPWave. First, check the Open EPWave After Run checkbox in the Tools
& Simulators section of the toolbar on the left side of the EDA Playground
window. If you’re using VHDL, you will need to specify which entity is the
top of your design. To do that, enter And_Gate_TB in the Top Entity dialog.
Then choose a simulator tool from the drop-down menu and hit Run.
Figure 5-4 shows the resulting waveform.

--- Page 111 ---
Figure 5-4: The AND gate testbench waveform output
Here we see all the signals that exist in the design, and we can note the
time in nanoseconds when each signal changes from high to low or low to
high. The top three signals (r_In1, r_In2, w_Out) are the testbench signals.
The bottom three (i_Switch_1, i_Switch_2, o_LED_1) are in the UUT.
Since we wired the testbench and UUT signals together when we
instantiated the UUT, the corresponding testbench/UUT signals look the
same. For example, r_In1 has the same waveform as i_Switch_1. Note that
if the UUT had other internal signals that weren’t brought out of the
module, you would be able to see waveforms for those as well, and they
wouldn’t have a corresponding testbench signal.
Looking at the waveform, we can see that the UUT is working as
expected. The AND gate output (o_LED_1 and w_Out) is high only when
both inputs are also high. When only one input is high, or when both inputs
are low, the output is low. As you examine the waveform, take a look back
at the testbench code and notice how the changes in the waveform
correspond to the statements in the initial or process block. In the code,
for example, both inputs start out low, and then r_In2 goes high after a 10
ns pause. Looking at the 10 ns mark in the waveform, you can see that this
is where r_In2 and i_Switch_2 change from low to high.
Although this was a simple example, it illustrates the power of the
testbench to simulate your FPGA design and let you see everything that is
happening. You can monitor all the interactions within the design, and if a
signal isn’t behaving as expected, you can investigate why that is, modify
your code, and run the testbench again to generate a new waveform. Often
when debugging issues, I’ll rerun simulations dozens of times until my
design is behaving as desired.

--- Page 112 ---
In this case, since we were testing a single basic module, we were able
to evaluate everything using a single testbench file. For more complicated
simulations, however, testbenches can contain many different files that all
work together to simulate, monitor, and check your design to make sure it’s
behaving as intended.
You’ll see how testbenches work in more detail in our next project,
where we’ll write a testbench and simulate the FPGA design prior to
programming the hardware. This will help you gain confidence that your
code is working, and it will allow you to identify and fix any bugs early in
the process. The project also illustrates how the concept of time works on
an FPGA, so even if you don’t have an FPGA to program, I recommend
reading through this section.
Project #4: Debouncing a Switch
In Chapter 4, we programmed an FPGA to toggle an LED at the push of a
button. However, there was a problem: pushing the button didn’t
consistently toggle the state of the LED. This is because any physical
switch, including a push-button or toggle switch, is subject to bouncing, or
rapid signal fluctuations that occur when the switch is toggled or flipped.
Bouncing happens when the metal contacts inside the switch come together
and move apart quickly before they have time to settle into the stable state.
Figure 5-5 illustrates how this affects the switch’s output signal.
Figure 5-5: Bouncing in a mechanical switch

--- Page 113 ---
If you didn’t know about bouncing, you would probably expect the
switch to behave like the top half of Figure 5-5. The button is pressed, and
the output immediately goes from low to high. However, in the real world
bouncing creates glitches in the output signal, which show up as rapid low-
to-high-to-low transitions of the output signal, before it finally stays high.
Again, this is due to the mechanical switch contacts quickly coming
together and moving apart before settling into a stable output state.
The code in our LED toggling project was looking for a single falling
edge to indicate the press and release of the button, but due to the bouncing,
the FPGA was seeing many falling edges per press/release. If it saw an odd
number of falling edges during the bouncing of the switch, then the LED
toggled successfully. If it saw an even number of falling edges, however,
the LED didn’t appear to change state, since each pair of falling edges
effectively canceled each other out.
The number of bounces on a switch is somewhat random, so pushing
the switch enough times got the LED to toggle successfully. Still, it would
be better if the LED toggled as expected each time the switch is pressed and
released. To make this happen, we need to add a debounce filter to the
switch. That is, we need to program the FPGA to ignore the bounces.
Figure 5-6 illustrates how this will work.
Figure 5-6: The Project #4 block diagram
We’ll add a debounce filter to the code from the previous project to
ensure that a single press of the button only toggles the LED once. The
signal from the switch will pass through the debounce filter before going on
to the LED-toggling logic we wrote in the last chapter.
We create a debounce filter by making sure that the input from the
switch is stable for some amount of time before allowing the output driving
the LED to change. We therefore need to have some concept of how much

--- Page 114 ---
time has passed in our FPGA. However, introducing the notion of time into
an FPGA design raises some interesting challenges.
Measuring Time on an FPGA
Time doesn’t exist inherently in an FPGA. The FPGA doesn’t automatically
know if it’s Saturday at 11:00 AM, or how to wait for 100 ms, for example.
To be sure, there are parts of Verilog and VHDL code that refer to time. For
example, we already saw how to use #10 in Verilog or wait for 10 ns; in
VHDL to add 10 ns delays to our AND gate testbench. To give another
example, in Verilog you can use $time to get the current time, while in
VHDL the reserved word now gets a timestamp of the current time.
However, while features like these will work perfectly well in simulation,
they will 100 percent not work on your FPGA. They aren’t synthesizable.
We’ve already talked about synthesis a few times. It’s the part of the
build process where the FPGA tool turns your Verilog or VHDL code into
flip-flops, LUTs, and other components. Unfortunately, synthesis tools can’t
synthesize anything relating to time. It’s just not possible. As a result,
language constructs like $time and now are simply ignored or will create
errors during synthesis. In Chapter 7, we’ll look more closely at what
features of VHDL and Verilog aren’t able to be synthesized in an FPGA.
For now, take it for granted that we can’t use some of these built-in features
relating to time.
If time doesn’t exist in an FPGA, how can you keep track of how much
time has passed for the purposes of debouncing a switch or one of the many
other time-related tasks you may wish your FPGA to perform? The answer
is to count clock cycles. If you know how many clock cycles have occurred,
and you know the period of the clock, you’ll know how much time has
elapsed. Let’s walk through an example.
Say you have a clock that oscillates at 25 MHz, and that the clock’s
period—the duration of a single cycle—is 40 ns. Given these specifications,
how many clock cycles would it take for 400 ns to elapse? Answer: 10. And
for 4,000 ns to elapse? Answer: 100. Simply divide the amount of time you
want to wait by the period of the clock to get the number of clock cycles
you need to count before that amount of time has elapsed. This technique is
going to be critical in our debounce project.

--- Page 115 ---
Writing the Code
Let’s look at how to implement the debounce filter. We’ll start with the top-
level module, which instantiates and links together two lower-level
modules, one for debouncing the switch and the other for toggling the LED:
Verilog
module Debounce_Project_Top 
  (input  i_Clk, 
  input  i_Switch_1, 
  output o_LED_1); 
  wire w_Debounced_Switch; 
❶ Debounce_Filter ❷ #(.DEBOUNCE_LIMIT(250000)) Debounce_Ins
t 
  (.i_Clk(i_Clk), 
   .i_Bouncy(i_Switch_1), 
   .o_Debounced(w_Debounced_Switch)); 
❸ LED_Toggle_Project LED_Toggle_Inst 
  (.i_Clk(i_Clk), 
   .i_Switch_1(w_Debounced_Switch), 
   .o_LED_1(o_LED_1)); 
endmodule
VHDL
library ieee; 
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all; 
entity Debounce_Project_Top is 
  port ( 
    i_Clk       : in  std_logic; 
    i_Switch_1  : in  std_logic; 
    o_LED_1     : out std_logic 
    ); 
end entity Debounce_Project_Top; 
architecture RTL of Debounce_Project_Top is 
  signal w_Debounced_Switch : std_logic; 
begin 

--- Page 116 ---
❶ Debounce_Inst : entity work.Debounce_Filter 
    generic map( 
    ❷ DEBOUNCE_LIMIT => 250000) 
    port map ( 
      i_Clk      => i_Clk, 
      i_Bouncy   => i_Switch_1, 
      o_Debounced => w_Debounced_Switch); 
❸ LED_Toggle_Inst : entity work.LED_Toggle_Project 
    port map ( 
      i_Clk      => i_Clk, 
      i_Switch_1 => w_Debounced_Switch, 
      o_LED_1    => o_LED_1); 
end architecture RTL;
The code matches the block diagram in Figure 5-6. At the highest level
we have Debounce_Project_Top, which instantiates two other modules.
The first is the new debounce filter ❶, which we’ll examine next. The
second is the LED_Toggle_Project module that we created in the previous
chapter ❸. It’s worth taking a minute to follow the signals here. We can see
the input signal i_Switch_1 going into the debounce filter. Out of that
comes w_Debounced_Switch, which is the debounced version of this input.
This is passed into the LED_Toggle _Project module. The output of that
module is o_LED_1, which will be connected to the LED pin on your
development board. Note that indicating the direction of your signals via
their names, as we do here with the i_ and o_ prefixes, becomes very
helpful as your designs get larger and incorporate more signals.
It’s important to highlight the value of creating reusable modules when
writing FPGA code. Rather than writing all the project’s code from scratch,
here we’re able to reuse the LED_Toggle_Project module from the previous
chapter and improve its functionality by interfacing it with another module.
Another way to make modules reusable is to incorporate Verilog
parameters or VHDL generics. These are variables within a module that
you can override from higher-level code. We do this when we instantiate the
Debounce_Filter module. Specifically, we override the module’s
parameter/generic called DEBOUNCE_LIMIT with the value 250000 ❷. As
you’ll see later, this value sets the number of clock cycles to wait while

--- Page 117 ---
debouncing the switch. Coding it as a parameter/generic makes it easy to
modify the value. In general, parameters (in Verilog) and generics (in
VHDL) are a very useful way to keep code portable. They let you change
the behavior of a module without having to actually modify the module’s
file.
Let’s now examine the code of the debounce filter module:
Verilog
module Debounce_Filter #(parameter DEBOUNCE_LIMIT = 20) ( 
  input  i_Clk, 
  input  i_Bouncy, 
  output o_Debounced); 
❶ reg [$clog2(DEBOUNCE_LIMIT)-1:0] r_Count = 0; 
  reg r_State = 1'b0; 
  always @(posedge i_Clk) 
  begin 
  ❷ if (i_Bouncy !== r_State && r_Count < DEBOUNCE_LIMIT-1) 
     begin 
       r_Count <= r_Count + 1; 
     end 
  ❸ else if (r_Count == DEBOUNCE_LIMIT-1) 
     begin 
       r_State <= i_Bouncy; 
       r_Count <= 0; 
     end 
     else 
     begin 
     ❹ r_Count <= 0; 
     end 
   end 
❺ assign o_Debounced = r_State; 
endmodule
VHDL

--- Page 118 ---
library ieee; 
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all; 
use ieee.numeric_std.all; 
entity Debounce_Filter is 
  generic (DEBOUNCE_LIMIT : integer := 20); 
  port ( 
    i_Clk       : in  std_logic; 
    i_Bouncy    : in  std_logic; 
    o_Debounced : out std_logic 
    ); 
end entity Debounce_Filter; 
architecture RTL of Debounce_Filter is 
❶ signal r_Count : integer range 0 to DEBOUNCE_LIMIT := 0; 
  signal r_State : std_logic := '0'; 
begin 
  process (i_Clk) is 
  begin 
    if rising_edge(i_Clk) then 
    ❷ if (i_Bouncy /= r_State and r_Count < DEBOUNCE_LIMIT-
1) then 
         r_Count <= r_Count + 1; 
    ❸ elsif r_Count = DEBOUNCE_LIMIT-1 then 
         r_State <= i_Bouncy; 
         r_Count <= 0; 
       else 
       ❹ r_Count <= 0; 
       end if; 
     end if; 
  end process; 
❺ o_Debounced <= r_State; 
end architecture RTL;
The overall purpose of this module is to remove any bounces or
glitches in the input (i_Bouncy) and create a stable output (o_Debounced).
To do this, we check if the input and output are different. If they are, we
know the input is changing, but we don’t want to immediately update the
output, since the switch might still be bouncing. Instead, we want to make
sure that the input is stable for a long enough period of time before updating

--- Page 119 ---
the output. Because the FPGA has no inherent concept of time, we
implement the delay by counting clock cycles.
Let’s say we want the input to be stable for 10 ms before we update the
output. We need to count up to some number of clock cycles that represents
10 ms (or 10 million nanoseconds) of time passed. The Go Board, for
example, has a clock period of 40 ns, so in this case we divide 10 million by
40 to get a delay of 250,000 clock cycles. This is the value we used for the
DEBOUNCE_LIMIT parameter/generic in the top-level module
Debounce_Project_Top. If your development board has a different clock
period, you’ll need to change DEBOUNCE_LIMIT accordingly.
The code used to create our clock cycle counter ❶ differs between the
Verilog and VHDL versions. In Verilog, we use a common trick: the
$clog2() built-in function (short for ceiling log base 2) determines the log2
of the number of clock cycles we want to count, rounded up. This tells us
the number of binary digits needed to implement the counter. Thanks to the
$clog2() function, we can dynamically size the r_Count register based on
the input parameter, so if the input parameter changes (because your clock
has a different period, or because you want to extend the wait time), the
code will see this and synthesize r_Count to be as wide as it needs to be.
This is better than hardcoding r_Count to some arbitrary limit, which could
break when the code is reused.
With VHDL, we’re able to achieve the same dynamic sizing in a
simpler way, using the range keyword. This not only will size the variable
correctly, but has an added benefit of creating a warning in your simulation
if the value of r_Count ever goes beyond the integer range limit. The fact
that the simulator can provide these types of warnings when running your
testbench is another great reason for using simulations.
We implement the debounce filter using a series of if statements that
are evaluated at each clock cycle. First we handle the case where the input
is different from the output (meaning the input is changing) but r_Count is
less than DEBOUNCE_LIMIT-1 ❷. This means we haven’t yet waited the
desired amount of time for the switch to stop bouncing, so we increment
our clock cycle counter by 1. In this if statement, we’re effectively waiting
for some amount of time to pass to ensure the input is stable, before
updating the output value.

--- Page 120 ---
Next we handle the case where the counter has reached its limit, so we
know that we’ve waited the full 10 ms (or whatever length of time
DEBOUNCE _LIMIT corresponds to) ❸. At this point, we can register the
current value of the input (i_Bouncy) to r_State, whose value is in turn
assigned to the output (o_Debounced) ❺. We also reset the counter to 0 to
prepare for the next event. Finally, the else statement ❹ covers situations
where the input and output have the same state. In this case, we reset the
counter, since we have nothing to debounce here and we want our debounce
filter to always be ready for the next event.
Creating the Testbench and Simulation
Now we’ll create a testbench to exercise our project and make sure it works
as expected. Recall that the testbench is what will instantiate our unit under
test and simulate its inputs, while monitoring its outputs. In this case, we
want the testbench to simulate the unstable input from a bouncing switch so
we can confirm that the debounce filter is delaying the output until the
switch has settled into a stable state. Here’s the code:
Verilog
module Debounce_Filter_TB (); 
  reg r_Clk = 1'b0, r_Bouncy = 1'b0; 
❶ always #2 r_Clk <= !r_Clk;
❷ Debounce_Filter #(.DEBOUNCE_LIMIT(4)) UUT 
  (.i_Clk(r_Clk), 
   .i_Bouncy(r_Bouncy), 
   .o_Debounced(w_Debounced)); 
❸ initial begin 
    $dumpfile("dump.vcd"); $dumpvars; 
    repeat(3) @(posedge r_Clk); 
 ❹ r_Bouncy <= 1'b1; // toggle state of input pin 
    @(posedge r_Clk); 
 ❺ r_Bouncy <= 1'b0; // simulate a glitch/bounce of switch 
    @(posedge r_Clk); 
 ❻ r_Bouncy <= 1'b1; // bounce goes away 
    repeat(6) @(posedge r_Clk); 

--- Page 121 ---
    $display("Test Complete"); 
    $finish(); 
  end 
endmodule
VHDL
library ieee; 
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all; 
use std.env.finish; 
entity Debounce_Filter_TB is 
end entity Debounce_Filter_TB; 
architecture test of Debounce_Filter_TB is 
  signal r_Clk, r_Bouncy, w_Debounced : std_logic := '0'; 
begin 
❶ r_Clk <= not r_Clk after 2 ns; 
❷ UUT : entity work.Debounce_Filter 
     generic map (DEBOUNCE_LIMIT => 4) 
     port map ( 
        i_Clk       => r_Clk, 
        i_Bouncy    => r_Bouncy, 
        o_Debounced => w_Debounced); 
❸ process is 
  begin 
     wait for 10 ns; 
  ❹ r_Bouncy <= '1';  -- toggle state of input pin 
     wait until rising_edge(r_Clk); 
  ❺ r_Bouncy <= '0';  -- simulate a glitch/bounce of switch 
     wait until rising_edge(r_Clk); 
  ❻ r_Bouncy <= '1';  -- bounce goes away 
     wait for 24 ns; 
     finish;  -- need VHDL-2008 
  end process; 
end test;
Unlike our AND gate testbench, this testbench must provide a clock
signal to the UUT, along with the other inputs. We create the clock signal

--- Page 122 ---
with a simple trick ❶: we repeatedly invert a signal after a fixed amount of
time to generate a 50 percent duty cycle signal that will toggle for the
duration of the testbench execution. The signal inverts every 2 ns, for a
clock period of 4 ns per cycle. This is much faster than the actual clock
period on a typical FPGA development board, but for the purposes of this
simulation, that’s okay.
When we instantiate the UUT ❷, we override DEBOUNCE_LIMIT with
the value 4. This means our debounce filter will only look for four clock
cycles of stability before it deems the output debounced. In a real FPGA,
this would be a very short amount of time (less than 1 microsecond),
probably not long enough to actually fix the problem. However, keep in
mind the purpose of this testbench: we want to make sure that our FPGA
logic works as intended. That logic is functionally the same whether we’re
waiting 4 clock cycles or 250,000 clock cycles. Using the much smaller
number will make for a quicker simulation and an easier-to-evaluate
waveform, while still giving us realistic feedback about whether or not the
design works. Shortening counters is a handy trick to remember for large
designs: a simulation of such a design could take many minutes to run, but
using smaller limits for counters will make the simulation run faster,
allowing you to debug your code more quickly. Once your design is fully
debugged and verified, you can update the simulation with your actual
expected counter lengths to validate your actual design. This means you’ll
only have to endure the longer simulation time once, after any issues with
the code have already been resolved using the shortened simulation.
Next, we start to provide stimulus to the UUT ❸. With synchronous
designs, we want to ensure that our input signals to the UUT are
synchronous to the clock. We therefore set up the code to change the
stimulus on the rising edge of the testbench clock. Otherwise, we might be
introducing strange timing effects that would not exist in a real FPGA
design. (Remember that all of the flip-flops in your UUT will be using the
rising edge of the clock, so your testbench stimulus should also be reacting
to the rising edge of the clock.)
When the test starts, the input is low. After a short time, the input goes
high for a single clock cycle ❹, then low again ❺, to simulate a bouncing-
induced glitch. We want to make sure that the debounced output of this

--- Page 123 ---
module doesn’t react to this glitch. Later in the test, we drive the input back
high again and leave it there ❻. This time we want the output to match the
input, but only after the debounce filter has counted out four clock cycles.
After running this testbench code in EDA Playground (or whichever
simulator you prefer), you should get a waveform that looks something like
that shown in Figure 5-7.
Figure 5-7: The debounce simulation waveform
The waveform shows that the output o_Debounced stays low when
i_Bouncy goes high for only one clock cycle. Then, toward the end of the
simulation, we see the output go high to match the input, but only after the
input has been high for four clock cycles. The debounce filter works!
While the testbench we wrote is better than no test at all, it could
certainly be improved. For example, we don’t check what happens when the
input goes low again, to make sure the output responds correctly.
Additionally, we might want to check that a higher DEBOUNCE_LIMIT value
than 4 doesn’t cause any issues. Setting up multiple tests to stress the bulk
of your design, and in particular any corner cases, is good test design
practice.
Building and Programming the FPGA
Having simulated the design, we now have some confidence that if we were
to go ahead and program the FPGA, it would likely work as intended. Let’s
try it out! Create a new project inside iCEcube2, and add the following
modules to the project: Debounce_Filter, Debounce_Project_Top, and
LED_Toggle_Project. Make sure that you’ve also included the clock
constraints file, as well as the physical constraints file.
When everything’s ready, build the project. Then double-check for
errors, and check your utilization reports. The synthesis report after
building the FPGA will look something like this:

--- Page 124 ---
--snip-- 
Register bits not including I/Os:   21 (1%) 
Total load per clock: 
   i_Clk: 1 
Mapping Summary: 
Total  LUTs: 31 (2%) 
--snip--
From this report, we can see that we’re using more LUTs and flip-flops
than we did for Project #3. This makes sense; the debounce filter accounts
for these extra resources. Still, the FPGA has plenty of resources to spare.
Go ahead and program your FPGA, then try pushing the button to turn
the LED on and off. You should notice that the LED is now toggling
consistently with each press of the button. We’ve successfully filtered out
the bounces from the switch.
As you’ve seen in this project, simulations are invaluable for building
confidence in a design and debugging issues in your Verilog and VHDL.
However, even in this relatively simple example, you may have noticed a
drawback: examining waveforms to determine if a design is working can be
tedious, especially if you have to keep changing the design and rerunning
the simulation. It would be much more convenient if the testbench could
simply tell you whether the simulation has worked, without you having to
study the waveform. As we’ll explore next, it’s possible to write testbenches
that offer exactly this capability.
Self-Checking Testbenches
A self-checking testbench is a testbench that you program to verify your
UUT is working as intended, without having to manually inspect the output.
The self-checking testbench will run a series of steps and let you know if
any have failed, at which point you can inspect the failure and fix it. This
saves you from having to visually examine the waveforms generated during
simulation to determine whether your design has worked as expected. It
takes a bit more effort to set up your testbench to be self-checking, but it’s
almost always worth the time spent.

--- Page 125 ---
When setting up a self-checking testbench, your goal is to inject many
different test cases into your UUT, then monitor the outputs and check, or
assert, that they are what you expect. Assertions are statements about what
value a signal will have at a particular moment in the simulation, and
they’re probably the most critical part of a self-checking testbench. Often, a
self-checking testbench will have hundreds of assertions, with each one
imparting a little more confidence that the design is correct.
Self-checking testbenches are particularly useful if you’re adding a
new feature to some old code. It might be something that you haven’t
looked at in years, and suddenly you need to try to remember (or learn, if
someone else wrote it) how it works. From experience, I can tell you that
starting with a testbench that has many checks is a huge benefit. You’ll be
able to open the simulation, see all of the assertions in the self-checking
testbench, and make sure everything in the old code still works. Then you
can add your new code and add new tests for it. Once all the old and new
tests are passing, you can have high confidence that your new code is
performing as expected—and equally importantly, that you haven’t broken
any old code.
To illustrate how self-checking testbenches work, let’s return to the
simple testbench we wrote for our AND gate project earlier in the chapter.
The following Verilog and VHDL code takes the original testbench we
wrote and adds some assertion checks within it. These assertions will
automatically run to verify that the actual output is in the expected state.
The new code is shown in bold:
Verilog
--snip-- 
  initial 
    begin 
       $dumpfile("dump.vcd"); $dumpvars; 
       r_In1 <= 1'b0; 
       r_In2 <= 1'b0; 
       #10; 
    ❶ assert (w_Out == 1'b0); 
       r_In1 <= 1'b0; 

--- Page 126 ---
       r_In2 <= 1'b1; 
       #10; 
       assert (w_Out == 1'b0); 
--snip--
VHDL
--snip-- 
process is 
  begin 
    r_In1 <= '0'; 
    r_In2 <= '0'; 
    wait for 10 ns; 
 ❶ assert (w_Out = '0') severity failure; 
    r_In1 <= '0'; 
    r_In2 <= '1'; 
    wait for 10 ns; 
    assert (w_Out = '0') severity failure; 
--snip--
In this excerpt from the testbench, we’ve added two checks. We use the
assert keyword ❶ to first confirm that the output is low when both inputs
are low, then that it’s low when one input is low and the other is high. The
assert keyword only exists in SystemVerilog, not regular Verilog. This is
an example of how SystemVerilog has improved features for testbenches.
VHDL, meanwhile, has assert built into it, and the severity can be note,
warning, or failure, depending on the level of assertion that you want to
check for. Each has a different escalation, so you can filter them out in your
report. In this case, we’ve chosen failure, since we definitely wouldn’t
want an AND gate output high when the inputs are low.
If this assertion evaluates to true, then the simulation moves on.
However, if something goes wrong and the assertion fails, you’ll see output
printed to the screen. In Verilog, you’d see something like this:
# ASSERT: Error: ASRT_0301 testbench.sv(20): Immediate asser
t 

--- Page 127 ---
condition (w_Out==1'b1) FAILED at time: 10ns, scope: And_Gat
e_TB
In VHDL, here is what the failure message would look like:
# ** Failure: Assertion violation. 
#    Time: 10 ns Iteration: 0  Process: /and_gate_tb/line__2
2 
File: testbench.vhd
This is very helpful! Not only do we know that the testbench failed, but
we know that it failed exactly 10 ns into the simulation, which allows us to
immediately locate the failure in the waveform viewer. We also know the
exact line of code that caused the failure: line 20 in Verilog or line 22 in
VHDL. These pieces of information make it easier to investigate the
problem, understand the cause, and fix it. I recommend adding assertions
into your tests wherever possible.
The self-checking testbench is an area where SystemVerilog really
shines. Many of the added features beyond what regular Verilog offers are
geared toward writing better testbenches. For example, SystemVerilog
provides the ability for you to verify sequences of events. This can be
handy for analyzing interactions between different signals, to make sure
they happen correctly (that is, first one thing happens, then on the next
clock cycle, another thing happens). SystemVerilog also provides classes,
allowing you to use object-oriented programming techniques to streamline
your testbench code. Other SystemVerilog features allow you to randomly
inject data into your designs, making your tests much more comprehensive
and robust. The details of these features are beyond the scope of this book,
but as you start writing more testbenches—particularly self-checking
testbenches—I encourage you to learn more about SystemVerilog.
Initial Signal Conditions
By default, if a signal isn’t assigned an initial condition, then it will show
up in an unknown state when you start a simulation. This is often
represented by a red signal and an X in the waveform viewer. The simulator

--- Page 128 ---
is telling you that it doesn’t know how to treat the signal when the testbench
is first running. Should it be a 0 or a 1? The simulator doesn’t know.
There are two methods for assigning a default state to your signals, so
that they start in a known state. One method is to use resets. As we
discussed back in Chapter 4, a reset assigns an initial default value to a flip-
flop. Driving the reset input at the start of a simulation will set the signals to
known states to begin the test. This will work for all signals that are
assigned a reset condition.
The other way we can set signals to an initial state is to use the
initialization feature in both Verilog and VHDL. This is particularly useful
for simulation purposes. It’s as simple as assigning a signal to a value after
it’s created. In Verilog, for example, reg r_State = 1'b0; initializes the
r_State signal to 0. In VHDL, signal r_State : std_logic := '0';
does the same. You can use any state that the signal can validly be set to as
an initialization value.
Initial signal assignments are only synthesizable for some FPGAs,
since not all FPGAs can load an initial state into their flip-flops when they
boot up after being programmed. Because this feature isn’t available for all
FPGAs, I generally don’t recommend relying on it. A better, more portable
solution is to use resets to set signals to some default value. Resets are
widely supported across all FPGA manufacturers, so your code will be
more portable if you need to change FPGAs.
On-FPGA Debugging
Early in this chapter, I told you that once you’re on hardware, you’re
looking at a black box. You can see inputs and outputs, but you can’t see
what’s going on internally. This isn’t entirely true. There is a way to do
some limited on-FPGA debugging. However, this method has significant
drawbacks and should only be used sparingly, if at all.
On-FPGA debugging is achieved by adding a logic analyzer, a tool that
shows the state (high or low) of many digital signals at once, inside your
FPGA. This allows you to monitor the FPGA’s internal signals in real time.
By looking at these signals, you can debug issues and see where data isn’t
behaving as expected.

--- Page 129 ---
Each of the major FPGA companies has a unique product within its
suite of tools that creates a logic analyzer inside the FPGA. AMD has a
feature called Integrated Logic Analyzer (ILA), Intel has Signal Tap, and
Lattice has Reveal. They all work basically the same way: they take part of
your FPGA’s resources and turn those resources into a logic analyzer. You
run your FPGA code, the logic analyzer “sniffs” the data, and the results are
presented on your computer screen so you can debug your design.
There are several problems with this process, however. The first issue
is that it’s extremely time-consuming. If you want to add a logic analyzer to
your FPGA, you need to rebuild and reprogram the entire design. You also
need to decide ahead of time what signals you’re interested in monitoring
with the logic analyzer, as you likely won’t have enough resources on your
FPGA to look at everything. If you want to change what you’re looking at
while the FPGA is running, too bad! You’ll have to rebuild the entire FPGA
from scratch and start the process all over again. A simulation, on the other
hand, can easily see the state of all the signals on your FPGA; you don’t
have to pick and choose.
An additional problem with on-FPGA debugging is that adding a logic
analyzer is basically throwaway effort. Once you find and fix your one
problem, you don’t need the debug tool anymore. In fact, since it uses your
FPGA’s resources (which are a limited commodity), you may not want to
keep it in your design. You can save and rerun a simulation, but a logic
analyzer is a one-and-done debugging effort.
The final and perhaps worst problem is that when you add a logic
analyzer to your FPGA, you’re changing the FPGA’s design, which can
have unintended consequences. Issues that are subject to small timing
variations might be fixed by the very act of adding the logic analyzer, or
new issues might be created. If you’re trying to use the logic analyzer to
debug a race condition inside your FPGA, for example, the design changes
that result from adding in the logic analyzer might actually make the race
condition go away. Scientists refer to this as the observer effect, where a
phenomenon is changed by the act of investigating it.
This isn’t to say that these on-FPGA debuggers are entirely useless.
They’re helpful when you’re trying to investigate a situation that’s difficult
to simulate. For example, say some external interface to your FPGA is
causing problems, but those problems are only occurring on your hardware

--- Page 130 ---
while the simulation is working fine. At that point you might want to fire up
a logic analyzer and try to see why your simulation is different from real
life. Once you figure it out, you should strive to make your simulation as
realistic as possible, adding to it the failure mode that you identified with
the real-world test.
These tools have saved me a couple of times in my career, but in
general I try to avoid them if possible.
Verification
Verification is the process of ensuring that an FPGA or ASIC design is
working as intended. It’s an exhaustive process that goes well beyond
writing a few testbenches and running a simulation—so much so that there
are people called verification engineers who perform verification full time.
The complete details of how verification works are beyond the scope of this
book. In fact, there are entire books dedicated to the subject. This section
simply introduces the topic so you’re aware of the key role verification can
play in real-world FPGA and ASIC design.
Consider a device like a DVD player. What happens if a DVD is
playing, then the user pauses playback, ejects the DVD, and presses the
fast-forward button? Does the code handle that sequence of events
correctly? Or does the unexpected fast-forward command lock up the
processor in a strange state? The verification engineer must test all of these
corner cases to ensure the design won’t make a mistake in handling some
strange situation.
Back in Chapter 1, I mentioned that making an ASIC is an incredibly
expensive and time-consuming process. Once the ASIC is fabricated at the
foundry, you have to cut a big check. If there are critical bugs in the design
and the ASIC doesn’t work as intended, then you’ve just lost all that money,
and you’ll need to rerun the ASIC fabrication process again. It’s the job of a
verification engineer to ensure the design is correct up front, since finding
and fixing bugs later is incredibly expensive.
Squashing bugs is great, but that’s only half the benefit. Another major
goal of verification is to ensure the design is performing as intended. If
you’re handed a specification of how an ASIC is supposed to perform, there
might be ambiguities or missing information. Usually, one or more

--- Page 131 ---
designers will design to the specification, and one or more separate
verification engineers will simultaneously verify that the design is meeting
the specification. If any discrepancies arise, the two teams can get together
and update the specification so that everyone is clear on the intent.
Most verification engineers take advantage of the extra features built
into SystemVerilog to thoroughly test a design. Self-checking testbenches
are absolutely a must. It’s helpful to exercise the design randomly as well,
so there are blocks of code that can inject random test cases into the design
and ensure it’s working as intended.
Verifying code like this is no small feat. Often it’s more expensive and
time-consuming to verify a design is working correctly than to create the
design itself! For this reason, unlike with ASICs, not many FPGA designs
go through a dedicated verification process. In most cases, it’s just too
expensive. Remember that FPGA stands for field programmable gate array,
so if a few bugs are allowed to slip through, the device can always be
updated in the field, or in the hands of a customer.
Usually, only FPGA designs that demand very high reliability or
simply cannot be updated in the field go through verification. For example,
some FPGAs are one-time programmable (OTP), meaning they can only be
programmed once; afterward, the functionality is locked in and cannot be
changed. Some applications in outer space utilize these OTP FPGAs, since
they’re more resistant to radiation. Additionally, OTP FPGAs are
considered less susceptible to reverse engineering, so they’re preferable for
high-security applications. OTP FPGA designs often require verification;
however, this isn’t the norm for typical FPGA designs.
For our purposes, testbenches are sufficient to find bugs in the FPGA
design, but for ASICs or FPGAs that require it, verification is critically
important.
Summary
In this chapter, you’ve learned about simulating your FPGA code and seen
how running simulations is time well spent. In contrast to debugging on
hardware, simulation lets you visualize all the signals in your design,
observe how they interact, and create stimuli to stress your code and see
how it responds. You practiced writing testbenches, or code that instantiates

--- Page 132 ---
your UUT, injects it with sample input, and monitors the output. You saw
how looking at the waveforms generated during simulation is a great way to
see if your design is working, but better still is adding tests that make your
testbench self-checking. Less debugging on hardware, more beautiful
simulations: that’s what makes a happy FPGA designer.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 133 ---
6
COMMON FPGA MODULES
Working with an FPGA can feel like
building with LEGO: you have a
limited variety of small bricks at your disposal, but
by stacking them elegantly, you can create amazingly
complex designs. At the lowest level, you’re working
with LUTs and flip-flops. At a slightly higher level,
there are several basic building blocks that appear
over and over again in FPGA designs, including
multiplexers and demultiplexers, shift registers, and
first in, first out (FIFO) and other types of memory.
Each of these elements is very common. In fact, it’s likely that one or
more of them will be used in every single FPGA project you’ll ever work
on. In this chapter, I’ll show you how these basic building blocks work and
how to implement them with Verilog and VHDL. For each of these
common elements, you’ll create a self-contained module that you can reuse
anytime you need that element in an FPGA design. This will reinforce your
FPGA programming knowledge and give you a solid foundation for your
own projects.
Multiplexers and Demultiplexers

--- Page 134 ---
Multiplexers and demultiplexers are circuit components that allow you to
select between two or more things. In the case of a multiplexer (sometimes
spelled multiplexor, and often shortened to mux), you have multiple input
signals, and you select which of them is sent to a single output. A
demultiplexer (demux for short) is the opposite: you have a single input
signal, and you select which of multiple outputs it should go to.
Multiplexers and demultiplexers have many applications. For example,
a mux could be used to select which speed to run a fan at: the low-med-high
switch might be acting as a mux to control which setting is sent to the fan
controller. A demux could work with a switch to select which of four LEDs
to illuminate: only one LED will be illuminated at a time, but you’ll be able
to specify which one is illuminated.
Muxes and demuxes are classified based on how many inputs and
outputs they have. For example, a 4-1 (pronounced four-to-one) mux has
four inputs and one output. Conversely, a 1-4 (pronounced one-to-four)
demux has one input and four outputs. You can design muxes to have any
number of inputs, depending on the requirements of your circuit: you can
have a 2-1 mux, a 3-1 mux, an 8-1 mux, a 13-1 mux, or whatever you want.
Likewise, you can design a demux with however many outputs you need.
Implementing a Multiplexer
Let’s consider how to create a multiplexer on an FPGA. Specifically, we’ll
look at creating a 4-1 mux, but you can apply the same logic to a mux with
any number of inputs. Figure 6-1 shows a block diagram of a 4-1 mux.
Figure 6-1: A 4-1 multiplexer (mux)
Our multiplexer has four inputs on the left: i_Data0, i_Data1,
i_Data2, and i_Data3. On the right is the single output, called o_Data. At

--- Page 135 ---
the bottom are two additional inputs, labeled i_Sel1 and i_Sel0. Sel is
short for select. These selector inputs choose which of the four data inputs
is passed to the output. The truth table in Table 6-1 shows how i_Sel1 and
i_Sel0 work together to determine the mux’s output.
Table 6-1: Truth Table for a 4-1 Mux
i_Sel1 i_Sel0 o_Data
0 0 i_Data0
0 1 i_Data1
1 0 i_Data2
1 1 i_Data3
Looking at Table 6-1, we can see that i_Data0 is connected to the
output when i_Sel1 and i_Sel0 are both 0. The output gets i_Data1 when
i_Sel1 is 0 and i_Sel0 is 1, it gets i_Data2 when i_Sel1 is 1 and i_Sel0 is
0, and it gets i_Data3 when both selectors are 1.
NOTE
Because muxes serve to select which inputs go to which outputs, they’re
often called selectors. In fact, select is a reserved word in VHDL that can be
used to generate muxes.
Implementing this truth table in Verilog or VHDL is simply a matter of
evaluating i_Sel1 and i_Sel0 and assigning the appropriate data input to
the output. The following listing shows how it’s done (I’ve omitted the
signal definitions to focus on the actual mux code, but more context can be
found in the book’s GitHub repository, at https://github.com/nandland
/getting-started-with-fpgas):
Verilog
assign o_Data = !i_Sel1 & !i_Sel0 ? i_Data0 : 
                !i_Sel1 &  i_Sel0 ? i_Data1 : 
                 i_Sel1 & !i_Sel0 ? i_Data2 : i_Data3;

--- Page 136 ---
VHDL
o_Data <= i_Data0 when i_Sel1 = '0' and i_Sel0 = '0' else 
          i_Data1 when i_Sel1 = '0' and i_Sel0 = '1' else 
          i_Data2 when i_Sel1 = '1' and i_Sel0 = '0' else 
          i_Data3;
The Verilog version uses the conditional (or ternary) operator,
represented by a question mark (?). This is shorthand for writing
conditional expressions without using if…else statements. The operator
works by first evaluating the condition before the question mark (for
example, !i_Sel1 & !i_Sel0). If the condition is true, the expression
selects the condition before the colon. If the condition is false, it selects the
condition after the colon. Here, we’ve chained several ? operators together
to handle each possible combination of the two selector inputs.
In the VHDL version, we accomplish the same thing by chaining
several when/else statements. Since the VHDL version uses more spelled-
out keywords, it’s a bit more readable, but the Verilog is more concise. In
both the Verilog and VHDL versions, the chain of logical checks gets
evaluated until one evaluates as true. If none of them are true, then we use
the last assignment in the chain.
Implementing a Demultiplexer
For a 1-4 demux, the block diagram looks like a mirrored version of a 4-1
mux, as you can see in Figure 6-2.
Figure 6-2: A 1-4 demultiplexer (demux)

--- Page 137 ---
This demux takes a single data input on the left (i_Data) and selects
which output to connect it to. The demux is doing a 1-4 selection, so two
input selectors are required to select between the four possible outputs. The
truth table in Table 6-2 shows all the possible combinations.
Table 6-2: Truth Table for a 1-4 Demux
i_Sel1 i_Sel0 o_Data3 o_Data2 o_Data1 o_Data0
0 0 0 0 0 i_Data
0 1 0 0 i_Data 0
1 0 0 i_Data 0 0
1 1 i_Data 0 0 0
Looking at the table, we can see that i_Data is connected to one of the
four outputs at a time, as determined by the i_Sel1 and i_Sel0 selector
inputs. When i_Sel1 and i_Sel0 are both 0, o_Data0 gets i_Data;
otherwise it gets 0. When i_Sel1 is 0 and i_Sel0 is 1, o_Data1 gets
i_Data; otherwise it gets 0. When i_Sel1 is 1 and i_Sel0 is 0, o_Data2
gets i_Data; otherwise it gets 0. Finally, when i_Sel1 is 1 and i_Sel0 is 1,
o_Data3 gets i_Data; otherwise it gets 0. Let’s see how we can implement
this truth table in Verilog and VHDL:
Verilog
module Demux_1_To_4 
 (input  i_Data, 
  input  i_Sel1, 
  input  i_Sel0, 
  output o_Data0, 
  output o_Data1, 
  output o_Data2, 
  output o_Data3); 
❶ assign o_Data0 = !i_Sel1 & !i_Sel0 ? i_Data : 1'b0; 
assign o_Data1 = !i_Sel1 &  i_Sel0 ? i_Data : 1'b0; 
assign o_Data2 = i_Sel1 & !i_Sel0 ? i_Data : 1'b0; 
assign o_Data3 = i_Sel1 &  i_Sel0 ? i_Data : 1'b0; 
endmodule

--- Page 138 ---
VHDL
library ieee; 
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all; 
entity Demux_1_To_4 is 
  port ( 
    i_Data  : in  std_logic; 
    i_Sel0  : in  std_logic; 
    i_Sel1  : in  std_logic; 
    o_Data0 : out std_logic; 
    o_Data1 : out std_logic; 
    o_Data2 : out std_logic; 
    o_Data3 : out std_logic); 
end entity Demux_1_To_4; 
architecture RTL of Demux_1_To_4 is 
begin 
❶ o_Data0 <= i_Data when i_Sel1 = '0' and i_Sel0 = '0' else
 '0'; 
  o_Data1 <= i_Data when i_Sel1 = '0' and i_Sel0 = '1' else
 '0'; 
  o_Data2 <= i_Data when i_Sel1 = '1' and i_Sel0 = '0' else
 '0'; 
  o_Data3 <= i_Data when i_Sel1 = '1' and i_Sel0 = '1' else
 '0'; 
end architecture RTL;
Notice how each output in this code is set independently. The input
i_Data can only be assigned to a single output at a time. For example, we
assign it to the first output, o_Data0, when both selector inputs are 0 ❶.
When an output isn’t wired to the input data, then it’s just set to 0 to disable
it.
In practice, since a mux or demux can be created with just a few lines
of code, it’s unlikely that you’d ever create a module to instantiate a single
multiplexer or demultiplexer. Generally, you’ll be better off just putting the
code that builds the mux or demux directly into the module where it’s
needed. However, multiplexers and demultiplexers are incredibly common

--- Page 139 ---
circuit design elements, so it’s important to understand how to implement
them. Next, we’ll look at another common component: the shift register.
The Shift Register
A shift register is a series of flip-flops where the output of one flip-flop is
connected to the input of the next. We looked at a shift register back in
Chapter 4 when we talked about a chain of flip-flops, but to keep things
simple I didn’t introduce the term at the time. To review, Figure 6-3 shows a
chain of four flip-flops, which we can now call a 4-bit shift register. As
discussed in Chapter 4, each additional flip-flop in the chain adds a single
clock cycle of delay to the output.
Figure 6-3: A shift register
Shift registers have many uses. For example, they can delay data for
some fixed number of clock cycles, convert data from serial to parallel or
from parallel to serial, or create a linear feedback shift register. We’ll look
at examples of each of these applications in this section.
Delaying Data
Creating delay in an FPGA is the most common application of a shift
register. The delay is often used to align data in time. For example, when
you send input data through a math operation, it might take a few clock
cycles to produce a result. If you need to align the output result with the
original input data, then the original input data needs to be delayed by the
number of clock cycles that the math operation will take to perform.
As we’ve seen, a shift register is simply a chain of flip-flops, and the
number of flip-flops in the chain dictates how many clock cycles it will take

--- Page 140 ---
for the data on the input to propagate to the output. With that in mind, this
code will create a shift register that generates a four-clock-cycle delay on
some input data:
Verilog
❶ reg [3:0] r_Shift; 
always @ (posedge i_Clk) 
  begin 
  ❷ r_Shift[0]   <= i_Data_To_Delay; 
  ❸ r_Shift[3:1] <= r_Shift[2:0]; 
  end
VHDL
❶ signal r_Shift : std_logic_vector(3 downto 0); 
process (i_Clk) 
begin 
  if rising_edge(i_Clk) then 
  ❷ r_Shift(0)          <= i_Data_To_Delay; 
  ❸ r_Shift(3 downto 1) <= r_Shift(2 downto 0); 
  end if; 
end process;
Here we create a shift register called r_Shift, which will be four flip-
flops in length ❶. Remember, the r_ in the name is a clue that the signal
will consist of flip-flops and be assigned within a clocked always block (in
Verilog) or process block (in VHDL). We load up the first flip-flop in the
chain (position 0) with i_Data_To_Delay, the input signal ❷. Then we use
a trick to create the remaining three flip-flop assignments in a single line of
code, rather than three: we take the values on flip-flops 0 through 2 and
assign them to flip-flops 1 through 3 ❸. This way, the data that was on the
first flip-flop in the chain is shifted to the second flip-flop, the data on the
second flip-flop is shifted to the third, and so on. If you wanted, you could
break this step down into its individual operations, like so:

--- Page 141 ---
r_Shift[3] <= r_Shift[2]; 
r_Shift[2] <= r_Shift[1]; 
r_Shift[1] <= r_Shift[0];
This example shows the Verilog version. For VHDL, replace the square
brackets with parentheses.
Writing out each assignment individually demonstrates more explicitly
how the data moves through the shift register one bit at a time, but both
methods will work the same way. Now we can use bit position 3 of r_Shift
for our purposes, as this is the flip-flop that represents a four-clock-cycle
delay of the input data i_Data_To_Delay. If we needed a three-clock-cycle
delay instead, we could use the data at bit position 2, or we could add more
flip-flops to the chain to create a longer delay.
Converting Between Serial and Parallel Data
Converting from serial data to parallel data and vice versa is another
common use of a shift register. You might need to do this when
communicating with off-chip interfaces that transmit and receive data
serially. One specific example is interfacing with a universal asynchronous
receiver-transmitter (UART). This is a device that transmits bytes of data by
breaking them into individual bits, which are then reconstituted into bytes
on the receiving end. When the data is sent, it is converted from parallel to
serial: the eight parallel bits of data in a byte are sent serially, one after the
other. When the data is received, it’s converted back from serial (individual
bits) to parallel (a complete byte).
UARTs are widely used to send and receive data between devices
because they’re simple and effective, and they’re a perfect application for a
shift register. An eight-bit shift register can send a byte of data by reading it
out, one flip-flop at a time, or it can receive a byte of data by shifting the
bits through the chain of flip-flops, one bit after the other. For example, say
we want to send and receive ASCII-encoded characters, each of which can
be represented within a single byte of data. First, let’s look at the receiving
end of the UART. Each line in Table 6-3 represents the receipt of a single
bit of data. The column on the right shows how the complete byte is built
up by shifting the bits through a shift register.

--- Page 142 ---
Table 6-3: Receiving a Byte of Data Through a UART
Bit index Received bit Byte contents
0 1 1
1 1 11
2 0 011
3 1 1011
4 0 01011
5 0 001011
6 1 1001011
7 0 01001011
ASCII=0x4B='K'
UARTs normally receive data starting with the least significant
(rightmost) bit. The first bit received is shifted through the shift register
from the most significant (leftmost) position to the least significant position
as more bits come in. Let’s walk through how this works.
On the first line of the table, we’ve received the first bit, which has a
value of 1. We place it into the most significant bit position, the first flip-
flop in the shift register. When we receive the second bit, which is also a 1,
we shift the existing bit to the right, and put the new received bit in the most
significant bit position. The third bit we receive is a 0. Once again, we place
it into the most significant position, and the rest of the bits are shifted right.
Once we’ve received all eight bits, the shift register is full, with the last bit
placed into the most significant bit position and the first bit placed in the
least significant position. At this point, the byte is complete. In our
example, we’ve received 01001011, which is equivalent to 0x4B (meaning
4B in hexadecimal), the ASCII encoding for the letter K. By receiving the
data one bit at a time and shifting the received bits to the right with a shift
register, we converted serial data to parallel data.
Now let’s look at the transmit side of a UART. Table 6-4 shows how to
transmit the byte 00110111, or 0x37, which is the digit 7 in ASCII.
Table 6-4: Transmitting a Byte of Data Through a UART
Bit index Byte contents Transmitted bit

--- Page 143 ---
Bit index Byte contents Transmitted bit
ASCII=0x37='7'
0 00110111 1
1 0011011 1
2 001101 1
3 00110 0
4 0011 1
5 001 1
6 00 0
7 0 0
In this case, we start with the entire byte of data loaded in an 8-bit shift
register. Again, a UART transmits from least significant bit to most
significant bit, so here we send out the rightmost bit and shift the entire byte
to the right with each step. By using a shift register to send out one bit at a
time and shift the remaining bits to the right, we’re converting parallel data
to serial data.
Creating a Linear Feedback Shift Register
The last common application of the shift register is to create a linear
feedback shift register (LFSR). This is a shift register where certain flip-
flops in the chain are tapped into and used as input for either an XOR or an
XNOR gate (we’ll be using XNOR). The output of this gate is then fed back
into the beginning of the shift register, hence the word feedback in the
name. Linear comes from the fact that this arrangement produces an input
bit that’s a linear function of the LFSR’s previous state. Figure 6-4 shows
an example of a 3-bit LFSR, but keep in mind that LFSRs can have any
number of bits.

--- Page 144 ---
Figure 6-4: A 3-bit LFSR
This LFSR features three chained flip-flops, representing bits 0 through
2 of a shift register. The outputs of the bit 1 flip-flop and the bit 2 flip-flop
are passed through an XNOR gate, and the output of the gate is sent to the
input of the first bit in the shift register. The value of the LFSR at any given
clock cycle is the value of the three flip-flop outputs.
NOTE
The flip-flops in Figure 6-4 are drawn backward compared to how we’ve
usually seen them, with input D on the right and output Q on the left. I drew
them this way so the least significant bit (bit 0) would appear on the right,
to match how we write numbers, but there’s nothing special here; these are
the same flip-flops that we all know and love, just mirrored.
When an LFSR is running, the pattern generated by the individual flip-
flops is pseudorandom, meaning it’s close to but not completely random.
It’s only pseudorandom because from any state of the LFSR pattern, you
can predict the next state. Table 6-5 shows what happens when the 3-bit
LFSR is initialized to zero, then the clock starts toggling.
Table 6-5: Pseudorandom Output of 3-Bit LFSR
Clock cycle LFSR data (binary) LFSR data (decimal)
0 000 0
1 001 1
2 011 3
3 110 6
4 101 5

--- Page 145 ---
Clock cycle LFSR data (binary) LFSR data (decimal)
5 010 2
6 100 4
7 000 0
8 001 1
9 011 3
10 110 6
… … …
The LFSR goes from 000 to 001 on the first clock cycle. This makes
sense, because the XNOR of bit 2 (0) and bit 1 (0) is 1, which gets written
into bit 0. On the next clock cycle, the LFSR goes from 001 to 011. Once
again we’ve taken the XNOR of bit 2 (0) and bit 1 (0), giving us a new bit 0
value of 1. Meanwhile, the old bit 0 value (1) has shifted to bit 1. Following
the rest of the values in the table, they seem relatively random—
pseudorandom, even!
Notice that the table repeats itself on the seventh clock cycle, so there
are seven unique values that the 3-bit LFSR can have: 000, 001, 010, 011,
100, 101, and 110. It can never have a value of 111. If you’re wondering
why, consider what would happen if this value arose. At the next clock
cycle, the new bit 0 would be the XNOR of 1 and 1, which is 1, while the
other bits would shift over, giving us 111 again. The LFSR would be stuck
on 111 forever, so it would effectively stop running! As a rule, for an LFSR
that’s N bit positions long, the maximum number of clock cycles that the
LFSR takes to run through all combinations is 2N − 1. For 3 bits, it’s 23 − 1
= 7; for 4 bits, it’s 24 − 1 = 15; and so on.
Because of their pseudorandomness, LFSRs have many applications.
They can function as low-utilization counters, test pattern generators, data
scramblers, or be used in cryptography. The LFSR is lightweight, so these
kinds of mathematical operations are carried out with few resources, which
is desirable so you can save your precious FPGA flip-flops and LUTs for
other tasks.
Let’s look at how the LFSR in Figure 6-4 could be implemented in
Verilog and VHDL:

--- Page 146 ---
Verilog
❶ reg [2:0] r_LFSR; 
wire     w_XNOR; 
always @(posedge i_Clk) 
begin 
❷ r_LFSR <= {r_LFSR[1:0], w_XNOR}; 
end 
❸ assign w_XNOR = r_LFSR[2] ^~ r_LFSR[1];
VHDL
❶ signal r_LFSR : std_logic_vector(2 downto 0) 
signal w_XNOR : std_logic; 
begin 
  process (i_Clk) is 
  begin 
    if rising_edge(i_Clk) then 
    ❷ r_LFSR <= r_LFSR(1 downto 0) & w_XNOR; 
    end if; 
  end process; 
❸ w_XNOR <= r_LFSR(2) xnor r_LFSR(1);
First we declare a 3-bit-wide LFSR ❶. We perform the shift and
incorporate the result of the XNOR operation through concatenation ❷. In
Verilog we concatenate values by placing them in curly brackets, {},
separated by commas, while in VHDL we use a single ampersand (&).
Together, the shifting and concatenation build up a single 3-bit-wide value,
with w_XNOR in the least significant bit position. Finally, we assign the
w_XNOR gate, based on the values of bits 2 and 1 in the register ❸. This is a
continuous assignment, occurring outside the always or process block, and
it will be implemented by a LUT in the FPGA.
NOTE

--- Page 147 ---
This example has shown a very simple 3-bit-wide LFSR, but an LFSR would
normally have initialization and reset logic, which would help avoid and
recover from any disallowed state. More thorough code, including reset
logic and the ability to size the LFSR to any number of bits, is available in
the book’s GitHub repository.
LFSRs are a simple and efficient way to perform several useful tasks.
They also highlight one of the strengths of an FPGA, namely being able to
quickly perform math operations with few resources. Consider that you
could have hundreds of LFSRs running in parallel on a single FPGA
without issue, and you can start to see how FPGAs excel at fast math
operations running in parallel.
Project #5: Selectively Blinking an LED
Now that we’ve introduced some building blocks, let’s start putting them
together. The requirement for this project is to blink each of four LEDs on
your development board on and off, but only one LED should be blinking at
a time. You’ll select which LED to blink using two switches. Table 6-6
shows how the LED selection is performed.
Table 6-6: LED Selection
i_Switch_2 i_Switch_1 LED to blink Signal name
0 0 D1 o_LED_1
0 1 D2 o_LED_2
1 0 D3 o_LED_3
1 1 D4 o_LED_4
Looking at the table, we can see that when the two input switches are
both 0 (not pressed), the D1 LED will blink. By pushing just switch 1 down
(setting it to 1), we select the D2 LED to blink. When we push down just
switch 2, D3 should blink, and finally, when we push down both buttons,
D4 should blink. This sounds like a job for a demultiplexer! We’ll have a
single signal that toggles on and off, and we’ll want to route it to one of
four LEDs. But how can we generate the toggling signal?

--- Page 148 ---
The clock on a development board is quite fast. On the Go Board
(discussed in Appendix A), for example, it’s 25 MHz. If we fed that directly
to an LED, then the LED would blink at 25 MHz. To the human eye, it
would look like the LED was just on, since that’s too fast for us to perceive.
We need to generate a signal that toggles on its own, but at some much
slower frequency than the clock: say, 2 to 4 Hz. That’s fast enough that
you’ll be able to tell the LED is blinking quickly, but not too fast for the
human eye to see. Remember, however, that FPGAs have no built-in
concept of time, so we can’t blink an LED by writing code like this:
r_LED <= 1; 
wait for 0.20 seconds 
r_LED <= 0; 
wait for 0.20 seconds
As discussed in Chapter 5, an FPGA can determine how much time has
passed by counting clock cycles. To wait for 0.20 seconds to pass, we
would need to count one-fifth of the number of clock cycles that occur in a
second. In the case of the Go Board, since there are 25,000,000 clock cycles
per second (a 25 MHz clock), we would need to count to 25,000,000 / 5 =
5,000,000. Once the count hits this limit, we could reset it to zero and
toggle the state of the LED.
But there’s another way! Recall that one of the possible uses for an
LFSR is to create a low-resource counter. Start an LFSR with a certain
pattern, such as all zeros, and it will take 2N − 1 clock cycles for that pattern
to recur, where N is the number of flip-flops that make up the LFSR. Create
an LFSR with a high enough number of flip-flops in the shift register, and
the rate at which it cycles through all its values will be slow enough to
toggle the LED at a satisfying frequency. For example, a 22-bit LFSR will
repeat its pattern every 222 − 1 = 4,194,303 clock cycles. With the Go
Board’s 25 MHz clock, that comes out to a little less than 0.20 seconds.
NOTE
If your board has a different clock frequency, you’ll need to experiment with
the number of bits in the LFSR. For the 100 MHz clock on the Alchitry Cu,

--- Page 149 ---
for example (see Appendix A), try 24 bits: 224 − 1 = 16,777,215 cycles, or
about 0.17 seconds.
Each time the LFSR returns to all zeros, it will toggle a signal, and
we’ll use that signal to blink whichever LED is currently selected. All of
this can be done using fewer FPGA resources than a traditional counter.
Figure 6-5 shows a block diagram of how it will work.
Figure 6-5: The Project #5 block diagram
This project will instantiate two modules: the LFSR and the 1-4 demux.
Between the two modules, we’ll have a flip-flop and a NOT gate (which
will become a LUT). The input to the LFSR is the clock, and the output is a
signal that goes high for one clock cycle when the LFSR has reached its
limit and started at the beginning of its pattern again. We call this a done
pulse. A pulse is a 1 (high) on a signal that lasts for one clock cycle, and
this particular pulse signals when the LFSR is done with each cycle through
its pattern loop.
We can’t use the LFSR output directly to blink the LEDs, but we can
use it to create a toggling signal. We do this by feeding the LFSR output
signal into the enable input of a flip-flop. The flip-flop’s output will be the
inversion (using a NOT gate) of its input. This way, each time the LFSR
cycles through its pattern, the done pulse will enable the flip-flop for one
clock cycle and trigger a change on the flip-flop’s output, either from a 0 to
a 1 or from a 1 to a 0. The net result is a signal with a 50 percent duty cycle
and a frequency of about 3 Hz, perfect for toggling an LED at a rate the

--- Page 150 ---
human eye can see. This toggling signal is the input to the demux module.
The 1-4 demux selects which LED to pass the toggling signal to by reading
the values on the two switches (SW1 and SW2). Only one LED will be
blinking at a time, while the LEDs not selected by the switches will be off.
Writing the Code
Let’s look at the Verilog and VHDL for this project, starting with the top-
level code:
Verilog
module Demux_LFSR_Project_Top 
  (input i_Clk, 
  input i_Switch_1, 
  input i_Switch_2, 
  output o_LED_1, 
  output o_LED_2, 
  output o_LED_3, 
  output o_LED_4); 
  reg r_LFSR_Toggle = 1'b0; 
  wire w_LFSR_Done; 
❶ LFSR_22 LFSR_Inst 
  (.i_Clk(i_Clk), 
 ❷ .o_LFSR_Data(), // unconnected
 ❸ .o_LFSR_Done(w_LFSR_Done)); 
  always @(posedge i_Clk) 
  begin 
  ❹ if (w_LFSR_Done) 
      r_LFSR_Toggle <= !r_LFSR_Toggle; 
  end 
❺ Demux_1_To_4 Demux_Inst 
  (.i_Data(r_LFSR_Toggle), 
   .i_Sel0(i_Switch_1), 
   .i_Sel1(i_Switch_2), 
   .o_Data0(o_LED_1), 
   .o_Data1(o_LED_2), 
   .o_Data2(o_LED_3), 

--- Page 151 ---
   .o_Data3(o_LED_4)); 
endmodule
VHDL
library ieee; 
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all; 
entity Demux_LFSR_Project_Top is 
  port ( 
    i_Clk      : in  std_logic; 
    i_Switch_1 : in  std_logic; 
    i_Switch_2 : in  std_logic; 
    o_LED_1    : out std_logic; 
    o_LED_2    : out std_logic; 
    o_LED_3    : out std_logic; 
    o_LED_4    : out std_logic); 
end entity Demux_LFSR_Project_Top; 
architecture RTL of Demux_LFSR_Project_Top is 
  signal r_LFSR_Toggle : std_logic := '0'; 
  signal w_LFSR_Done   : std_logic; 
begin 
❶ LFSR_22 : entity work.LFSR_22 
  port map ( 
    i_Clk       => i_Clk, 
 ❷ o_LFSR_Data => open, -- unconnected 
 ❸ o_LFSR_Done => w_LFSR_Done); 
  process (i_Clk) is 
  begin 
    if rising_edge(i_Clk) then 
    ❹ if w_LFSR_Done  = '1' then 
         r_LFSR_Toggle <= not r_LFSR_Toggle; 
       end if; 
    end if; 
  end process; 
❺ Demux_Inst : entity work.Demux_1_To_4 
  port map ( 
    i_Data  => r_LFSR_Toggle, 
    i_Sel0  => i_Switch_1, 

--- Page 152 ---
    i_Sel1  => i_Switch_2, 
    o_Data0 => o_LED_1, 
    o_Data1 => o_LED_2, 
    o_Data2 => o_LED_3, 
    o_Data3 => o_LED_4); 
end architecture RTL;
Our project has three top-level inputs—the clock and two switches—as
well as four outputs for the four LEDs. After declaring these, we instantiate
the LFSR module ❶. We’ll look closely at the module next, but for now,
notice its o_LFSR_Done output ❸, which we wire to w_LFSR_Done. This
output will pulse with each repetition of the LFSR loop.
We don’t actually need the LFSR to output the current value on its
register for this project, but this may be important in other contexts, so the
LFSR module has an o_LFSR_Data output for this purpose. One handy trick
when instantiating a module with unused outputs is to keep those outputs
unconnected, which we do here with o_LFSR_Data ❷. In Verilog, we simply
leave the parentheses after the output name empty, while in VHDL we use
the open keyword. When this design is synthesized, the synthesis tool will
prune any outputs that are unused, removing logic that doesn’t go
anywhere. This way, you can reuse modules without having to worry about
devoting precious FPGA resources to unused features. The synthesis tools
are smart enough to optimize your design and remove signals where they
aren’t needed.
In our top-level logic, we check if w_LFSR_Done is high, meaning the
LFSR has output its done pulse ❹. If so, we invert the r_LFSR_Toggle
signal. This is the signal that gets sent to the 1-4 demux, which we
instantiate next ❺. The selection is performed by the two input switches,
and the outputs of the demux are directly connected to the four output
LEDs.
We’ve already seen the code for the 1-4 demux module, in
“Implementing a Demultiplexer” on page 94. Let’s look at the LFSR
module now:
Verilog

--- Page 153 ---
module LFSR_22 ( 
  input         i_Clk, 
  output [21:0] o_LFSR_Data, 
  output        o_LFSR_Done); 
❶ reg [21:0] r_LFSR; 
wire       w_XNOR; 
always @(posedge i_Clk) 
begin 
❷ r_LFSR <= {r_LFSR[20:0], w_XNOR}; 
end 
❸ assign w_XNOR = r_LFSR[21] ^~ r_LFSR[20]; 
❹ assign o_LFSR_Done = (r_LFSR == 22'd0); 
❺ assign o_LFSR_Data = r_LFSR; 
endmodule
VHDL
library IEEE; 
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all; 
entity LFSR_22 is 
   port ( 
    i_Clk       : in std_logic; 
    o_LFSR_Data : out std_logic_vector(21 downto 0); 
    o_LFSR_Done : out std_logic); 
end entity LFSR_22; 
architecture RTL of LFSR_22 is 
❶ signal r_LFSR : std_logic_vector(21 downto 0); 
signal w_XNOR : std_logic; 
begin 
  process (i_Clk) begin 
    if rising_edge (i_Clk) then 
    ❷ r_LFSR <= r_LFSR(20 downto 0) & w_XNOR; 
    end if; 
  end process; 
❸ w_XNOR      <= r_LFSR(21) xnor r_LFSR(20); 
❹ o_LFSR_Done <= '1' when (r_LFSR = "0000000000000000000000")
 else '0'; 

--- Page 154 ---
❺ o_LFSR_Data <= r_LFSR; 
end RTL;
This module is similar to the 3-bit LFSR that we looked at earlier in the
chapter, but the LFSR register has been scaled up to be 22 bits wide ❶.
(Modify the code if you need a different bit width based on your board’s
clock speed.) The module also has extra logic to generate the done pulse, as
well as to output the LFSR data, which may be useful in other contexts.
We shift the LFSR register and concatenate the result with a new value
for the rightmost bit ❷, just as we did in the 3-bit LFSR module. Then we
XNOR the leftmost two bits in the register to get the new rightmost bit
value ❸. We generate the done pulse on the o_LFSR_Done output when all
of the flip-flops that make up the LFSR have zeros on their outputs ❹.
Since this will be the case for exactly one clock cycle, this pulse will be one
clock cycle wide. Otherwise, o_LFSR_Done will be low. Finally, we assign
the contents of the LFSR register to the o_LFSR_Data output ❺. This way
the module provides access to the LFSR data itself, but remember that in
this case the o_LFSR_Data output won’t be synthesized since we don’t need
the data for this particular application.
At this point, you can build and program the FPGA. When the project
starts running, you should see one of the LEDs blinking, but you can select
a different LED to blink by pushing either or both of the two switches.
Trying Another Way
This project has shown how simple building blocks like LFSRs and
demuxes can be combined to build larger projects, and it has illustrated an
interesting application for an LFSR. In the real world, however, you
probably wouldn’t use an LFSR to act as a counter like this, since it doesn’t
provide much flexibility. Let’s say we want to change the count limit. With
the LFSR implementation, we only have a few possible options to choose
from, based on the number of bits in the LFSR. For blinking an LED, that
was totally acceptable, as we didn’t care exactly how fast the LED was
blinking—anywhere between 2 and 4 Hz would be fine. But if we needed to
count to a very specific value—say, 4,000,000 instead of 4,194,303—we’d
be hard pressed to do this with the LFSR. The next lowest option would be

--- Page 155 ---
to use a 21-bit LFSR instead of a 22-bit LFSR, which would only allow us
to count to 221 − 1 = 2,097,151. For any value between 2,097,151 and
4,194,303, we’re out of luck.
To provide more flexibility, I created another version of this project
that uses a traditional counter. Figure 6-6 shows the block diagram of this
alternate code.
Figure 6-6: The revised Project #5 block diagram
Here, we’ve replaced the LFSR module with a module that simply
counts up to some value and then toggles its output. This approach also
allows us to eliminate the flip-flop and NOT gate between the project’s two
modules. Let’s look at the code for the new Count_And_Toggle module:
Verilog
module Count_And_Toggle #(COUNT_LIMIT = 10) 
 (input i_Clk, 
  input i_Enable, 
  output reg o_Toggle); 
❶ reg [$clog2(COUNT_LIMIT-1):0] r_Counter; 
  always @(posedge i_Clk) 
  begin 
    if (i_Enable == 1'b1) 
    begin 
    ❷ if (r_Counter == COUNT_LIMIT - 1) 
       begin 
       ❸ o_Toggle   <= !o_Toggle;
       ❹ r_Counter <= 0; 

--- Page 156 ---
       end 
       else 
       ❺ r_Counter <= r_Counter + 1; 
    end 
    else 
       o_Toggle <= 1'b0; 
  end 
endmodule
VHDL
library ieee; 
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all; 
use ieee.numeric_std.all; 
entity Count_And_Toggle is 
  generic (COUNT_LIMIT : natural); 
  port ( 
    i_Clk      : in std_logic; 
    i_Enable : in std_logic; 
    o_Toggle : out std_logic); 
end Count_And_Toggle; 
architecture RTL of Count_And_Toggle is 
❶ signal r_Counter : natural range 0 to COUNT_LIMIT - 1; 
begin 
  process (i_Clk) is 
  begin 
    if rising_edge(i_Clk) then 
       if i_Enable = '1' then 
       ❷ if r_Counter = COUNT_LIMIT - 1 then 
          ❸ o_Toggle  <= not o_Toggle; 
          ❹ r_Counter <= 0; 
          else 
          ❺ r_Counter <= r_Counter + 1; 
          end if; 
       else 
          o_Toggle <= '0'; 
       end if; 
    end if; 

--- Page 157 ---
  end process; 
end RTL;
This code is much simpler to read and understand than the LFSR code.
We declare a register that will act as a counter, using the COUNT_LIMIT
parameter/generic to define its size ❶. If the module is enabled, we check if
the counter has reached its limit ❷. If so, we invert the output signal ❸ and
reset the counter ❹. If the counter isn’t at its limit, then it simply
increments by 1 ❺. With this code, we can set the counter to any arbitrary
value and it will count to exactly that value.
NOTE
In the VHDL code, we have an output signal o_Toggle on the right side of
an assignment ❸, meaning we’re accessing the output’s value. This is valid
in VHDL-2008 and later but will throw an error on older versions of
VHDL. I recommend using VHDL-2008 in your designs, because of
improvements like this.
Now let’s look at the changes to the top-level code that are needed to
use this new Count_And_Toggle module instead of the LFSR:
Verilog
--snip-- 
  output o_LED_3, 
  output o_LED_4); 
  // Equivalent to 2^22 - 1, which is what the LFSR counted
 up to 
  localparam COUNT_LIMIT = 4194303; 
  wire w_Counter_Toggle; 
❶ Count_And_Toggle #(.COUNT_LIMIT(COUNT_LIMIT)) Toggle_Count
er 
   (.i_Clk(i_Clk), 
    .i_Enable(1'b1), 
    .o_Toggle(w_Counter_Toggle)); 
  Demux_1_To_4 Demux_Inst 

--- Page 158 ---
❷ (.i_Data(w_Counter_Toggle), 
   .i_Sel0(i_Switch_1), 
   .i_Sel1(i_Switch_2), 
   .o_Data0(o_LED_1), 
   .o_Data1(o_LED_2), 
   .o_Data2(o_LED_3), 
   .o_Data3(o_LED_4)); 
endmodule
VHDL
--snip-- 
architecture RTL of Demux_LFSR_Project_Top is 
  -- Equivalent to 2^22 - 1, which is what the LFSR counted
 up to 
  constant COUNT_LIMIT : integer := 4194303; 
  signal w_Counter_Toggle : std_logic; 
begin 
❶ Toggle_Counter : entity work.Count_And_Toggle 
  generic map ( 
    COUNT_LIMIT => COUNT_LIMIT) 
  port map ( 
    i_Clk      => i_Clk, 
    i_Enable => '1', 
    o_Toggle => w_Counter_Toggle); 
  Demux_Inst : entity work.Demux_1_To_4 
  port map ( 
  ❷ i_Data   => w_Counter_Toggle, 
    i_Sel0   => i_Switch_1, 
    i_Sel1   => i_Switch_2, 
    o_Data0 => o_LED_1, 
    o_Data1 => o_LED_2, 
    o_Data2 => o_LED_3, 
    o_Data3 => o_LED_4); 
end architecture RTL;
I’ve snipped the parts that are the same. The LFSR has been removed
and replaced with the Count_And_Toggle module ❶. Since that module

--- Page 159 ---
generates a toggling signal, we no longer need the flip-flop between the two
modules. Instead, we can feed w_Counter_Toggle, the output of the
Count_And_Toggle module, directly into the demux ❷.
Comparing the Two Approaches
As you’ve seen, using a traditional counter is simpler and more flexible
than using an LFSR. However, earlier I asserted that implementing an
LFSR requires fewer resources than a traditional counter. Let’s compare the
resource utilization reports for the two approaches to this project to see how
significant the resource savings are. First, here’s the report for the LFSR
version:
--snip-- 
Register bits not including I/Os:  23 (1%) 
Mapping Summary: 
Total  LUTs: 13 (1%)
And here’s the report for the counter version:
--snip-- 
Register bits not including I/Os:  24 (1%) 
Mapping Summary: 
Total  LUTs: 36 (2%)
The LFSR approach has used 1 fewer flip-flop and 23 fewer LUTs than
the counter, so the LFSR does indeed require fewer resources. However, it
helps to put that into perspective. Modern FPGAs have thousands of LUTs.
You really shouldn’t have to count every single one. By going with the
LFSR, we might save 1 percent (or less) of the total resources of our FPGA,
but we lose readability and flexibility in the design. In general, I prefer to
implement solutions that make sense and are simple, and in this case the
LFSR isn’t the simplest solution.
In addition to showing you how to blink an LED and create a
sophisticated project by combining various basic building blocks, this
project has illustrated that there’s often a trade-off between simplicity and
resources. You’ll find that there are typically several ways to solve

--- Page 160 ---
problems within an FPGA, and you’ll have to determine which solution
works best for you. It could be that the most resource-efficient solution isn’t
the simplest, but on the other hand, the simplest solution may not require
significantly more resources. In many cases, you might iterate on a design
with different approaches, testing each one out. This is always a good
exercise; you’ll become a stronger FPGA engineer when you explore
multiple ways to write your code.
Random Access Memory
Random-access memory (RAM) allows you to store data within your FPGA
and read it back later. This is an incredibly common requirement in an
FPGA design. For example, you might want to store data received from a
camera, a computer, or a microcontroller and retrieve it later for processing,
or you may need to create a storage space for data before saving it to a
microSD card. These are just a few examples of use cases for a RAM. The
random-access part of the name means that you can access the data in any
order. On one clock cycle, for example, you could read out the first location
of memory, and then on the very next clock cycle you could read out the
last location of memory.
A RAM is typically designed to be either single-port or dual-port. In a
single-port RAM, there’s just one interface into the memory, so in a single
clock cycle you can either read from or write to the memory, but not both.
A dual-port RAM allows you to read from and write to the memory in the
same clock cycle. The latter is more versatile and used more often, so we’ll
focus on how to implement that on an FPGA. Figure 6-7 shows at a high
level what we’ll be creating. Note that this is just one possible
implementation; the exact signal names can vary.
Figure 6-7: A dual-port RAM block diagram

--- Page 161 ---
In the middle of the figure, the memory itself is represented by the
large rectangle. The size of the memory is defined by its width and depth.
The depth determines the number of memory locations available, while the
width determines how many bits can be stored at each location. For
example, if the memory is 8 bits wide, then each location can store a byte of
data. Multiplying the width by the depth tells you the total number of bits of
memory available. For example, if we have an 8-bit-wide memory that’s 16
locations deep, then there’s a total of 8 × 16 = 128 bits of memory.
The memory has two ports, one for writing (on the left) and one for
reading (on the right). Each port has its own clock signal, i_Wr_Clk and
i_Rd_Clk. For our purposes, we’ll tie both of these to the same clock, but
note that it’s possible for each port to operate according to its own
independent clock. We’ll discuss working with more than one clock, or
crossing clock domains, in Chapter 7. For now, just know that this module
is built with that feature in mind.
Each port has an address signal, i_Wr_Addr and i_Rd_Addr, which
communicates the index into the memory where the writing or reading
operation should take place. If you’ve programmed in C, this is like the
index into an array. The indices typically range from 0 to (depth – 1), giving
us a total of depth locations in the physical memory.
For writing the data, we need to set the write address correctly, put the
data that we want to write on i_Wr_Data, and pulse the i_Wr_DV for a single
clock cycle. DV here stands for data valid, which I commonly use to indicate
that the data signal should be “looked at” by the module. If we want to keep
writing to the memory, we can change the address and the data, and keep
pulsing the data valid signal.
For reading the data, we drive i_Rd_En high, while setting the read
address to the address we want to read from. The module that is performing
the read can simply monitor the output o_Rd_DV to see when it goes high;
this indicates that there is valid data on o_Rd_Data, which is the data that is
read from the memory.
A RAM Implementation
Now that you understand at a high level how a RAM works, let’s examine
the code implementing the memory:

--- Page 162 ---
Verilog
module RAM_2Port ❶ #(parameter WIDTH = 16, DEPTH = 256) 
   ( 
   // Write signals 
   input                     i_Wr_Clk, 
   input [$clog2(DEPTH)-1:0] i_Wr_Addr, 
   input                     i_Wr_DV, 
   input [WIDTH-1:0]         i_Wr_Data, 
   // Read signals 
   input                     i_Rd_Clk, 
   input [$clog2(DEPTH)-1:0] i_Rd_Addr, 
   input                     i_Rd_En, 
   output reg                o_Rd_DV, 
   output reg [WIDTH-1:0]    o_Rd_Data 
   ); 
❷ reg [WIDTH-1:0] r_Mem[DEPTH-1:0]; 
   always @ (posedge i_Wr_Clk) 
   begin 
   ❸ if (i_Wr_DV) 
      begin 
      ❹ r_Mem[i_Wr_Addr] <= i_Wr_Data; 
      end 
   end 
   always @ (posedge i_Rd_Clk) 
   begin 
   ❺ o_Rd_Data <= r_Mem[i_Rd_Addr]; 
   ❻ o_Rd_DV   <= i_Rd_En; 
   end 
endmodule
VHDL
library ieee; 
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all; 
use ieee.numeric_std.all; 
entity RAM_2Port is 
❶ generic ( 

--- Page 163 ---
     WIDTH : integer := 16; 
     DEPTH : integer := 256 
     ); 
   port ( 
     -- Write signals 
     i_Wr_Clk  : in std_logic; 
     i_Wr_Addr : in std_logic_vector; -- sized at higher lev
el 
     i_Wr_DV   : in std_logic; 
     i_Wr_Data : in std_logic_vector(WIDTH-1 downto 0); 
     -- Read signals 
     i_Rd_Clk  : in std_logic; 
     i_Rd_Addr : in std_logic_vector; -- sized at higher lev
el 
     i_Rd_En   : in std_logic; 
     o_Rd_DV   : out std_logic; 
     o_Rd_Data : out std_logic_vector(WIDTH-1 downto 0) 
     ); 
end RAM_2Port; 
architecture RTL of RAM_2Port is 
   type t_Mem is array (0 to DEPTH-1) of std_logic_vector(WI
DTH-1 downto 0); 
❷ signal r_Mem : t_Mem;
begin 
   process (i_Wr_Clk) 
   begin 
     if rising_edge(i_Wr_Clk) then 
     ❸ if i_Wr_DV = '1' then
        ❹ r_Mem(to_integer(unsigned(i_Wr_Addr))) <= i_Wr_Dat
a; 
        end if; 
     end if; 
   end process; 
   process (i_Rd_Clk) 
   begin 
     if rising_edge(i_Rd_Clk) then 
     ❺ o_Rd_Data <= r_Mem(to_integer(unsigned(i_Rd_Addr))); 
     ❻ o_Rd_DV   <= i_Rd_En;
     end if; 

--- Page 164 ---
   end process; 
end RTL;
We’ve implemented the memory as a module called RAM_2Port. Notice
that the module has two parameters (in Verilog) or generics (in VHDL):
WIDTH and DEPTH ❶. This gives us the flexibility to create a RAM of any
size we want, without having to modify the module code. If we need a
memory that’s 4 bits wide and 16 locations deep, this code can do that; if
we need it to be 16 bits wide by 1,024 deep, this code can do that too. We
only need to choose different WIDTH and DEPTH values when we instantiate
the module.
Looking at the signal declarations to the module, we can see all the
signals shown in Figure 6-7 that make up the write and read interfaces. The
signals i_Wr_Addr and i_Rd_Addr will provide the indices of the write and
read locations, respectively. These address signals are given a bit width
large enough to represent any index to a memory containing DEPTH
elements. For example, if you need to address into 128 memory locations
(DEPTH = 128), then you’re going to need 7 bits to accomplish that (27 =
128), so the address signals will be 7 bits wide. In Verilog, this sizing of the
address works with the $clog2() trick described in Chapter 5. In VHDL we
can leave the length of the vector undefined and set it in the higher-level
module when this memory is instantiated. The instantiation itself must be of
a fixed width, which will then specify the address signal width in this
module. The last place we are using the parameters/generics to size our
signals is for i_Wr_Data and o_Rd_Data. These carry the actual data being
written or read, respectively, and are sized based on WIDTH to accommodate
the full width of each location in memory.
We instantiate the memory itself as r_Mem ❷. It will be WIDTH wide and
DEPTH long, for a total storage of WIDTH × DEPTH bits of memory. This
instantiates a two-dimensional (2D) array in the code. In Verilog, we create
it by setting a register of specific width, as we’ve done in the past, but with
extra brackets on the end that specify the number of memory locations
based on the DEPTH. In VHDL, we need to create a custom data type called
t_Mem that defines the 2D array; then we can create the memory signal
r_Mem, of type t_Mem.

--- Page 165 ---
Next, we give the write and read operations their own always or
process blocks, triggered by the i_Wr_Clk and i_Rd_Clk clock signals,
respectively. (Again, unless you need to cross clock domains, you can
simply tie these signals to the same clock in the higher-level code that
instantiates this module.) For write operations, we first check to see that the
i_Wr_DV signal is high ❸. If it is, we take the data that’s on i_Wr_Data and
store it into memory at the location specified by i_Wr_Addr ❹. This looks a
lot like updating a value in an array, because that’s basically what we’re
doing.
For read operations, the o_Rd_Data output is updated with the value of
the memory at the address given by i_Rd_Addr ❺. At the same time, the
value on i_Rd_En is passed to o_Rd_DV ❻. The higher-level module will set
i_Rd_En to high when it’s actually trying to read data, and passing this
signal to o_Rd_DV generates a data valid pulse telling the higher-level
module that the data is safe to read. Notice, however, that i_Rd_En doesn’t
really control when data will be read within this module. In fact, the code to
update o_Rd_Data ❺ will run on every single clock cycle, updating it with
whatever is stored at the i_Rd_Addr memory location, whether we’re
explicitly trying to read data out of the memory or not. That’s fine! It does
no harm to read the memory on every clock cycle like this, even if we end
up ignoring the data that’s being read out.
To see the dual-port memory operating in a simulation, download the
code from the repository and run the testbench for this module.
RAM on an FPGA
We’ve written the code for a dual-port RAM, but what FPGA component
makes up the memory itself? The answer is, it depends. If the memory is
small enough—for example, 4 locations wide by 8 deep—the storage
elements will be individual flip-flops. However, if the memory gets large
enough, the synthesis tools will instead decide to use a block RAM
(BRAM). We’ll discuss the block RAM in detail in Chapter 9. For now, just
know that it’s a large memory storage component that exists on the FPGA
for this very purpose.
You wouldn’t want to use flip-flops for large memories because you’re
limited with how many flip-flops are available for memory storage. You

--- Page 166 ---
want to save those precious flip-flops to do the main work in your FPGA,
not just store a single bit of data in a large memory. The synthesis tools are
smart; they know it’s best to push a large memory instantiation to one or
more block RAMs.
FIFO: First In, First Out
The first in, first out (FIFO) is another common FPGA building block for
storing and retrieving data. The concept of a FIFO is quite simple: data
comes in one entry at a time and gets read out in order from oldest to
newest. Figure 6-8 shows a high-level representation of a FIFO.
Figure 6-8: A high-level block diagram of a FIFO
As you can see, a FIFO has a write interface pushing data in on the left
side and a read interface pulling data out on the right side. Compared to the
dual-port RAM diagram in Figure 6-7, notice that I’ve flipped the width and
depth here. This helps to visualize the key FIFO behavior: the first data that
gets put in is the first data that gets pulled out. In this sense, data moves
through a FIFO like cars through a tunnel. The first car into the tunnel is
also the first car out. Other programming languages often have some sort of
queue structure, which behaves the same way. With a FIFO in an FPGA,
however, you’re building a real queue out of real components!
FIFOs are used extensively in FPGA designs. Any time you need to
buffer some data between a producer and a consumer, a FIFO acts as that
buffer. For example, to write data to an off-chip memory storage element
like a low-power double data rate (LPDDR) memory, you’d use many
FIFOs to queue up the data, and then quickly burst it out of the FPGA into
the LPDDR. Similarly, if you interface with a camera, you might store rows
of pixel data into FIFOs for image manipulation like blurring or brightness
enhancement. Finally, whenever you need to send data across clock

--- Page 167 ---
domains, FIFOs are up to the task: one clock coordinates loading data into
the FIFO, while the other clock coordinates reading it out.
A FIFO is full when there are no more memory locations available for
new write data. A FIFO is empty when it has nothing in it. This leads to two
critical rules that you must follow to ensure your FIFO behaves as
expected:
1.  Never write to a full FIFO.
2.  Never read from an empty FIFO.
Writing to a full FIFO is bad because it can cause data loss: you’ll end
up overwriting data that was stored earlier. Reading from an empty FIFO is
also bad, as you don’t know what data you’re going to get out of it.
Breaking one of these two rules is one of the most common FPGA bugs that
I’ve encountered in my career. It’s also one of the harder bugs to find,
because writing to a full FIFO or reading from an empty FIFO can cause
strange behavior, like unexpected data and data loss. Often this corrupted
data looks like a problem with the data, rather than a problem with the
FIFO, so what’s causing the bug is difficult to diagnose. Keep these rules in
mind as we discuss the details of how a FIFO works.
Input and Output Signals
A FIFO is basically a version of a dual-port RAM with some extra signals
added to create the FIFO behavior. Before we look at the code for the FIFO,
let’s consider what all those signals are. Figure 6-9 shows a more detailed
block diagram of a FIFO.
Figure 6-9: A detailed FIFO block diagram

--- Page 168 ---
Like the dual-port RAM, the FIFO has ports for writing and reading.
Each port has its own dedicated clock. FIFOs are commonly used to cross
clock domains, so i_Wr_Clk is different from i_Rd_Clk. However, the FIFO
that we’ll explore has a single clock for both the write and read ports, for
simplicity and portability across FPGAs.
Next, on the write side, the i_Wr_DV (data valid) input signals when
there’s data to be written on i_Wr_Data and pushes that data into the FIFO.
On the read side, the i_Rd_En and i_Rd_DV signals similarly communicate
when we wish to read data, and the o_Rd_Data output retrieves the data
itself. All of this is just like what we saw on the RAM. Unlike on the RAM,
however, we no longer need to worry about keeping track of which address
to write to or read from. The FIFO knows to simply cycle through the
memory addresses in sequence, one after the other, when reading or writing.
As such, there’s no need for i_Wr_Addr and i_Rd_Addr input signals we had
on the RAM. Instead, the remaining input and output signals help to track
how much of the FIFO is used, while ensuring that we don’t write to a full
FIFO or read from an empty FIFO.
On the write side, the o_Full output goes high when all the locations
within the FIFO have been written to. When the user sees o_Full go high,
they must stop writing to the FIFO until some space frees up and o_Full
goes low again. As you know by now, writing to a full FIFO is very bad and
should be avoided.
The i_AF_Level and o_AF_Flag signals, also on the write side, aren’t
always included in FIFO modules, but they can be very helpful. AF is short
for almost full, and these signals allow the user to set a watermark in the
FIFO before it fills up completely. If the number of elements (sometimes
called words) in the FIFO is greater than or equal to the value set by
i_AF_Level, then o_AF_Flag will be high. Otherwise, o_AF_Flag will be
low. This feature is particularly useful in situations where data is written to
the FIFO in batches. For example, say the write interface must write a
minimum of four elements at a time in a burst, meaning once the interface
starts writing it can’t stop, even if the o_Full flag goes high mid-burst. To
prevent data loss, we would want to set i_AF_Level to depth − 4 and then
check that o_AF_Flag is low before writing each burst of four elements.

--- Page 169 ---
This ensures that there will be space in the FIFO for all four elements,
before the write operation begins.
The read side has a similar set of FIFO-specific signals. o_Empty will
be high when the FIFO has no data in it. To ensure that we never read from
an empty FIFO, we should check the o_Empty flag before attempting to read
data out to know if there’s data available for reading.
The i_AE_Level and o_AE_Flag signals behave similarly to
i_AF_Level and o_AF_Flag, guaranteeing that a burst of reads is possible
without the FIFO becoming empty mid-burst (AE is short for almost empty).
For example, say your FIFO is 1,024 bits deep and 1 byte wide, and you
have an LPDDR interface that requires data to be written in 256-byte bursts.
Again, since a burst can’t be interrupted, you can’t simply stop reading if
the FIFO becomes empty partway through the read. To guarantee that at
least 256 bytes will be available to be pulled from the FIFO before sending
a burst of data to the LPDDR, set i_AE_Level to 256, and check that
o_AE_Flag is low before reading data.
NOTE
If you don’t need almost full or almost empty behaviors for your
application, you can just ignore the i_AF_Level, o_AF_Flag, i_AE_Level,
and o_AE_Flag signals in your design.
Figure 6-10 shows some examples summarizing what we’ve learned
about FIFO signals.
Figure 6-10: FIFO flag examples
The figure illustrates a FIFO with a depth of 12 words (the width isn’t
important). For this example, let’s assume we’ve set i_AE_Level to 4 and

--- Page 170 ---
i_AF_Level to 8. In the first row, we can see that if the FIFO has nothing in
it, the count is zero and the o_Empty and o_AE_Flag signals are both set to
1. Remember that o_AE_Flag is set when the count is less than or equal to
i_AE_Level. Next, we see that there are four words written, the FIFO is no
longer empty, but o_AE_Flag is still set. It’s not until the fifth word is
written that o_AE_Flag goes low. All flags are low from words five through
seven, but when there are eight words in the FIFO, o_AF_Flag goes high
(since i_AF_Level was set to 8). When the FIFO is full, we see that both
o_AF_Flag and o_Full are high.
A FIFO Implementation
We’ll now consider the Verilog and VHDL for implementing the FIFO
illustrated in Figure 6-9. This code adds features around the RAM_2Port
module discussed in “A RAM Implementation” on page 113 that convert
the RAM into a FIFO. The complete code is available in the book’s GitHub
repository, along with the testbenches that exercise it. I’m not showing the
module signals or the instantiation of the memory (the dual-port RAM from
the previous section) here, so we can focus on the functional code that
makes the FIFO a FIFO:
Verilog
--snip-- 
  always @(posedge i_Clk or negedge i_Rst_L) 
  begin 
  ❶ if (~i_Rst_L) 
    begin 
      r_Wr_Addr <= 0; 
      r_Rd_Addr <= 0; 
      r_Count   <= 0; 
    end 
    else 
    begin 
    ❷ if (i_Wr_DV) 
      begin 
        if (r_Wr_Addr == DEPTH-1) 

--- Page 171 ---
          r_Wr_Addr <= 0; 
        else 
          r_Wr_Addr <= r_Wr_Addr + 1; 
      end 
   ❸ if (i_Rd_En) 
     begin 
       if (r_Rd_Addr == DEPTH-1) 
         r_Rd_Addr <= 0; 
       else 
         r_Rd_Addr <= r_Rd_Addr + 1; 
     end 
   ❹ if (i_Rd_En & ~i_Wr_DV)
     begin 
       if (r_Count != 0) 
       begin 
         r_Count <= r_Count - 1; 
       end 
     end 
   ❺ else if (i_Wr_DV & ~i_Rd_En)
     begin 
       if (r_Count != DEPTH) 
       begin 
         r_Count <= r_Count + 1; 
       end 
     end 
      if (i_Rd_En) 
      begin 
        o_Rd_Data <= w_Rd_Data; 
      end 
    end // else: !if(~i_Rst_L) 
  end // always @ (posedge i_Clk or negedge i_Rst_L) 
❻ assign o_Full  = (r_Count == DEPTH) || 
                   (r_Count == DEPTH-1 && i_Wr_DV && !i_Rd_E
n); 
  assign o_Empty = (r_Count == 0); 
  assign o_AF_Flag = (r_Count > DEPTH - i_AF_Level); 
  assign o_AE_Flag = (r_Count < i_AE_Level); 
--snip--

--- Page 172 ---
VHDL
--snip-- 
  process (i_Clk, i_Rst_L) is 
  begin 
  ❶ if not i_Rst_L then
      r_Wr_Addr <= 0; 
      r_Rd_Addr <= 0; 
      r_Count   <= 0; 
    elsif rising_edge(i_Clk) then 
  
    ❷ if i_Wr_DV then 
        if r_Wr_Addr = DEPTH-1 then 
          r_Wr_Addr <= 0; 
        else 
          r_Wr_Addr <= r_Wr_Addr + 1; 
        end if; 
      end if; 
    ❸ if i_Rd_En then 
        if r_Rd_Addr = DEPTH-1 then 
          r_Rd_Addr <= 0; 
        else 
          r_Rd_Addr <= r_Rd_Addr + 1; 
        end if; 
      end if; 
    ❹ if i_Rd_En = '1' and i_Wr_DV = '0' then 
        if (r_Count /= 0) then 
          r_Count <= r_Count - 1; 
        end if; 
    ❺ elsif i_Wr_DV = '1' and i_Rd_En = '0' then 
        if r_Count /= DEPTH then 
          r_Count <= r_Count + 1; 
        end if; 
      end if; 
      if i_Rd_En = '1' then 
        o_Rd_Data <= w_Rd_Data; 
      end if; 
  
    end if; 

--- Page 173 ---
  end process; 
  
❻ o_Full <= '1' when ((r_Count = DEPTH) or 
                      (r_Count = DEPTH-1 and i_Wr_DV = '1' a
nd i_Rd_En = '0')) 
                     else '0'; 
  o_Empty <= '1' when (r_Count = 0) else '0'; 
  
  o_AF_Flag <= '1' when (r_Count > DEPTH - i_AF_Level) else
 '0'; 
  o_AE_Flag <= '1' when (r_Count < i_AE_Level) else '0'; 
--snip--
The bulk of this code is the main always block (in Verilog) or process
block (in VHDL), which handles memory addressing, counting the number
of elements in the FIFO, and read and write operations. Notice that this
block has a reset signal, i_Rst_L, in the sensitivity list, in addition to a
clock signal. If the reset signal goes low, then we’re in a reset state and we
reset the signals that control the read address, the write address, and the
FIFO count ❶. The _L at the end of the reset signal name is a clue that it’s
active-low.
NOTE
As I mentioned earlier, FIFOs are useful for crossing clock domains, but
this particular implementation of a FIFO cannot do this. It only has one
clock, the i_Clk signal. Crossing clock domains is an advanced feature that
we aren’t prepared to implement at this stage in the book.
Next, we create the logic for the write address ❷ and read address ❸.
For these, we simply increment the address each time we do a write or a
read. When we reach the last address in the FIFO, which is DEPTH-1, we
start over again at 0. Thanks to this system, elements are written to memory
sequentially and they’re read from memory in the same order they were
written, ensuring adherence to the first-in, first-out scheme.
To keep track of the number of elements in the FIFO, first we check for
the condition where we’re doing a read but not a write ❹. In this case, the

--- Page 174 ---
total number of elements in the FIFO goes down by 1. Next we check if
we’re doing a write but not a read ❺, in which case the total number of
elements in the FIFO increases by 1. It’s also possible that we could be
writing and reading at the same time, but notice that the code doesn’t
explicitly handle this case. That’s intentional; in this situation, the count
will remain the same. We could make this explicit by writing r_Count <=
r_Count;, but this isn’t necessary. By default, the count variable retains its
value.
We also perform several signal assignments outside of the always or
process block ❻. Recall that this will generate combinational (as opposed
to sequential) logic. First we assign the o_Full flag, which will be high
when r_Count is equal to DEPTH, or when r_Count is equal to DEPTH-1 and
there’s a write and there’s not a read. This second case lets the full flag
“anticipate” the write and tell the higher-level module to stop writing, since
the FIFO is about to be full.
Next we have the o_Empty assignment, which is a bit simpler. When
the count is zero, the FIFO is empty; otherwise, it’s not empty. After that we
assign the almost full (o_AF_Flag) and almost empty (o_AE_Flag) flags. For
these, we need to compare the count of the FIFO to the thresholds
determined by i_AF_Level and i_AE_Level, respectively. This is the first
time we’ve seen the < and > comparison operators being used in Verilog and
VHDL. These are perfectly valid to include in combinational signal
assignments.
By monitoring these status flags from a higher-level module, you’ll be
able to precisely control when data can move into and out of the FIFO.
Summary
In this chapter, you learned about several common building blocks in FPGA
designs, including multiplexers and demultiplexers, shift registers, RAM,
and FIFOs. You saw how these components work and learned how to
implement them with Verilog and VHDL. With these foundational pieces of
code, you can start to see how very large FPGA designs can be composed
of many smaller modules structured together.

--- Page 175 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 176 ---
7
SYNTHESIS, PLACE AND ROUTE, AND
CROSSING CLOCK DOMAINS
In Chapter 2, I provided an overview of
the FPGA build process to get you
comfortable running the tools needed to work on this
book’s projects. We’ll now take a closer look at the
build process, to give you a deeper understanding of
what exactly is going on when you click the Build
FPGA button. Once you have a firm knowledge of
what your FPGA tools are doing, you’ll be able to
avoid many common mistakes and write highly
reliable code.
As you learned back in Chapter 2, after you’ve written your Verilog or
VHDL code the FPGA design goes through three stages: synthesis, place
and route, and programming. If any of these processes fails, the FPGA build
won’t be successful. In this chapter, we’ll focus on the first two stages.
We’ll talk in detail about synthesis, and break down the differences between
synthesizable and non-synthesizable code. After that, we’ll revisit the place
and route process and explore one common issue that arises during this
stage: timing errors. You’ll learn what causes these errors and how to fix

--- Page 177 ---
them. Finally, we’ll look in detail at a situation where you’re particularly
likely to encounter timing issues: when signals cross between parts of your
FPGA design running at different clock frequencies. You’ll learn how to
safely cross clock domains in your FPGA.
Synthesis
Synthesis is the process of breaking down your Verilog or VHDL code and
converting it to simple components (LUTs, flip-flops, block RAMs, and so
on) that exist on your specific FPGA. In this sense, an FPGA synthesis tool
is similar to a compiler, which takes code in a language like C and breaks it
down into very simple instructions that your CPU can understand.
For the process to work correctly, the synthesis tool needs to know
exactly what type of FPGA you’re using so it knows what resources are
available. Then, since these resources are finite, it becomes the synthesis
tool’s job to figure out how to use them as efficiently as possible. This is
called logic optimization (or logic minimization), and it’s a major part of the
synthesis process. As I mentioned in Chapter 3, there’s no reason for you to
ever perform logic optimization manually; you can simply leave it to the
synthesis tool. That’s not to say, however, that writing code that uses your
available resources intelligently isn’t important. Having a good
understanding of what your code will synthesize into is critical to becoming
a strong FPGA designer.
A key output of the synthesis process is your utilization report, which
tells you how many LUTs, flip-flops, block RAMs, and other resources
you’re using in your design. We’ve examined excerpts from utilization
reports in past chapters; I recommend always reading through this report to
make sure that your expectations match reality with regard to the resources
being used.
Notes, Warnings, and Errors
The synthesis process often generates a very large number of notes and
warnings, even when it runs successfully. When unsuccessful, the process
generates errors as well. The notes are mostly informational, telling you
how the tool is interpreting your code. Warnings are worth looking at to
make sure that you’re not making mistakes. However, in large designs there

--- Page 178 ---
might be hundreds of warnings, so they can become overwhelming. Some
tools allow you to hide warnings once you’re comfortable with them. This
is a useful feature that allows you to focus on the real problems.
One particular warning worth noting is the inferred latch warning. As
you learned back in Chapter 4, latches are bad. They’re often created
accidentally, and the tools can have trouble analyzing them in the context of
timing in your FPGA design. If you create a latch, you’ll be notified of it
during the synthesis process. You’ll get a warning like this:
[Synth 8-327] inferring latch for variable 'o_test' [test_pr
ogram.vhd:19]
Don’t ignore this warning. Unless you’re sure that you really want that
latch in your design, you should try to remove it. I’ve been doing FPGA
design for many years and I’ve never needed to use a latch, so you should
have a very good reason if you’re planning to keep it.
If something goes wrong during synthesis, you’ll get an error rather
than a warning. The two most common errors you’ll encounter are syntax
errors and utilization errors; we’ll look at those next.
Syntax Errors
When you start the synthesis process, the first thing the tool will do is check
your Verilog or VHDL code for syntax errors. These are by far the most
common errors you’ll encounter. There are literally hundreds of kinds of
syntax errors that might be lurking in your code; perhaps you forgot to
define a signal, mistyped a keyword, or left out a semicolon, for example.
In the last case, you might see an error message like this one in Verilog:
** Error: (vlog-13069) design.v(5): near "endmodule": syntax 
error, 
unexpected endmodule, expecting ';' or ','.
or this one in VHDL:
** Error: design.vhd(5): near "end": (vcom-1576) expecting
 ';'.

--- Page 179 ---
The synthesis tool will tell you on which line of which file it
encountered the error. In the preceding error messages, for example,
design.v(5) in Verilog or design.vhd(5) in VHDL is telling you to check
line 5 of the file called design. You can use this information to edit your
code to pass the syntax check.
Occasionally, you’ll get an overwhelming number of syntax errors. The
best thing you can do in this case is find the first error and fix that one.
Often, a cascade of errors can stem from the first one. This is a good rule
for engineering in general: fix the first problem first. Once you’ve resolved
that first syntax error, rerun the synthesis process. If you’re still getting
errors, again find the first one, fix it, and rerun synthesis. This process is
iterative, and it often takes a few cycles for all the syntax errors to be
resolved and the synthesis process to complete successfully.
Utilization Errors
Once your code passes the syntax check, the next most common error you’ll
encounter during synthesis is a utilization error, where your design requires
more components than the FPGA has available. For example, if your FPGA
has 1,000 flip-flops but your code is requesting 2,000, you’ll get a
utilization error. The design simply won’t fit on your FPGA, so you’ll need
to think of ways to shrink your code to instantiate fewer flip-flops. A good
rule of thumb is to aim to utilize no more than 80 percent of the available
LUTs or flip-flops. This will make it easier for the place and route process
to get your design to meet timing (more on this later in the chapter), as well
as giving you more flexibility to modify your design or add new features in
the future.
If you can’t get your code to fit in your chosen FPGA, you have a few
options:
1.  Switch to a larger FPGA.
2.  Identify the most resource-intensive modules and rewrite them.
3.  Remove functionality.
Switching to a larger FPGA might be a big deal, but it isn’t always.
Many FPGA vendors offer higher-resource FPGAs in the same physical
package as lower-resource parts. The higher-resource ones often cost a bit
more, so you’ll pay a few extra dollars for those additional resources, but

--- Page 180 ---
the new FPGA won’t take up any extra space on your circuit board. When
you’re selecting an FPGA for a project, it’s a good idea to pick an FPGA
family and package where you have the option to move up in resources, just
in case you end up needing more resources than you expect.
If you can’t switch to a different FPGA, the next step is to analyze your
code to see if it uses more resources than necessary. This isn’t a matter of
low-level logic minimization to shave off a LUT here and a flip-flop there
—the tools do that for you. Rather, there are ways in which you might
inadvertently write code that uses dramatically more resources than you
expect. As an example, I once traced a high utilization error to one single
line of code that was dividing two numbers. As you’ll learn in Chapter 10,
division is often a very resource-intensive operation in an FPGA. I was able
to change the division operation into a memory operation by creating a
table of possible inputs and mapping each input to an output. This used a
block RAM, but it freed up the LUTs and flip-flops used for the division
and allowed the FPGA to pass the synthesis process. Rewriting code with a
focus on lower resource utilization is a skill you’ll sharpen as you gain
more FPGA experience. You can dig into the utilization reports of each
module to figure out which are using the most resources, and then examine
those individually.
Another approach for reducing resource utilization is to have different
inputs share the same FPGA resource. FPGAs often perform the same
operation on multiple input channels. Instead of having dedicated FPGA
resources for each channel, you can use a single implementation, with each
channel taking a turn sharing the hardware. For example, say you have 100
channels that all need a cosine operation performed on them once a second.
You could have channel 1 perform the cosine operation in the first 10 ms,
then allow channel 2 to perform that same cosine operation in the next 10
ms, then channel 3, and so on. This way, the hardware used to perform the
cosine operation can be shared between all the channels and only needs to
be instantiated once, rather than being instantiated 100 times, once for each
channel.
This keeps the overall resource utilization much lower, but it only
works if you have the time available to share a resource. If your timelines
are too tight this approach might not work. Additionally, it does add some
complexity, because now you need to build a component that will negotiate

--- Page 181 ---
the sharing. We refer to the process of sharing a resource as arbitration, and
the component that performs sharing this is often referred to as an arbiter.
Arbiters can be built to share off-FPGA resources as well. For example, we
might have several modules that write data to a MicroSD card. An arbiter
could be designed to allow those modules to share the single MicroSD card
and prevent two modules from trying to write data at the same time, which
would cause data loss or corruption.
If you’ve written very efficient code and you still can’t make it fit on
your FPGA, the only option left is to remove functionality. Maybe there’s a
microcontroller on the same board that can do some of the things that the
FPGA was supposed to do. Or maybe you just need to tell your team that it
won’t work. FPGAs simply have a limit to the amount of stuff they can fit.
Non-synthesizable Code
Many keywords in the Verilog and VHDL languages can’t be translated into
FPGA components by a synthesis tool; they aren’t synthesizable. If you
include any of these keywords in your project code, the synthesis tool will
simply ignore them. It might generate a warning or a note, but not an error.
The tool will move forward with the synthesis process, omitting the non-
synthesizable parts from the final design—and potentially leading to
problems if you were counting on the functionality of the non-synthesizable
code.
It might seem strange that non-synthesizable keywords exist in Verilog
and VHDL, but they’re useful for simulation and testbenches. As we
discussed in Chapter 5, testing your code is critical, and the languages
provide keywords to assist you with this. In fact, you can include non-
synthesizable elements in your project code for simulation purposes and
leave them in when you run the code through synthesis, since the tool will
just ignore them. To be safe, you can explicitly tell the tool not to bother
trying to synthesize these parts of your code by preceding them with
synthesis translate_off and succeeding them with synthesis
translate_on. This technique works for both Verilog and VHDL. For
example, if you’re designing a FIFO, you might want to assert that you’re
never writing to a full FIFO or reading from an empty FIFO when running
simulations of the code. The synthesis translate_off and synthesis

--- Page 182 ---
translate_on directives let you bake those assertions into the actual design
code, without having to worry about maintaining separate code for
simulation and synthesis.
Some of the most common areas where non-synthesizable code arises
include keeping track of time, printing text, working with files, and looping.
We’ll consider those now.
Keeping Track of Time
As you know, there’s no inherent way to measure the passage of time in an
FPGA. Instead, we rely on counting clock cycles. Still, there are parts of
both VHDL and Verilog that refer to time: for example, $time in Verilog or
now in VHDL will provide a current timestamp, while a statement like #100
in Verilog or wait for 100 ns; in VHDL will create a short delay. These
features can be useful for running simulations—for example, to trigger
input signals at precise time intervals—but they aren’t synthesizable.
Printing
One common way to get feedback during the testing process is to send text
to the terminal. In C and Python, for example, you have functions like
printf() and print() that will send text to a console to allow you to see
what’s going on. Similar functions exist in Verilog and VHDL. In Verilog,
you can use $display() to send text to the terminal. In VHDL, it’s a bit
more complicated, and there are a few options. For example, you can use
assert followed by report and severity note to send text to the screen,
as shown here:
assert false report "Hello World" severity note;
These text outputs only work in simulation. They can’t be synthesized,
as the concept of a console or terminal doesn’t exist on a physical FPGA.
Working with Files
In most cases, you can’t synthesize Verilog or VHDL code that involves
reading from or writing to a file. The FPGA has no concept of “files” or any
operating system; you have to build all that stuff yourself if you really need
it. Consider something like storing data from a temperature sensor. You

--- Page 183 ---
might want to read data from the sensor every second and write those
values to a file. This is possible to do in simulation with functions like
$fopen() and $fwrite() in Verilog or file_open() and write() in
VHDL, but in synthesis, forget about it.
One exception here is that some FPGAs allow you to use a text file to
preload (initialize) a block RAM. The specifics of how different vendors
accomplish this vary, so refer to the memory usage guide for your FPGA if
this is something you ever need to do.
Looping
Loop statements can be synthesized, but they probably won’t work the way
you expect. You might be familiar with for loops from a software language
like C or Python: they allow you to write concise code that repeats an
operation a specific number of times one after another. In simulation,
Verilog or VHDL for loops work this way. In synthesizable FPGA code,
however, for loops work differently; they’re used to condense replicated
logic, providing a shorthand for writing several similar statements that are
meant to be executed at the same time, rather than one after another. To
demonstrate, consider this example code for a 4-bit shift register:
Verilog
always @(posedge i_Clk) 
  begin 
    r_Shift[1] <= r_Shift[0]; 
    r_Shift[2] <= r_Shift[1]; 
    r_Shift[3] <= r_Shift[2]; 
  end
VHDL
process (i_Clk) 
begin 
  if rising_edge(i_Clk) then 
    r_Shift(1) <= r_Shift(0); 
    r_Shift(2) <= r_Shift(1); 

--- Page 184 ---
    r_Shift(3) <= r_Shift(2); 
  end if; 
end process;
Each clock cycle, this code shifts data through the r_Shift register.
The value from bit 0 is shifted to bit 1, the value from bit 1 is shifted to bit
2, and so on. The assignment statements that accomplish this follow a
completely predictable pattern: the value of r_Shift[i] is assigned to
r_Shift[i+1]. Synthesizable Verilog and VHDL for loops provide a more
compact way of writing predictable code like this. Using a for loop, we can
rewrite the shift register code as follows:
Verilog
always @(posedge i_Clk) 
  begin 
  ❶ for(i=0; i<3; i=i+1) 
     ❷ r_Shift[i+1] <= r_Shift[i]; 
  end
VHDL
process (i_Clk) 
begin 
  if rising_edge(i_Clk) then 
  ❶ for i in 0 to 2 loop 
     ❷ r_Shift(i+1) <= r_Shift(i); 
     end loop; 
  end if; 
end process;
Here, we declare a for loop with incrementing variable i ❶. With each
iteration, the statement assigning the value from bit i to bit i + 1 ❷ is
executed. For example, on the first iteration of the loop i is 0, so the line
that gets executed is r_Shift[0 + 1] <= r_Shift[0]. The second time

--- Page 185 ---
through i is 1, so we get r_Shift[1 + 1] <= r_Shift[1]. On the third and
final iteration, we get r_Shift[2 + 1] <= r_Shift[2].
The important thing to realize here is that this all happens in one clock
cycle. In effect, all iterations of the loop execute simultaneously, just as the
three separate assignment statements in the version without the for loop
will execute simultaneously. The two versions do exactly the same thing
(and will synthesize to the exact same FPGA resources), except the for
loop version is written in a more compact way.
A common mistake that beginners make is putting a for loop inside a
clocked always or process block and expecting each iteration of the loop to
take one clock cycle. Take the following snippet of C code, for example:
for (i=0; i<10; i++) 
  data[i] = data[i] + 1;
Here we have an array, data, and we’re incrementing every value
inside the array by 1 using a for loop. (We’re assuming here that data has
10 items.) If you try to do the same thing using a Verilog or VHDL for
loop, expecting that it will take 10 clock cycles to run, you’ll be very
confused, since the loop will actually be executed in a single clock cycle. If
you do want to run a sequence like this over a number of clock cycles, you
can update the values inside an if statement that checks for an index value
to exceed a certain threshold, like this:
Verilog
always @(posedge i_Clk) 
  begin 
  ❶ if (r_Index < 10) 
      begin 
      ❷ r_Data[r_Index] <= r_Data[r_Index] + 1; 
      ❸ r_Index         <= r_Index + 1; 
      end 
  end

--- Page 186 ---
VHDL
process (i_Clk) 
begin 
  if rising_edge(i_Clk) then 
  ❶ if r_Index < 10 then 
     ❷ r_Data(r_Index) <= r_Data(r_Index) + 1; 
     ❸ r_Index         <= r_Index + 1; 
     end if; 
  end if; 
end process;
Here, we use an if statement to replicate the check that stops the for
loop ❶. In this case, we want the operation to run 10 times, or until
r_Index is no longer less than 10. (We’re assuming that the index value
starts at 0, although this isn’t shown in the code.) Next, we increment a
value in r_Data, using r_Index to access the correct item in the array ❷.
Finally, we increment r_Index ❸, which will then be used on the next
clock cycle to update the next value in the array. In total, this will take 10
clock cycles to execute. In general, when trying to write code that iterates
like a conventional for loop, usually all you need to do is add a counter
signal (like r_Index) and monitor it with an if statement, as you’ve seen
here.
Until you’re very confident in how FPGA for loops work, I
recommend avoiding them in any synthesizable code.
Place and Route
Place and route is the process of taking your synthesized design and
mapping it to physical locations on your specific FPGA. The place and
route tool decides exactly which LUTs, flip-flops, and block RAMs (and
other components we haven’t talked about yet) in your FPGA will be used,
and wires them all together. At the end of the process, you get a file that can
be loaded onto the FPGA. As you’ve seen, actually programming the FPGA
using this file is usually a separate step.

--- Page 187 ---
Place and route, as the name implies, is in fact two processes: the
placement of the synthesized design into your FPGA, and then the routing
of that design using physical wires to connect everything together. The
routing process is often the most time-consuming step in the build process,
especially for large designs. On a single computer, it can take several hours
to route a complicated FPGA. This is one of the main reasons why
simulations are critical. You may only get a few chances a day to test your
design on an actual FPGA because the build process takes so long, so it’s
best to iron out as many problems as you can through simulation before
starting this process.
Constraints
To run the place and route process, you need to constrain at least two
aspects of your design: the pins and the clock(s). There are other elements
that can be constrained as well—input/output delays, specific routing, and
more—but these two are the most fundamental.
The pin constraints tell the place and route tool which signals in the
Verilog or VHDL code are mapped to which physical pins on the FPGA.
When you’re working with your circuit board, you’ll need to look at the
PCB schematic to know which FPGA pins connect to switches, which pins
connect to LEDs, and so on. This is an example of a situation in which
having some knowledge of how to read schematics is helpful for an FPGA
designer.
The clock constraints tell the tool about the clock frequency used to
drive your FPGA (or frequencies, if you have multiple clock domains, as
we’ll discuss later in the chapter). Clock constraints are fundamental to the
routing process, in particular, since there are physical limitations on how far
a signal can travel and how much can be done to it within a single clock
period. When the place and route process finishes, it will generate a timing
report that takes the clock constraints into account. If everything is sure to
work under the specified clock constraints, the design is said to meet
timing, and the report will show this. If, however, the tool determines that
the clock constraints may be too tight for what you’ve designed, the tool
will display timing errors in your timing report. As you’ll see next, timing
errors are really bad!

--- Page 188 ---
Timing Errors
Timing errors occur when your design and clock constraints are asking for
the FPGA components and wires to work at a faster pace than the place and
route tool can guarantee they can handle. This means your FPGA might not
work as desired. I say might because it’s possible that it will work perfectly,
despite the timing errors—there’s no way to know for sure ahead of time.
This is in part because an FPGA’s performance is affected by its operating
conditions; it can vary, for example, based on changes in voltage and
temperature. It might sound odd that your FPGA will perform slightly
differently at cold temperatures versus hot temperatures, but that’s the
reality.
It’s the job of the place and route tool to stress your design and analyze
how it will perform in all possible operating conditions, including worst-
case scenarios. If the design can run at your specified clock frequency
across all those conditions, the tool can guarantee that the FPGA will meet
timing; otherwise, it will report timing errors. The tools won’t stop you
from programming your FPGA with a design that contains timing errors.
Maybe they should, but they don’t. Again, this is because it’s uncertain
whether or how the timing errors will manifest. The tools don’t know if
you’ll be running your design on your desk at room temperature, or on a
satellite in the vacuum of space. In either case, the design might work, or it
might fail, or it might appear to work perfectly for five minutes before
manifesting a small error. Timing errors can produce strange behavior.
I once was brought onto an FPGA design for a camera product that was
riddled with timing errors that the previous designer hadn’t bothered to fix.
Instead, they had built the design, looked at the report and seen that it
contained dozens of timing errors, and programmed the FPGA anyway.
They then tested it at their desk to see if it worked. They ran it for a few
minutes and didn’t run into any problems, so they decided it was fine and
integrated it into the product. Then the product started to fail in odd ways.
Pixels would blink, or the scene would flicker, but only occasionally, so the
user might ignore it. Even stranger, only some products would have issues,
and the severity of the problem varied from unit to unit.
Once someone realized how bad the issue was, a serious effort was
made to fix the timing errors and produce an FPGA design that would work

--- Page 189 ---
100 percent of the time. The FPGA tools had been trying to tell the original
designer that there might be a problem. Not a functional problem—the code
was theoretically OK as written—but there was a chance that it wouldn’t
work correctly with the given clock constraints under all operating
conditions. The moral of this story is that when an FPGA acts in weird
ways, it’s very possible that you haven’t looked closely at your timing
report (or, as was the case with my prior coworker, ignored it completely!).
At their root, timing errors arise because FPGAs are subject to physical
limitations. Up to this point, we’ve been working in an ideal world. We’ve
imaged that all signals can travel instantly from their source to their
destination, and that all flip-flops can change their output instantly when
they see a rising clock edge. We’ve been assuming that if the code is
correct, then everything will just work.
Welcome to reality! In the real world, nothing is truly instantaneous,
and components behave in unpredictable ways if they’re asked to work too
quickly. Three physical limitations that contribute to FPGA timing errors
are setup time, hold time, and propagation delay. Let’s take a quick look at
these, and then we’ll explore how to fix timing errors.
Setup and Hold Time
Setup time is the amount of time for which the input to a flip-flop is
required to be stable before a clock edge in order for the flip-flop to
accurately register the input data to its output on that clock edge. Hold time
is the amount of time for which the input must be stable after a clock edge
in order for the flip-flop to reliably hold its current output value until the
next clock edge. This is illustrated in Figure 7-1.
Figure 7-1: Setup (tsu) and hold (th) time

--- Page 190 ---
We expect the flip-flop to register some data at the rising clock edge
shown in the middle of the figure. The time immediately before the rising
edge is the setup time, labeled tsu. The time immediately after the rising
edge is the hold time, labeled th. If the data input to the flip-flop changes
outside the setup and hold window, then everything works fine. However,
bad things can happen if your data input changes during the setup and hold
window. Specifically, the flip-flop can become metastable, entering a state
where its output is unstable: it could be a 1, it could be a 0, or it could even
be somewhere in between. Figure 7-2 shows an example of a metastable
event.
Figure 7-2: A metastable condition
Here we see a clock signal and the input and output signals of a flip-
flop. The shaded area of the input signal labeled tsu represents the flip-flop’s
setup time, immediately before the rising clock edge. As you can see, the
data input to the flip-flop transitions from low to high during the setup
window. This causes the output to be metastable for some amount of time,
after which it settles out to either a 0 or a 1.
To understand metastability, people often use the analogy of a ball
balanced on top of a hill, as shown in Figure 7-3. The ball could roll down
the hill either to the left or to the right, and there’s no predicting which way
it’ll go. A random gust of wind could blow it one way or the other. If it rolls
down to the left, that’s state 0, and if it rolls to the right, that’s state 1. When

--- Page 191 ---
the output of a flip-flop is in a metastable state, it’s a ball teetering on a hill,
trying to find a more stable state to rest into.
Figure 7-3: A metastable state
In addition to not knowing which way the ball will roll, there’s also no
way to tell how long it will take for the ball to roll down the hill. It might
fall quickly, or it might take a while. This is known as the metastable
resolution time, or the time it takes for a metastable situation to become
stable.
There’s no way to know ahead of time which state the output will settle
on. Sometimes it might be a 0, while other times when this situation occurs
it might be a 1. Assuming the data input doesn’t change again, the output
will definitely be a 1 at the next rising clock edge, when the flip-flop again
registers its input to its output. In the meantime, however, for the duration
of this one clock cycle, there’s no telling what the output will be, and this is
not desired behavior for an FPGA.
If your design has timing errors, your FPGA tools are telling you that
one or more flip-flops could have their setup and hold windows violated,
which could put them in a metastable state. Metastability is probabilistic,
however, so there’s no guarantee that it will actually occur. There’s a chance
that your design will be completely fine despite the reported timing errors,
but there’s also a chance that the FPGA will exhibit strange and
unpredictable behavior. In FPGA design we like things to be predictable, so
even the remote possibility of metastability occurring is a problem.
Metastable conditions can occur when either the setup or the hold time
is violated, but setup and hold time are physical properties of your FPGA
and are beyond your control. You can’t modify your design in a way that
will change the setup or hold time. In order to resolve a timing error, you

--- Page 192 ---
must focus your efforts on the other main physical limitation of FPGAs:
propagation delay.
Propagation Delay
Propagation delay is the amount of time it takes for a signal to travel from a
source to a destination. As mentioned previously, in the real world this is
not instantaneous: it takes some time, albeit a very small amount, for
voltage changes to propagate down a wire. A decent rule of thumb is that
signals can travel along a wire at a rate of 1 foot per nanosecond. That may
not sound like much of a delay, but consider that there are thousands of tiny
wires running everywhere inside your FPGA. When you add up the
physical length of the wires the total can be amazingly long, considering
how small the chips are. This can lead to a significant propagation delay as
signals travel from one flip-flop to another.
Additionally, every piece of logic that a signal goes through—for
example, a LUT representing an AND gate—adds some extra time to the
propagation delay, since these logic operations aren’t perfectly
instantaneous either. This concept is illustrated in Figure 7-4.
Figure 7-4: Propagation delay between two flip-flops
Here we have two flip-flops, with data traveling from the output of one
flip-flop to the input of the other. The logic and routing in between might
consist of wires and/or LUTs. This is where the propagation delay happens,
and the more stuff there is in that cloud—for example, longer wires or more
LUTs—the longer it will take for the output of flip-flop 1 to reach the input
of flip-flop 2. If the propagation delay is too long, the design won’t be able
to meet timing at the requested clock constraint.

--- Page 193 ---
The issue here is that both flip-flops are driven by the same clock. If
flip-flop 1 sees a change on its input and registers that change to its output
at one rising clock edge, we’d expect flip-flop 2 to see that change and
register it at the next rising clock edge. The signal only has a single clock
period to propagate from flip-flop 1 to flip-flop 2. If the signal can safely
arrive within that time, the design will work. But if the logic and routing in
between the flip-flops create too long of a propagation delay, we’ll get a
timing error. There might be many thousands of flip-flops in the FPGA
design, and it’s the responsibility of the place and route tool to analyze
every single path and show us the worst offenders from a timing
perspective.
In fact, the signal has less than the length of a single clock period to
propagate from flip-flop 1 to flip-flop 2, since we also need to take the
setup time into account. The propagation delay may be less than the clock
period, but as we’ve just seen, if the signal arrives at flip-flop 2 within its
setup window, the output of flip-flop 2 will be uncertain. This leads to the
following formula for calculating the clock period needed for a design to
function properly:
tclk(min) = tsu + tp
Here, tclk(min) is the minimum clock period required for the design to
work without timing errors, tsu is the setup time, and tp is the worst
propagation delay the design will experience between two flip-flops. As an
example, say all of the flip-flops on the FPGA have a fixed setup time of 2
ns and our design will create a propagation delay of up to 10 ns (in the
worst case) between two particular flip-flops. Our formula tells us that our
clock needs to have a period of at least 2 + 10 = 12 ns, which works out to a
frequency of 83.3 MHz. We could easily run the design with a slower clock
than that if we wanted, in which case the period would be even longer, but
if we wanted to run the FPGA faster, say at 100 MHz, then the clock period
would be too short and we would get timing errors.
How to Fix Timing Errors
As you’ve just seen, the clock period, setup time, and propagation delay are
the main factors contributing to timing errors. Since the setup time is fixed,
there are two basic ways to solve timing errors:

--- Page 194 ---
Slow down the clock frequency.
Reduce the propagation delay by breaking up the logic into stages.
Slowing down your clock frequency might seem like the most obvious
choice. If you’re able to run your FPGA slower, your timing will improve.
However, it’s unlikely that you’ll be able to change your clock frequency
freely; it’s usually set in stone for some particular reason, such as if you’re
interfacing to a peripheral that needs to run at a specific frequency. Chances
are you won’t be able to slow the clock down just to relax timing.
Breaking up your logic into stages, also known as pipelining, is the
more robust (and often the only) option. If you do less “stuff” between any
two flip-flops, the propagation delay will decrease, and it will be easier for
your design to meet timing. Figure 7-5 illustrates how this works.
Figure 7-5: Reducing the propagation delay through pipelining
In the top half of the figure, we have a large amount of logic between
two flip-flops—so much that the design has too long of a propagation delay
and fails timing. The solution, shown in the bottom half of the figure, is to
break up the logic into two stages, with another flip-flop added in between.
This way, half of the logic can be done between flip-flops 1 and 2, and the
other half between flip-flops 2 and 3. The propagation delay for each of
these stages should be short enough that the stages can be accomplished in a
single clock cycle, and overall the tools will have two clock cycles to do
what we were originally trying to do in one clock cycle.
When you break up a single stage in your design into multiple stages
like this, you’re creating a pipeline of operations, with a flip-flop between

--- Page 195 ---
each stage to synchronize the operations with the clock. A well-pipelined
design will have a much better chance at meeting timing at high clock
frequencies. To demonstrate, let’s consider an example of some code that
has poor timing, and then look at how to pipeline the logic to avoid timing
errors. First, here’s the problematic code:
Verilog
module timing_error 
  (input            i_Clk, 
  input [7:0]       i_Data, 
  output reg [15:0] o_Data); 
  reg [7:0] r0_Data = 0; 
  always @(posedge i_Clk) 
  begin 
     r0_Data <= i_Data; 
  ❶ o_Data  <= ((r0_Data / 3) + 1) * 5; 
  end 
endmodule
VHDL
library ieee; 
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all; 
use ieee.numeric_std.all; 
entity timing_error is 
  port ( 
    i_Clk  : in std_logic; 
    i_Data : in unsigned(7 downto 0); 
    o_Data : out unsigned(15 downto 0)); 
end entity timing_error; 
architecture RTL of timing_error is 
  signal r0_Data : unsigned(7 downto 0); 
begin 
  process (i_Clk) is 
  begin 
    if rising_edge(i_Clk) then 
       r0_Data <= i_Data; 

--- Page 196 ---
    ❶ o_Data <= ((r0_Data / 3) + 1) * 5; 
    end if; 
  end process; 
end RTL;
I can’t imagine why anyone would write code like this, but it will do
for demonstration purposes. The problem arises when we perform some
mathematical operations—division, addition, and multiplication—on the
value of r0_Data ❶. All three of these operations are performed on the
same line, inside a synchronous always or process block, which means
they must occur within one clock cycle. To do all that math, the output of
the 8-bit-wide register r0_Data will pass through a bunch of LUTs, then
into the inputs of the flip-flops for o_Data, all within one clock cycle. This
puts us firmly in the upper half of Figure 7-5: the mathematical operations
require a lot of logic and will create a considerable propagation delay.
Let’s see what happens when we run this code through place and route
with a 100 MHz clock constraint. Here’s the resulting timing report:
--snip-- 
4.1::Critical Path Report for i_Clk 
*********************************** 
Clock: i_Clk 
❶ Frequency: 89.17 MHz | Target: 100.00 MHz 
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ 
❷ Path Begin : r0_Data_fast_5_LC_1_9_5/lcout 
❸ Path End : o_DataZ0Z_7_LC_5_12_5/in3 
Capture Clock : o_DataZ0Z_7_LC_5_12_5/clk 
Setup Constraint : 10000p 
❹ Path slack : -1215p 
--snip--
We can see that we tried to drive the clock to 100 MHz, but the place
and route tool can only guarantee timing up to 89.17 MHz ❶. When the
target frequency is higher than the maximum achievable frequency, we’ll
have timing errors. The timing report then tells us about the worst-offending
paths in the design, albeit a little cryptically. First, the report identifies the

--- Page 197 ---
beginning ❷ and end ❸ of each problematic path. Notice that r0_Data is in
the signal name of Path Begin and o_Data is in the signal name of Path
End, but there’s a bunch of extra stuff there too. The tools add this
additional information to identify the exact locations of the components in
question within the FPGA. The downside is that the information isn’t very
human-readable, but since the core signal names have persisted, we can see
that the path from r0_Data to o_Data is the failing path. Further, the report
tells us exactly how much the path is failing by ❹. The path slack is the
amount of wiggle room the path has available to meet timing, and the fact
that it’s negative is telling us we’re too slow; we need an additional 1,215
picoseconds (ps), or 1.215 ns, to remove this timing error. That makes
sense, since the difference in clock period between 89.17 MHz and 100
MHz is 1,215 ps.
Now that we’ve identified the failing path, we can pipeline the path’s
logic by breaking up the math operations with some flip-flops. Here’s what
that might look like:
Verilog
module timing_error 
  (input            i_Clk, 
  input [7:0]       i_Data, 
  output reg [15:0] o_Data); 
  reg [7:0] r0_Data, r1_Data, r2_Data = 0; 
  always @(posedge i_Clk) 
  begin 
     r0_Data <= i_Data; 
  ❶ r1_Data <= r0_Data / 3; 
  ❷ r2_Data <= r1_Data + 1; 
  ❸ o_Data  <= r2_Data * 5; 
  end 
endmodule
VHDL

--- Page 198 ---
library ieee; 
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all; 
use ieee.numeric_std.all; 
entity timing_error is 
  port ( 
    i_Clk  : in  std_logic; 
    i_Data : in  unsigned(7 downto 0); 
    o_Data : out unsigned(15 downto 0)); 
end entity timing_error; 
architecture RTL of timing_error is 
  signal r0_Data, r1_Data, r2_Data : unsigned(7 downto 0); 
begin 
  process (i_Clk) is 
  begin 
    if rising_edge(i_Clk) then 
       r0_Data <= i_Data; 
    ❶ r1_Data <= r0_Data / 3; 
    ❷ r2_Data <= r1_Data + 1; 
    ❸ o_Data  <= r2_Data * 5; 
    end if; 
  end process; 
end RTL;
We’ve taken what used to be a single line of code and broken it up into
three lines. First, we perform just the division operation and write the result
to an intermediary signal, r1_Data ❶. Then we perform the addition
operation on r1_Data and assign the result to r2_Data ❷, and finally we
perform the multiplication operation on r2_Data and assign the result to our
original output, o_Data ❸. We’ve introduced new signals to distribute the
large math operation that was occurring in a single clock cycle across
multiple clock cycles. This should reduce the propagation delay. Indeed, if
we run the new, pipelined design through place and route, we’ll get the
following timing report:
--snip-- 
4.1::Critical Path Report for i_Clk 
*********************************** 

--- Page 199 ---
Clock: i_Clk 
Frequency: 110.87 MHz | Target: 100.00 MHz 
--snip--
Now we’re meeting timing: the place and route tool can guarantee
performance up to a clock frequency of 110.87 MHz, when the target
frequency was 100 MHz. As you’ve seen, fixing the timing errors involved
a bit of trade-off. We had to add flip-flops into our design to break up the
logic into stages, so our design now uses more FPGA resources than before.
Additionally, the math operation that was meant to take a single clock cycle
now takes three clock cycles. However, keep in mind that our module can
still take in new input values at a rate of 100 MHz and spit out calculated
output values at a rate of 100 MHz, as we intended with the original design;
it’s only the first result to come out of the pipeline that will take two
additional clock cycles, due to the added flip-flops.
Unexpected Timing Errors
You can fix most timing errors by pipelining your design to cut down on
propagation delay and avoid metastable conditions. However, place and
route tools can’t anticipate every timing error. These tools aren’t perfect;
they can only analyze your design based on the information they have. Even
if you don’t see any errors in your timing report, there are two situations
where metastable conditions may still occur that the place and route tool
can’t reliably predict:
When sampling a signal asynchronous to the FPGA clock
When crossing clock domains
Sampling a signal asynchronous to the FPGA clock is very common
when you have an external signal that serves as input to your FPGA. The
input signal will go directly to the input of a flip-flop in your design, but it
will be asynchronous, meaning it isn’t coordinated by your main FPGA
clock. For example, think about someone pushing a button. That button
press could come at any time, so if it happens to occur during the setup time
of the flip-flop the button is wired to, then that flip-flop will be in a
metastable state. The place and route tool doesn’t know anything about this
potential issue, so it won’t flag it as a timing error. But you, dear FPGA

--- Page 200 ---
designer, can anticipate and fix the problem. The solution is to double-flop
the input data by passing it through an extra flip-flop, as shown in Figure 7-
6.
Figure 7-6: Double-flopping to fix metastability
In this figure, a signal that’s asynchronous to the clock is being
sampled by the first flip-flop. Since we can’t guarantee the timing of this
input relative to the clock, it might violate setup or hold times and create a
metastable condition at the output of the first flip-flop. As discussed
previously, though, the occurrence of a metastable condition is
probabilistic. It’s also quite rare. Even if the first flip-flop enters a
metastable state, it’s highly unlikely that the second flip-flop will enter one
too. In fact, adding a second flip-flop in series with the first one reduces the
likelihood of a metastable condition at the output to effectively zero.
(Adding a third flip-flop in series would decrease the likelihood even more,
but FPGA experts have concluded that two flip-flops in series is enough.)
We can now use the stable signal internal to our design and be confident
that we won’t see strange behavior.
The other situation where you still may encounter a metastable state is
when you cross clock domains in your FPGA. This is a big topic that
warrants its own section.
Crossing Clock Domains
As I’ve mentioned, it’s possible to have multiple clock domains inside a
single FPGA, with different clocks driving different parts of the design. You
might need a camera interface running at 25.725 MHz and an HDMI
interface running at 148.5 MHz, for example. If you wanted to send the data
from the camera out to the HDMI for visualization on a monitor, that data
would have to cross clock domains, moving from the part of the design
controlled by a 25.725 MHz clock to the part of the design controlled by a

--- Page 201 ---
148.5 MHz clock. However, there’s no way to guarantee the alignment
between these clock domains; they can drift apart and back together. Even if
the clocks have a seemingly predictable relationship, like a 50 MHz clock
and a 100 MHz clock, you can’t be sure that the clocks started at the same
time.
NOTE
The exception is if you’re using an FPGA component called a phase-locked
loop (PLL), which can generate unique clock frequencies and establish
relationships between them. The PLL is discussed in detail in Chapter 9.
The bottom line is that when you have clock domains that are
asynchronous to each other, signals crossing between domains might
produce metastable states within some flip-flops. In this section, we’ll look
at how to cross clock domains safely, from slower to faster and vice versa,
and avoid metastability. We’ll also discuss how to use a FIFO to send large
amounts of data across clock domains.
Crossing from Slower to Faster
The simplest situation to handle is going from a slower clock domain to a
faster clock domain. To avoid problems, all you need to do is double-flop
the data when it enters the faster domain, as shown in Figure 7-7. This is the
same approach we took to fix the external asynchronous signal, since it’s
fundamentally the same issue: the signal from the slower clock domain is
asynchronous to the faster clock domain that it’s entering.
Figure 7-7: Crossing from a slower to a faster clock domain

--- Page 202 ---
In Figure 7-7, we have three flip-flops in series. The first is driven by a
slower clock, while the others are driven by a faster clock. The slower clock
is your source clock domain, and the faster clock is your destination clock
domain. Since the clocks are asynchronous to each other, we can’t
guarantee that data coming from the slower clock domain won’t violate the
setup or hold times of the middle flip-flop (the first one in the faster clock
domain) and trigger a metastable state. However, we know that the output
of the second of these flip-flops will be stable, allowing the data to be used
in the faster clock domain. Let’s look at how this design could be
implemented in code:
Verilog
always @(posedge i_Fast_Clk) 
  begin 
  ❶ r1_Data <= i_Slow_Data; 
  ❷ r2_Data <= r1_Data;
  end
VHDL
process (i_Fast_Clk) is 
begin 
  if rising_edge(i_Fast_Clk) then 
  ❶ r1_Data <= i_Slow_Data; 
  ❷ r2_Data <= r1_Data;
  end if; 
end process;
The code consists of an always or process block running off the
positive edges of the faster clock. First, the signal i_Slow_Data (coming
from the slower domain) enters flip-flop r1_Data ❶. The output of this flip-
flop could be metastable if a change in i_Slow_Data violates its setup or
hold time, but we resolve this metastable condition by double-flopping the
data, passing it through a second flip-flop, r2_Data ❷. At this point, we

--- Page 203 ---
have stable data that we can use in the faster clock domain without having
to worry about metastable conditions.
One word of caution about writing code for an FPGA that uses two
clock domains: be very careful to keep the code for the two domains
separate. Keep all of your slower signals in one always or process block,
clearly separated from the faster signals in a different always or process
block (the exception is signals crossing between domains). In fact, I find it
helpful to put code that runs in different clock domains in completely
different files, just to be sure I’m not mixing and matching signals.
Crossing from Faster to Slower
Going from a faster clock domain to a slower one is more complicated than
the other way around, since the data inside the faster clock domain could
easily change before the slower clock domain even sees it. For example,
consider a pulse that occurs for one clock cycle in a 100 MHz clock
domain, that you’re trying to detect in a 25 MHz clock domain. There’s a
good chance that you’ll never see this pulse, as illustrated in Figure 7-8.
Figure 7-8: A failed crossing from a faster to a slower clock domain
This figure shows two cycles of the 25 MHz clock. After the clock’s
first rising edge but before its second rising edge, the 100 MHz pulse comes
and goes, so fast that the 25 MHz clock never “sees” and registers it. This is
because the pulse doesn’t occur during the rising edge of the 25 MHz clock.
Therefore, the pulse will go completely unnoticed in the 25 MHz clock
domain. The solution to this problem is to stretch out any signals from the
faster clock domain that are meant to enter the slower clock domain, until

--- Page 204 ---
they’re long enough to guarantee that they’ll be noticed. Figure 7-9 shows
how this works.
Figure 7-9: A successful crossing from a faster to a slower clock domain
Looking at the new waveform of the 100 MHz pulse, we can see that
it’s been stretched from a single cycle of the 100 MHz clock to multiple
clock cycles, ensuring that a rising edge in the 25 MHz clock domain will
see the pulse. As a general rule, pulses passing from a faster clock domain
to a slower clock domain should be stretched to last at least two clock
cycles in the slower domain. This way, even if the pulse violates the setup
and hold time of the first clock cycle in the slower domain and triggers a
metastable state, it will be stable at the second clock cycle. In our example,
we should stretch out the 100 MHz pulse to at least eight 100 MHz clock
cycles, the equivalent of two 25 MHz clock cycles. You can stretch the
signals even longer if you like.
Using a FIFO
In the previous examples we looked at how to transmit a simple pulse
across clock domains. But what if you want to send a lot of data between
two clock domains, such as when sending camera data to an HDMI
interface? In this case, the most common method is to use a FIFO. You
write data to the FIFO according to one clock and read it out according to
the other. Of course, the key requirement here is that the FIFO must support
two different clock frequencies, whereas the FIFO we looked at in Chapter
6 only supported one clock.
To cross clock domains with a FIFO, you’ll likely need to use a
primitive, a dedicated FPGA component designed by the manufacturer

--- Page 205 ---
specifically for your exact FPGA. For example, Intel will have prewritten
FIFO primitives that run in different clock domains, but the Verilog or
VHDL code to create them will differ from that of AMD’s FIFO primitives.
(We’ll explore more examples of primitives in Chapter 9.)
When using FIFOs, always remember not to violate the two cardinal
rules: don’t read from an empty FIFO, and don’t write to a full FIFO. Many
FIFO primitives provide a count of the number of words (elements) in the
FIFO as an output, but I don’t recommend relying on it. Instead, I suggest
making heavy use of the AF and AE (almost full and almost empty) flags,
introduced in “Input and Output Signals” on page 117. It’s best to read from
and write to the FIFO in bursts of a fixed size, especially when crossing
clock domains, and to use that burst size to determine your AF and AE
threshold levels. Set your AE level equal to your fixed burst size, and set
your AF level equal to the FIFO depth minus your burst size. With this
setup, you can guarantee that you’ll never break the two key rules. The AF
flag can throttle the write clock interface by ensuring that if the FIFO
doesn’t have enough room for another burst, writes will be disabled.
Likewise, the AE flag can throttle the read clock interface by ensuring that
if the FIFO doesn’t have a complete burst in it, the read side will not try to
pull data out of the FIFO.
Let’s explore an example. Consider a case where we have some module
writing data to a FIFO at 33 MHz. On the read side, we’re dumping the data
as quickly as possible to external memory. Let’s say the read clock
frequency is 110 MHz. In this situation, because the read clock is much
faster than the write clock, the read side will be idle much of the time, even
if the writes are happening at every clock cycle. To avoid reading from an
empty FIFO, you can set the AE flag to some number that indicates to your
read code that there’s a burst of data ready to be read. If you set it to 50
words, for example, once the FIFO has 50 words inside it the AE flag will
change from a 1 to a 0, which will trigger some logic on the read side to
drain exactly 50 words from the FIFO.
This is often how crossing clock domains gets implemented. If you’re
using your AE/AF flags, you’re doing it correctly. Try not to rely on the
flags that tell you when the FIFO is completely full or empty, and definitely
don’t use the counter that some FIFOs support.

--- Page 206 ---
Addressing Timing Errors
When running a design with multiple clock domains through the place and
route process, you’ll need to include the frequencies of each clock in your
clock constraints. The place and route tool will analyze data sent and
received between these clock interfaces and report on any timing errors it
observes. As you’ve seen, this is the tool telling you that you’re likely to
encounter situations where setup and hold times will be violated, which
could trigger metastable conditions.
Let’s assume you’ve handled the clock domain crossings well, using
the double-flopping, data stretching, and FIFO methods discussed in the
previous sections. You’re aware of the possibility of the metastable states,
and you’ve prepared for them. The tool doesn’t know about the steps
you’ve taken, though. It’s unable to see that you’re a smart FPGA designer
and that you’ve got it all under control. To suppress the errors in your
timing report, you’ll need to create some unique timing constraints that
relax the tools and tell them that you’re a competent designer and that you
understand that your design may be metastable. Exactly how to create these
timing constraints is beyond the scope of this book, as each FPGA vendor
has its own unique style.
You should always aim to have no timing errors in your design.
However, as an FPGA designer, you’ll inevitably experience situations
where you cross clock domains. You need to clearly understand the
common pitfalls that can occur in these situations. If the crossing is simple
enough, you can just double-flop the data or perform data stretching. For
many situations, you’ll likely need to use a FIFO that supports two clocks,
one for reading and one for writing. When structuring your code that
handles crossing clock domains, be very careful not to mix and match
signals from both clock domains.
Summary
In this chapter we’ve explored the FPGA build process in detail, looking
closely at what happens to your FPGA code when it is synthesized and run
through place and route. You’ve learned about different categories of non-
synthesizable code, and in particular seen how for loops synthesize
differently than you may expect. While examining the place and route

--- Page 207 ---
process, you learned about some of the physical limitations of FPGAs and
saw how they can lead to timing errors. Finally, you learned some strategies
for fixing timing errors, including errors that can arise when crossing clock
domains. With this knowledge, you’ll be able to write your Verilog or
VHDL code more confidently, and you’ll be able to address common issues
that arise during the build process.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 208 ---
8
THE STATE MACHINE
A state machine is a model for
controlling a sequence of actions. In a
state machine, a task is broken down into a series of
stages, or states. The system flows through these
states along prescribed routes, transitioning from one
state to another based on inputs or other triggers.
State machines are widely used to organize the
operations in an FPGA, so understanding how they
work is crucial to developing sophisticated FPGA
designs.
Some common examples of state machines control behaviors in
elevators, traffic lights, and vending machines. Each of these devices can
only be in one unique state at any given time and can perform different
actions as a result of inputs. In the case of an elevator, for example, the
elevator car remains on its current floor until someone pushes a button to
request a ride. The floor that the elevator is on is its state, and pushing a
button is the input that triggers a change in that state. In the case of a traffic
light, the possible states are red, yellow, and green, and the light changes
based on some kind of input—perhaps a timer or a motion sensor. Certain

--- Page 209 ---
transitions are possible, such as going from red to green or from yellow to
red, while other transitions, such as yellow to green, are not.
Within an FPGA, you might have several state machines performing
different independent tasks, all running simultaneously. You might have one
state machine that initializes an LPDDR memory, another that receives data
from an external sensor, and a third for communicating with an external
microcontroller, for example. And since an FPGA is a parallel device, these
state machines will all be running in parallel, with each state machine
coordinating its own complicated series of actions.
In this chapter, you’ll learn the basic concepts behind state machines
and see how to design them with Verilog and VHDL. You’ll learn strategies
for keeping your state machines clear and concise, which reduces the
likelihood of bugs in your designs. Finally, you’ll gain hands-on experience
with state machines by designing a Simon-style memory game for your
development board.
States, Transitions, and Events
State machines revolve around three interrelated concepts: states,
transitions, and events. A state describes the status of a system when it’s
waiting to execute a transition. Going back to the elevator example, if a
button is never pressed, the elevator will simply remain in its current state;
that is, waiting on its current floor. A state machine can only ever be in one
state at a time (an elevator can’t be on two floors at once), and there are
only so many possible states that it can be in (we haven’t yet figured out
how to build a building with an infinite number of floors). For this reason,
state machines are also called finite state machines (FSMs).
A transition is the action of moving from one state to another. For an
elevator, that would include opening and closing the doors, running a motor
to raise or lower the car, and so on. Transitions are usually caused by
events, which can include inputs like a button press or a timer expiring.
Transitions between states can also occur without an external event, which
would be an internal transition. The same event might trigger a different
transition, depending on the current state of the state machine. For example,
pushing the 5 button will make an elevator go down if it’s on the tenth floor,

--- Page 210 ---
or go up if it’s on the first floor. The elevator’s next state is influenced by
both its current state and the input event.
Designing a state machine entails determining all the possible states,
planning out the transitions between the states, and identifying the events
that can trigger those transitions. The easiest way to do this is to draw a
diagram. To demonstrate, let’s explore an example of a simple state
machine, one that controls a coin-operated turnstile like you might use to
enter a subway station. Figure 8-1 shows a diagram of this state machine.
Figure 8-1: A state machine for a turnstile
In a state machine diagram, states are traditionally represented as
labeled circles, transitions are represented as arrows between circles, and
events are represented as text alongside the transitions they trigger. Our
turnstile state machine has two possible states: Locked and Unlocked. The
black dot beneath the Locked state indicates that Locked is the initial state
of the machine. This is where the state machine will go when power is first
applied, or if the user hits a reset button.
Let’s consider what happens once we’re in the Locked state. There are
two possible events that can trigger a transition: pushing on the turnstile, or
depositing a coin. A Push event causes a transition from Locked back to
Locked, represented by the arrow on the left of the diagram. In this case, the
state machine stays in the Locked state. It’s not until a user deposits a coin
(the Coin event) that we transition to the Unlocked state. At this point, if the
user pushes the turnstile, it will let them through, then transition back to the
Locked state for the next user. Finally, notice that if a user deposits a coin
into a system that’s already Unlocked, it transitions back into the Unlocked
state.
It may seem trivial to define the behavior of a subway turnstile this
way, but it’s good practice for getting to know how state machines are

--- Page 211 ---
organized and represented. For systems that have a large sequence of states,
events, and transitions, explicitly documenting the state machine is critical
for generating the desired behavior. Even something as simple as a
calculator can require a surprisingly complex state machine.
Implementing a State Machine
Let’s look at how to implement our basic subway turnstile state machine in
an FPGA using Verilog or VHDL. We’ll consider two common approaches:
the first uses two always or process blocks, while the second uses just one.
It’s important to understand both of these approaches to implementing a
state machine, since they’re both widely used. However, as you’ll see, there
are reasons to prefer the latter approach.
Using Two always or process Blocks
Using two always or process blocks is a more traditional way of
implementing a state machine. Historically, FPGA synthesis tools weren’t
very good. They could make mistakes when trying to synthesize state
machines. The two-block approach was devised to get around these
limitations. One always or process block controls the synchronous logic,
using a register to keep track of the current state. The other always or
process block controls the combinational logic; it looks for transition-
triggering events and determines what the next state should be. Figure 8-2
illustrates this arrangement.
Figure 8-2: A block diagram of a state machine with two always or process blocks
Notice that the next state logic in this diagram doesn’t have a clock as
an input. It determines the next state immediately, based on the current state
and any inputs (events). Only the current state register has a clock input,

--- Page 212 ---
which it uses to register the output of the next state logic. In this way, it
stores the current state of the machine.
Here’s how to implement the turnstile state machine using this two-
block approach:
Verilog
module Turnstile_Example 
 (input i_Reset, 
  input i_Clk, 
  input i_Coin, 
  input i_Push, 
  output o_Locked); 
❶ localparam LOCKED   = 1'b0; 
  localparam UNLOCKED = 1'b1; 
  reg r_Curr_State, r_Next_State; 
  // Current state register 
❷ always @(posedge i_Clk or posedge i_Reset) 
  begin 
    if (i_Reset) 
    ❸ r_Curr_State <= LOCKED; 
    else 
    ❹ r_Curr_State <= r_Next_State; 
  end 
  // Next state determination 
❺ always @(r_Curr_State or i_Coin or i_Push) 
  begin 
     r_Next_State <= r_Curr_State; 
  ❻ case (r_Curr_State)
       LOCKED: 
         if (i_Coin) 
         ❼ r_Next_State <= UNLOCKED; 
       UNLOCKED: 
         if (i_Push) 
            r_Next_State <= LOCKED; 
       ❽ 
     endcase 
  end 

--- Page 213 ---
❾ assign o_Locked = (r_Curr_State == LOCKED); 
endmodule
VHDL
library ieee; 
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all; 
entity Turnstile_Example is 
  port ( 
    i_Reset  : in std_logic; 
    i_Clk    : in std_logic; 
    i_Coin   : in std_logic; 
    i_Push   : in std_logic; 
    o_Locked : out std_logic); 
end entity Turnstile_Example; 
architecture RTL of Turnstile_Example is 
❶ type t_State is (LOCKED, UNLOCKED); 
  signal r_Curr_State, r_Next_State : t_State; 
begin 
  -- Current state register 
❷ process (i_Clk, i_Reset) is 
  begin 
    if i_Reset = '1' then 
    ❸ r_Curr_State <= LOCKED; 
    elsif rising_edge(i_Clk) then 
    ❹ r_Curr_State <= r_Next_State; 
    end if; 
  end process; 
  -- Next state determination 
❺ process (r_Curr_State, i_Coin, i_Push) 
  begin 
    r_Next_State <= r_Curr_State; 
 ❻ case r_Curr_State is 
      when LOCKED => 
        if i_Coin = '1' then 
        ❼ r_Next_State <= UNLOCKED; 
        end if; 
      when UNLOCKED => 

--- Page 214 ---
        if i_Push = '1' then 
          r_Next_State <= LOCKED; 
        end if; 
     ❽ 
    end case; 
  end process; 
❾ o_Locked <= '1' when r_Curr_State = LOCKED else '0'; 
end RTL;
We create the states using enumeration ❶, meaning each state name
has an assigned number. In Verilog, you need to create the list of states
manually. I like to use localparam to define each state, assigning them
numbers in an incrementing order. In VHDL, you instead create a user-
defined type for your state machine (t_State). Then you list the states in
order, and VHDL automatically assigns them numbers. If you’re familiar
with C programming, the VHDL method is similar to how enumerations
work in C.
NOTE
SystemVerilog supports automatic enumeration, but it doesn’t exist in
regular Verilog, so we just number the states manually in the Verilog code.
The first always or process block ❷, the current state register, is
driven by a clock. It keeps track of the current state by assigning
r_Next_State to r_Curr_State on every rising clock edge ❹. Notice that
this block also has the i_Reset signal in its sensitivity list, and that this
signal is checked in the block. It’s important to include a way to get the
state machine to its initial condition, and we use i_Reset for that. The
block’s if…else statement (Verilog) or if…elsif statement (VHDL) checks
whether i_Reset is high before checking to see if we have a rising edge of
the clock. This means we’re using an asynchronous reset; the reset can
occur at any time, not necessarily on the rising edge of the clock. When
i_Reset is high, we set the current state to LOCKED ❸. This is in keeping
with the initial state indication in Figure 8-1.

--- Page 215 ---
The second always or process block ❺ is the combinational one. It
contains the logic for determining how to set r_Next_State. Notice that the
sensitivity list ❺ and the block itself don’t include a clock, so this block
won’t generate any flip-flops, just LUTs. We set r_Next_State using a
case statement tied to the current state ❻, and by looking at our inputs. For
example, if the state is currently LOCKED and the i_Coin input is high, then
the next state will be UNLOCKED ❼. Compare the case statement and
conditional logic with the state machine diagram in Figure 8-1, and you’ll
see that we’ve addressed all the transitions and events shown in the diagram
that result in an actual change of state. We don’t need to write code for
transitions that don’t cause the signal to change. For example, if the current
state is LOCKED and i_Push is high, we’ll just stay in the LOCKED state. We
could add a check for i_Push in the LOCKED case and write r_Next_State
<= LOCKED to make this explicit, but that’s unnecessary. Adding this line can
make the designer’s intent clearer, but it also clutters up the code with
additional assignments. It’s up to you which style you prefer.
We could also add a default case (in Verilog) or a when others case
(in VHDL) above the endcase or end case statement ❽, to cover any
conditions not explicitly called out in the state machine. Again, this is not
required, but it can be a good idea; if you forget or omit a case, the default
case will catch it. In this instance, I chose not to include a default. In fact,
my code editor displays a suggestion for the VHDL when I try to include it:
Case statement contains all choices explicitly. You can safe
ly remove the 
redundant 'others'(13).
The code ends by assigning the module’s single output, o_Locked ❾. It
will be high when we’re in the LOCKED state, or low otherwise. If this code
were really controlling a physical turnstile, we’d use changes in this output
to trigger the actions that occur during state transitions, such as enabling or
disabling the mechanism that locks the turnstile.
Using One always or process Block

--- Page 216 ---
The other approach to implementing a state machine combines all the logic
into a single always or process block. As synthesis tools have improved
over the years, they’ve gotten much better at understanding when you want
to create a state machine, and where this one-block approach may once
have been hard to synthesize, it’s now perfectly viable (and arguably more
straightforward to code). Here’s the same turnstile state machine
implemented with a single always or process block:
Verilog
module Turnstile_Example 
 (input i_Reset, 
  input i_Clk, 
  input i_Coin, 
  input i_Push, 
  output o_Locked); 
  localparam LOCKED   = 1'b0; 
  localparam UNLOCKED = 1'b1; 
  reg r_Curr_State; 
  // Single always block approach 
❶ always @(posedge i_Clk or posedge i_Reset) 
  begin 
    if (i_Reset) 
      r_Curr_State <= LOCKED; 
    else 
    begin 
    ❷ case (r_Curr_State) 
        LOCKED: 
          if (i_Coin) 
            r_Curr_State <= UNLOCKED; 
        UNLOCKED: 
          if (i_Push) 
            r_Curr_State <= LOCKED; 
      endcase 
    end 
  end 
  assign o_Locked = (r_Curr_State == LOCKED); 
endmodule

--- Page 217 ---
VHDL
library ieee; 
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all; 
entity Turnstile_Example is 
  port ( 
    i_Reset  : in std_logic; 
    i_Clk    : in std_logic; 
    i_Coin   : in std_logic; 
    i_Push   : in std_logic; 
    o_Locked : out std_logic); 
end entity Turnstile_Example; 
architecture RTL of Turnstile_Example is 
  type t_State is (LOCKED, UNLOCKED); 
  signal r_Curr_State : t_State; 
begin 
  -- Single always block approach 
❶ process (i_Clk, i_Reset) is 
  begin 
    if (i_Reset) then 
      r_Curr_State <= LOCKED; 
    elsif rising_edge(i_Clk) then 
  ❷ case r_Curr_State is 
      when LOCKED => 
         if i_Coin = '1' then 
           r_Curr_State <= UNLOCKED; 
         end if; 
      when UNLOCKED => 
         if i_Push = '1' then 
           r_Curr_State <= LOCKED; 
         end if; 
    end case; 
  end if; 
end process; 
   o_Locked <= '1' when r_Curr_State = LOCKED else '0'; 
end RTL;
Everything works the same in the two approaches; the differences are
purely stylistic, not functional. In this version of the state machine, we have

--- Page 218 ---
a single always or process block ❶ that’s sensitive to the clock and the
reset signal. Rather than having both r_Curr_State and r_Next_State to
worry about, we now only have r_Curr_State. None of the actual logic has
changed, however. All we’ve done is move the work that was being done in
the combinational always or process block into the sequential one, so the
case statement will be evaluated at every rising clock edge ❷.
I’m not a big fan of the first approach we looked at, with the two
always or process blocks. There are a few reasons for this. First, separating
the LUT-based logic and the flip-flop-based logic into two separate blocks
can be confusing, especially for beginners. Compared to the single-block
solution, the design is more complicated and less intuitive, and it’s easier to
make mistakes. Second, as I said back in Chapter 4, I prefer not to use
combinational-only always or process blocks if I can avoid them. They can
generate latches if you’re not careful, which can result in unwanted
behavior. I recommend keeping your state machine logic within a single
always or process block. The code is easier to read and understand, and the
tools are good enough now to build the state machine correctly.
Testing the Design
Let’s generate a testbench for this state machine to ensure that we’re getting
the output we desire:
Verilog
module Turnstile_Example_TB(); 
❶ reg r_Reset = 1'b1, r_Clk = 1'b0, r_Coin = 1'b0, r_Push =
 1'b0; 
  wire w_Locked; 
  Turnstile_Example UUT 
   (.i_Reset(r_Reset), 
   .i_Clk(r_Clk), 
   .i_Coin(r_Coin), 
   .i_Push(r_Push), 
   .o_Locked(w_Locked)); 
  always #1 r_Clk <= !r_Clk; 
  initial begin 

--- Page 219 ---
    $dumpfile("dump.vcd"); 
    $dumpvars; 
    #10; 
 ❷ r_Reset <= 1'b0; 
    #10; 
    ❸ assert (w_Locked == 1'b1); 
 ❹ r_Coin <= 1'b1; 
    #10; 
    assert (w_Locked == 1'b0); 
    r_Push <= 1'b1; 
    #10; 
    assert (w_Locked == 1'b1); 
    r_Coin <= 1'b0; 
    #10; 
    assert (w_Locked == 1'b1); 
    r_Push <= 1'b0; 
    #10; 
    assert (w_Locked == 1'b1); 
    $finish(); 
  end 
endmodule
VHDL
library ieee; 
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all; 
use std.env.finish; 
entity Turnstile_Example_TB is 
end entity Turnstile_Example_TB; 
architecture test of Turnstile_Example_TB is 
❶ signal r_Reset : std_logic := '1'; 
  signal r_Clk, r_Coin, r_Push : std_logic := '0'; 
  signal w_Locked : std_logic; 
begin 
  UUT : entity work.Turnstile_Example 
  port map ( 
    i_Reset  => r_Reset, 
    i_Clk    => r_Clk, 

--- Page 220 ---
    i_Coin   => r_Coin, 
    i_Push   => r_Push, 
    o_Locked => w_Locked); 
  r_Clk <= not r_Clk after 1 ns; 
  process is 
  begin 
    wait for 10 ns; 
  ❷ r_Reset <= '0'; 
    wait for 10 ns; 
  ❸ assert w_Locked = '1' severity failure; 
  ❹ r_Coin <= '1'; 
    wait for 10 ns; 
    assert w_Locked = '0' severity failure; 
    r_Push <= '1'; 
    wait for 10 ns; 
    assert w_Locked = '1' severity failure; 
    r_Coin <= '0'; 
    wait for 10 ns; 
    assert w_Locked = '1' severity failure; 
    r_Push <= '0'; 
    wait for 10 ns; 
    assert w_Locked = '1' severity failure; 
    finish;  -- need VHDL-2008 
  end process; 
end test;
This testbench drives the inputs in all possible combinations and
monitors the single output (w_Locked) to see how it behaves. For example,
r_Reset is initialized to high at the outset ❶, which should put us in the
LOCKED state. Then, after 10 ns, we drive r_Reset low ❷. This should have
no effect on the state, so we use the assert keyword in both VHDL and
Verilog to verify that we’re in the LOCKED state (indicated by a w_Locked
value of 1) ❸. We then continue manipulating the other inputs and asserting
the expected output (for instance, driving r_Coin high ❹ should put us in
an UNLOCKED state). Our use of assert statements to automatically alert us
to any failures makes this a self-checking testbench.

--- Page 221 ---
NOTE
For Verilog users, remember that assert only exists in SystemVerilog. Be
sure to tell the simulator that your testbench is a SystemVerilog file, rather
than regular Verilog.
State Machine Best Practices
Before moving on, I want to share some recommendations for developing
successful state machines. These are guidelines that I find helpful when I
write my own FPGA state machines, and they’re all modeled in the turnstile
example we reviewed in the previous section:
Include one state machine per file.
It’s certainly possible to write many state machines within a single file,
but I strongly suggest that you limit the scope of any given Verilog or
VHDL file to a single state machine. When you put two or more state
machines in the same file, it can be hard to keep them from getting
logically intertwined. It might require more typing to break things into
multiple files, but it will save you time in the debugging stage.
Use the single-block approach.
As I’ve stated, I find that it’s easier to write cleaner and less error-
prone state machines if you only have one always or process block to
worry about, rather than two. The one-block approach also avoids the
need for combinational always or process blocks, which can generate
latches if you’re not careful.
Give your states meaningful names.
It’s much easier to read a case statement that has actual words
associated with each of the cases, provided you’ve named your states
thoughtfully. For example, use descriptive names like IDLE,
START_COUNT, LOCKED, UNLOCKED, and so on, rather than generic names
like S0, S1, S2, and S3. Meaningful state names will help other people
reading the code understand what’s going on. Additionally, you’ll thank
yourself for descriptive state naming when you come back to your code
after not looking at it for months. Enumeration allows you to do this.
Enumeration is a common programming technique that allows you to

--- Page 222 ---
use words in place of integers in your code. This is done either through
localparam in Verilog or a user-defined type in VHDL.
Draw your state machine flow before coding.
Diving headfirst into coding a state machine is a recipe for disaster.
Begin by drawing a diagram of the state machine that you want to
implement, like the one you saw in Figure 8-1. This will help you
ensure that you’ve thought through the entire flow, from the initial
transition through all the possible permutations. If you realize that
you’ve missed something once you start working on the code, that’s
fine; just be sure to go back and update your diagram to keep it in sync
with the code you’re writing. Your future self will thank you if you
have this documentation.
It is by no means mandatory to follow these suggestions, but doing so
will help you avoid some common pitfalls and create state machines within
your FPGAs that are bug-free, easy to understand, and easy to maintain.
The more complex your state machines become, the more helpful these best
practices will be.
Project #6: Creating a Memory Game
We’ll now put what you’ve learned about state machines into action by
creating a memory game that runs on your development board. The player
will have to remember and reproduce a pattern that grows longer as the
game progresses, similar to a game like Simon. If the player can remember
the entire pattern, they win.
The pattern is displayed using four LEDs. It starts simply, with just one
LED lighting up. Then it’s the player’s turn to re-create the pattern by
pressing the switch that matches the LED. If they push the wrong switch,
the game is over. If they push the correct switch, the game continues, with
the pattern expanding to a sequence of two LED blinks. The pattern keeps
expanding until it’s seven blinks long (although you’ll be able to adjust the
code to make it longer if you want). If the player re-creates the last pattern
correctly, they may choose to play another round with a new pattern.
This project takes advantage of a peripheral that we haven’t used
before: a seven-segment display. This device uses an arrangement of seven

--- Page 223 ---
LEDs to display the digits 0 through 9 (and a selection of letters), like
something you’d see on a digital clock. It will serve as a scoreboard,
keeping track of the player’s progress through the pattern. We’ll also use it
to display an F (for failure) if the player makes a mistake, or an A when the
game is won.
NOTE
If your development board doesn’t have four LEDs and switches, you can
adapt the project’s code to work with the resources available. If it doesn’t
have a seven-segment display, try connecting one to your board, for
example using a Pmod connector.
Planning the State Machine
To create the game, we’ll need to control the FPGA’s flow through various
states of operation, such as displaying the pattern and waiting for the
player’s response. Sounds like a perfect opportunity to use a state machine!
In keeping with our best practices, we’ll use a diagram to plan out the state
machine before we write any code. Figure 8-3 shows a diagram for a state
machine that satisfies the description of the game.

--- Page 224 ---
Figure 8-3: The memory game state machine diagram
Starting from the top-left corner, we have a reset/initial condition,
which will jump into the Start state from any other state. I didn’t draw
arrows from every state back to Start, to avoid cluttering the diagram; just
remember that you can always jump back to Start from any state when the
reset condition occurs. We remain in the Start state until the reset is cleared,
at which point we transition into the Pattern Off state. We wait here with all
LEDs off for a set amount of time, and then we transition into the Pattern
Show state, where we illuminate a single LED from the pattern, again for a
set amount of time. If it’s the last LED in the pattern (the pattern is done),
we then transition to the Wait Player state to await the player’s response. If
the LED pattern is not done, we transition back to Pattern Off. We keep
cycling between Pattern Show and Pattern Off, lighting up the LEDs in the
pattern one at a time, until the pattern is done. The transitions back to
Pattern Off add a pause between each blink, which avoids ambiguity in
cases where the pattern includes the same LED twice in a row. This is the

--- Page 225 ---
part of the game where the LED pattern is being shown to the player, for
them to try to re-create later on.
NOTE
The diamond in the diagram between the Pattern Show and Wait Player
states represents a guard condition, a Boolean expression that determines
the state machine flow. In this case, the guard condition is checking whether
the pattern is done.
Once we’re in the Wait Player state, the FPGA monitors the input from
the buttons until one of two things happens. If the player pushes an
incorrect button in the sequence, then we transition to the Loser state and
show an F on the seven-segment display. If the player successfully re-
creates the entire pattern, then we transition to the Incr Score (Increment
Score) state. Here we check if the game is done, in which case the player
has won and we transition to the Winner state, where we show an A on the
seven-segment display. If the game isn’t done, then we go back to Pattern
Off to get ready to display the pattern again, this time with one additional
LED blink added to the sequence.
There are nearly endless possibilities for designing state machines, so
by no means is the arrangement shown in Figure 8-3 the only option. For
example, we could have combined Pattern Off and Pattern Show into a
single state that handles turning the LEDs both on and off. Our design,
however, strikes a balance between the number of states and the complexity
of each individual state. As a general rule, if one state is responsible for
several actions, it might be an indication that the state should be broken into
two or more states.
Organizing the Design
Next, we’ll take a look at the overall organization of the project. Figure 8-4
shows a block diagram of the design.

--- Page 226 ---
Figure 8-4: The Project #6 block diagram
Let’s trace the flow of data through the block diagram. First, we have
four switches (buttons) that are used to control the entire game. Remember
that these are mechanical switches, so they’re subject to bouncing. To get
reliable button responses, these inputs must be debounced, which is the first
thing that we do to each switch’s signal as it enters the FPGA. We’ll use the
debounce filter module we implemented in Chapter 5 for this. The FPGA
also has a clock input, which we’ll use to drive all the flip-flops in this
design.
Next, we have the memory game module itself, which is where the
state machine lives. We’ll explore this code in detail shortly. Notice that this
module instantiates two submodules: Count_And_Toggle and the LFSR
module, both of which you saw in Chapter 6. Remember that LFSRs are
pseudorandom pattern generators, so we’ll use one here to create a random
pattern for the game. We’ll use the Count_And_Toggle module to keep track
of how long to display each LED in the pattern sequence; the toggling of
this module will trigger transitions between states.
Finally, we have the Binary_To_7Segment module, which takes a
binary input representing the player’s score and drives the seven-segment
display to light up that score. We’ll look at how this works next.
Using the Seven-Segment Display

--- Page 227 ---
A seven-segment display consists of an arrangement of seven LEDs that
can be lit in various combinations to produce different patterns. Figure 8-5
shows the seven segments of the display, labeled A through G. We’ll use
one of these displays to keep track of the score in this project, incrementing
it each time the player successfully repeats the pattern.
Figure 8-5: A seven-segment display
Conventionally, seven-segment displays are used to show the decimal
numbers 0 through 9, but we can extend our display’s range further by
showing the hexadecimal numbers A through F (for 10 through 15) as well.
We can’t simply tell the display to light up a particular number, however,
since each segment in the display is controlled separately. Instead, our
Binary _To_7Segment module takes in the number to be shown and
translates it into the appropriate signals for driving the display. Let’s take a
look at the code:
Verilog
module Binary_To_7Segment 
  (input      i_Clk, 
❶ input [3:0] i_Binary_Num, 
  output      o_Segment_A, 
  output      o_Segment_B, 
  output      o_Segment_C, 
  output      o_Segment_D, 
  output      o_Segment_E, 
  output      o_Segment_F, 

--- Page 228 ---
  output      o_Segment_G); 
  reg [6:0]   r_Hex_Encoding; 
  always @(posedge i_Clk) 
    begin 
    ❷ case (i_Binary_Num) 
         4'b0000 : r_Hex_Encoding <= 7'b1111110; // 0x7E 
         4'b0001 : r_Hex_Encoding <= 7'b0110000; // 0x30 
         4'b0010 : r_Hex_Encoding <= 7'b1101101; // 0x6D 
         4'b0011 : r_Hex_Encoding <= 7'b1111001; // 0x79 
         4'b0100 : r_Hex_Encoding <= 7'b0110011; // 0x33 
         4'b0101 : r_Hex_Encoding <= 7'b1011011; // 0x5B 
         4'b0110 : r_Hex_Encoding <= 7'b1011111; // 0x5F 
      ❸ 4'b0111 : r_Hex_Encoding <= 7'b1110000; // 0x70 
         4'b1000 : r_Hex_Encoding <= 7'b1111111; // 0x7F 
         4'b1001 : r_Hex_Encoding <= 7'b1111011; // 0x7B 
         4'b1010 : r_Hex_Encoding <= 7'b1110111; // 0x77 
         4'b1011 : r_Hex_Encoding <= 7'b0011111; // 0x1F 
         4'b1100 : r_Hex_Encoding <= 7'b1001110; // 0x4E 
         4'b1101 : r_Hex_Encoding <= 7'b0111101; // 0x3D 
         4'b1110 : r_Hex_Encoding <= 7'b1001111; // 0x4F 
         4'b1111 : r_Hex_Encoding <= 7'b1000111; // 0x47 
         default : r_Hex_Encoding <= 7'b0000000; // 0x00 
      endcase 
    end 
❹ assign o_Segment_A = r_Hex_Encoding[6]; 
  assign o_Segment_B = r_Hex_Encoding[5]; 
  assign o_Segment_C = r_Hex_Encoding[4]; 
  assign o_Segment_D = r_Hex_Encoding[3]; 
  assign o_Segment_E = r_Hex_Encoding[2]; 
  assign o_Segment_F = r_Hex_Encoding[1]; 
  assign o_Segment_G = r_Hex_Encoding[0]; 
endmodule
VHDL
library ieee; 
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all; 
entity Binary_To_7Segment is 

--- Page 229 ---
  port ( 
    i_Clk        : in std_logic; 
 ❶ i_Binary_Num : in std_logic_vector(3 downto 0); 
    o_Segment_A  : out std_logic; 
    o_Segment_B  : out std_logic; 
    o_Segment_C  : out std_logic; 
    o_Segment_D  : out std_logic; 
    o_Segment_E  : out std_logic; 
    o_Segment_F  : out std_logic; 
    o_Segment_G  : out std_logic 
    ); 
end entity Binary_To_7Segment; 
architecture RTL of Binary_To_7Segment is 
  signal r_Hex_Encoding : std_logic_vector(6 downto 0); 
begin 
  process (i_Clk) is 
  begin 
     if rising_edge(i_Clk) then 
     ❷ case i_Binary_Num is 
          when "0000" => 
            r_Hex_Encoding <= "1111110"; -- 0x7E 
          when "0001" => 
            r_Hex_Encoding <= "0110000"; -- 0x30 
          when "0010" => 
            r_Hex_Encoding <= "1101101"; -- 0x6D 
          when "0011" => 
            r_Hex_Encoding <= "1111001"; -- 0x79 
          when "0100" => 
            r_Hex_Encoding <= "0110011"; -- 0x33 
          when "0101" => 
            r_Hex_Encoding <= "1011011"; -- 0x5B 
          when "0110" => 
            r_Hex_Encoding <= "1011111"; -- 0x5F 
        ❸ when "0111" => 
            r_Hex_Encoding <= "1110000"; -- 0x70 
          when "1000" => 
            r_Hex_Encoding <= "1111111"; -- 0x7F 
          when "1001" => 
            r_Hex_Encoding <= "1111011"; -- 0x7B 

--- Page 230 ---
          when "1010" => 
            r_Hex_Encoding <= "1110111"; -- 0x77 
          when "1011" => 
            r_Hex_Encoding <= "0011111"; -- 0x1F 
          when "1100" => 
            r_Hex_Encoding <= "1001110"; -- 0x4E 
          when "1101" => 
            r_Hex_Encoding <= "0111101"; -- 0x3D 
          when "1110" => 
            r_Hex_Encoding <= "1001111"; -- 0x4F 
          when "1111" => 
            r_Hex_Encoding <= "1000111"; -- 0x47 
          when others => 
            r_Hex_Encoding <= "0000000"; -- 0x00 
      end case; 
    end if; 
  end process; 
❹ o_Segment_A <= r_Hex_Encoding(6); 
  o_Segment_B <= r_Hex_Encoding(5); 
  o_Segment_C <= r_Hex_Encoding(4); 
  o_Segment_D <= r_Hex_Encoding(3); 
  o_Segment_E <= r_Hex_Encoding(2); 
  o_Segment_F <= r_Hex_Encoding(1); 
  o_Segment_G <= r_Hex_Encoding(0); 
end architecture RTL;
This module takes a 4-bit binary input ❶ and uses seven outputs to
light up the appropriate segments in the display, given the input. The case
statement ❷ captures all possible inputs, from 0000 to 1111 (0 through 15),
and translates each number into the correct output pattern using the 7-bit
r_Hex_Encoding register. Each bit in the register maps to one of the
segments in the display: bit 6 maps to segment A, bit 5 maps to segment B,
and so on. To see how this works, let’s consider a specific input—say, 0111,
which is the digit 7—as an example. Figure 8-6 illustrates how to illuminate
a seven-segment display to show this digit.

--- Page 231 ---
Figure 8-6: Illuminating a 7 on a seven- segment display
As you can see in the figure, we need to illuminate segments A, B, and
C, while keeping the other segments turned off, to show the digit 7. In the
code at ❸, we therefore set r_Hex_Encoding to 0x70, or 1110000 in binary,
putting 1s on the three bits corresponding to segments A, B, and C. Then,
outside the case statement, we extract each individual bit from the register
and pass it to the appropriate output using a continuous assignment ❹. This
approach of encoding the pattern into the r_Hex_Encoding register saves a
lot of typing; we don’t have to assign all seven outputs in every single
branch of the case statement.
Coding the Top-Level Module
Next, let’s jump into the top module of the project to see how everything is
wired up at the highest level. If you refer back to the block diagram in
Figure 8-4, you’ll see this module represented by the square with the dotted
line:
Verilog
module State_Machine_Project_Top 
 (input i_Clk, 
  // Input switches for entering pattern 
  input i_Switch_1, 
  input i_Switch_2, 
  input i_Switch_3, 
  input i_Switch_4, 
  // Output LEDs for displaying pattern 

--- Page 232 ---
  output o_LED_1, 
  output o_LED_2, 
  output o_LED_3, 
  output o_LED_4, 
  // Scoreboard, 7-segment display 
  output o_Segment2_A, 
  output o_Segment2_B, 
  output o_Segment2_C, 
  output o_Segment2_D, 
  output o_Segment2_E, 
  output o_Segment2_F, 
  output o_Segment2_G); 
❶ localparam GAME_LIMIT     = 7;        // Increase to make
 game harder 
  localparam CLKS_PER_SEC   = 25000000; // 25 MHz clock 
  localparam DEBOUNCE_LIMIT = 250000;  // 10 ms debounce fil
ter 
  wire w_Switch_1, w_Switch_2, w_Switch_3, w_Switch_4; 
  wire w_Segment2_A, w_Segment2_B, w_Segment2_C, w_Segment2_
D; 
  wire w_Segment2_E, w_Segment2_F, w_Segment2_G; 
  wire [3:0] w_Score; 
  // Debounce all switch inputs to remove mechanical glitche
s 
❷ Debounce_Filter #(.DEBOUNCE_LIMIT(DEBOUNCE_LIMIT)) Debounc
e_SW1 
  (.i_Clk(i_Clk), 
   .i_Bouncy(i_Switch_1), 
   .o_Debounced(w_Switch_1)); 
  Debounce_Filter #(.DEBOUNCE_LIMIT(DEBOUNCE_LIMIT)) Debounc
e_SW2 
  (.i_Clk(i_Clk), 
   .i_Bouncy(i_Switch_2), 
   .o_Debounced(w_Switch_2)); 
  Debounce_Filter #(.DEBOUNCE_LIMIT(DEBOUNCE_LIMIT)) Debounc
e_SW3 
  (.i_Clk(i_Clk), 
   .i_Bouncy(i_Switch_3), 
   .o_Debounced(w_Switch_3)); 

--- Page 233 ---
  Debounce_Filter #(.DEBOUNCE_LIMIT(DEBOUNCE_LIMIT)) Debounc
e_SW4 
  (.i_Clk(i_Clk), 
   .i_Bouncy(i_Switch_4), 
   .o_Debounced(w_Switch_4)); 
❸ State_Machine_Game #(.CLKS_PER_SEC(CLKS_PER_SEC), 
                       .GAME_LIMIT(GAME_LIMIT)) Game_Inst 
  (.i_Clk(i_Clk), 
   .i_Switch_1(w_Switch_1), 
   .i_Switch_2(w_Switch_2), 
   .i_Switch_3(w_Switch_3), 
   .i_Switch_4(w_Switch_4), 
   .o_Score(w_Score), 
   .o_LED_1(o_LED_1), 
   .o_LED_2(o_LED_2), 
   .o_LED_3(o_LED_3), 
   .o_LED_4(o_LED_4)); 
❹ Binary_To_7Segment Scoreboard 
  (.i_Clk(i_Clk), 
   .i_Binary_Num(w_Score), 
   .o_Segment_A(w_Segment2_A), 
   .o_Segment_B(w_Segment2_B), 
   .o_Segment_C(w_Segment2_C), 
   .o_Segment_D(w_Segment2_D), 
   .o_Segment_E(w_Segment2_E), 
   .o_Segment_F(w_Segment2_F), 
   .o_Segment_G(w_Segment2_G)); 
❺ assign o_Segment2_A = !w_Segment2_A; 
  assign o_Segment2_B = !w_Segment2_B; 
  assign o_Segment2_C = !w_Segment2_C; 
  assign o_Segment2_D = !w_Segment2_D; 
  assign o_Segment2_E = !w_Segment2_E; 
  assign o_Segment2_F = !w_Segment2_F; 
  assign o_Segment2_G = !w_Segment2_G; 
endmodule
VHDL

--- Page 234 ---
library IEEE; 
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all; 
entity State_Machine_Project_Top is 
  port ( 
    i_Clk : in std_logic; 
    -- Input switches for entering pattern 
    i_Switch_1 : in std_logic; 
    i_Switch_2 : in std_logic; 
    i_Switch_3 : in std_logic; 
    i_Switch_4 : in std_logic; 
    -- Output LEDs for displaying pattern 
    o_LED_1 : out std_logic; 
    o_LED_2 : out std_logic; 
    o_LED_3 : out std_logic; 
    o_LED_4 : out std_logic; 
    -- Scoreboard, 7-segment display 
    o_Segment2_A : out std_logic; 
    o_Segment2_B : out std_logic; 
    o_Segment2_C : out std_logic; 
    o_Segment2_D : out std_logic; 
    o_Segment2_E : out std_logic; 
    o_Segment2_F : out std_logic; 
    o_Segment2_G : out std_logic); 
end entity State_Machine_Project_Top; 
architecture RTL of State_Machine_Project_Top is 
❶ constant GAME_LIMIT      : integer := 7;       -- Increase 
to make game harder 
   constant CLKS_PER_SEC   : integer := 25000000; -- 25 MHz
 clock 
   constant DEBOUNCE_LIMIT : integer := 250000;   -- 10 ms d
ebounce filter 
   signal w_Switch_1, w_Switch_2, w_Switch_3, w_Switch_4 : s
td_logic; 
   signal w_Score : std_logic_vector(3 downto 0); 
   signal w_Segment2_A, w_Segment2_B, w_Segment2_C, w_Segmen
t2_D : std_logic; 
   signal w_Segment2_E, w_Segment2_F, w_Segment2_G : std_log
ic; 
begin 

--- Page 235 ---
❷ Debounce_SW1 : entity work.Debounce_Filter 
     generic map ( 
       DEBOUNCE_LIMIT => DEBOUNCE_LIMIT) 
     port map ( 
       i_Clk       => i_Clk, 
       i_Bouncy    => i_Switch_1, 
       o_Debounced => w_Switch_1); 
   Debounce_SW2 : entity work.Debounce_Filter 
     generic map ( 
       DEBOUNCE_LIMIT => DEBOUNCE_LIMIT) 
     port map ( 
       i_Clk       => i_Clk, 
       i_Bouncy    => i_Switch_2, 
       o_Debounced => w_Switch_2); 
   Debounce_SW3 : entity work.Debounce_Filter 
     generic map ( 
       DEBOUNCE_LIMIT => DEBOUNCE_LIMIT) 
     port map ( 
       i_Clk       => i_Clk, 
       i_Bouncy    => i_Switch_3, 
       o_Debounced => w_Switch_3); 
   Debounce_SW4 : entity work.Debounce_Filter 
     generic map ( 
       DEBOUNCE_LIMIT => DEBOUNCE_LIMIT) 
     port map ( 
       i_Clk => i_Clk, 
       i_Bouncy => i_Switch_4, 
       o_Debounced => w_Switch_4); 
❸ Game_Inst : entity work.State_Machine_Game 
   generic map ( 
     CLKS_PER_SEC => CLKS_PER_SEC, 
     GAME_LIMIT   => GAME_LIMIT) 
   port map ( 
     i_Clk      => i_Clk, 
     i_Switch_1 => w_Switch_1, 
     i_Switch_2 => w_Switch_2, 
     i_Switch_3 => w_Switch_3, 
     i_Switch_4 => w_Switch_4, 
     o_Score    => w_Score, 

--- Page 236 ---
     o_LED_1    => o_LED_1, 
     o_LED_2    => o_LED_2, 
     o_LED_3    => o_LED_3, 
     o_LED_4    => o_LED_4); 
❹ Scoreboard : entity work.Binary_To_7Segment 
     port map ( 
       i_Clk        => i_Clk, 
       i_Binary_Num => w_Score, 
       o_Segment_A  => w_Segment2_A, 
       o_Segment_B  => w_Segment2_B, 
       o_Segment_C  => w_Segment2_C, 
       o_Segment_D  => w_Segment2_D, 
       o_Segment_E  => w_Segment2_E, 
       o_Segment_F  => w_Segment2_F, 
       o_Segment_G  => w_Segment2_G); 
❺ o_Segment2_A <= not w_Segment2_A; 
   o_Segment2_B <= not w_Segment2_B; 
   o_Segment2_C <= not w_Segment2_C; 
   o_Segment2_D <= not w_Segment2_D; 
   o_Segment2_E <= not w_Segment2_E; 
   o_Segment2_F <= not w_Segment2_F; 
   o_Segment2_G <= not w_Segment2_G; 
end RTL;
My goal for writing the top module of a design, especially as the design
becomes more complicated, is to minimize the amount of functional code
within it. Ideally, code that performs functionality should be pushed into
lower levels, so the highest level is just wires and module instantiation. This
helps keep the code clean and ensures that each module is focused on
performing what’s needed of it, without spreading the functionality across
multiple layers.
For this project, we first instantiate four debounce filter modules, one
for each push button ❷. Then we instantiate the State_Machine_Game
module, which contains the logic for the state machine and the game itself
❸. The inputs to this module, w_Switch_1 through w_Switch_4, are the
outputs of the debounce filters, so this module can trust that the input
signals are stable. Notice that the module has two parameters (Verilog) or

--- Page 237 ---
generics (VHDL), CLKS_PER_SEC and GAME_LIMIT, both of which were set
earlier ❶. The former specifies the number of clock cycles per second
(needed for keeping track of time), and is there in case the design is run at a
different clock frequency. The latter controls the maximum length of the
pattern.
Next we instantiate the Binary_To_7Segment module ❹, which takes
the w_Score output from the game as an input so the score will be displayed
to the player. Notice, however, that we invert all the outputs from the
display module before outputting them at the top level ❺. A low on the
output may be needed, rather than a high, to light up each segment,
depending on the way the seven-segment display is connected on your
development board’s PCB. If your display isn’t behaving as expected, try
removing the !s from the Verilog or nots from the VHDL to avoid inverting
the outputs.
Our top-level module doesn’t instantiate the LFSR or
Count_And_Toggle modules directly: those are instantiated within the
State_Machine_Game module. You’re starting to see here how a hierarchy
can be established inside an FPGA, and how a complex design can be built
up from relatively simple modules.
Coding the State Machine
Now let’s get to the meat of the project: the state machine itself. We’ll
examine the State_Machine_Game module in sections, but remember that
you can view the complete code listing in the book’s GitHub repository
(https://github.com/nandland/getting-started-with-fpgas). The module
starts, as usual, by declaring the inputs, outputs, and internal signals:
Verilog
module State_Machine_Game # (parameter CLKS_PER_SEC = 250000
00, 
                             parameter GAME_LIMIT = 6) 
 (input i_Clk, 
  input i_Switch_1, 
  input i_Switch_2, 

--- Page 238 ---
  input i_Switch_3, 
  input i_Switch_4, 
  output reg [3:0] o_Score, 
  output o_LED_1, 
  output o_LED_2, 
  output o_LED_3, 
  output o_LED_4 
  ); 
❶ localparam START        = 3'd0; 
  localparam PATTERN_OFF  = 3'd1; 
  localparam PATTERN_SHOW = 3'd2; 
  localparam WAIT_PLAYER  = 3'd3; 
  localparam INCR_SCORE   = 3'd4; 
  localparam LOSER        = 3'd5; 
  localparam WINNER       = 3'd6; 
❷ reg [2:0] r_SM_Main; 
  reg r_Toggle, r_Switch_1, r_Switch_2, r_Switch_3; 
  reg r_Switch_4, r_Button_DV; 
❸ reg [1:0] r_Pattern[0:10]; // 2D array: 2 bits wide x 11 d
eep 
  wire [21:0] w_LFSR_Data; 
  reg [$clog2(GAME_LIMIT)-1:0] r_Index; // Display index 
  reg [1:0] r_Button_ID; 
  wire w_Count_En, w_Toggle; 
--snip--
VHDL
library IEEE; 
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all; 
use IEEE.numeric_std.all; 
entity State_Machine_Game is 
  generic ( 
    CLKS_PER_SEC : integer := 25000000; 
    GAME_LIMIT   : integer := 6); 
  port( 
    i_Clk      : in std_logic; 
    i_Switch_1 : in std_logic; 

--- Page 239 ---
    i_Switch_2 : in std_logic; 
    i_Switch_3 : in std_logic; 
    i_Switch_4 : in std_logic; 
    o_Score    : out std_logic_vector(3 downto 0); 
    o_LED_1    : out std_logic; 
    o_LED_2    : out std_logic; 
    o_LED_3    : out std_logic; 
    o_LED_4    : out std_logic); 
end entity State_Machine_Game; 
architecture RTL of State_Machine_Game is 
❶ type t_SM_Main is (START, PATTERN_OFF, PATTERN_SHOW, 
                     WAIT_PLAYER, INCR_SCORE, LOSER, WINNE
R); 
❷ signal r_SM_Main : t_SM_Main; 
  signal w_Count_En, w_Toggle, r_Toggle, r_Switch_1 : std_lo
gic; 
  signal r_Switch_2, r_Switch_3, r_Switch_4, r_Button_DV : s
td_logic; 
  type t_Pattern is array (0 to 10) of std_logic_vector(1 do
wnto 0); 
❸ signal r_Pattern : t_Pattern; -- 2D Array: 2-bit wide x 11 
deep 
  signal w_LFSR_Data : std_logic_vector(21 downto 0); 
  signal r_Index : integer range 0 to GAME_LIMIT; 
  signal w_Index_SLV : std_logic_vector(7 downto 0); 
  signal r_Button_ID : std_logic_vector(1 downto 0); 
  signal r_Score : unsigned(3 downto 0); 
--snip--
We use the enumeration approach described earlier in the chapter to
name each state ❶. The r_SM_Main signal ❷ will keep track of the current
state. It needs to have enough bits to convey all the possible states. In this
case, we have seven total states, which can fit inside a 3-bit-wide register.
In Verilog, we explicitly declare the signal as having 3 bits. In VHDL,
however, we just create the state machine signal to be of the custom
t_SM_Main data type (the enumeration that we created ❶), and it will be
sized automatically.

--- Page 240 ---
Another important signal we’re creating is r_Pattern, which stores the
pattern for the game ❸. This is the second time that we’ve created a two-
dimensional signal within our FPGA (the first time was back in Chapter 6,
when we were creating RAM). Specifically, r_Pattern is 2 bits wide by 11
items deep, for a total storage of 22 bits. Each pair of bits in this signal
corresponds to one of the four LEDs (00 indicates LED1, 01 indicates
LED2, and so on), giving us a sequence of LEDs to light up (and a
sequence of switches to press). Table 8-1 shows an example of what the
data in this 2D register might look like.
Table 8-1: Pattern Storage Example
Index Binary LED/switch
0 01 2
1 11 4
2 11 4
3 00 1
4 10 3
5 00 1
6 01 2
7 01 2
8 11 4
9 00 1
10 10 3
In this example, the value at index 0 is 01, which correlates to the
second LED/switch, the value at index 1 is 11, which correlates to the
fourth LED/switch, and so on. We’ll be able to use the index to increment
through the register, getting 2 bits for each index. The binary pattern itself
comes from the LFSR, and will be random each time. The LFSR is 22 bits
wide, so each bit of the LFSR output is mapped to a bit in this 2D register.
This means that the maximum length of the memory pattern that we can
create is 11 LED blinks long. After playing this game several times,
however, I can tell you that it gets quite challenging to remember patterns
that go that high. As I noted earlier, the actual limit for the game is set by

--- Page 241 ---
the parameter/generic GAME_LIMIT, which can be overridden from the top
module. If you want to set the game to the maximum difficulty, try
changing GAME_LIMIT to 11.
The module continues by handling reset conditions:
Verilog
--snip-- 
  always @(posedge i_Clk) 
  begin 
    // Reset game from any state 
  ❶ if (i_Switch_1 & i_Switch_2) 
       r_SM_Main <= START; 
    else 
    begin 
       // Main state machine switch statement 
    ❷ case (r_SM_Main) 
--snip--
VHDL
--snip-- 
begin 
  process (i_Clk) is 
  begin 
    if rising_edge(i_Clk) then 
       -- Reset game from any state 
    ❶ if i_Switch_1 = '1' and i_Switch_2 = '1' then 
        r_SM_Main <= START; 
      else 
         -- Main state machine switch statement 
      ❷ case r_SM_Main is 
--snip--
The player must push switch 1 and switch 2 at the same time to trigger
the START state. We check for this with an if statement ❶. Notice that this

--- Page 242 ---
check occurs outside the state machine’s main case statement, which we
initiate in the else branch ❷. This means that on every clock cycle we’ll
check if both switches are pressed, and enter the START state if they are or
run the state machine for the game if they aren’t. It would have been easier
if we had a fifth button that was dedicated to resetting the state machine, but
alas, I did not, so I had to be a bit creative here.
Now let’s look at the first few states in the case statement:
Verilog
--snip-- 
     // Main state machine switch statement 
        case (r_SM_Main) 
           // Stay in START state until user releases button
s 
        ❶ START: 
           begin 
              // Wait for reset condition to go away 
           ❷ if (!i_Switch_1 & !i_Switch_2 & r_Button_DV) 
              begin 
                o_Score   <= 0; 
                r_Index   <= 0; 
                r_SM_Main <= PATTERN_OFF; 
              end 
           end 
        ❸ PATTERN_OFF: 
           begin 
             if (!w_Toggle & r_Toggle) // Falling edge found 
                r_SM_Main <= PATTERN_SHOW; 
           end 
           // Show the next LED in the pattern 
        ❹ PATTERN_SHOW:
           begin 
             if (!w_Toggle & r_Toggle) // Falling edge found 
             ❺ if (o_Score == r_Index) 
                begin 
                ❻ r_Index   <= 0; 

--- Page 243 ---
                   r_SM_Main <= WAIT_PLAYER; 
                end 
                else 
                begin 
                ❼ r_Index   <= r_Index + 1; 
                   r_SM_Main <= PATTERN_OFF; 
                end 
           end 
--snip--
VHDL
--snip-- 
      -- Main state machine switch statement 
      case r_SM_Main is 
      -- Stay in START state until user releases buttons 
   ❶ when START => 
         -- Wait for reset condition to go away 
         ❷ if (i_Switch_1 = '0' and i_Switch_2 = '0' and 
                r_Button_DV = '1') then 
              r_Score   <= to_unsigned(0, r_Score'length); 
              r_Index   <= 0; 
              r_SM_Main <= PATTERN_OFF; 
            end if; 
      ❸ when PATTERN_OFF => 
            if w_Toggle = '0' and r_Toggle = '1' then -- Fal
ling edge found 
               r_SM_Main <= PATTERN_SHOW; 
            end if; 
         -- Show the next LED in the pattern 
      ❹ when PATTERN_SHOW =>
           if w_Toggle = '0' and r_Toggle = '1' then -- Fall
ing edge found 
           ❺ if r_Score = r_Index then 
              ❻ r_Index   <= 0; 
                 r_SM_Main <= WAIT_PLAYER; 
              else 
              ❼ r_Index   <= r_Index + 1; 

--- Page 244 ---
                 r_SM_Main <= PATTERN_OFF; 
              end if; 
            end if; 
--snip--
First we handle the START state ❶, where we wait for the reset
condition to be removed. This happens when switches 1 and 2 are released
❷. Notice that we’re looking not only for a low on the two switches, but
also for a high on r_Button_DV. We use this signal throughout the module
to detect falling edges—that is, releases—on the four switches. You’ll see
how this works later in the code. When the reset is cleared, we set the score
and the pattern index to 0, then go into the PATTERN_OFF state.
The PATTERN_OFF state ❸ simply waits for a timer, driven by the
Count_And _Toggle module, to expire. When this happens we transition to
the PATTERN _SHOW state ❹, during which we’ll be illuminating one of the
LEDs (you’ll see the code for illuminating the LEDs later). The transition
out of PATTERN_SHOW is also triggered by the timer in the Count_And_Toggle
module. When the timer expires we need to decide if we’re done displaying
the pattern, which we do by checking whether the player’s score (o_Score)
equals the current index into the pattern (r_Index) ❺. If it doesn’t, we
aren’t done, so we increment r_Index to get ready to light up the next LED
in the pattern ❼ and we go back to the PATTERN_OFF state. If we are done,
we reset r_Index to 0 ❻ and transition to the WAIT_PLAYER state. Let’s look
at that now:
Verilog
--snip-- 
       WAIT_PLAYER: 
       begin 
       ❶ if (r_Button_DV) 
          ❷ if (r_Pattern[r_Index] == r_Button_ID && r_Index 
== o_Score) 
             begin 
               r_Index   <= 0; 

--- Page 245 ---
               r_SM_Main <= INCR_SCORE; 
             end 
          ❹ else if (r_Pattern[r_Index] != r_Button_ID) 
               r_SM_Main <= LOSER; 
          ❺ else 
               r_Index <= r_Index + 1; 
       end 
--snip--
VHDL
--snip-- 
        when WAIT_PLAYER => 
        ❶ if r_Button_DV = '1' then 
           ❷ if (r_Pattern(r_Index) = r_Button_ID and 
                ❸ unsigned(w_Index_SLV) = r_Score) then 
                r_Index   <= 0; 
                r_SM_Main <= INCR_SCORE; 
           ❹ elsif r_Pattern(r_Index) /= r_Button_ID then 
                r_SM_Main <= LOSER; 
           ❺ else 
                r_Index <= r_Index + 1; 
              end if; 
           end if; 
--snip--
In the WAIT_PLAYER state, we wait for r_Button_DV to go high,
indicating the player has pressed and released a switch ❶. Then we check if
the player has correctly pressed the next switch in the pattern. As you’ll see
later, each time any switch is released, r_Button_ID is set to indicate which
switch it was (00 for switch 1, 01 for switch 2, and so on), so we compare
r_Button_ID with a value in r_Pattern, using r_Index as an index into the
2D array. There are three possibilities. If the switch is correct and we’re at
the end of the pattern ❷, we reset r_Index and transition to the INCR_SCORE
state. If the switch is incorrect, we transition to the LOSER state ❹.
Otherwise, the switch is correct but we aren’t done with the pattern, so we

--- Page 246 ---
increment r_Index and wait for the next press ❺. Notice in this last case
that we don’t explicitly assign the state, so r_SM_Main will just retain its
previous assignment (WAIT_PLAYER). We could add a line at the end of the
else statement that says r_SM_Main <= WAIT_PLAYER; but it’s not necessary.
If r_SM_Main isn’t assigned, then we know that path doesn’t cause a state
change.
One difference between the Verilog and the VHDL is that in the latter
we need to be very explicit about the types we’re comparing. In the VHDL
only, we need to cast w_Index_SLV to unsigned type ❸ so that we can
compare it to r_Score, which is also of type unsigned. Verilog is much
more forgiving, so we don’t need this extra conversion. We’ll discuss
numerical data types in detail in Chapter 10.
Now let’s look at the remaining states in the case statement:
Verilog
--snip-- 
         // Used to increment score counter 
      ❶ INCR_SCORE: 
         begin 
           o_Score <= o_Score + 1; 
           if (o_Score == GAME_LIMIT-1) 
             r_SM_Main <= WINNER; 
           else 
             r_SM_Main <= PATTERN_OFF; 
         end 
         // Display 0xA on 7-segment display, wait for new g
ame 
      ❷ WINNER: 
         begin 
           o_Score <= 4'hA; // Winner! 
         end 
         // Display 0xF on 7-segment display, wait for new g
ame 
      ❸ LOSER: 
         begin 
           o_Score <= 4'hF; // Loser! 

--- Page 247 ---
         end 
      ❹ default: 
           r_SM_Main <= START; 
      endcase 
    end 
  end 
--snip--
VHDL
--snip-- 
          -- Used to increment score counter 
       ❶ when INCR_SCORE => 
            r_Score <= r_Score + 1; 
            if r_Score = GAME_LIMIT then 
              r_SM_Main <= WINNER; 
            else 
              r_SM_Main <= PATTERN_OFF; 
            end if; 
          -- Display 0xA on 7-segment display, wait for new
 game 
       ❷ when WINNER => 
            r_Score <= X"A"; -- Winner! 
          -- Display 0xF on 7-segment display, wait for new
 game 
       ❸ when LOSER => 
            r_Score <= X"F"; -- Loser! 
       ❹ when others => 
            r_SM_Main <= START; 
       end case; 
     end if; 
   end if; 
  end process; 
--snip--
In INCR_SCORE ❶, we increment the score variable and compare it with
GAME_LIMIT to check if the game is over. If so, we go to the WINNER state,

--- Page 248 ---
and if not, we go back to PATTERN_OFF to continue the memory sequence.
Notice that we’ll only be in this state for a single clock cycle. You could
perhaps make the argument that INCR_SCORE isn’t a necessary state, and that
this logic should happen in WAIT_PLAYER instead. I chose to treat
INCR_SCORE as a separate state to avoid making WAIT_PLAYER too
complicated.
For the WINNER ❷ and LOSER ❸ states, we simply set the score value to
show an A or F on the seven-segment display and remain in the current
state. The state machine can only leave these states in the event of a reset
condition, in which switches 1 and 2 are both pressed at the same time.
We also include a default clause at the end of the case statement ❹,
which specifies what behavior to take in the event that r_SM_Main isn’t one
of the previously defined states. This shouldn’t ever happen, but it’s good
practice to create a default case where we go back to START. The end
statements at the end of this listing close out the case statement, if…else
statement, and always or process block that the state machine was wrapped
in.
We’ve now finished coding the state machine itself. The rest of the
code in the module handles logic for helping with the tasks that occur
during the various states. First we have the code for randomly generating
the pattern:
Verilog
--snip-- 
  // Register in the LFSR to r_Pattern when game starts 
  // Each 2 bits of LFSR is one value for r_Pattern 2D array 
  always @(posedge i_Clk) 
  begin 
  ❶ if (r_SM_Main == START) 
     begin 
       r_Pattern[0]  <= w_LFSR_Data[1:0]; 
       r_Pattern[1]  <= w_LFSR_Data[3:2]; 
       r_Pattern[2]  <= w_LFSR_Data[5:4]; 
       r_Pattern[3]  <= w_LFSR_Data[7:6]; 
       r_Pattern[4]  <= w_LFSR_Data[9:8]; 

--- Page 249 ---
       r_Pattern[5]  <= w_LFSR_Data[11:10]; 
       r_Pattern[6]  <= w_LFSR_Data[13:12]; 
       r_Pattern[7]  <= w_LFSR_Data[15:14]; 
       r_Pattern[8]  <= w_LFSR_Data[17:16]; 
       r_Pattern[9]  <= w_LFSR_Data[19:18]; 
       r_Pattern[10] <= w_LFSR_Data[21:20]; 
     end 
  end 
--snip--
VHDL
--snip-- 
  -- Register in the LFSR to r_Pattern when game starts 
  -- Each 2 bits of LFSR is one value for r_Pattern 2D array 
  process (i_Clk) is 
  begin 
     if rising_edge(i_Clk) then 
     ❶ if r_SM_Main = START then 
          r_Pattern(0)  <= w_LFSR_Data(1 downto 0); 
          r_Pattern(1)  <= w_LFSR_Data(3 downto 2); 
          r_Pattern(2)  <= w_LFSR_Data(5 downto 4); 
          r_Pattern(3)  <= w_LFSR_Data(7 downto 6); 
          r_Pattern(4)  <= w_LFSR_Data(9 downto 8); 
          r_Pattern(5)  <= w_LFSR_Data(11 downto 10); 
          r_Pattern(6)  <= w_LFSR_Data(13 downto 12); 
          r_Pattern(7)  <= w_LFSR_Data(15 downto 14); 
          r_Pattern(8)  <= w_LFSR_Data(17 downto 16); 
          r_Pattern(9)  <= w_LFSR_Data(19 downto 18); 
          r_Pattern(10) <= w_LFSR_Data(21 downto 20); 
        end if; 
     end if; 
  end process; 
❷ w_Index_SLV <= std_logic_vector(to_unsigned(r_Index, w_Ind
ex_SLV'length)); 
--snip--

--- Page 250 ---
We need to generate a different pattern each time the game is played,
while also making sure the pattern gets “locked in” once the game is
underway. To do this, we first check if we’re in the START state ❶. If so, the
game isn’t currently in progress, so we use the LFSR to create a new
pattern. Recall that the output of our LFSR is a pseudorandom string of bits,
which changes on every clock cycle. We take 2-bit sections from the LFSR
output and place them into the 11 slots in r_Pattern. This will keep
happening every clock cycle until the player releases switches 1 and 2,
triggering the transition out of START. At that point, the current values of
r_Pattern will be locked in for the duration of the game.
In VHDL, we also need to create an intermediary signal, w_Index_SLV
❷, which is just the std_logic_vector representation of r_Index. Again,
since VHDL is strongly typed, you’ll often see intermediary signals used
for generating the “correct” signal types. I could have put this line
anywhere since it’s a combinational assignment; as long as it’s outside of a
process block, its precise location in the file makes no functional
difference.
Next comes the code for illuminating the four LEDs:
Verilog
--snip-- 
  assign o_LED_1 = (r_SM_Main == PATTERN_SHOW && 
                    r_Pattern[r_Index] == 2'b00) ? 1'b1 : i_
Switch_1; 
  assign o_LED_2 = (r_SM_Main == PATTERN_SHOW && 
                    r_Pattern[r_Index] == 2'b01) ? 1'b1 : i_
Switch_2; 
  assign o_LED_3 = (r_SM_Main == PATTERN_SHOW && 
                    r_Pattern[r_Index] == 2'b10) ? 1'b1 : i_
Switch_3; 
  assign o_LED_4 = (r_SM_Main == PATTERN_SHOW && 
                    r_Pattern[r_Index] == 2'b11) ? 1'b1 : i_
Switch_4; 
--snip--

--- Page 251 ---
VHDL
--snip-- 
  o_LED_1 <= '1' when (r_SM_Main = PATTERN_SHOW and 
                       r_Pattern(r_Index) = "00") else i_Swi
tch_1; 
  o_LED_2 <= '1' when (r_SM_Main = PATTERN_SHOW and 
                       r_Pattern(r_Index) = "01") else i_Swi
tch_2; 
  o_LED_3 <= '1' when (r_SM_Main = PATTERN_SHOW and 
                       r_Pattern(r_Index) = "10") else i_Swi
tch_3; 
  o_LED_4 <= '1' when (r_SM_Main = PATTERN_SHOW and 
                       r_Pattern(r_Index) = "11") else i_Swi
tch_4; 
--snip--
Here we have four continuous assignment statements, one for each
LED. In each one, we use the ternary operator (?) in Verilog or when/else
in VHDL to illuminate the LED in one of two cases. First, we’ll drive the
LED high if we’re in the PATTERN_SHOW state and the value at the current
index of r_Pattern matches the current LED. This will only ever be true
for one LED at a time, so only one LED can be illuminated during each
PATTERN_SHOW. Second, if we aren’t in the PATTERN_SHOW state, the LED
will be driven based on the input from its associated switch. This way the
LED will light up when the player presses the corresponding switch, giving
them visual feedback about the pattern they’re entering.
The next part of the code uses falling edge detection to identify
timeouts and button presses:
Verilog
--snip-- 
  // Create registers to enable falling edge detection 
  always @(posedge i_Clk) 
  begin 
  ❶ r_Toggle   <= w_Toggle; 

--- Page 252 ---
  ❷ r_Switch_1 <= i_Switch_1; 
     r_Switch_2 <= i_Switch_2; 
     r_Switch_3 <= i_Switch_3; 
     r_Switch_4 <= i_Switch_4; 
  ❸ if (r_Switch_1 & !i_Switch_1) 
     begin 
       r_Button_DV <= 1'b1; 
       r_Button_ID <= 0; 
     end 
     else if (r_Switch_2 & !i_Switch_2) 
     begin 
       r_Button_DV <= 1'b1; 
       r_Button_ID <= 1; 
     end 
     else if (r_Switch_3 & !i_Switch_3) 
     begin 
       r_Button_DV <= 1'b1; 
       r_Button_ID <= 2; 
     end 
     else if (r_Switch_4 & !i_Switch_4) 
     begin 
       r_Button_DV <= 1'b1; 
       r_Button_ID <= 3; 
     end 
  ❹ else 
     begin 
       r_Button_DV <= 1'b0; 
       r_Button_ID <= 0; 
     end 
  end 
--snip--
VHDL
--snip-- 
  -- Create registers to enable falling edge detection 
  process (i_Clk) is 
  begin 

--- Page 253 ---
    if rising_edge(i_Clk) then 
    ❶ r_Toggle   <= w_Toggle; 
    ❷ r_Switch_1 <= i_Switch_1; 
       r_Switch_2 <= i_Switch_2; 
       r_Switch_3 <= i_Switch_3; 
       r_Switch_4 <= i_Switch_4; 
    ❸ if r_Switch_1 = '1' and i_Switch_1 = '0' then 
         r_Button_DV <= '1'; 
         r_Button_ID <= "00"; 
       elsif r_Switch_2 = '1' and i_Switch_2 = '0' then 
         r_Button_DV <= '1'; 
         r_Button_ID <= "01"; 
       elsif r_Switch_3 = '1' and i_Switch_3 = '0' then 
         r_Button_DV <= '1'; 
         r_Button_ID <= "10"; 
       elsif r_Switch_4 = '1' and i_Switch_4 = '0' then 
         r_Button_DV <= '1'; 
         r_Button_ID <= "11"; 
    ❹ else 
         r_Button_DV <= '0'; 
         r_Button_ID <= "00"; 
       end if; 
    end if; 
  end process; 
--snip--
Notice we are still using the rising edge of the clock; we’re just looking
for falling edges for our timeouts and button presses. Recall that this falling
edge is used to progress through the state machine. We perform falling edge
detection on the output of the Count_And_Toggle module, where the output
represents the timer expiring. We do this by first registering its output,
w_Toggle, and assigning it to r_Toggle ❶. (The actual instantiation of the
Count_And_Toggle module will be handled momentarily.) This creates a
one-clock-cycle-delayed version of w_Toggle on r_Toggle. Then, as shown
previously, we look for the condition where the current value (w_Toggle) is
low, but the previous value (r_Toggle) is high. We used this earlier to
trigger transitions out of PATTERN_OFF and PATTERN_SHOW.

--- Page 254 ---
For our switches, when a switch is pressed, it has the value 1; when a
switch is not pressed, it has the value 0. We are looking for the situation in
which the switch goes from a 1 to a 0, which is the falling edge of the
switch, representing the switch being released. We register each switch ❷
in order to detect the falling edge from the switch being released. This is
followed by the actual edge detection logic ❸. For each switch, when we
see a falling edge, we drive r_Button_DV high. As you’ve seen elsewhere in
the code, this signal serves as a flag to indicate that some switch, any
switch, has been released. We also set r_Button_ID to the switch’s 2-bit
binary code, so we’ll know which switch it was. The else statement ❹
clears r_Button_DV and r_Button_ID to get ready for the next falling edge.
NOTE
I’ve chosen to make the state machine react to button releases rather than
button presses. You could try inverting the test cases ❸ to see the difference.
I think you’ll find it a bit unnatural if the game responds the moment a
button is pressed instead of the moment it’s released.
The final section of the code instantiates the Count_And_Toggle and
LFSR_22 modules. Remember, you’ve seen the code for these modules
before, in Chapter 6:
Verilog
--snip-- 
   // w_Count_En is high when state machine is in 
   // PATTERN_SHOW state or PATTERN_OFF state, else low 
❶ assign w_Count_En = (r_SM_Main == PATTERN_SHOW || 
                        r_SM_Main == PATTERN_OFF); 
❷ Count_And_Toggle #(.COUNT_LIMIT(CLKS_PER_SEC/4)) Count_Ins
t 
    (.i_Clk(i_Clk), 
     .i_Enable(w_Count_En), 
     .o_Toggle(w_Toggle)); 
   // Generates 22-bit-wide random data 
❸ LFSR_22 LFSR_Inst 

--- Page 255 ---
    (.i_Clk(i_Clk), 
     .o_LFSR_Data(w_LFSR_Data), 
   ❹ .o_LFSR_Done()); // leave unconnected 
endmodule
VHDL
--snip-- 
   -- w_Count_En is high when state machine is in 
   -- PATTERN_SHOW state or PATTERN_OFF state, else low 
❶ w_Count_En <= '1' when (r_SM_Main = PATTERN_SHOW or 
                           r_SM_Main = PATTERN_OFF) else
 '0'; 
❷ Count_Inst : entity work.Count_And_Toggle 
   generic map ( 
     COUNT_LIMIT => CLKS_PER_SEC/4) 
   port map ( 
     i_Clk   => i_Clk, 
     i_Enable => w_Count_En, 
     o_Toggle => w_Toggle); 
   -- Generates 22-bit-wide random data 
❸ LFSR_Inst : entity work.LFSR_22 
   port map ( 
     i_Clk       => i_Clk, 
     o_LFSR_Data => w_LFSR_Data, 
   ❹ o_LFSR_Done => open); -- leave unconnected 
❺ o_Score <= std_logic_vector(r_Score); 
end RTL;
First we instantiate the Count_And_Toggle module ❷. As you saw in
Chapter 6, it measures out a set amount of time by incrementing a register
on each clock cycle until it reaches the COUNT_LIMIT parameter/generic.
Here we’ve set COUNT_LIMIT to CLKS_PER_SEC/4 to make each
PATTERN_OFF and PATTERN_SHOW state last a quarter of a second, but feel
free to change this to make the game run faster or slower. Keep in mind that
CLKS_PER_SEC/4 is a constant (in this case, 25,000,000 / 4 = 6,250,000) that
the synthesis tools will calculate in advance, so the division operation

--- Page 256 ---
(which would require a lot of resources) won’t have to be performed inside
the FPGA itself. The continuous assignment of w_Count_En ❶ only enables
the counter during the PATTERN_OFF and PATTERN_SHOW states, since we
don’t want it running during other phases of the game.
Next, we instantiate the LFSR_22 module ❸. Recall from Chapter 6 that
this module has two outputs: o_LFSR_Data for the data itself, and
o_LFSR_Done to signal each repetition of the LFSR’s cycle. For this project
we don’t need o_LFSR_Done, so we leave the unused output unconnected in
Verilog, or use the open keyword in VHDL ❹. When we write general-
purpose modules like this, we won’t always need every single output in
every single application. When we don’t use an output, the synthesis tools
are intelligent enough to remove the associated logic, so there’s no hit to
our resource utilization when we have unused code.
Finally, in VHDL we need to perform one more action: converting
r_Score, which is an unsigned type, to a std_logic_vector so we can
assign that value to o_Score ❺. Because VHDL is strongly typed, you’ll
frequently see type conversions like this when looking at VHDL code.
Testing the Memory Game
The code and state machine diagram that we’ve been looking at here
represent the final version of this game, but it went through some
improvements and fixes as I developed it. A lot of the changes were a result
of me actually playing the game and experimenting to see what I liked and
didn’t like. For example, when I was first designing the state machine, I
went straight from START to PATTERN_SHOW without passing through
PATTERN_OFF. This made the first LED come on immediately, which was
confusing; it was hard to tell whether the game had started or not. So, I
switched the order to add a delay at the outset.
Most of the changes that I made followed this same pattern: program
the board, play the game, see behavior I don’t like, change the code, play
the game. Another example is that the LED on-time was too long initially,
so I decreased it to make the gameplay snappier. These sorts of issues are
more about feel; running a simulation wouldn’t have identified them.
Simulations and testbenches are valuable for understanding where and
why bugs are occurring and how to fix them. Most of my “problems”

--- Page 257 ---
weren’t bugs, but behaviors that I wanted to change based on my
experience playing the game. I did create a testbench that allowed me to
simulate button presses, however, to see how the State_Machine_Game
module responded. That code is available in the book’s GitHub repository,
if you’d like to look at it. It’s a simple testbench, not one that performs any
self-checking, but it did help me find a few bugs when I was initially
writing this state machine.
Adding the Pin Constraints
Since we’ve added a new interface at the highest level (the seven-segment
display), we need to add those signals to our physical constraints file. If we
forget this step, the place and route tool will likely automatically choose
pins for us, which will almost certainly be incorrect. You’ll have to refer to
the schematic for your development board to trace the signal paths from the
seven-segment display back to your FPGA for each signal. Here are the
constraints needed for the Go Board, for example:
set_io o_Segment2_A 100 
set_io o_Segment2_B 99 
set_io o_Segment2_C 97 
set_io o_Segment2_D 95 
set_io o_Segment2_E 94 
set_io o_Segment2_F 8 
set_io o_Segment2_G 96
See Chapter 2 for a reminder on how to add physical constraints to
your iCEcube2 project.
Building and Programming the FPGA
At this point, we’re ready to build the code for the FPGA. Let’s take a look
at the synthesis results of both the Verilog and the VHDL. Your report
should look similar to the following:
Verilog

--- Page 258 ---
--snip-- 
Register bits not including I/Os: 164 (12%) 
--snip-- 
Total LUTs: 239 (18%)
VHDL
--snip-- 
Register bits not including I/Os: 163 (12%) 
--snip-- 
Total LUTs: 225 (17%)
The results are pretty close between the Verilog and VHDL versions;
we’re using about 12 percent of the available flip-flops and 18 percent of
the available LUTs for this project. We have an entire memory game
consisting of a few hundred lines of code, and we’ve used less than 20
percent of the FPGA’s main resources. Not bad!
Program your development board and play the game. See if you can
beat it, and if you can, try increasing the difficulty by changing GAME_LIMIT
up to its maximum difficulty of 11. I found it quite challenging!
Summary
In this chapter you’ve learned about state machines, which are critical
building blocks in many programming disciplines, including FPGAs. State
machines are used to precisely control the flow through a sequence of
operations. The operations are organized into a network of states, with
events that trigger transitions between those states. After reviewing a simple
example, you designed and implemented a sophisticated state machine to
control a memory game for your development board. The project combined
many elements that we’ve discussed throughout the book, including
debounce logic to clean up the inputs from the switches, an LFSR for
pseudorandom number generation, and a counter to keep track of time. You
also learned to use a seven-segment display to create the game’s
scoreboard.

--- Page 259 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 260 ---
9
USEFUL FPGA PRIMITIVES
So far, you’ve learned about the two
most fundamental FPGA components:
the LUT and the flip-flop. These general-purpose
components are the main workhorses in your FPGA,
but there are also other dedicated components that are
commonly used in FPGA designs for more
specialized tasks. These components are usually
called primitives, but they’re also sometimes referred
to as hard IP or cores.
Working with primitives helps you get the most out of your FPGA. In
fact, a lot of modern FPGA development revolves around linking together
these pre-existing primitives, with custom code added as needed for
application-specific logic. In this chapter, we’ll explore three important
primitives: the block RAM (BRAM), the digital signal processor (DSP)
block, and the phase-locked loop (PLL). You’ll learn what role each one
plays within an FPGA and see how to create them through your Verilog or
VHDL code, or with assistance from your build tools.
The primitives we’ll discuss are especially important on higher-end
FPGAs, more advanced than the iCE40 FPGAs we’ve focused on so far.
With these feature-rich FPGAs, the companion GUI software has become a

--- Page 261 ---
critical piece of the build process. These GUIs are more complicated than
the iCEcube2 tool we’ve been working with, and a large part of the
complexity stems from the creation and wiring up of these primitives. Once
you have an understanding of how the primitives work, however, you’ll be
better equipped to start working with these more advanced tools and to take
full advantage of the common built-in features of professional-grade
FPGAs.
How to Create Primitives
There are a few different ways to create an FPGA primitive. Up to this
point, we’ve been writing Verilog or VHDL and letting the synthesis tools
decide for us how to translate that code into primitives. We trust the tools to
understand when we want to create a flip-flop or a LUT. This is called
inference, since we’re letting the tools infer (or make an educated guess
about) what we want based on our code.
In general, the tools are able to understand our intentions quite well.
However, there are some primitives that the synthesis tools won’t be able to
infer. To create those, you need to use another method: you can either
explicitly instantiate the primitive in your code or use the GUI built into
most synthesis tools to automate the creation process.
Instantiation
Instantiation is the creation of a primitive from a code template written by
the FPGA manufacturer. When you instantiate a primitive component, it
looks like you’re instantiating a Verilog or VHDL module—but in this case,
the module you’re instantiating isn’t one you’ve created. Rather, it’s built
into the tools for your specific FPGA. The actual module code behind these
primitives is often unavailable to view; it’s part of the secret sauce that the
FPGA vendors like to keep to themselves.
Let’s look at an example of how to instantiate a block RAM (we’ll talk
more about these primitives later in the chapter):
Verilog

--- Page 262 ---
RAMB18E1 #( 
  // Address Collision Mode: "PERFORMANCE" or "DELAYED_WRIT
E" 
  .RDADDR_COLLISION_HWCONFIG("DELAYED_WRITE"), 
  // Collision check: Values ("ALL", "WARNING_ONLY", "GENERA
TE_X_ONLY" or "NONE") 
  .SIM_COLLISION_CHECK("ALL"), 
  // DOA_REG, DOB_REG: Optional output register (0 or 1) 
  .DOA_REG(0), 
  .DOB_REG(0), 
  // INITP_00 to INITP_07: Initial contents of parity memory 
array 
.INITP_00(256'h000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
0000000000000000000), 
--snip-- 
.INIT_3F(256'h0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
000000000000000000), 
  // INIT_A, INIT_B: Initial values on output ports 
  .INIT_A(18'h00000), 
   .INIT_B(18'h00000), 
  // Initialization File: RAM initialization file 
  .INIT_FILE("NONE"), 
  // RAM Mode: "SDP" or "TDP" 
  .RAM_MODE("TDP"), 
  // READ_WIDTH_A/B, WRITE_WIDTH_A/B: Read/write width per p
ort 
  .READ_WIDTH_A(0),                    // 0-72 
  .READ_WIDTH_B(0),                    // 0-18 
  .WRITE_WIDTH_A(0),                   // 0-18 
  .WRITE_WIDTH_B(0),                   // 0-72 
  // RSTREG_PRIORITY_A, RSTREG_PRIORITY_B: Reset or enable p
riority ("RSTREG" or "REGCE") 
  .RSTREG_PRIORITY_A("RSTREG"), 
  .RSTREG_PRIORITY_B("RSTREG"), 
  // SRVAL_A, SRVAL_B: Set/reset value for output 
  .SRVAL_A(18'h00000), 
  .SRVAL_B(18'h00000), 
  // Simulation Device: Must be set to "7SERIES" for simulat
ion behavior 

--- Page 263 ---
  .SIM_DEVICE("7SERIES"), 
  // WriteMode: Value on output upon a write ("WRITE_FIRST", 
"READ_FIRST", or "NO_CHANGE") 
  .WRITE_MODE_A("WRITE_FIRST"), 
  .WRITE_MODE_B("WRITE_FIRST") 
) 
RAMB18E1_inst ( 
  // Port A Data: 16-bit (each) output: Port A data 
  .DOADO(DOADO), ❶             // 16-bit output: A port dat
a/LSB data 
  .DOPADOP(DOPADOP),            // 2-bit output: A port pari
ty/LSB parity 
  // Port B Data: 16-bit (each) output: Port B data 
  .DOBDO(DOBDO),                // 16-bit output: B port dat
a/MSB data 
  .DOPBDOP(DOPBDOP),            // 2-bit output: B port pari
ty/MSB parity 
  // Port A Address/Control Signals: 14-bit (each) input: Po
rt A address and control signals 
  // (read port when RAM_MODE="SDP") 
  .ADDRARDADDR(ADDRARDADDR),    // 14-bit input: A port addr
ess/Read address 
  .CLKARDCLK(CLKARDCLK),        // 1-bit input: A port cloc
k/Read clock 
--snip--
VHDL
RAMB18E1_inst : RAMB18E1 
generic map ( 
  -- Address Collision Mode: "PERFORMANCE" or "DELAYED_WRIT
E" 
  RDADDR_COLLISION_HWCONFIG => "DELAYED_WRITE", 
  -- Collision check: Values ("ALL", "WARNING_ONLY", "GENERA
TE_X_ONLY" or "NONE") 
  SIM_COLLISION_CHECK => "ALL", 
  -- DOA_REG, DOB_REG: Optional output register (0 or 1) 
  DOA_REG => 0, 
  DOB_REG => 0, 

--- Page 264 ---
  -- INITP_00 to INITP_07: Initial contents of parity memory 
array 
  INITP_00 => X"00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
00000000000000000000", 
--snip-- 
  INIT_3F => X"000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
0000000000000000000", 
  -- INIT_A, INIT_B: Initial values on output ports 
  INIT_A => X"00000", 
  INIT_B => X"00000", 
  -- Initialization File: RAM initialization file 
  INIT_FILE => "NONE", 
  -- RAM Mode: "SDP" or "TDP" 
  RAM_MODE => "TDP", 
  -- READ_WIDTH_A/B, WRITE_WIDTH_A/B: Read/write width per p
ort 
  READ_WIDTH_A => 0,             -- 0-72 
  READ_WIDTH_B => 0,             -- 0-18 
  WRITE_WIDTH_A => 0,            -- 0-18 
  WRITE_WIDTH_B => 0,            -- 0-72 
  -- RSTREG_PRIORITY_A, RSTREG_PRIORITY_B: Reset or enable p
riority ("RSTREG" or "REGCE") 
  RSTREG_PRIORITY_A => "RSTREG", 
  RSTREG_PRIORITY_B => "RSTREG", 
  -- SRVAL_A, SRVAL_B: Set/reset value for output 
  SRVAL_A => X"00000", 
  SRVAL_B => X"00000", 
  -- Simulation Device: Must be set to "7SERIES" for simulat
ion behavior 
  SIM_DEVICE => "7SERIES", 
  -- WriteMode: Value on output upon a write ("WRITE_FIRST", 
"READ_FIRST", or "NO_CHANGE") 
  WRITE_MODE_A => "WRITE_FIRST", 
  WRITE_MODE_B => "WRITE_FIRST" 
) 
port map ( 
  -- Port A Data: 16-bit (each) output: Port A data 
  DOADO => DOADO, ❶             -- 16-bit output: A port dat
a/LSB data 

--- Page 265 ---
  DOPADOP => DOPADOP,            -- 2-bit output: A port par
ity/LSB parity 
  -- Port B Data: 16-bit (each) output: Port B data 
  DOBDO => DOBDO,                -- 16-bit output: B port da
ta/MSB data 
  DOPBDOP => DOPBDOP,            -- 2-bit output: B port par
ity/MSB parity 
  -- Port A Address/Control Signals: 14-bit (each) input: Po
rt A address and control signals 
  -- (read port when RAM_MODE="SDP") 
  ADDRARDADDR => ADDRARDADDR,    -- 14-bit input: A port add
ress/Read address 
  CLKARDCLK => CLKARDCLK,        -- 1-bit input: A port cloc
k/Read clock 
--snip--
This code is an example of instantiation of a RAMB18E1 component
(a type of block RAM) from an AMD FPGA. The code makes the block
RAM available for use by wiring its internal signals to signals external to
the block RAM: for example, it wires the block RAM’s internal DOADO
signal, a 16-bit output, to an external signal of the same name ❶. I’ve
omitted many more lines of code that make similar connections. It’s not
important that you understand the details of this code; it’s just to
demonstrate what instantiation looks like. Clearly a block RAM is a
complicated component, with many bells and whistles available to you.
Instantiation specifies every single input and output of the primitive and
allows you to set them exactly as you want. However, it also requires that
you have a deep knowledge of the primitive being instantiated. If you
connect it improperly, it won’t work as intended.
If you wanted to, it would be possible to instantiate, rather than infer,
even a simple component like a flip-flop. Here’s what AMD’s Verilog
template looks like for instantiating a single flip-flop (which AMD calls an
FDSE):
Verilog

--- Page 266 ---
FDSE #( 
  .INIT(1'b0) // Initial value of register (1'b0 or 1'b1) 
) FDSE_inst ( 
  .Q(Q),      // 1-bit data output 
  .C(C),      // 1-bit clock input 
  .CE(CE),    // 1-bit clock enable input 
  .S(S),      // 1-bit synchronous set input 
  .D(D)       // 1-bit data input 
);
VHDL
FDSE_inst : FDSE 
generic map ( 
  INIT => '0') -- Initial value of register ('0' or '1') 
port map ( 
  Q => Q,      -- Data output 
  C => C,      -- Clock input 
  CE => CE,    -- Clock enable input 
  S => S,      -- Synchronous set input 
  D => D       -- Data input 
);
Notice that this primitive has the normal connections we’d expect from
a flip-flop, including the data output (Q), the clock input (C), the clock
enable (CE), and the data input (D). After instantiating this flip-flop, you
could then make use of these connections in your code. If you had to
instantiate every single flip-flop in your entire FPGA, however, it would
take quite a lot of code!
NOTE
I found the templates for the RAM18E1 block RAM and the FDSE flip-flop
in AMD’s online Libraries Guide, which contains the templates for all
primitives throughout AMD FPGAs. Every FPGA manufacturer has a
similar resource where you’ll find the instantiation templates for its
primitives.

--- Page 267 ---
The benefit of instantiating a primitive is that it gives you exactly what
you want. You don’t need to trust the synthesis tools to guess at what you’re
trying to do. However, there are clearly some downsides. As you’ve just
seen, instantiation takes more code than inference. It also requires you to
wire up every connection correctly, or the design won’t function as
intended. This means you need to understand the primitive at a deep level.
Finally, each primitive needs to be instantiated using a dedicated template
specific to your FPGA vendor, or sometimes specific to just a subset of
devices within a family of FPGAs. For example, the RAMB18E1 block
RAM component we instantiated earlier only exists on AMD FPGAs; Intel
and Lattice FPGAs have their own block RAMs. Therefore, instantiation
makes your code less portable than writing more generic Verilog or VHDL
where the tools can just infer the primitive based on which FPGA you’re
targeting. Next, we’ll look at the alternative: using the GUI.
The GUI Approach
Every FPGA vendor has its own GUI or IDE for FPGA development, and
that GUI will have a section allowing you to view the library of available
primitives for your FPGA. You can select a primitive that you want to add
to your project, and the tool will walk you through the process.
Additionally, the GUI explains how the primitive works and what each
setting controls. Figure 9-1 shows an example of creating a block RAM
using the Lattice Diamond GUI. As mentioned in Chapter 2, this is Lattice’s
IDE for working with higher-end FPGAs with features like the primitives
discussed in this chapter. (The iCEcube2 IDE doesn’t have a GUI for
creating primitives, since it’s designed to work primarily with simpler
FPGAs.)

--- Page 268 ---
Figure 9-1: Instantiating a block RAM with a GUI
The block diagram on the left side of the window visually demonstrates
the block RAM’s inputs and outputs. In the configuration section on the
right, it’s clear which selections for the primitive are mutually exclusive.
These are represented with radio buttons, like Initialize to All 0’s or
Initialize to All 1’s. We can also tell which options can be enabled or
disabled. These are represented by checkboxes, like Enable Output Register
or Enable Output ClockEn. In addition, there’s a convenient Help button in
the bottom-right corner that can guide you through some of these decisions
if you’re unsure what to pick.
Once you’ve configured a primitive with a GUI, you’ll get an
instantiation template that you can drop into your Verilog or VHDL code,
much like the one we looked at in the previous section. The template will be
customized to the exact settings that you picked in the GUI so you can wire

--- Page 269 ---
up your primitive without having to make any guesses about how to
configure it.
Compared to direct instantiation, the GUI method is more approachable
for beginners. You’re much less likely to make a mistake using the GUI,
since you have the menus to guide you, but you can still control exactly
what you get, just like with instantiation. There is an important downside to
this approach, however. If you need to change a setting in your primitive,
then you need to open the GUI and run through the whole process again.
This might not sound like a big deal, but if your design features many
primitives created using a GUI, making adjustments can become quite
tedious and time-consuming.
The Block RAM
A block RAM (BRAM) is a dedicated memory storage component built into
your FPGA. Next to LUTs and flip-flops, block RAMs are the third most
common FPGA primitive. We touched briefly on block RAMs in Chapter 6,
when we discussed common memory modules like RAMs and FIFOs. As I
mentioned in that chapter, when you need a memory over a certain size, it
will be created using a block RAM instead of flip-flops.
Creating memory for storing data is an incredibly common task in
FPGAs. You might use a block RAM for storing read-only data, like
calibration values, or you might regularly write data to a block RAM from
an off-chip device like an analog-to-digital converter (ADC) and then read
from it later. Block RAMs are also commonly used to buffer data between a
producer and a consumer, including when sending data between clock
domains. In this case, the block RAM can be configured as a FIFO, with
features specially designed to handle the metastability issues that arise
when crossing between domains (we discussed how you can transmit data
across cross clock domains back in Chapter 7).
The number of block RAMs available, and the specific features of each
block RAM, will vary from FPGA to FPGA and vendor to vendor. You
should always consult your FPGA’s datasheet and memory guide for details
particular to your model. As an example, Figure 9-2 shows a datasheet
highlighting the block RAMs on Intel’s Cyclone V line of FPGAs.

--- Page 270 ---
Figure 9-2: Block RAMs on the Cyclone V product line
Intel refers to block RAMs as memory blocks. The first of the
highlighted lines in the datasheet is telling us how many of these memory
blocks are available on each of three FPGA models: 176 on the 5CEA2
FPGA, 308 on the 5CEA4, and 446 on the 5CEA5 part. The next line on the
datasheet shows the total number of kilobits (Kb) of block RAM storage
available. Each memory block holds 10Kb (hence the M10K in the name),
so there are 1,760Kb of BRAM storage on the 5CEA2 FPGA, 3,080Kb on
the 5CEA4, and 4,460Kb on the 5CEA5.
You might be surprised by how little storage that really is. Even the
largest amount, 4,460Kb, is less than a megabyte! Consider the fact that you
can get a 32-gigabyte MicroSD card, which has thousands of times more
storage space, for around $10, and you’ll start to appreciate that FPGAs
aren’t designed for storing data in any significant quantity. Rather, block
RAMs are there to buffer data on the FPGA for temporary usage. If you
need to store large amounts of data, you’ll have to use an external chip to do
that. MicroSD cards, DDR memory, SRAM, and flash memory are common
examples of chips that an FPGA might interface to in order to expand its
memory storage and retrieval capabilities.
You should also notice in Figure 9-2 that block RAMs are the fourth
item in the Cyclone V datasheet’s list of FPGA resources, after LEs, ALMs,
and registers. Those are the terms that Intel uses to describe LUTs and flip-
flops (LE stands for logic element and ALM for Adaptive Logic Module).
While you may not always need many block RAMs for your application,
this prime position in the datasheet highlights that block RAMs are often

--- Page 271 ---
one of the most significant primitive components to take into consideration
when choosing an FPGA.
Features and Limitations
There are some common features and some limitations that are helpful to
keep in mind when working with block RAMs. First, block RAMs usually
come in only one size on an FPGA; 16Kb per block RAM is common. This
one-size-fits-all approach means that if you only need to use 4Kb out of the
16Kb, you’ll still use up an entire block RAM primitive. There’s no way to
divide a single block RAM component into multiple memories, and in that
way, block RAMs can be limiting.
In other ways, however, block RAMs can be quite flexible. You can
store data in whatever width you like: for example, with a 16Kb block
RAM you can store data that’s 1 bit wide and 16,384 bits (214) deep, or 8
bits wide and 2,048 deep, or 32 bits wide and 512 deep, among other
possibilities. It’s also possible to create memories that are larger than a
single block RAM. For example, if you needed to store 16 kilobytes (KB)
of data, that would use up eight individual block RAMs (16Kb × 8 =
16KB). The tools are smart enough to cascade the block RAMs and make
them look like one large memory, rather than eight individual components
that you need to index into individually.
Other common features include error detection and correction, where
the block RAM has some extra bits reserved to detect and correct any errors
that might occur within the memory itself (that is, when a 1 changes to a 0,
or vice versa). If that happens in your memory, a value could be completely
corrupted and produce very strange behavior when the FPGA tries to
analyze it.
Error detection and correction are two separate but related processes:
the FPGA can detect some number of bit errors and notify you about their
presence, and, separately, it can automatically correct some number of bit
errors. The number of bit errors that can be corrected is usually less than the
number of bit errors that can be detected. The important thing here is that
error detection and correction within a block RAM are performed
automatically, without you having to do anything.

--- Page 272 ---
Many block RAMs can also be initialized to default values. This can be
a useful feature if you need to store a large number of initial values or if you
want to create read-only memory (ROM). Pushing those values to a block
RAM rather than taking up flip-flops for data storage can be a valuable way
to save resources. We touched on this idea back in Chapter 7, when we were
looking at parts of Verilog and VHDL that are synthesizable and not
synthesizable. Even though reading from a file is normally not
synthesizable—remember that there’s no filesystem on an FPGA unless you
create it yourself—we can read data from files as part of the synthesis
process to preload a block RAM with default values. Again, I recommend
consulting the memory guide for your particular FPGA to find out which
features it supports.
Creation
When using a block RAM in your design, I generally recommend inferring
it. As you saw in Chapter 6, when we create a two-dimensional memory
element, the tools will easily recognize it. Whether or not this memory gets
pushed to a block RAM depends on its size. Again, the synthesis tool is
smart about this: it knows how many bits of memory you’re creating, and if
it’s above some threshold, then it will be pushed to a block RAM.
Otherwise, the tool will just use flip-flops. For example, if you’re creating a
memory that holds 16 bytes, it will likely be pushed to flip-flops. You only
need 16 × 8 = 128 bits of memory, so it doesn’t make much sense to use an
entire 16Kb block RAM for this small quantity of data.
At which point the tools will start pushing memory to block RAMs
instead of using flip-flops is highly dependent on the situation. To find out
what your tool decided for a particular design, consult your utilization
report after synthesis. Here’s an example:
--snip-- 
Number of registers:   1204 out of 84255 (1%) 
--snip-- 
Number of LUT4s:       1925 out of 83640 (2%) 
--snip-- 
❶ Number of block RAMs:  3 out of 208 (1%)

--- Page 273 ---
The utilization report lists the number of block RAMs required ❶, just
as it lists the number of flip-flops (registers) and LUTs (LUT4s, or four-
input LUTs in this case). If you see that no block RAMs are being used,
then your memory was inferred as flip-flops instead. As a reminder, I
always recommend double-checking your utilization report to make sure the
tools are inferring what you expect.
If you’re wary of trying to infer large memory elements, or you’re
confused about which features you may or may not want to take advantage
of in your block RAM, then creating it with a GUI is your best option. The
GUI will guide you through the process, so for beginners it’s very helpful.
Using the GUI is also the best way to ensure that you’re using a FIFO
correctly when crossing clock domains, as it can help you handle the
complexities involved.
The Digital Signal Processing Block
Digital signal processing (DSP) is a catch-all term for performing math-
based operations on signals within a digital system. Often these math
operations need to happen very fast and in parallel, which makes FPGAs an
excellent tool for the job. Since DSP is such a common FPGA application,
another kind of FPGA primitive, the DSP block, exists for this purpose.
DSP blocks (also known as DSP tiles) specialize in performing
mathematical operations, in particular multiply–accumulate (MAC), which
is an operation where a multiplication is followed by an addition. Before we
look more closely at these primitives, however, it’s worth taking a step back
to discuss the difference between analog and digital signals.
Analog vs. Digital Signals
An analog signal is a continuous signal representing some physical
measurement. A common example is the audio signal stored on a vinyl
record (a big black shiny thing that has music on it, sometimes seen in old
movies or new hipster bars). The record is etched with a continuous groove
that mirrors the continuous waveform of the audio. Then a record player
reads that waveform with a needle and amplifies the resulting signal to play
back the sound. The information is always analog; no conversion is needed.

--- Page 274 ---
Digital signals, on the other hand, aren’t continuous. Rather, they
consist of discrete measurements at individual points in time, with gaps in
between. A common example is the audio signal stored on a CD, where the
sound is represented as a series of 1s and 0s. If you have enough discrete
measurements, you can fill in the gaps to create a reasonably accurate
approximation of an analog signal from those digital values. A CD player
reads those digital values and rebuilds an analog waveform from them. The
result is always an approximation of the original analog signal, however,
which is why some audiophiles prefer the true analog signal of a record to
digital media like CDs and MP3s.
Within your common FPGA fabric, like LUTs and flip-flops, data is
represented digitally. So what do you do if you have some analog signal
that you need to bring into your FPGA? This is the purpose of an ADC: it
converts an analog signal into a digital one by sampling it, or recording its
value, at discrete points in time. Figure 9-3 shows how this works.
Figure 9-3: Digital sampling of an analog signal
The undulating line moving from left to right in the figure represents a
continuous analog signal, and the dark points along that line represent the
individual samples taken of that signal to convert it into a digital form.
Notice that the samples are taken at regular time intervals. The frequency at

--- Page 275 ---
which the analog signal is sampled is called the sampling frequency or
sampling rate. The higher the sampling rate, the more accurately we can
represent an analog signal, because it’s easier to connect the discrete dots
into something that looks like the original waveform. However, a higher
sampling rate also means that we have more data that we have to process:
each dot represents some number of bits of digital data, so the more dots
you have, the more bits you’re working with.
Common DSP Tasks
FPGAs commonly take an analog signal as input, digitize it, and then do
some math to process that digital data. As an example, let’s say we have an
audio signal that we’ve sampled within our FPGA. Let’s furthermore
assume that the recorded data was too quiet, so when it’s played back it’s
hard to hear. How can we manipulate the digital signal such that the output
volume is louder? One simple thing we can do is multiply every digital
value by some constant, say 1.6. This is called applying gain to a signal.
How would we accomplish this within an FPGA? It’s quite simple:
gain_adjusted <= input_signal * 1.6;
We take the input_signal, multiply every discrete digital value in that
signal by 1.6, and store the result in the gain_adjusted output. Here is
where the DSP primitive comes into play. When we write code like this, the
synthesis tools will see that we’re performing a multiplication operation and
infer a DSP block for us automatically.
Applying gain to an input signal doesn’t require parallel processing.
There’s only one multiplication operation per data sample, and the data
samples can be processed one after the other. Often, however, you’ll need to
perform many mathematical operations in parallel by running several DSP
blocks simultaneously. A common example is creating a filter, a system that
performs mathematical operations on a signal to reduce or enhance certain
features of the input signal. A low-pass filter (LPF), for instance, keeps the
frequency components of a signal that are below some cutoff while
reducing the frequencies that are above that cutoff, which can be useful for
removing high-frequency noise from an input signal. Lowering the treble

--- Page 276 ---
slider on your audio system is a real-world example of applying a low-pass
filter, since it will reduce high frequencies within the audio. The details of
implementing a digital LPF are beyond the scope of this book, but since it
requires many multiplication and addition operations all occurring at the
same time, FPGAs are well suited for the task.
Another example of parallel math that might be performed in an FPGA
is processing video data to create a blur effect. Blurring video involves
replacing individual pixel values with the average value of a group of
neighboring pixels. This requires performing math on the many pixels in an
image at the same time, and this must happen quickly since the video data
consists of many images per second. An FPGA is very capable of
performing these parallel mathematical operations using DSP blocks.
Features
DSP blocks are versatile primitives, providing many features that facilitate
different math operations. You won’t always need every feature for your
application—most often, you’ll just be performing a multiplication or
addition operation—but for more complicated scenarios, the DSP block can
be set up to solve a wide range of problems. Figure 9-4 provides a detailed
look at a DSP block in an FPGA from AMD. Each manufacturer’s DSP
primitive is a bit different, but this example is representative of the typical
features available.

--- Page 277 ---
Figure 9-4: Block diagram of a DSP primitive
This diagram actually shows a simplified version of the DSP block. It’s
not critical to understand the complete anatomy of the primitive, but it’s
worth pointing out a few things. First, notice that this DSP block can take
up to four inputs and has two outputs. This allows for more applications
than simply multiplying two numbers together: for example, MAC, where
the result of a multiplication is fed back into the input at the next clock
cycle for an addition operation.
Toward the left-hand side of the block diagram, you can see a pre-
adder block. This can be enabled if an addition operation is requested prior
to another mathematical operation. To the right of this, near the middle of
the diagram, is a circle with an X in it. This is the multiplier, which is the
heart of the DSP block. It performs multiplication operations at very high
speeds. To its right is a circle labeled ALU, short for arithmetic logic unit,
which can perform more operations, like addition and subtraction. Finally,
there are built-in output registers that can be enabled to sample the outputs
and help meet timing at fast data rates.
Like the number of block RAMs, the number of DSP blocks available
to you will vary from FPGA to FPGA. Some higher-end FPGAs have
thousands of DSP blocks inside them; again, you should consult your
FPGA’s datasheet for details specific to your model. As an example, Figure

--- Page 278 ---
9-5 highlights the information on DSP blocks in the datasheet for Intel’s
Cyclone V product line.
Figure 9-5: DSP blocks on Cyclone V FPGAs
Notice that the DSP block information comes just below the block
RAM information, again pointing to the importance of these primitives in
FPGA development. The 5CEA2 FPGA has 25 DSP blocks, but that
increases to 66 for the 5CEA4 and 150 for the 5CEA5. Each DSP block has
two multipliers, so on the second highlighted line we can see that there are
twice as many 18 × 18 multipliers (where 18 is the width of the inputs) as
there are DSP blocks.
NOTE
If there aren’t any DSP blocks available on your FPGA, that doesn’t mean
you can’t perform these types of operations. Multiplication and addition
operations will just be implemented with LUTs, rather than with dedicated
DSP blocks. We’ll discuss this further in Chapter 10.
Creation
As with block RAMs, I generally recommend using inference to create DSP
blocks. Most of the multiplication operations you’ll need to do will require
two inputs and one output, as you saw earlier when we applied gain to a
signal. It’s simple enough to write the relevant code in Verilog or VHDL
and let the tools handle the rest. Remember to check your synthesis report

--- Page 279 ---
to ensure that you’re getting what you expect, but I’ve had good luck with
the synthesis tools understanding my intent with addition and multiplication
and pushing those operations to DSPs where relevant. The user guides for
your particular FPGA will also provide you with suggestions on how to
write your Verilog or VHDL code to help ensure the tools understand your
intentions.
If you have more complicated needs for your DSP blocks, or if you
want to explore all of the features and capabilities internal to them, then you
should probably create them using a GUI to ensure you get what you want.
Figure 9-6 shows an example of creating a multiplier within the Lattice
Diamond GUI.
Figure 9-6: Creating a DSP block with a GUI
One thing to highlight here is the Block Implementation drop-down
menu. You can change this from DSP to LUT to use look-up tables rather
than a DSP block to perform this multiplication operation. As mentioned
previously, LUTs and DSPs are both capable of performing math
operations, including multiplication. With the DSP block, however, you’ll

--- Page 280 ---
save LUT resources, and you’ll be able to run the math operation at much
faster clock rates, since you’ll be using a dedicated primitive highly
optimized for math.
The Phase-Locked Loop
The phase-locked loop (PLL) is a primitive commonly used as the main
clock generator for your entire FPGA. Very often, you’ll have an external
clock chip that runs at some frequency. On some FPGAs, you can simply
use that input clock to feed all of your synchronous logic directly, as we’ve
done in this book’s projects. In this case, your logic frequency will be fixed
at the frequency of whatever external clock you picked. But what happens if
you need to change that frequency? Without a PLL, you would need to
physically remove the external clock chip and replace it with a different
component that generates the clock frequency you want to switch to. With a
PLL, however, you can generate a different clock frequency inside your
FPGA by changing a few lines of code, without requiring a new external
component.
PLLs also make it easy to have multiple clock domains in your FPGA
design. Say you have some external memory that runs at 100 MHz, but you
want your main logic to run at 25 MHz. You could purchase a second
external clock and feed that into your FPGA, but a better solution is to use a
PLL, since this primitive can generate multiple clock frequencies
simultaneously.
Not all FPGAs have a PLL, but many have at least one, and some have
several. The datasheet will tell you what’s available. As an example, Figure
9-7 highlights the PLLs available on Intel’s Cyclone V product line.

--- Page 281 ---
Figure 9-7: PLLs on the Cyclone V product line
The 5CEA2 and 5CEA4 FPGAs both have four PLLs, while the
5CEA5 has six. Given that each PLL can generate multiple clocks, that
should be more than enough for all your clocking needs.
How It Works
A PLL serves as the source of your clock distribution throughout your
FPGA by taking a single clock input, often called the reference clock, and
generating one or more clock outputs from it. The input clock comes from a
dedicated external component, and the outputs can run at completely
different frequencies from the input clock and from one another. The block
diagram in Figure 9-8 shows the most common signals on a PLL.
Figure 9-8: Common PLL signals
The PLL typically takes two inputs: a clock signal and a reset. The
reset input will stop the PLL from running when it’s asserted.

--- Page 282 ---
On the output side, the PLL has some number of output clocks in the
range 1 to N, with the maximum number depending on the FPGA. The
output clocks can be of different frequencies, depending on what you need
for your design. These frequencies are achieved by taking the input
reference clock and multiplying and/or dividing it to get the desired value.
For example, say you have a 10 MHz input reference clock, and you want a
15 MHz output clock. The PLL would multiply the reference clock by 3
(giving you 30 MHz), then divide it by 2 to get down to 15 MHz. The
multiplication and division terms must be integers, so it’s important to
realize that you can’t get any arbitrary frequency out of the PLL. It isn’t
possible to get a π MHz clock output from a 10 MHz clock input, for
example, since π is an irrational number that can’t be expressed as the ratio
of two integers.
Besides varying the frequency of the output clock(s), a PLL can also
vary their phase. A signal’s phase is its current position along the repeating
waveform of the signal, measured as an angle from 0 to 360 degrees. It’s
easiest to picture what this means by comparing two signals that share a
frequency but aren’t aligned in time. Figure 9-9 demonstrates some
common phase shifts of a clock signal.
Figure 9-9: Common phase shifts
As this figure shows, shifting the phase of a clock signal results in
moving the location of its rising edges. Compare the first rising edge of Clk
(which has no phase shift) with the first rising edge of Clk+90° (which is
phase-shifted by 90 degrees). The rising edge of Clk+90° is delayed by one-
quarter of a clock period relative to Clk. Each increment of 90 degrees
shifts the signal by another quarter period. Continuing the example in the
figure, we have Clk+180°, which is delayed by 90 degrees from Clk+90°

--- Page 283 ---
and 180 degrees from Clk. Notice that Clk+180° is actually the same
waveform that you would get if you took the Clk signal and inverted it by
swapping the highs and lows. Finally, Clk+270° is delayed by three-quarters
of a clock period relative to the original Clk signal. If you went a full 360
degrees, you’d be back to your original signal. This example has
demonstrated positive phase shifts, but phase can also be negative, meaning
the signal is shifted backward in time compared to the other. Of course, you
can shift the phase by any arbitrary angle, not just in 90-degree steps.
NOTE
Creating clocks with phase shifts isn’t very common in simple designs, but it
can be useful in some applications. For example, it might be important for
interfacing to external components, like some off-FPGA memory.
Returning to the block diagram in Figure 9-8, a PLL also typically has
a locked output signal, which tells any module downstream that the PLL is
operating and you can “trust” the clocks. It’s a common design practice to
use this locked signal as a reset to other modules relying on the PLL’s
clocks. When the PLL isn’t locked, the modules downstream of the PLL are
held in a reset state until the PLL is locked and ready, meaning the output
clocks can be used by other modules in your FPGA design. When the PLL’s
reset input is driven high its locked output will go low, putting the
downstream modules back into a reset condition.
If you’re going to use a PLL in your design, it’s a good idea to use only
the PLL’s outputs for all your clocking needs. Even if part of your design
runs at the same clock frequency as the external reference clock, you
shouldn’t use the external clock directly to drive that part of the design.
Instead, have the PLL output a clock signal at the same frequency as the
external reference. By only using the PLL’s outputs, you can tightly control
the relationships between the output clocks. Additionally, you can
confidently use the locked output of the PLL for your reset circuitry,
knowing it reflects the state that all clocks in your design are operational.
Creation

--- Page 284 ---
The PLL is one primitive that I recommend using a GUI to create, since the
synthesis tools won’t be able to infer a PLL. Instantiation is also possible,
but it’s prone to errors. You need to choose PLL settings that are compatible
with one another for the PLL to work successfully, and during instantiation
it’s easy to pick settings that won’t work. If you had a 10 MHz reference
clock and you wanted to generate one 15 MHz output and a separate 89
MHz output, for example, that simply might not be possible, but you might
miss that fact during instantiation.
When you create a PLL using the GUI, you tell it your input reference
clock and desired output clock frequencies, and the tool will tell you if it
can find a solution that works. Continuing the 10/15/89 MHz example, the
GUI might tell you that the closest value to 89 MHz that it can give you is
90 MHz (since 90 MHz is a multiple of both 10 MHz and 15 MHz, this is
likely to work). Then it’s up to you to decide whether 90 MHz will work for
your design or if you really need 89 MHz, in which case you might need to
use a separate PLL or change your reference clock. Figure 9-10 shows an
example of the PLL GUI within Lattice Diamond.

--- Page 285 ---
Figure 9-10: Creating a PLL with a GUI
As you can see, the GUI helps guide us through the PLL creation
process. In this case, we have a 30 MHz reference on CLKI, and we’re
setting the desired output frequencies to 30 MHz on CLKOP, 60 MHz on
CLKOS, 15 MHz on CLKOS2, and 89 MHz on CLKOS3. Notice that for each
clock except CLKOS3, the actual frequency on the far right matches the
desired frequency. For CLKOS3, when I first tried to create an 89 MHz clock
with 0.0 percent tolerance, I got the error message shown in Figure 9-11.
Figure 9-11: Actionable feedback from invalid PLL settings

--- Page 286 ---
Not until I changed the tolerance to 2.0 percent did the error message
go away; the tool had selected an actual frequency of 90 MHz, which is
within 2.0 percent of the requested frequency. This type of guidance isn’t
provided if you try to instantiate your PLL directly.
Another helpful feature of the GUI is the PLL block diagram, shown in
the left half of Figure 9-10. This diagram will be updated if you modify the
inputs or outputs. For example, if we disabled CLKOS3, that output would
disappear from the block diagram to reflect that we only want to output
three clock signals. This is useful to ensure you’re creating what you
expect. Notice that there’s also a separate Phase tab near the top of the
window, which allows us to specify phase shifts on our output clocks.
After designing a PLL in the GUI, you can run your design through the
normal synthesis process. The utilization report will confirm you’re getting
a PLL, as it’s one of the main primitives highlighted in the report. Here’s an
example:
--snip-- 
Number of PLLs:   1 out of 4 (25%)
This indicates one PLL is being used out of four available on this
particular FPGA.
Summary
The majority of your Verilog and VHDL code will be dedicated to creating
LUTs and flip-flops, which are the two most fundamental FPGA
components. However, as you’ve seen in this chapter, FPGAs also contain
other primitive components, such as block RAMs, DSP blocks, and PLLs,
that add specialized functionality. Block RAMs add dedicated memory,
DSP blocks enable high-speed parallel math operations, and PLLs allow
you to generate different internal clock frequencies. With a combination of
these FPGA building blocks, you’ll be able to solve a wide range of
problems efficiently.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 287 ---
10
NUMBERS AND MATH
Throughout this book, I’ve been saying
that FPGAs are good at performing
mathematical computations quickly. I’ve also been
saying that FPGAs are good at doing tasks in parallel,
and that the combination of these two assets—fast
math done in parallel—is one of their killer features.
In low-level Verilog or VHDL code, however,
working with numbers and math is full of pitfalls.
In this chapter, we’ll explore exactly how FPGAs manage
mathematical calculations so you can avoid those pitfalls. To understand the
details of how operations like addition, subtraction, multiplication, and
division work, we also need to understand how to represent numbers, both
positive and negative, with or without decimals, inside your FPGA. It’s
time for a journey in the wonderful world of computer arithmetic.
Numerical Data Types
There are many ways to represent numbers in Verilog or VHDL, as is true
with all programming languages. For example, if you want to store only
whole numbers, you can use an integer data type, but if you need to store
fractional numbers, you’ll need a data type that can represent decimals.

--- Page 288 ---
Choosing the right type for the data you’re trying to represent is critical in
any programming language. If you assign data to the wrong type, you’ll
either get compiler errors or, worse, a design that behaves strangely. For
example, trying to assign a decimal number to an integer data type could
truncate the fractional component, causing an unintended rounding
operation.
Additionally, you don’t want to use more resources than necessary. For
example, you could create every signal with a 64-bit-wide data type, but
that’s clearly overkill if all you need is a counter that goes from 0 to 7.
FPGAs provide even more granular control over data types than you get
with most other programming languages. For example, C has the uint8_t,
uint16_t, and uint32_t data types, which create data widths of 8, 16, and
32 bits, respectively, but there’s nothing in between. In Verilog and VHDL,
by contrast, you can create a signal that’s 9 bits wide, 15 bits wide, 23 bits
wide, or any other number. We’ll explore recommendations for sizing
signals later in this chapter.
Representing Signed vs. Unsigned Values
When you’re working with numbers, you need to know if they’re positive
or negative. Sometimes, such as if you’re counting clock cycles to keep
track of time, you’ll know the values will all be positive. In this case, you
can store the numbers using an unsigned data type; the sign (positive or
negative) isn’t specified and is assumed to be positive. Other times, you’ll
need to work with negative numbers: for example, when you’re reading
temperature values, where the sign of the numbers might vary. In these
cases you’ll need to use a signed data type, where the positive or negative
sign is specified.
By default, signals in Verilog and VHDL are unsigned. For example, if
we need a counter that counts from 0 to 7, we can declare a signal like reg
[2:0] counter; in Verilog or signal counter : std_logic_vector(2
downto 0); in VHDL. We’ve used code like this throughout the book. It
will create a 3-bit register, and since it’s unsigned by default, the values on
the register will all be interpreted as positive. If we want counter to
represent negative numbers as well as positive ones, we’d have to explicitly
declare it to be signed using the signed keyword. In Verilog we would

--- Page 289 ---
write reg signed [2:0] counter;, and in VHDL we would use signal
counter : signed(2 downto 0);.
NOTE
To access the signed keyword in VHDL, you need to use the numeric_std
package, which you can do by adding the line use ieee.numeric_std.all; at
the top of your file. You may see some code that uses the std_logic_arith
package instead, but this isn’t an official IEEE-supported library and I
don’t recommend using it. It’s easier to make mistakes with this package
than with numeric_std.
Using the signed keyword explicitly tells the tools that this 3-bit-wide
register can represent negative and positive values. But which values can
we actually represent with it? Table 10-1 compares the values represented
by a 3-bit unsigned register and a 3-bit signed register. (We’ll discuss how
to determine the signed values in the next section.)
Table 10-1: 3-Bit Unsigned vs. Signed Decimal Values
Bits Unsigned decimal value Signed decimal value
000 0 0
001 1 1
010 2 2
011 3 3
100 4 –4
101 5 –3
110 6 –2
111 7 –1
Notice that when a register is declared as signed, we lose some
numbers on the positive end of the range (4, 5, 6, and 7 in this case) but
gain some numbers on the negative end (–1, –2, –3, and –4). The range of
numbers that can be represented by an unsigned register is 0 to 2N − 1,
where N is the number of bits available. For this 3-bit register, we can
represent from 0 to 23 − 1 = 7 if the register is unsigned. On the other hand,
the range of numbers that can be represented by a signed register is –2(N–1) to

--- Page 290 ---
2(N–1) − 1. In this case, that gives us –2(3–1) to 2(3–1) − 1, or = –4 to 3. The data
is still 3 bits of binary data, but what that binary data represents is different.
Another feature to notice in Table 10-1 is that the values that are
negative all have a 1 in the most significant bit position. In fact, the most
significant bit in a signed number is the sign bit, which indicates whether
the number being represented is positive or negative. For signed binary
numbers, a 0 in the sign bit tells you that the number is positive, while a 1
in the sign bit tells you that the number is negative.
Taking the Two’s Complement
How do you know what decimal value a negatively signed binary number is
supposed to represent? You take its two’s complement, a mathematical
operation where you invert the number’s bits and then add 1. For example,
take the binary number 101. If this were an unsigned number, we’d interpret
it as 5 in decimal, but if it’s a signed number, the 1 in the sign bit tells us
that the represented value should be negative, so we have to take the two’s
complement. First, we invert 101, which gives us 010. Then we add 1,
giving us 011, which is 3 in decimal. Finally, we apply the negative sign to
get –3. Look back at Table 10-1 and you’ll see that’s what we have in the
row for 101.
NOTE
An alternative to the invert-and-add-one method is to start at the right-most
(least significant) bit, move left until you get to the first 1, then invert all the
remaining bits to the left of that 1. For example, 100010 100 becomes
011101 100. The three bolded bits, up to and including the first 1 from the
right, remain the same, while the others are inverted. In decimal, 011101100
is 236; applying the negative sign, we know that 100010100 represents –
236. This method avoids the need for addition and can be simpler for long
numbers.
We can also take a two’s complement to go in the other direction,
converting a negative decimal number into its signed binary representation.
For example, how would we represent –1 in binary using 3 bits? First, strip
away the negative sign to get 1, which is 001 in binary. Then invert the bits

--- Page 291 ---
to get 110, and add 1 to get 111. Again, check Table 10-1 and you’ll see that
this is the correct result.
Taking the two’s complement is a useful trick us humans can use to
better understand how to interpret signed numbers, but this invert-and-add-
one logic isn’t something an FPGA actually does when working with
negative values. The data is binary 1s and 0s whether a number is signed or
unsigned. It’s just the representation of those 1s and 0s that makes a
difference. When you have a 3-bit unsigned signal set to 101, that represents
the decimal value 5. When you have a 3-bit signed signal set to 101, that
represents the decimal value –3. The FPGA doesn’t have to invert and add
bits anywhere to know that. It just needs to know that the signal is of a
signed data type. This is an important point and will become clearer as we
explore mathematical operations in binary.
Sizing Signals Appropriately
When you write Verilog or VHDL code working with signed and unsigned
data types, you must ensure that you properly size the signals you’re
creating. If you try to store too large of a number in too small of a signal,
you’ll get data loss. As we just discussed, for example, the value of a 3-bit
unsigned counter maxes out at 7. If you try to increment it again from 7, it
won’t go to 8; it’ll actually go back to 0. This is sometimes called
wraparound, and if you’re not expecting it, you’ll end up losing count. As
you’ll see later in the chapter, ensuring your signals are large enough to
handle your data is particularly important when the signals are for holding
the results of mathematical operations.
To avoid data loss you might be tempted to make all your signals larger
than they need to be, but there’s a downside to this, too: you’ll end up using
more of your FPGA’s precious resources than are needed. This may be less
of a problem than you think, though. If the synthesis tools are smart
enough, they might detect that your possible range of values is smaller than
the signal you’ve created and remove the upper bits that are unused to
conserve resources. If the tools did this to our counter register, for
example, we’d see a warning saying something like Pruning register
counter in the synthesis report. Getting a warning like this isn’t usually a
problem, but it might indicate code you could revisit and size differently.

--- Page 292 ---
As a rule of thumb, you should aim to size your signals to the values
you expect them to store, but know that making them too large is a much
better solution than making them too small. Of course, you have to
remember that the maximum value you can represent with a given number
of bits varies depending on whether the values are signed or unsigned. For
comparison, Table 10-2 summarizes the ranges of possible unsigned and
signed values you can represent using between 2 and 8 bits.
Table 10-2: N-bit Sizing for Unsigned and Signed Data Types
Width Type Min integer Min binary Max integer Max binary
2 Unsigned 0 00 3 11
2 Signed –2 10 1 01
3 Unsigned 0 000 7 111
3 Signed –4 100 3 011
4 Unsigned 0 0000 15 1111
4 Signed –8 1000 7 0111
5 Unsigned 0 00000 31 11111
5 Signed –16 10000 15 01111
6 Unsigned 0 000000 63 111111
6 Signed –32 100000 31 011111
7 Unsigned 0 0000000 127 1111111
7 Signed –64 1000000 63 0111111
8 Unsigned 0 00000000 255 11111111
8 Signed –128 10000000 127 01111111
Starting at a width of 2 bits, we can represent the numbers 0 to 3
unsigned, or –2 to 1 signed. At a width of 8 bits, we can represent 0 to 255
unsigned, or –128 to 127 signed.
One way to bypass the sizing dilemma is to size your signals
dynamically, instead of setting them to a fixed width. We’ve seen some
examples of this throughout the book. For instance, if you need to index
into something 32 words deep but that depth could change in the future, you
could write something like reg [$clog2(DEPTH)-1:0] index; instead of
reg [4:0] index; in Verilog, or signal index : integer range 0 to

--- Page 293 ---
DEPTH-1; instead of signal index : std_logic_vector(4 downto 0); in
VHDL. Here, DEPTH is a parameter/generic that can be changed on the fly.
Using it will generate a signal of the exact bit width you need, wide enough
to index into all possible values from 0 to DEPTH-1, with no extra headroom.
In this case, you would set DEPTH to 32, but if your indexing requirement
were to grow to some larger value (say 1,024), the code won’t break; all
you’ll have to do is change DEPTH. By contrast, if you arbitrarily say that
index will be fixed to 8 bits wide (which has a maximum value of 255, as
you can see in Table 10-2), then your code might break in the future if your
requirements grow beyond that range.
Converting Between Types in VHDL
VHDL has many numeric data types, including signed and unsigned,
where binary values are interpreted as positive or negative decimal
numbers; integer, where you can type numbers directly into the code; and
std_logic_vector, where by default binary values aren’t interpreted as
anything other than binary values. Because VHDL is strongly typed, you’ll
often need to convert between these different data types when you’re
working with numbers. Before we do any math, let’s look at some examples
of how to implement common VHDL type conversions using the
numeric_std package (not the unofficial std_logic_arith).
NOTE
Verilog users don’t need to worry about performing these conversions, since
Verilog is loosely typed. VHDL users should consult this section as needed
for reference.
From Unsigned or Signed to Integer
This example illustrates how to convert from the unsigned or signed type
to the integer type. For simplicity, we’re assuming the signals are all 4 bits
wide, but the conversion will work for any bit width:
signal in1  : unsigned(3 downto 0); 
signal in2  : signed(3 downto 0); 
signal out1 : integer; 

--- Page 294 ---
signal out2 : integer; 
out1 <= to_integer(in1); 
out2 <= to_integer(in2);
For these conversions, all we need to do is call the to_integer()
function from the numeric_std package. We already know the width and
the sign of the input, so the output will be sized automatically. This works
whether the input is unsigned (as with in1) or signed (as with in2).
From Integer to Unsigned, Signed, or std_logic_vector
This example shows how to convert from the integer type to one of the
other types. Again, we’re assuming 4-bit signals:
signal in1  : integer; 
signal out1 : unsigned(3 downto 0); 
signal out2 : signed(3 downto 0); 
signal out3 : std_logic_vector(3 downto 0); 
signal out4 : std_logic_vector(3 downto 0); 
❶ out1 <= to_unsigned(in1, out1'length); 
❷ out2 <= to_signed(in1, out2'length); 
-- Positive integers: 
❸ out3 <= std_logic_vector(to_unsigned(in1, out3'length)); 
-- Negative integers: 
❹ out4 <= std_logic_vector(to_signed(in1, out4'length));
Here we use the to_unsigned() ❶ and to_signed() ❷ functions from
numeric_std to convert from the integer to the unsigned or signed type.
In addition to the value to be converted, these functions require the width of
the output signal as an argument. Rather than entering the width manually,
we get it by applying 'length, a VHDL attribute, to the output signal. This
keeps the code flexible; if the width changes, the conversion code doesn’t
have to.
To get to std_logic_vector, we have to convert from integer to
unsigned if the integer is positive ❸, or to signed if the integer is negative
❹. Then, once we have an unsigned or signed value of the proper width, we
cast it using std_logic_vector().

--- Page 295 ---
From std_logic_vector to Unsigned, Signed, or Integer
Finally, here’s how to convert from the std_logic_vector type to one of
the other numeric types:
signal in1  : std_logic_vector(3 downto 0); 
signal out1 : unsigned(3 downto 0); 
signal out2 : signed(3 downto 0); 
signal out3 : integer; 
signal out4 : integer; 
❶ out1 <= unsigned(in1); 
❷ out2 <= signed(in1); 
-- Demonstrates the unsigned case: 
❸ out3 <= to_integer(unsigned(in1)); 
-- Demonstrates the signed case: 
❹ out4 <= to_integer(signed(in1));
To get to unsigned ❶ or signed ❷, we use a simple cast. However,
VHDL needs to know if the std_logic_vector is unsigned or signed
before converting to the integer type. We perform the appropriate cast
using unsigned() ❸ or signed() ❹, then call the to_integer() function
to do the final conversion.
Performing Mathematical Operations
Now we’ll consider how basic addition, subtraction, multiplication, and
division operations are performed within an FPGA, and how to implement
them in Verilog and VHDL. I’ll suggest some rules that, if followed, will
help you avoid many of the commit pitfalls when working with binary
math. The best way to explore these concepts is through examples. To that
end, we’ll create a large testbench that you can run in a simulator tool like
EDA Playground. The testbench will execute dozens of different math
equations, illustrating how binary math operations should be carried out and
how they can go awry.
In general, when working with numbers and manipulating them with
algebraic operations, testbenches are a very powerful tool. Hidden math
issues in your code can manifest themselves in strange ways. Testbenches

--- Page 296 ---
allow you to stress your design by running through a large range of possible
inputs, to see how the code works. I find it valuable to inject data into my
testbenches that stress the math operations over a wide range of values,
including minimum and maximum inputs. This helps ensure a design is
robust.
Before we do any math, let’s set up our testbench, called
Math_Examples, by declaring all the necessary inputs and outputs, as well
as some helper functions in the VHDL version. This setup code provides
the skeleton for the examples that follow throughout the rest of the chapter.
The code for each example will go where the -- snip-- is shown in the
setup code:
Verilog
module Math_Examples(); 
  reg unsigned [3:0] i1_u4, i2_u4, o_u4; 
  reg signed   [3:0] i1_s4, i2_s4, o_s4; 
  reg unsigned [4:0] o_u5, i2_u5; 
  reg signed   [4:0] o_s5, i1_s5, i2_s5; 
  reg unsigned [5:0] o_u6; 
  reg unsigned [7:0] o_u8, i_u8; 
  reg signed   [7:0] o_s8; 
  initial begin 
     --snip-- 
     $finish(); 
  end 
endmodule
VHDL
library ieee; 
use ieee.std_logic_1164.all; 
use ieee.numeric_std.all; 
use std.env.finish; 
entity Math_Examples is 
end entity Math_Examples; 
architecture test of Math_Examples is 

--- Page 297 ---
  -- Takes input unsigned, returns string for printing 
❶ function str(val : in unsigned) return string is 
  begin 
    return to_string(to_integer(val)); 
  end function str; 
  -- Takes input signed, returns string for printing 
❷ function str(val : in signed) return string is 
  begin 
    return to_string(to_integer(val)); 
  end function str; 
  -- Takes input real, returns string for printing 
❸ function str(val : in real) return string is 
  begin 
    return to_string(val, "%2.3f"); 
  end function str; 
begin 
  process is 
    variable i1_u4, i2_u4, o_u4 : unsigned(3 downto 0); 
    variable i1_u5, i2_u5, o_u5 : unsigned(4 downto 0); 
    variable i1_s4, i2_s4, o_s4 : signed(3 downto 0); 
    variable i1_s5, i2_s5, o_s5 : signed(4 downto 0); 
    variable i1_u6, i2_u6, o_u6 : unsigned(5 downto 0); 
    variable i1_u8, i2_u8, o_u8 : unsigned(7 downto 0); 
    variable i1_s8, i2_s8, o_s8 : signed(7 downto 0); 
    variable real1, real2, real3 : real; 
  begin 
    --snip-- 
    wait for 1 ns; 
    finish; 
    end process; 
end test;
The skeleton for this testbench sets up a single initial (in Verilog) or
process (in VHDL) block that runs once through. We’ll fill in this block
with examples later in the chapter. Notice that we’ve declared a number of
signals using reg (in Verilog) and variable (in VHDL). This is the first
time we’ve seen the variable keyword in VHDL: we need it so we can

--- Page 298 ---
write blocking assignment statements in the testbench. See “Blocking vs.
Non-Blocking Assignments” on page 214 for more information.
The examples in this chapter use a common naming scheme to quickly
identify the data types and widths of the signals so you don’t have to keep
looking back at the signal definitions. The prefix i indicates an input to a
math equation, while o indicates an output, the result of the math equation.
In addition, we have the suffixes _uN and _sN, where u represents unsigned,
s represents signed, and N represents the bit width of the signal. For
example, o_s4 is a 4-bit-wide signed output. Establishing a scheme like this
that makes it easier to remember data types and widths can be very helpful
in your code, especially if there are many values in a single file.
Notice in the VHDL that we declare a custom function, str(), to help
convert the outputs of our equations to strings for printing. This will save us
a lot of typing in the examples later on. We actually define the function in
three different ways, depending on the data type involved—because VHDL
is strongly typed, we need to define all the supported function inputs so that
the compiler knows which one to use. The first definition ❶ converts an
unsigned value, the second ❷ converts a signed value, and the third ❸
converts a real value. This is an example of function overloading, a
programming technique where a single function can have multiple
implementations. Overloading is a somewhat advanced VHDL concept, but
it’s very useful. You can even overload normal VHDL operators like + and
– with any implementation that you need, though I don’t recommend doing
so.
Now that we have our testbench set up, we’re ready to start exploring
math operations.
BLOCKING VS. NON-BLOCKING ASSIGNMENTS
Up to this point, we have been assigning all signals within our always, initial, and process
blocks with <=, which is a non-blocking assignment. As we discussed in Chapter 4, this means
that these statements execute at the same instant in time. Non-blocking assignments are what
allow us to write several statements one after the other that will all execute on the same clock
edge. These assignments are key to FPGA design; they are how we can write operations that
occur in parallel, instead of serially. Remember, flip-flops that share the same clock are all
updated on the same clock edge, all at once.

--- Page 299 ---
There’s also such a thing as a blocking assignment, however, written with = in Verilog or :=
for VHDL variables, where the next line of code won’t execute until the current line is finished
running. Blocking assignments are probably familiar if you have experience with conventional
programming languages. We’re used to the idea that when we write two lines of code in a
language like C or Python, the second line won’t execute until the first line is done. In FPGA
design, however, non-blocking assignments are the norm. They’re the preferred way to generate
sequential logic (flip-flops). When in doubt, stick to non-blocking assignments in your always,
initial, and process blocks.
An exception is if you’re writing a testbench, where blocking assignments are useful when
data needs to be updated at an exact point during the simulation, especially for printing. To see
why, consider this Verilog testbench code:
int test = 0; 
initial begin 
  test <= 7; 
  $display("value is %d\n", test);
We change the value of test from 0 to 7, then use $display to print it out. But what value
of test will be printed to the console? It’s actually going to be 0, not 7. The line test <= 7;
uses a non-blocking assignment, so it happens at the same time as the printing. Therefore, the
value of test won’t have updated yet when $display reads that value for printing. We can fix
this issue by using a blocking assignment instead:
int test = 0; 
initial begin 
  test = 7; 
  $display("value is %d\n", test);
Thanks to the blocking assignment (test = 7;), the simulation will wait to execute the
$display line until the value of test has been updated. The value will now print out as 7,
which is probably what was intended.
Another way you can fix this issue is to add a small delay between the non-blocking
assignment and the next line, like this:
test <= 7; 
#1; 
$display("value is %d\n", test);
The short delay (#1) provides enough simulation time for the non- blocking assignment to
complete before printing, so the value will be displayed as 7.
In the testbench examples throughout this chapter, we’ll be updating and then printing out a
lot of values. Rather than add a bunch of small delays throughout the testbench, we’ll use

--- Page 300 ---
blocking assignments to ensure the values are updated before printing. Keep in mind that (as
mentioned previously) to use the blocking assignment in VHDL, we need to declare values
using the variable keyword rather than the signal keyword.
Addition
Adding binary data works the same way you were taught to add numbers in
elementary school: you add them one digit at a time, working from right to
left. For example, here’s how to add the binary numbers 0010 and 1000:
  0010 
+ 1000 
------ 
 01010
To arrive at the result, you simply go digit by digit, starting with the
least significant bit, adding the digits in that column together. If you get 1 +
1 = 10 in a column, then you write 0 at the bottom of the column and carry
the 1 to the next digit to the left.
Notice that the result of adding two 4-bit numbers together is 5 bits
wide. This is our first rule of FPGA math:
Rule #1 When adding, the result should be at least 1 bit bigger than the
biggest input.
The extra bit is needed in the case where adding the most significant bit
requires a carry operation. Without the extra bit, we’d be truncating the
result, which could produce an incorrect answer. In our first example,
dropping the most significant bit wouldn’t make a difference, but consider
this example where having that extra bit is critical:
  1001 
+ 1011 
------ 
 10100
Here, the most significant bit of the result is a 1. Had we just assumed
that the output width would be the same as the input widths, then we would

--- Page 301 ---
have dropped this bit and gotten the wrong answer. Our result would have
been 0100 instead of 10100.
Perhaps you’ve noticed that I haven’t explicitly said what these binary
numbers represent yet, and whether they’re positive or negative. For
example, is 1001 unsigned and equal to 9, or is it signed and equal to the
two’s complement of 9, which is –7 (invert the bits to get 0110, then add 1
to get 0111)? The reason I haven’t specified this is because the
representation of the binary data ultimately doesn’t affect how the math is
performed, as long as the inputs and outputs are sized appropriately.
Whether 1001 represents +9 or –7, the addition operation will be performed
the same way. Of course, we care if the result is positive or negative, but the
implementation of the addition doesn’t change depending on whether the
data types are signed or unsigned. Let’s revisit our first example and
consider what happens when we assign it various signed and unsigned
combinations. Here’s the example again:
  0010 
+ 1000 
------ 
 01010
If both addition inputs are declared as unsigned types, then we have 2 +
8 = 10. Pretty simple. If both addition inputs are declared as signed, then the
first input is still 2, but the second input is –8. (Invert the bits to get 0111,
add 1 to get 1000, and apply the negative sign to get –8.) So now we have 2
+ –8, which should equal –6, but the result, 01010, is still 10. Something
isn’t right here!
The problem is that we’re not performing sign extension on the inputs.
Sign extension is the operation of increasing the number of bits of a binary
number while preserving the number’s sign and value. This operation is
required when the inputs are signed. Without it, we’ll get an incorrect
answer, as you’ve just seen. To perform sign extension on a signed value,
simply replicate the most significant bit. For example, 1000 becomes 11000,
and 0010 becomes 00010. Let’s try that math again, this time first applying
sign extension to our inputs:

--- Page 302 ---
  00010 
+ 11000 
------- 
  11010
Our inputs are still 2 and –8. (For the latter, invert the bits of 11000 to
get 00111, add 1 to get 01000, and apply the negative sign to get –8.) The
answer, 11010, is the signed equivalent of –6, which is exactly what we
want. Sign extension was the critical step to ensure we got the expected
answer.
Sign extension is useful for unsigned values, too. In fact, since VHDL
is strongly typed, the inputs and outputs to an addition operation must all
have exactly the same width. You can’t, for example, add two 4-bit inputs
to produce a 5-bit output; everything must be 5 bits. That means we should
revisit Rule #1 and add a small modification:
Rule #1 (modification #1) When adding, the result should be at least 1
bit bigger than the biggest input, before sign extension. Once sign
extension is applied, the input and output widths should match exactly.
For unsigned values, sign extension simply means adding a 0 as the
new most significant bit. For example, unsigned 1000 becomes 01000. The
good news for those of you using Verilog is that the code performs sign
extension automatically when you’re adding numbers. If you’re using
VHDL, however, you’ll need to sign-extend your inputs manually using the
resize() function, as you’ll see in the coming examples. Both approaches
have their pros and cons. Verilog is easier if you know what you’re doing,
as there’s less to worry about, but it also leaves more room for mistakes (for
example, trying to store data in too small a signal). VHDL’s extra steps can
be more confusing for beginners, and it generates cryptic errors when the
rules aren’t followed. On the other hand, VHDL ensures that you’ve
matched widths and types every step along the way, so there’s less room for
error in the end.
Let’s summarize what we’ve learned with a few code examples. Add
this code to your testbench where you saw the -- snip-- earlier:
Verilog

--- Page 303 ---
   // Unsigned + Unsigned = Unsigned (Rule #1 violation) 
   i1_u4 = 4'b1001; // dec 9 
   i2_u4 = 4'b1011; // dec 11 
   o_u4  = i1_u4 + i2_u4; 
   $display("Ex01: %2d + %2d = %3d", i1_u4, i2_u4, o_u4); 
   // Signed + Signed = Signed (Rule #1 violation) 
   i1_s4 = 4'b1001; // dec -7 
   i2_s4 = 4'b1011; // dec -5 
   o_s4  = i1_s4 + i2_s4; 
   $display("Ex02: %2d + %2d = %3d", i1_s4, i2_s4, o_s4); 
   // Unsigned + Unsigned = Unsigned (Rule #1 fix) 
   i1_u4 = 4'b1001; // dec 9 
   i2_u4 = 4'b1011; // dec 11 
   o_u5  = i1_u4 + i2_u4; 
   $display("Ex03: %2d + %2d = %3d", i1_u4, i2_u4, o_u5); 
   // Signed + Signed = Signed (Rule #1 fix) 
   i1_s4 = 4'b1001; // dec -7 
   i2_s4 = 4'b1011; // dec -5 
   o_s5  = i1_s4 + i2_s4; 
   $display("Ex04: %2d + %2d = %3d", i1_s4, i2_s4, o_s5);
VHDL
   -- Unsigned + Unsigned = Unsigned (Rule #1 violation) 
   i1_u4 := "1001"; -- dec 9 
   i2_u4 := "1011"; -- dec 11 
   o_u4  := i1_u4 + i2_u4; 
   report "Ex01: " & str(i1_u4) & " + " & str(i2_u4) & " = " 
& str(o_u4); 
   -- Signed + Signed = Signed (Rule #1 violation) 
   i1_s4 := "1001"; -- dec -7 
   i2_s4 := "1011"; -- dec -5 
   o_s4  := i1_s4 + i2_s4; 
   report "Ex02: " & str(i1_s4) & " + " & str(i2_s4) & " = " 
& str(o_s4); 
   -- Unsigned + Unsigned = Unsigned (Rule #1 fix) 
   i1_u4 := "1001"; -- dec 9 
   i2_u4 := "1011"; -- dec 11 

--- Page 304 ---
   ❶ i1_u5 := resize(i1_u4, i1_u5'length); 
   i2_u5 := resize(i2_u4, i2_u5'length); 
   o_u5  := i1_u5 + i2_u5; 
   report "Ex03: " & str(i1_u5) & " + " & str(i2_u5) & " = " 
& str(o_u5); 
   -- Signed + Signed = Signed (Rule #1 Fix) 
   i1_s4 := "1001"; -- dec -7 
   i2_s4 := "1011"; -- dec -5 
   i1_s5 := resize(i1_s4, i1_s5'length); 
   i2_s5 := resize(i2_s4, i2_s5'length); 
   o_s5  := i1_s5 + i2_s5; 
   report "Ex04: " & str(i1_s5) & " + " & str(i2_s5) & " = " 
& str(o_s5);
Here’s the output:
Verilog
# Ex01:  9 + 11 =   4 
# Ex02: -7 + -5 =   4 
# Ex03:  9 + 11 =  20 
# Ex04: -7 + -5 = -12
VHDL
# ** Note: Ex01: 9 + 11 = 4 
#    Time: 0 ns  Iteration: 0   Instance: /math_examples 
# ** Note: Ex02: -7 + -5 = 4 
#    Time: 0 ns  Iteration: 0   Instance: /math_examples 
# ** Note: Ex03: 9 + 11 = 20 
#    Time: 0 ns  Iteration: 0   Instance: /math_examples 
# ** Note: Ex04: -7 + -5 = -12 
#    Time: 0 ns  Iteration: 0   Instance: /math_examples
First, we have two situations (Ex01 and Ex02) where Rule #1 isn’t
followed. We’re using 4-bit inputs and storing the result in a 4-bit output,
and we’re not performing any sign extension. In both of these examples, we

--- Page 305 ---
get the wrong answer. In Ex01, we add two unsigned numbers, 9 and 11, but
get 4 as a result. The problem here is that we’re dropping the most
significant bit, which would be worth 16. (Indeed, 4 + 16 = 20, which is the
answer we should be getting.) In Ex02, we add two signed numbers
representing negative values, and again we get the wrong answer.
The fix is to store the result in a 5-bit output, which we do in both Ex03
and Ex04. We’ve satisfied Rule #1, so the math works correctly. Notice that
in the Verilog version, the sign extension happens automatically: we can
simply assign 4-bit inputs to a 5-bit output, for example by writing o_u5 =
i1_u4 + i2_u4;. In VHDL, however, we must explicitly match input and
output widths, while preserving the sign and value of each input. To do this,
we call the resize() function ❶. We use the VHDL tick attribute 'length
to reference the length of the output signal, as we did when we were
performing type conversions. Again, this is more flexible than hardcoding
the desired width by writing something like resize(i1_u4, 5).
Another tip for performing successful addition operations is to never
mix signed and unsigned values. Your inputs and outputs should be of the
same type; otherwise you might get an incorrect answer. This brings us to
our second rule of FPGA math:
Rule #2 Match types among inputs and outputs.
With VHDL, it’s easy to follow Rule #2 because it will throw an error
if you try to do a math operation where one input is signed and the other is
unsigned. For example, say you write this in your testbench to try to add a
4-bit unsigned value (i1_u4) to a 4-bit signed value (i2_s4):
  o_u4 := i1_u4 + i2_s4;
You’ll end up with an error message indicating the tool doesn’t know
how to interpret the + operator given those inputs:
** Error: testbench.vhd(49): (vcom-1581) No feasible entries 
for infix 
operator '+'.

--- Page 306 ---
Verilog is much more lenient. It will happily let you perform that math
operation, and it won’t tell you that it’s actually treating your signed input
as unsigned. This can very possibly result in the wrong answer, so be
careful to always match your data types in Verilog.
Subtraction
Subtraction isn’t that different from addition. After all, subtraction is just an
addition operation where one of the inputs is negative. In this sense, we’ve
been doing subtraction all along; 2 + –8 is the same as 2 – 8. Likewise, you
can think of something like 5 – 3 as 5 + –3 and approach it like an addition
operation.
There’s one thing to be careful with when subtracting two numbers,
though: while you could use subtraction with unsigned inputs and outputs, I
wouldn’t recommend it. What happens if the result should be negative? For
example, 3 – 5 = –2, but if you try to store –2 into an unsigned data type,
you won’t get the correct result. This brings us to our next rule:
Rule #3 When subtracting, use signed inputs and outputs.
Even if you don’t think the result of a subtraction will produce a
negative number, you should use signed data types to be safe.
Because subtraction is really just negative addition, subtraction carries
the same risk that you could truncate the result if the output isn’t sized
appropriately. Again, it’s better to size up the output by 1 bit and to sign-
extend your inputs before performing the math operation. This gives us a
further modified Rule #1:
Rule #1 (modification #2) When adding or subtracting, the result
should be at least 1 bit bigger than the biggest input, before sign
extension. Once sign extension is applied, the input and output widths
should match exactly.
With those two rules in place, let’s extend our Math_Examples
testbench to take a look at some subtraction operations in Verilog and
VHDL:
Verilog

--- Page 307 ---
    // Unsigned - Unsigned = Unsigned (bad) 
    i1_u4 = 4'b1001; // dec 9 
    i2_u4 = 4'b1011; // dec 11 
    o_u5  = i1_u4 - i2_u4; 
    $display("Ex05: %2d - %2d = %3d", i1_u4, i2_u4, o_u5); 
    // Signed - Signed = Signed (fix) 
    i1_u4 = 4'b1001; // dec 9 
    i2_u4 = 4'b1011; // dec 11 
 ❶ i1_s5 = i1_u4; 
    i2_s5 = i2_u4; 
    o_s5  = i1_s5 - i2_s5; 
    $display("Ex06: %2d - %2d = %3d", i1_s5, i2_s5, o_s5);
VHDL
    -- Unsigned - Unsigned = Unsigned (bad) 
    i1_u4 := "1001"; -- dec 9 
    i2_u4 := "1011"; -- dec 11 
    i1_u5 := resize(i1_u4, i1_u5'length); 
    i2_u5 := resize(i2_u4, i2_u5'length); 
    o_u5  := i1_u5 - i2_u5; 
    report "Ex05: " & str(i1_u5) & " - " & str(i2_u5) & " =
 " & str(o_u5); 
    -- Signed - Signed = Signed (fix) 
    i1_u4 := "1001"; -- dec 9 
    i2_u4 := "1011"; -- dec 11 
 ❷ i1_s5 := signed(resize(i1_u4, i1_s5'length)); 
    i2_s5 := signed(resize(i2_u4, i2_s5'length)); 
    o_s5  := i1_s5 - i2_s5; 
    report "Ex06: " & str(i1_s5) & " - " & str(i2_s5) & " =
 " & str(o_s5);
Here’s the output:
Verilog

--- Page 308 ---
# Ex05: 9 - 11 = 30 
# Ex06: 9 - 11 = -2
VHDL
# ** Note: Ex05: 9 - 11 = 30 
#    Time: 0 ns  Iteration: 0  Instance: /math_examples 
# ** Note: Ex06: 9 - 11 = -2 
#    Time: 0 ns  Iteration: 0  Instance: /math_examples
In Ex05, we’re trying to calculate 9 – 11 but we get a result of 30,
clearly the wrong answer. The problem here is that we’re using unsigned
types for subtraction, which is a violation of Rule #3. We fix this in Ex06 by
converting the input values from unsigned to signed data types. We also
perform sign extension in the process, going from 4-bit inputs to 5-bit
inputs. In the Verilog code, we handle the conversion by simply assigning
the 4-bit unsigned signals to 5-bit signed signals ❶. Verilog takes care of
the details automatically. VHDL makes us jump through a few more hoops.
We first resize the input, which will sign-extend it, but the result of the
resize operation is still an unsigned type, so we then explicitly cast it to a
signed data type using signed() ❷. This is safe to do because we’ve
already resized the signal, so the most significant bit will be 0. Therefore,
the value after converting to a signed type won’t be changed.
Multiplication
Multiplication also works similarly to addition; after all, a multiplication
operation is just a series of repeated addition operations (4 × 3 = 4 + 4 + 4).
The first thing to consider when multiplying two inputs together is how to
properly size the output bit width. This brings us to our next rule:
Rule #4 When multiplying, the output bit width must be at least the
sum of the input bit widths (before sign extension).
This rule holds true for both signed and unsigned numbers. For
example, say we’re trying to multiply the unsigned inputs 111 and 11
(equivalent to 7 × 3). According to Rule #4, the output should be 3 + 2 = 5

--- Page 309 ---
bits wide. You can try out the multiplication yourself to confirm this, using
the same technique you learned in school for multiplying multidigit
numbers—multiply each digit individually and add the results together:
   111 
×   11 
------ 
   111 
+ 1110 
------ 
 10101
The output, 10101 (equivalent to 21), is indeed 5 bits wide, which is
what we expected. But what happens to this same multiplication if we treat
our inputs and outputs as signed, rather than unsigned? In this case, we
would have the equivalent of –1 × –1 in decimal, which should produce a
result of +1, but signed 10101 in binary is equal to –11 in decimal. What’s
wrong here?
The problem is that we didn’t sign-extend our inputs to match the
width of our output (5 bits) before multiplying. If we do that, our inputs
both become 11111, and the multiplication looks like this:
      11111 
 ×    11111 
----------- 
      11111 
     111110 
    1111100 
   11111000 
+ 111110000 
----------- 
  000000001
Now we’re getting 00000001, or really 00001 once we truncate the
result to be 5 bits wide, which is +1 in decimal. Sign extension gives us the
result we expect. Unlike with addition and subtraction, however, you don’t
actually need to perform this sign extension manually when multiplying

--- Page 310 ---
numbers using Verilog or VHDL. The tools will handle this automatically;
you simply need to size the output signal correctly.
VHDL helps with this too: it won’t even let you compile the code if
you disobey Rule #4 and fail to size the output of a multiplication correctly.
With Verilog, you’ll need to be more careful. It won’t warn you if the
output is the wrong size, and you could get an unexpected result. Let’s add
some examples of this to our Math_Examples testbench:
Verilog
   // Unsigned * Unsigned = Unsigned (Rule #4 violation) 
   i1_u4 = 4'b1001; // dec 9 
   i2_u4 = 4'b1011; // dec 11 
   o_u4  = i1_u4 * i2_u4; 
   $display("Ex07: %2d * %2d = %3d", i1_u4, i2_u4, o_u4); 
   // Signed * Signed = Signed (Rule #4 violation) 
   i1_s4 = 4'b1000; // dec -8 
   i2_s4 = 4'b0111; // dec 7 
   o_s4  = i1_s4 * i2_s4; 
   $display("Ex08: %2d * %2d = %3d", i1_s4, i2_s4, o_s4);
VHDL
   -- Unsigned * Unsigned = Unsigned 
   i1_u4 := "1001"; -- dec 9 
   i2_u4 := "1011"; -- dec 11 
   o_u4  := i1_u4 * i2_u4; 
   report "Ex07: " & str(i1_u4) & " * " & str(i2_u4) & " = " 
& str(o_u4); 
   -- Signed * Signed = Signed 
   i1_s4 := "1000"; -- dec -8 
   i2_s4 := "0111"; -- dec 7 
   o_s4  := i1_s4 * i2_s4; 
   report "Ex08: " & str(i1_s4) & " * " & str(i2_s4) & " = " 
& str(o_s4);
Here’s the output:

--- Page 311 ---
Verilog
# Ex07:  9 * 11 =  3 
# Ex08: -8 *  7 = -8
VHDL
** Error (suppressible): testbench.vhd(89): (vcom-1272) Leng
th of expected 
is 4; length of actual is 8.
Verilog allows us to perform the math operation despite the fact that
we’re disobeying Rule #4 by multiplying 4 bits by 4 bits and storing the
result in a 4-bit output. This produces incorrect results for both unsigned
(Ex07) and signed (Ex08) input values. VHDL, on the other hand, won’t
even build this code; we get a nice descriptive error telling us that the tool is
trying to assign an 8-bit-wide result to a 4-bit-wide variable, which isn’t
permitted. Let’s add a few more examples to our testbench that fix these
issues:
Verilog
   // Unsigned * Unsigned = Unsigned (Rule #4 fix) 
   i1_u4 = 4'b1001; // dec 9 
   i2_u4 = 4'b1011; // dec 11 
   o_u8  = i1_u4 * i2_u4; 
   $display("Ex09: %2d * %2d = %3d", i1_u4, i2_u4, o_u8); 
   // Signed * Signed = Signed (Rule #4 fix) 
   i1_s4 = 4'b1000; // dec -8 
   i2_s4 = 4'b0111; // dec 7 
   o_s8  = i1_s4 * i2_s4; 
   $display("Ex10: %2d * %2d = %3d", i1_s4, i2_s4, o_s8);
VHDL

--- Page 312 ---
   -- Unsigned * Unsigned = Unsigned 
   i1_u4 := "1001"; -- dec 9 
   i2_u4 := "1011"; -- dec 11 
   o_u8  := i1_u4 * i2_u4; 
   report "Ex09: " & str(i1_u4) & " * " & str(i2_u4) & " = " 
& str(o_u8); 
   -- Signed * Signed = Signed 
   i1_s4 := "1000"; -- dec -8 
   i2_s4 := "0111"; -- dec 7 
   o_s8  := i1_s4 * i2_s4; 
   report "Ex10: " & str(i1_s4) & " * " & str(i2_s4) & " = " 
& str(o_s8);
Here’s the output:
Verilog
# Ex09:  9 * 11 =  99 
# Ex10: -8 *  7 = -56
VHDL
# ** Note: Ex09: 9 * 11 = 99 
#    Time: 0 ns  Iteration: 0   Instance: /math_examples 
# ** Note: Ex10: -8 * 7 = -56 
#    Time: 0 ns  Iteration: 0   Instance: /math_examples
In Ex09, we correct the problem in Ex07 by storing the output of
multiplying two unsigned 4-bit values into an 8-bit signal. Similarly, Ex10
corrects the issue from Ex08 with signed values. Notice that we never have
to sign-extend the inputs, in either Verilog or VHDL. The tools handle this
automatically.
Multiplication by Powers of 2
There’s a trick that we can use when multiplying numbers by a power of 2
(for example, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, …). Rather than instantiating a bunch of

--- Page 313 ---
multiplication logic, we can simply instantiate a shift register and perform a
shift left operation. Shifting left by N bits is equivalent to multiplying by 2N.
For example, 0011 (3 in binary) shifted left 2 bits gives us 1100 (12 in
binary). It’s the same as calculating 3 × 4, or 3 × 22. This trick works for
both signed and unsigned numbers. Let’s try it out in our testbench:
Verilog
   i_u8 = 3; 
   o_u8 = i_u8 << 1; 
   $display("Ex11: %d * 2 = %d",  i_u8, o_u8); 
   o_u8 = i_u8 << 2; 
   $display("Ex12: %d * 4 = %d",  i_u8, o_u8); 
   o_u8 = i_u8 << 4; 
   $display("Ex13: %d * 16 = %d", i_u8, o_u8);
VHDL
   i1_u8 := to_unsigned(3, i1_u8'length); 
   o_u8 := shift_left(i1_u8, 1); 
   report "Ex11: " & str(i1_u8) & " * 2 = "  & str(o_u8); 
   o_u8 := shift_left(i1_u8, 2); 
   report "Ex12: " & str(i1_u8) & " * 4 = "  & str(o_u8); 
   o_u8 := shift_left(i1_u8, 4); 
   report "Ex13: " & str(i1_u8) & " * 16 = " & str(o_u8);
Here’s the output:
Verilog
# Ex11:  3 * 2 =  6 
# Ex12:  3 * 4 = 12 
# Ex13:  3 * 16 = 48
VHDL

--- Page 314 ---
# ** Note: Ex11: 3 * 2 = 6 
#    Time: 0 ns  Iteration: 0  Instance: /math_examples 
# ** Note: Ex12: 3 * 4 = 12 
#    Time: 0 ns  Iteration: 0  Instance: /math_examples 
# ** Note: Ex13: 3 * 16 = 48 
#    Time: 0 ns  Iteration: 0  Instance: /math_examples
We start with the decimal value 3 and shift left by 1, 2, and 4 bits to
multiply it by 2, 4, and 16, respectively. In Verilog we perform the shift
using the << operator, and in VHDL we use the function shift_left().
Both take as an argument the number of bit positions to shift.
Shifting left is a simple and quick trick to save FPGA resources, but
you don’t necessarily need to write it out explicitly. It’s likely that if you
hardcode a multiplication by a power of 2, the synthesis tools will be smart
enough to figure out that a left shift would take fewer resources.
Division
Unfortunately, division isn’t nearly as simple an operation as addition,
subtraction, or multiplication. Division comes with all sorts of messy
complications, like remainders and fractions. In general, it’s a good idea to
avoid division inside your FPGA if you can. It’s a resource-intensive
operation, especially if you need that operation to run at high clock rates.
I once worked on a project that needed to add a division operation to an
FPGA in the field. The FPGA was a very old part, and it simply couldn’t fit
it within the available resources. To accommodate the division operation we
ended up having to upgrade to a higher-resource FPGA of the same family,
which increased the cost of the hardware by over $1 million. I always think
of that one extra operation as the million-dollar divide!
If you must divide numbers, there are a few ways to make the operation
less resource-intensive. These include restricting yourself to dividing by
powers of 2, using a precalculated table of answers, or breaking up the
operation across multiple clock cycles.
Using Powers of 2
My best suggestion for reducing the overhead of dividing numbers inside an
FPGA is to make the divisor a power of 2. Similar to how multiplication by

--- Page 315 ---
a power of 2 can be efficiently performed with a shift left operation,
division by a power of 2 can be performed efficiently with a shift right
operation. Shifting right by N bits is equivalent to dividing by 2N. Let’s look
at a few examples of this:
Verilog
   i_u8 = 128; 
   o_u8 = i_u8 >> 1; 
   $display("Ex14: %d / 2 = %d",  i_u8, o_u8); 
   o_u8 = i_u8 >> 2; 
   $display("Ex15: %d / 4 = %d",  i_u8, o_u8); 
   o_u8 = i_u8 >> 4; 
   $display("Ex16: %d / 16 = %d", i_u8, o_u8);
VHDL
   i1_u8 := to_unsigned(128, i1_u8'length); 
   o_u8 := shift_right(i1_u8, 1); 
   report "Ex14: " & str(i1_u8) & " / 2 = "  & str(o_u8); 
   o_u8 := shift_right(i1_u8, 2); 
   report "Ex15: " & str(i1_u8) & " / 4 = "  & str(o_u8); 
   o_u8 := shift_right(i1_u8, 4); 
   report "Ex16: " & str(i1_u8) & " / 16 = " & str(o_u8);
Here’s the output:
Verilog
# Ex14: 128 / 2 = 64 
# Ex15: 128 / 4 = 32 
# Ex16: 128 / 16 =  8
VHDL

--- Page 316 ---
# ** Note: Ex14: 128 / 2 = 64 
#    Time: 0 ns  Iteration: 0  Instance: /math_examples 
# ** Note: Ex15: 128 / 4 = 32 
#    Time: 0 ns  Iteration: 0  Instance: /math_examples 
# ** Note: Ex16: 128 / 16 = 8 
#    Time: 0 ns  Iteration: 0  Instance: /math_examples
Ex14 performs a shift right by 1, which in Verilog uses the >> operator
and in VHDL uses the shift_right() function. This accomplishes a single
divide by 2. To divide by 4, shift right by 2 bit positions, as in Ex15.
Likewise, a right shift by 4 divides by 16, as in Ex16.
What happens when we don’t have a number that’s cleanly divisible by
the power of 2 serving as the divisor? In this case, shifting right effectively
accomplishes a division that’s rounded down to the nearest integer. The
next few examples illustrate how this works:
Verilog
   i_u8 = 15; 
   o_u8 = i_u8 >> 1; 
   $display("Ex17: %d / 2 = %d", i_u8, o_u8); 
   o_u8 = i_u8 >> 2; 
   $display("Ex18: %d / 4 = %d", i_u8, o_u8); 
   o_u8 = i_u8 >> 3; 
   $display("Ex19: %d / 8 = %d", i_u8, o_u8);
VHDL
   i1_u8 := to_unsigned(15, i1_u8'length); 
   o_u8 := shift_right(i1_u8, 1); 
   report "Ex17: " & str(i1_u8) & " / 2 = " & str(o_u8); 
   o_u8 := shift_right(i1_u8, 2); 
   report "Ex18: " & str(i1_u8) & " / 4 = " & str(o_u8); 
   o_u8 := shift_right(i1_u8, 3); 
   report "Ex19: " & str(i1_u8) & " / 8 = " & str(o_u8);

--- Page 317 ---
Here’s the output:
Verilog
# Ex17: 15 / 2 =  7 
# Ex18: 15 / 4 =  3 
# Ex19: 15 / 8 =  1
VHDL
# ** Note: Ex17: 15 / 2 = 7 
#    Time: 0 ns  Iteration: 0  Instance: /math_examples 
# ** Note: Ex18: 15 / 4 = 3 
#    Time: 0 ns  Iteration: 0  Instance: /math_examples 
# ** Note: Ex19: 15 / 8 = 1
In Ex17, we try to perform 15 / 2. This should give us 7.5, but we have
no way to represent the .5 part, so we end up rounding down to 7 instead.
Thinking of this as a shift right, we went from 00001111 to 00000111. In
Ex18, we try to take 15 / 4, which should be 3.75, but we drop the decimal
places and just get 3. Finally, in Ex19 we get 15 / 8 = 1. This rounding might
cause a problem if you’re not expecting it, so be aware that this can happen
when performing shift right operations.
Using a Precalculated Table
Another option for dividing two numbers is to precalculate the result for all
possible input combinations. For example, if we’re trying to divide any
number 1 through 7 by any other number 1 through 7, we could create
something like Table 10-3 inside the FPGA.
Table 10-3: Precalculated Table for Full Range of Division Inputs
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 1.00 0.50 0.33 0.25 0.20 0.17 0.14
2 2.00 1.00 0.67 0.50 0.40 0.33 0.29
3 3.00 1.50 1.00 0.75 0.60 0.50 0.43

--- Page 318 ---
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
4 4.00 2.00 1.33 1.00 0.80 0.67 0.57
5 5.00 2.50 1.67 1.25 1.00 0.83 0.71
6 6.00 3.00 2.00 1.50 1.20 1.00 0.86
7 7.00 3.50 2.33 1.75 1.40 1.17 1.00
For this example, let’s assume that each row represents a possible
dividend, and each column represents a possible divisor. The value at the
intersection of a given dividend and divisor is the corresponding quotient.
As an example, to find the value in decimal for the fraction 5/6, go to row 5,
then over to column 6 to get the value 0.83. To implement this in Verilog or
VHDL, we could store this two-dimensional table in a 2D array. (You saw
how 2D arrays work in the state machine project in Chapter 8.) The row
input values provide one index, the column input values provide the second
index, and the quotient is the value at those two indices. We’re not actually
performing any math here; we’re just indexing into the correct result, which
has been precalculated and stored in memory.
NOTE
If you’re wondering how to represent decimal values like 0.50 and 0.33
inside an FPGA, good question! We’ll explore this topic shortly.
As the range of possible inputs grows, of course, we’ll need a larger
and larger table to store the possible outputs. Eventually, a single table
could take up an entire block RAM, which are often 16Kb in size. Using a
precalculated table in a block RAM guarantees that a single division
calculation will take a single clock cycle, since we only need one clock
cycle to read from the memory (as you learned when we discussed RAM
back in Chapter 6). However, we can’t read from multiple locations in the
memory on the same clock cycle, so if we needed to do two divisions
simultaneously, on the exact same clock cycle, we would need to instantiate
a second copy of the precalculated table in another block RAM.
Block RAMs are usually valuable resources, so taking up a bunch of
them for concurrent divisions doesn’t scale very well. If the design will
allow us to run the different divisions in consecutive clock cycles, rather

--- Page 319 ---
than simultaneously, we could instead use a single table and time-share it.
Time sharing a single resource would require arbitration of that resource, as
we discussed in Chapter 7. We would have to create some arbiter that would
only allow access to the block RAM table by one module at a time.
The solutions discussed up to this point assume we have just one clock
cycle to get the result of a division operation. However, if we can wait
multiple clock cycles for the result of a division operation, that allows us to
use another option.
Using Multiple Clock Cycles
Another way to ease the burden of the synthesis tools when it comes to
division is to create an algorithm that performs division in more than a
single clock cycle, using simpler math operations such as addition and
subtraction. At its heart, division is about calculating how many times one
number fits into another number. You can accomplish this, for example, by
adding the divisor to itself over and over until you’ve passed the value of
the dividend, while counting the number of times you had to run that loop.
Then you subtract the dividend to get the remainder.
There are various other techniques for performing division using
simpler math operations. (Specific implementations are beyond the scope of
this book; search the web for division algorithms on FPGAs if you want to
learn more.) But of course, these methods only work if you’re able to wait
multiple clock cycles for the result. Using multiple clock cycles to produce
a result is a bit different in this context than the pipelining example we
discussed in Chapter 7, where we broke up a complex math operation
across multiple clock cycles to meet timing. In that case, we were still able
to get a result every clock cycle, but the outputs were delayed a few clock
cycles from the inputs.
In this case, we don’t know how many clock cycles the division
algorithm will take to provide a result, so we can’t rely on a result each
clock cycle. Ultimately, it’s a question of trading lower resource utilization
for more clock cycles. If you really need to get the result of a division
operation on every single clock cycle, you’ll have to use one of the
previously discussed division techniques.
How FPGAs Implement Math Operations

--- Page 320 ---
With all the operations we’ve discussed so far, we’ve only looked at how
the math works, without really considering how the operations are
implemented inside an FPGA. There are various FPGA components that
may be involved, depending on the specific operation performed. If you
take an introductory digital electronics course, you might learn about half
adders and full adders, digital circuits that combine various logic gates (like
XOR and AND) to perform addition operations. It’s a fascinating subject,
but in the end you might be frustrated to find that you don’t need to know
how these circuits work to be able to do math with modern FPGA code.
You’ll never need to instantiate a full adder component by manually typing
out all the necessary logic operations if you’re just adding two numbers
together. Instead, you just use the + operator in Verilog or VHDL, like you
would in any other programming language, and trust the synthesis tools to
handle the implementation.
The tools will likely place addition and subtraction operations into
basic LUTs. For multiplication, the tools will use flip-flops for the shift left
approach, or LUTs or DSP blocks (if available) for more complicated
calculations. As discussed in Chapter 9, DSP blocks are useful for
accelerating large multiply–accumulate operations without utilizing a lot of
LUT logic. Finally, division will require registers for the shift right
approach, block RAMs for the precalculated table approach, or LUTs.
There’s more to math than just addition, subtraction, multiplication,
and division, however. Look at your calculator and consider all the
operations we haven’t discussed: sine, cosine, square root, and more. It’s
certainly possible to run these operations on an FPGA, but it gets
complicated and is beyond the scope of this book. If you’re interested in
learning more, there are dedicated algorithms that you can instantiate for
these, such as a Coordinate Rotation Digital Computer (CORDIC). Search
GitHub for FPGA CORDIC and you’ll find many examples.
In addition to actually implementing more complicated math operations
on your FPGA, if you have the option it might be worth sending the inputs
to a dedicated processor to perform the calculations, and then returning the
result back to the FPGA logic. We’ll discuss floating- versus fixed-point
arithmetic in the next section, but processors are much more capable of
performing floating-point arithmetic than FPGAs. This processor can be a

--- Page 321 ---
dedicated component external to the FPGA, or it can be internal to the
FPGA itself. If it’s internal, it’s referred to as either a hard-core processor or
a soft-core processor, depending on if it’s a dedicated piece of silicon or not.
Many modern FPGAs have internal hard ARM cores. This type of
component with FPGA logic and a dedicated processor is often referred to
as a system on a chip (SoC). You can send the operations from the FPGA
LUT/flip-flop logic into the ARM core for processing, and it will perform
whatever operation is required and return the result. This solution is more
about handling data than performing math, since you’ll likely need to set up
FIFOs for each of the inputs and outputs. Working with a separate processor
is an advanced topic, but it can be very valuable in higher-end applications.
Working with Decimals
So far we’ve been working with integers, but there are many applications
where you’ll need your FPGA to operate on numbers with a decimal
component. In this section, we’ll examine how to do math using non-
integers. To begin with, we need to consider how fractional numbers are
actually represented using binary digits. There are two possible systems to
choose from: floating point and fixed point.
The vast majority of mathematical operations within electronic devices
use floating-point arithmetic, since most CPUs are designed to handle
floating-point numbers. The key to floating point is that the radix (the
decimal separator) “floats,” depending on how much precision is needed.
We won’t go into detail about how exactly this works, but the bottom line is
that with 32 bits you can represent an enormous range of values, with
varying precision; you can represent very small numbers with high
precision, or very large numbers with less precision. Fixed-point arithmetic,
on the other hand, has a fixed radix, meaning there are a fixed number of
integer places and a fixed number of decimal places.
FPGAs can perform floating-point operations, but they often require
more resources than fixed-point operations. Most FPGA math is therefore
done with fixed-point arithmetic, so that will be our focus for the rest of the
chapter.
To illustrate how fixed-point representation works, let’s take an
example. Say we have 3 bits allotted for representing a number inside our

--- Page 322 ---
FPGA. We’ve been assuming up to this point that each bit change will be
worth one integer value. For example, going from 001 to 010 means that we
go from 1 to 2. But we’ve just arbitrarily decided that each bit is worth one
integer. We could just as easily decide that a single bit is worth something
else, for example 0.5. In that case, 001 would be equivalent to 0.5, 010
would be 1.0, 011 would be 1.5, and so on. We now have a fixed-point
system where the rightmost bit represents the decimal component of the
number and the other two bits represent the integer component. We can also
interpret the bits in other ways to give us different fixed-point
representations. Table 10-4 shows the most common decimal interpretations
of 3 unsigned bits.
Table 10-4: 3-Bit Unsigned Fixed-Point Possibilities
Bits U3.0 U2.1 U1.2 U0.3
000 0 0 0 0
001 1 0.5 0.25 0.125
010 2 1.0 0.50 0.250
011 3 1.5 0.75 0.375
100 4 2.0 1.00 0.500
101 5 2.5 1.25 0.625
110 6 3.0 1.50 0.750
111 7 3.5 1.75 0.875
The headings in Table 10-4 use a modified version of Q notation,
which is a way to specify the parameters of a binary fixed-point number
format. In Q notation, for example, Q1.2 indicates that 1 bit is being used
for the integer portion of a number and 2 bits are being used for the
fractional portion. Standard Q notation assumes the values are signed;
however, in FPGAs it’s very common to have unsigned and signed values.
That’s why I prefer a notation that specifies if the values are signed (S) or
unsigned (U) using the leading character. Thus, S3.1 indicates a signed
value with 3 integer bits and 1 fractional bit, and U4.8 indicates an unsigned
value with 4 integer bits and 8 fractional bits.

--- Page 323 ---
In Table 10-4, the U3.0 column is what we’re used to; all 3 bits are
allotted to the integer portion of the number, so we only have whole
numbers. Let’s consider the next column, U2.1. It’s unsigned, with 2 bits for
the integer component and 1 bit for the decimal component. This means the
integer part can be in the range 00, 01, 10, 11, and the decimal part can be in
the range 0 or 1. To figure out what possible values that represents, simply
take the original U3.0 value and divide it by 2. For example, 111 is 7 in
U3.0, but in U2.1 it’s 3.5 (7 / 2 = 3.5). In general, when there are N bits
allotted to the fractional portion of the number, you divide the integer
representation by 2N to determine the fixed-point value. Thus, 111 in U0.3 is
7 / 23 = 7 / 8 = 0.875.
In Table 10-4 we treated all the values as unsigned. Table 10-5 shows
the most common possibilities for interpreting the same 3 bits when we use
signed data types.
Table 10-5: 3-Bit Signed Fixed-Point Possibilities
Bits S3.0 S2.1 S1.2 S0.3
000 0 0 0 0
001 1 0.5 0.25 0.125
010 2 1.0 0.50 0.250
011 3 1.5 0.75 0.375
100 –4 –2.0 –1.00 –0.500
101 –3 –1.5 –0.75 –0.375
110 –2 –1.0 –0.50 –0.250
111 –1 –0.5 –0.25 –0.125
The S3.0 column shows the same signed whole number values we saw
earlier in the chapter, in Table 10-1. We can generate the remaining columns
by dividing the values in the S3.0 column by 2 for S2.1, by 4 for S1.2, and
by 8 for S0.3.
Here’s the critical thing about working with fixed-point numbers: when
you’re performing operations on binary data, the behavior of the binary
operation doesn’t change based on its representation. Addition, subtraction,
multiplication, and division all work exactly the same way as before, when

--- Page 324 ---
we were treating the numbers as integers. However, there are a few more
rules that need to be established to get the correct answer with fixed-point
values.
You’ll notice for the remainder of this chapter that I make an effort to
keep track of the decimals in the code examples. I find it very helpful to add
comments recording the width of the math operations in my Verilog or
VHDL code. For example, when adding two 3-bit numbers together to get a
4-bit result, I’ll include a comment like // U2.1 + U2.1 = U3.1 so I know
the decimal and integer widths. This is particularly useful when there are
several math operations chained one after another, where the widths along
the way might be changing.
Adding and Subtracting with Fixed Point
When performing addition or subtraction with fixed-point decimals, the
actual process doesn’t change. The data is still just binary. There’s another
rule that we must apply when we have decimals involved, however:
Rule #5 When adding or subtracting, the decimal widths must match.
The number of places to the right of the decimal point determines the
value, or weight, of each bit, so if you try to add or subtract two inputs with
different decimal bit widths—for example, a U3.1 input and a U4.0 input—
you’ll get a wrong answer. We can see that in the following code:
Verilog
   // U3.1 + U4.0 = U4.1 (Rule #5 violation) 
   i1_u4 = 4'b0011; 
   i2_u4 = 4'b0011; 
   o_u5  = i1_u4 + i2_u4; 
❶ $display("Ex20: %2.3f + %2.3f = %2.3f", i1_u4/2.0, i2_u4,
 o_u5/2.0);
VHDL
   -- U3.1 + U4.0 = U4.1 (Rule #5 violation) 
   i1_u4 := "0011"; 

--- Page 325 ---
   i2_u4 := "0011"; 
   i1_u5 := resize(i1_u4, i1_u5'length); 
   i2_u5 := resize(i2_u4, i2_u5'length); 
   o_u5  := i1_u5 + i2_u5; 
❶ real1 := real(to_integer(i1_u5)) / 2.0; 
   real2 := real(to_integer(i2_u5)); 
   real3 := real(to_integer(o_u5)) / 2.0; 
   report "Ex20: " & str(real1) & " + " & str(real2) & " = " 
& str(real3);
Here’s the output:
Verilog
# Ex20: 1.500 + 3.000 = 3.000
VHDL
# ** Note: Ex20: 1.500 + 3.000 = 3.000 
#    Time: 0 ns  Iteration: 0  Instance: /math_examples
Ex20 shows the effect of not obeying Rule #5. Here we’re attempting to
add a U3.1 to a U4.0. This is going to cause a problem because the weight
of the bits being added together isn’t matched. Indeed, the printout tells us
that 1.5 + 3 = 3, so something has clearly gone wrong.
Notice that we’ve divided the input U3.1 and the output U5.1 by 2.0 to
print out these fixed-point values correctly ❶. For Verilog, we can simply
do the division on the unsigned input and use %f to format the result like a
float. In VHDL, the conversion is a bit more complicated. First we need to
switch to the real data type, which is used for numbers with decimals, and
then we can divide by 2.0 for printing.
To fix this example, we need to adjust one of the inputs so it has the
same number of decimal bits as the other input. We can either change the
first input from U3.1 to U4.0 to match the second input, or change the
second input from U4.0 to U4.1. In the following code, we try both options:

--- Page 326 ---
Verilog
   // Convert U3.1 to U4.0 
   // U4.0 + U4.0 = U5.0 (Rule #5 fix, using truncation) 
   i1_u4 = 4'b0011; 
   i2_u4 = 4'b0011; 
❶ i1_u4 = i1_u4 >> 1; // Convert U3.1 to U4.0 by dropping de
cimal 
   o_u5  = i1_u4 + i2_u4; 
   $display("Ex21: %2.3f + %2.3f = %2.3f", i1_u4, i2_u4, o_u
5); 
   // Or Convert U4.0 to U4.1 
   // U3.1 + U4.1 = U5.1 (Rule #5 fix, using expansion) 
   i1_u4 = 4'b0011; 
   i2_u4 = 4'b0011; 
❷ i2_u5 = i2_u4 << 1; 
   o_u6  = i1_u4 + i2_u5; 
   $display("Ex22: %2.3f + %2.3f = %2.3f", i1_u4/2.0, i2_u5/
2.0, o_u6/2.0);
VHDL
   -- Convert U3.1 to U4.0 
   -- U4.0 + U4.0 = U5.0 (Rule #5 fix, using truncation) 
    i1_u4 := "0011"; 
   i2_u4 := "0011"; 
❶ i1_u4 := shift_right(i1_u4, 1); -- Convert U3.1 to U4.0 
   i1_u5 := resize(i1_u4, i1_u5'length); 
   i2_u5 := resize(i2_u4, i2_u5'length); 
   o_u5  := i1_u5 + i2_u5; 
   real1 := real(to_integer(i1_u5)); 
   real2 := real(to_integer(i2_u5)); 
   real3 := real(to_integer(o_u5)); 
   report "Ex21: " & str(real1) & " + " & str(real2) & " = " 
& str(real3); 
   -- Or Convert U4.0 to U4.1 
   -- U3.1 + U4.1 = U5.1 (Rule #4 fix, using expansion) 
   i1_u4 := "0011"; 

--- Page 327 ---
   i2_u4 := "0011"; 
   i1_u6 := resize(i1_u4, i1_u6'length); -- expand for addin
g 
   i2_u6 := resize(i2_u4, i2_u6'length); -- expand for addin
g 
❷ i2_u6 := shift_left(i2_u6, 1); -- Convert 4.0 to 4.1 
   o_u6  := i1_u6 + i2_u6; 
   real1 := real(to_integer(i1_u6)) / 2.0; 
   real2 := real(to_integer(i2_u6)) / 2.0; 
   real3 := real(to_integer(o_u6)) / 2.0; 
   report "Ex22: " & str(real1) & " + " & str(real2) & " = " 
& str(real3);
Here’s the output:
Verilog
# Ex21: 1.000 + 3.000 = 4.000 
# Ex22: 1.500 + 3.000 = 4.500
VHDL
# ** Note: Ex21: 1.000 + 3.000 = 4.000 
#    Time: 0 ns  Iteration: 0  Instance: /math_examples 
# ** Note: Ex22: 1.500 + 3.000 = 4.500 
#    Time: 0 ns  Iteration: 0  Instance: /math_examples
In Ex21, we convert the U3.1 to a U4.0, effectively dropping the
decimal point. We do this using a 1-bit shift to the right ❶. But consider the
effect of this: we’re eliminating the least significant bit, and if that bit has a
1 in it, then we’re dropping that data. Essentially, we’re performing a
rounding operation to the next lowest integer. We can see that our first input
was originally 1.5, but after dropping the decimal point it’s 1.0. The math is
correct, 1.0 + 3.0 = 4.0, but we’ve truncated our input.
Ex22 shows a better solution that retains the precision of all inputs.
Rather than shifting the first input to the right, we shift the second input to

--- Page 328 ---
the left ❷. This pads the least significant bit with a 0, converting our second
input from U4.0 to U4.1. Notice that this means the second input now
occupies a total of 5 bits. We need to be sure to resize it, or we could end up
losing the data in the most significant bit during the shift left. Additionally,
our output now has to be 6 bits so we don’t violate Rule #1.
Now that the decimal widths of the two inputs are matched with no loss
of precision, we’re able to successfully calculate that 1.5 + 3.0 = 4.5.
Expanding your inputs to match is the best solution if you don’t want to
round any of the decimal values.
NOTE
Subtracting fixed-point numbers works with all the same rules as addition,
so we won’t consider an example here. Follow the rules introduced in this
chapter, and your subtraction operations will work as expected.
Multiplying with Fixed Point
Multiplication with fixed-point numbers doesn’t require any shifting to
match the decimal widths. Instead, we can simply multiply the two inputs
together as they are, provided we keep track of the input widths and size the
output appropriately. We already have a rule for multiplication:
Rule #4 When multiplying, the output bit width must be at least the
sum of the input bit widths (before sign extension).
Now we need to add another rule to account for fixed-point numbers:
Rule #6 When multiplying fixed-point numbers, add the integer
component bit widths and the decimal component bit widths of your
inputs separately to get the output format.
For example, if you’re trying to multiply a U3.5 by a U1.7, the result is
formatted as a U4.12. We determine this by adding the integer components
(3 + 1 = 4) and the decimal components (5 + 7 = 12), and putting them
together to get the output width format. It works the same way for signed
values, so S3.0 × S2.4 = S5.4. Notice that we’re still obeying Rule #4 as
well, since the output width will be the sum of the input widths. It’s just that
the integer and decimal components are treated separately.
Let’s take a look at some examples in Verilog and VHDL:

--- Page 329 ---
Verilog
   // U2.2 * U3.1 = U5.3 
   i1_u4 = 4'b0101; 
   i2_u4 = 4'b1011; 
   o_u8  = i1_u4 * i2_u4; 
   $display("Ex23: %2.3f * %2.3f = %2.3f", i1_u4/4.0, i2_u4/
2.0, o_u8/8.0); 
   // S2.2 * S4.0 = S6.2 
   i1_s4 = 4'b0110; 
   i2_s4 = 4'b1010; 
   o_s8  = i1_s4 * i2_s4; 
   $display("Ex24: %2.3f * %2.3f = %2.3f", i1_s4/4.0, i2_s4, 
o_s8/4.0);
VHDL
   -- U2.2 * U3.1 = U5.3 
   i1_u4 := "0101"; 
   i2_u4 := "1011"; 
   o_u8  := i1_u4 * i2_u4; 
   real1 := real(to_integer(i1_u4)) / 4.0; 
   real2 := real(to_integer(i2_u4)) / 2.0; 
   real3 := real(to_integer(o_u8))  / 8.0; 
   report "Ex23: " & str(real1) & " * " & str(real2) & " = " 
& str(real3); 
   -- S2.2 * S4.0 = S6.2 
   i1_s4 := "0110"; 
   i2_s4 := "1010"; 
   o_s8  := i1_s4 * i2_s4; 
   real1 := real(to_integer(i1_s4)) / 4.0; 
   real2 := real(to_integer(i2_s4)); 
   real3 := real(to_integer(o_s8))  / 4.0; 
   report "Ex24: " & str(real1) & " * " & str(real2) & " = " 
& str(real3);
Here’s the output:

--- Page 330 ---
Verilog
# Ex23: 1.250 * 5.500 = 6.875 
# Ex24: 1.500 * -6.000 = -9.000
VHDL
# ** Note: Ex23: 1.250 * 5.500 = 6.875 
#    Time: 0 ns  Iteration: 0  Instance: /math_examples 
# ** Note: Ex24: 1.500 * -6.000 = -9.000 
#    Time: 0 ns  Iteration: 0  Instance: /math_examples
In Ex23, we’re multiplying a U2.2 by a U3.1 to get a result that’s a
U5.3. We can see in the printout that the answer is correct: 1.25 × 5.5 =
6.875. As with the addition examples, notice that we have to divide the
values to print them out correctly. We divide the U2.2 by 4, the U3.1 by 2,
and the U5.3 by 8. In Ex24, we use the same technique to multiply signed
values. We’re multiplying 1.5 by –6.0 to get –9.0, which is represented with
S2.2 × S4.0 = S6.2.
Summary
Since FPGAs are known for being able to perform many calculations at fast
clock rates and in parallel, many common FPGA applications call for using
addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. Inside your FPGA, these
operations may involve LUTs, shift registers, or DSP blocks. More
important than knowing exactly how the operations are implemented,
however, is understanding how the inputs and outputs are stored and what
those binary digits represent when you’re writing your Verilog or VHDL
code. Are they signed or unsigned? Integers or fixed point?
Over the course of this chapter, we’ve developed a set of rules for
successfully performing FPGA math operations and interpreting the results.
They are:
Rule #1 When adding or subtracting, the result should be at least 1 bit
bigger than the biggest input, before sign extension. Once sign
extension is applied, the input and output widths should match exactly.

--- Page 331 ---
Rule #2 Match types among inputs and outputs.
Rule #3 When subtracting, use signed inputs and outputs.
Rule #4 When multiplying, the output bit width must be at least the
sum of the input bit widths (before sign extension).
Rule #5 When adding or subtracting, the decimal widths must match.
Rule #6 When multiplying fixed-point numbers, add the integer
component bit widths and the decimal component bit widths of your
inputs separately to get the output format.
These rules don’t capture every nuance of performing math in FPGAs,
but they cover the major details that you need to get right. If you follow
these six rules, it’s much more likely that you’ll get the correct answer from
your calculations. Whenever you’re working with math, adding tests will
help to ensure things are working as you expect.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 332 ---
11
GETTING DATA IN AND OUT WITH I/O AND
SERDES
Throughout this book, we’ve focused
on the internals of FPGAs, and that’s
typical of the FPGA design process. FPGA design
largely centers around writing Verilog or VHDL code
targeting internal components like flip-flops, LUTs,
block RAMs, and DSP blocks. But what’s going on
at the edge of the device, where data enters and exits
the FPGA?
There’s a surprising amount of complexity involved in getting data into
and out of an FPGA. In my experience, this is where most of the trickier
FPGA design problems occur. Understanding how the input/output (I/O)
works will help you tackle those problems. You’ll be able to spend less time
worrying about external interfaces, and more time solving the internal task
at hand.
Working with I/O is where the boundary between being a “software
person” and a “hardware person” lies. You need to understand the details of
the electrical signals that you’re interfacing to in order to configure the
FPGA pins correctly. What voltage do they operate at? Are the signals
single-ended or differential? (And what does that even mean?) How can

--- Page 333 ---
you use double data rate or a serializer/deserializer to send data at very high
speeds? This chapter answers these questions and more. Even if you don’t
have an electrical engineering background, you’ll learn the fundamentals of
interfacing FPGAs to the outside world.
Working with GPIO Pins
Most pins on the FPGA are general purpose input/output (GPIO) pins,
meaning they can function as a digital input or output. We’ve used these
pins in the book’s projects to take in signals from push buttons and output
signals to light up LEDs, but we haven’t worried about the details of how
this actually works. In this section, we’ll look at how GPIO pins interface
with an FPGA and how they can be made to input data, output data, or both.
When I was first getting into FPGA design, I had no idea of the
nuances involved in pin configuration. There are many knobs to turn and
settings to play with. Having a thorough understanding of your GPIO pins
is important, especially for high-speed designs, because maintaining signal
integrity and performance throughout your design starts at the pins.
I/O Buffers
GPIO pins interface with an FPGA through buffers, electronic circuit
elements that isolate their input from their output. These buffers are what
allow you to configure some pins as inputs and others as outputs. As you’ll
see soon, they even allow you to toggle a pin between input and output
while the FPGA is running. Figure 11-1 shows a simplified block diagram
of a GPIO pin interface on an Intel FPGA, to illustrate how a buffer serves
as an intermediary between the pin and the internal FPGA logic.
Figure 11-1: A simplified GPIO block diagram

--- Page 334 ---
The box on the right-hand side of the image (with the X inside it)
represents the physical pin. Immediately to the left of the pin is a block
labeled Buffer, which represents the I/O buffer. It contains two main
components, represented by triangles. The triangle pointing to the right is
the output buffer; it pushes data out to the pin. The triangle pointing to the
left is the input buffer; it sends data from the pin into the FPGA.
On the far left of the diagram is a block labeled GPIO, representing the
internal FPGA logic that interacts directly with the pin via the buffers. The
main path to notice here is OE, which stands for output enable. This turns
the output buffer on or off to control whether the pin will function as an
output or an input. When OE is high, the output buffer will drive the pin
with whatever data is present on the output path. If data on the output path
is low, the pin will be low, and if data on the output path is high, the pin will
be high. When OE is low, the pin is configured as an input, so the output
buffer stops passing its input to its output. At this point the buffer’s output
becomes high impedance (also called hi-Z or tri-state), meaning it will
accept very little current. A high-impedance output buffer no longer affects
anything happening on the pin. Instead, the pin’s state is governed by
whatever external signal is coming in. The input buffer is free to read that
signal and pass it along to the input path for use inside the FPGA.
Table 11-1 shows a truth table for an output buffer, summarizing this
behavior.
Table 11-1: Truth Table for an Output Buffer
Input OE Output
0 0 Z
1 0 Z
0 1 0
1 1 1
Looking at this table, we can see that when OE is high, the value on the
buffer’s input is simply passed to its output. However, when OE is low, the
buffer’s output is high impedance (conventionally represented by a Z),
regardless of the value on the input.

--- Page 335 ---
In the projects in this book, we’ve defined the input and output signals
at the top level of the design code. Inputs are represented with the keyword
input (Verilog) or in (VHDL), while outputs are indicated by the keyword
output (Verilog) or out (VHDL). When building the FPGA, the synthesis
tools see which signals are defined for each direction and set up the buffers
accordingly. If the signal is an input, OE will be set low. If the signal in an
output, OE will be set high. Then, during the place and route process, the
physical constraints file maps the signals to the specific pins on the FPGA.
This is how GPIO pins get configured as dedicated input or output pins for
your design.
Bidirectional Data for Half-Duplex Communication
While most pins in a design are typically fixed as either input or output, a
GPIO pin can be configured to be bidirectional, meaning it can switch
between functioning as input and output within the same design. When the
FPGA needs to output data through the bidirectional pin, it drives the OE
signal high, then puts the data to transmit onto the output path. When the
FPGA needs to receive data as input through the bidirectional pin, it drives
OE low. This puts the output buffer into tri-state (high impedance), enabling
the FPGA to listen to the data on the pin and pass it to the input path. When
a pin is configured to be bidirectional like this, it’s acting as a transceiver,
as opposed to just a transmitter or just a receiver.
Bidirectional pins are useful for half-duplex communication, where two
devices exchange data using a single, shared transmission line (one pin).
Either device can serve as a transmitter, but only one device can transmit at
a time, while the other receives. This is in contrast to full-duplex
communication, where both devices can transmit and receive data at the
same time. Full-duplex communication requires two transmission lines (two
pins), one for sending data from device 1 to device 2 and the other for
sending data from device 2 to device 1, as opposed to the single
transmission line of half-duplex communication.
A common example of half-duplex communication is a two-way radio.
The speaker is only able to transmit when they hold down the button on the
radio. When the speaker is transmitting, the listener is unable to transmit, so
the speaker and listener must agree whose turn it is to talk. This is why
people always say “Over” in the movies when they’re talking on walkie-

--- Page 336 ---
talkies; it’s a signal that the speaker is done talking and the listener is now
free to respond.
With a physical wire, if the two sides don’t take turns sharing the
communication channel, then there can be a data collision. This collision
can corrupt the data, so nobody receives anything. To avoid this the devices
must agree on a protocol, a set of rules governing communication. The
protocol determines how a device can initiate a transaction, establishes
well-defined locations in time for other devices on the line to talk back (the
equivalent of saying “Over”), and so on. Some protocols are even able to
handle data collisions by detecting when data is corrupted and resending the
corrupted data, though this requires additional complexity.
Half-duplex communication is usually more complicated than using
dedicated transmit and receive channels, but it’s still quite common. I2C (or
I2C, pronounced “eye-squared-see” or “eye-two-see” and short for inter-
integrated circuit), for example, is a widely used half-duplex protocol.
Countless unique integrated circuits—including ADCs, DACs,
accelerometers, gyroscopes, temperature sensors, microcontrollers, and
many others—use I2C to communicate, since it’s relatively simple to
implement and, thanks to its half-duplex nature, requires a very low pin
count. Only two pins, clock and data, are used in I2C, which is why you
may also see it referred to as TWI (two-wire interface).
A Bidirectional Pin Implementation
Let’s look at how to code a bidirectional pin using Verilog or VHDL. As
you examine this code, refer to Figure 11-2 to see how the signals in the
code match the block diagram from Figure 11-1:
Verilog
❶ module bidirectional(inout io_Data, 
   --snip-- 
❷ assign w_RX_Data = io_Data; 
❸ assign io_Data   = w_TX_En ? w_TX_Data : 1'bZ; 
   --snip--
VHDL

--- Page 337 ---
entity bidirectional is 
❶ port (io_Data : inout std_logic, 
   --snip-- 
❷ w_RX_Data <= io_Data;
❸ io_Data   <= w_TX_Data when w_TX_En = '1' else 'Z'; 
   --snip--
We declare the bidirectional pin (io_Data) with the keyword inout in
both Verilog and VHDL ❶. At this point we can imagine that we’re at the
pin, as indicated by the label io_Data in Figure 11-2. We’ll need to map this
signal to one of the FPGA’s pins in our physical constraints file. For the
input functionality, we simply use an assignment to drive w_RX_Data with
the data from the pin ❷. On the output side, we selectively enable the
output buffer using the signal w_TX_En ❸. We use the ternary operator in
Verilog or a conditional assignment in VHDL. The data driven onto
io_Data will either be w_TX_Data or high impedance (indicated by 1'bZ in
Verilog or 'Z' in VHDL), depending on the state of the output enable signal
(w_TX_En). This code pattern is very common for bidirectional data.
Synthesis tools are smart enough to recognize it and infer an I/O buffer.
Figure 11-2: A labeled bidirectional interface
One thing you might notice is that any data driven out on w_TX_Data
will be received on w_RX_Data, since they’re connected together through
io_Data. You’ll need to address this elsewhere in the code by telling your
receiver to ignore any data on io_Data when w_TX_En is high. Otherwise,
your FPGA will be hearing itself talk.

--- Page 338 ---
Electrical Characteristics
There are many different electrical characteristics that you can specify for
each individual GPIO pin. We’re going to talk about three: operating
voltage, drive strength, and slew rate. We’ll also look at the electrical
differences between single-ended and differential data transmission.
As you read, keep in mind that these aren’t the only pin settings you
can control. For example, you also may be able to set pins to be open drain,
include a pull-up or pull-down resistor or a termination resistor, and much
more. The I/O of your FPGA can be configured in many, many ways,
depending on which GPIO properties are built into the device itself. If you
need to implement anything other than simple signal interfaces, it’s worth
exploring the relevant datasheets to ensure you’re working correctly with
your I/O buffers. All of the specific information about your FPGA’s I/O can
usually be found in the I/O user guide, which is a great reference for details
on what types of electronics your FPGA is capable of interfacing to.
Operating Voltage
The operating voltage specifies what voltage the pin will be driven to for a
logic 1 output and sets the expected voltage for a logic 1 input. Most
commonly, FPGA pins use 0 V to represent a 0 and 3.3 V to represent a 1.
This standard is called LVCMOS33 (LVCMOS is short for low-voltage
complementary metal oxide semiconductor). Another standard you might
come across is 0 V to represent a 0 and 5 V to represent a 1. This is called
TTL, short for transistor–transistor logic. TTL is less common in FPGAs
these days, since many don’t allow voltages as high as 5 V internally.
There’s also the LVCMOS25 standard, which uses 0 V to represent a 0 and
2.5 V to represent a 1.
LVCMOS33, LVCMOS25, and TTL are all examples of single-ended
I/O standards, meaning the signals involved are referenced to ground. As
you’ll see soon, there are also differential standards, where the signals
aren’t referenced to ground. There are many more single-ended standards
than the three I’ve mentioned. A typical FPGA supports about a dozen
single-ended I/O standards.
One important note about setting your operating voltage is that all
signals on a single bank need to be at the same operating voltage. A bank is
a group of pins that all operate with a common reference voltage, usually

--- Page 339 ---
called VCCIO. You might have eight banks on your FPGA, and each bank
can use a unique operating voltage. For example, you might configure bank
1 to use 1.8 V, bank 2 to use 3.3 V, and bank 3 to use 2.5 V. What’s critical
is that all the pins within a single bank are operating at the same voltage.
You can’t put an LVCMOS33 pin on the same bank as an LVCMOS25 pin,
because the former requires a VCCIO of 3.3 V while the latter requires a
VCCIO of 2.5 V. When doing your schematic review, always check to make
sure that the signals on each bank share the same reference voltage. If you
try to mix voltages in the same bank, the place and route tool will likely
generate an error, or at least a very strong warning.
Drive Strength
The drive strength of a pin determines how much current (in milliamps, or
mA) can be driven into or out of the pin. For example, a pin set to an 8 mA
drive strength will be capable of sinking or sourcing up to 8 mA of current.
The drive strength can be changed on an individual pin basis and should be
high enough to match the needs of the circuit you’re interfacing to. Most
often, the drive strength settings can be left at the default for all of the pins
on your FPGA. Unless you have some high current needs, it’s unlikely
you’ll need to modify the default settings.
Slew Rate
The slew rate sets the rate of change allowed for an output signal. It’s
usually specified in qualitative terms, such as fast, medium, or slow. The
slew rate setting affects how quickly a pin can change from a 0 to a 1 or
from a 1 to a 0. Like drive strength, the slew rate can often be left at the
default setting for each of your pins. The exception is if you’re interfacing
to some component that requires very fast data rates, in which case you
might want to select the fastest option. However, selecting a faster slew rate
can increase system noise, so it’s not recommended to slew faster unless
you really need it.
Differential Signaling
Differential signaling is a method of sending data where you have two
signals that aren’t referenced to ground, but rather to each other. As I hinted
earlier, this is in contrast to single-ended signaling, where you have one
data signal referenced to ground. Figure 11-3 illustrates the difference.

--- Page 340 ---
Figure 11-3: Single-ended vs. differential interfaces
The top half of the figure shows a single-ended configuration: we have
device 1 transmitting data to device 2 on a single wire, and another wire for
the ground path. There’s no data on this ground wire, but it’s needed to
maintain a consistent ground reference between the devices. Data is sent as
a voltage on the data wire: 0 V for a 0 or some other value (such as 3.3 V)
for a 1, depending on the operating voltage. If we wanted to add another
data path, we could just add another single wire between the two devices;
the ground reference can work for multiple data paths.
The bottom half of the image shows a differential configuration. Here,
we don’t have a ground reference passed between the devices. Instead, we
have a pair of data lines. Notice the bubble at the start of the upper line, on
the output of device 1’s transmit buffer. This looks like the bubble we saw
when looking at NOT gates and NAND gates back in Chapter 3, and it’s a
common indication that we have a differential pair. If the difference
between the + and – terminals on the receiver is a positive voltage above
some threshold, then the signal is decoded as a 1; if the difference is a
negative voltage below some threshold, then the signal is decoded as a 0.
The details depend on the differential standard. For example, TIA/EIA-644,
more commonly called LVDS (low-voltage differential signaling), specifies
that there should be a difference of about +/– 350 millivolts (mV) between
the two wires. This voltage is quite a bit lower than most single-ended
signals use, meaning the system can operate at less power, which is one
advantage of differential communication over single-ended communication.
A typical FPGA supports about the same number of differential standards
as single-ended standards (a dozen or so).

--- Page 341 ---
One disadvantage you might have picked up on is that differential
communication requires twice as many wires for every data path. In the
case of single-ended data transfer, there’s just one wire for each data path
we want to create. If we want 10 data paths, we need 10 wires (and usually
at least 1 ground wire). To create the same 10 data paths with differential
signaling, we’d need 20 wires (but no ground wires). This extra wiring
costs money and will require a larger connector. Still, differential signals
have some unique properties that may make this trade-off worthwhile in
certain applications.
One important advantage is that differential signals are much more
immune to noise, or electromagnetic interference (EMI), than single-ended
signals. EMI is a phenomenon caused by changing electrical and magnetic
fields—for example, from a nearby microwave oven, cell phone, or power
line—that can cause disturbances in other systems. You can think of a wire
that carries data as a small antenna that receives all sorts of unwanted
electrical signals, creating noise that shows up as a voltage blip on the wire.
A large enough voltage blip on a single-ended signal could corrupt the data,
causing a 0 to turn into a 1, or a 1 into a 0. With a differential signal,
however, the voltage blip will affect both wires equally, meaning the
voltage difference between the wires will remain constant. Since it’s the
voltage difference, and not the exact value of the voltage itself, that matters,
the noise is effectively canceled out.
An additional benefit of differential communication is that the
transmitter and the receiver can be referenced to different ground voltages
and still send and receive data reliably. It might seem strange, but ground
isn’t always exactly 0 V. The ground in a system can be affected by noise,
just as data lines can be, so problems can arise when you rely on ground as
a source of truth throughout your system. In particular, it’s difficult to
maintain a common ground reference for two devices that are far apart,
which is why differential signals are often used to send data over long
distances. For example, RS-485, a differential electrical standard, can send
data at 10 megabits per second (Mb/s) over a distance of nearly 1 mile,
which would be impossible with a single-ended signal. Even at closer
distances, there are situations where one system might not be referenced to
ground at all. Instead, it might be floating or isolated from a ground
reference. To communicate with an isolated system, you need a method of

--- Page 342 ---
communication that doesn’t rely on a shared ground reference; differential
communication is one such method.
Differential signals are also able to send data at faster rates than single-
ended signals. When a transmitter needs to change from a 0 to a 1, it must
drive the line all the way from the voltage corresponding to a 0 to the
voltage corresponding to a 1, and that process takes some amount of time
(the slew rate). The bigger the difference between the voltages, the more
current must be driven onto the line, and the longer the process will take.
Since single-ended protocols typically require wider voltage swings
between a 0 and a 1, they’re inherently slower than differential protocols.
For example, the LVCMOS33 voltage swing of 3.3 V is much greater than
the LVDS voltage swing of +/– 350 mV. For this reason, almost all high-
speed applications use differential signals. We’ll get into more detail about
this later in the chapter when we discuss SerDes, but interfaces like USB,
SATA, and Ethernet all use differential signals for the highest possible data
rates.
How to Modify Pin Settings
If you want to specify the operating voltage, drive strength, or slew rate
values for your pins, or control which pins are for single-ended signals and
which are for differential signals, the place to do it is your physical
constraints file. Recall that this file lists how the pins on your FPGA
connect to the signals in your design. In addition to specifying the pin
mapping, you can also add these other parameters to further define the I/O
behavior. Here’s an excerpt from a Lattice constraint file that includes some
additional parameters:
LOCATE COMP "o_Data" SITE "A13"; 
IOBUF PORT "o_Data" IO_TYPE=LVCMOS33 DRIVE=8 SLEWRATE=FAST;
The first line maps the signal o_Data to the pin A13. The second line
sets the operating voltage to LVCMOS33, the drive strength to 8, and the slew
rate to FAST. You should refer to the constraints user guide for your
particular FPGA to see how to set these parameters; the syntax isn’t
universal across devices. You can also use the GUI in your IDE to set these
parameters without having to learn the exact syntax required.

--- Page 343 ---
Faster Data Transmission with Double Data Rate
Sending data quickly is where FPGAs can really shine, and one way to
speed up transmission is to use double data rate (DDR). Up until this point,
I’ve stated that the signals in your FPGA should be synchronized to the
rising edges of the clock. With double data rate, however, signals change on
the rising and falling edges of the clock. This enables you to send twice the
amount of data with the same clock frequency, as shown in Figure 11-4.
Figure 11-4: Single vs. double data rate
As you can see, with single data rate, where data is sent on each rising
clock edge, you’re able to move three bits of data (D0 through D2) during
three clock cycles. In comparison, with double data rate, where data is sent
on both rising and falling edges, you can send six bits of data (D0 through
D5) during the same three clock cycles. This technique is known for its use
in LPDDR memory, short for low-power double data rate, a type of RAM
commonly found in computers, smartphones, and other electronics.
Changing the data on both edges of the clock increases the bandwidth of the
memory.
You need to create double data rate output (ODDR) buffers anywhere
you want to use DDR for data transfer. The details vary between FPGA
manufacturers, but I generally recommend creating these ODDR buffers
directly within your Verilog or VHDL, using instantiation, since they aren’t
terribly complicated to configure. As an example, let’s take a look at an
instantiation template for an ODDR buffer from AMD’s Virtex-7 Library
User Guide:
Verilog

--- Page 344 ---
ODDR #( 
.DDR_CLK_EDGE("OPPOSITE_EDGE"), 
.INIT(1'b0), // Initial value of Q: 1'b0 or 1'b1 
.SRTYPE("SYNC") // Set/reset type: "SYNC" or "ASYNC" 
) ODDR_inst ( 
❶ .Q(Q), // 1-bit DDR output
.C(C), // 1-bit clock input 
.CE(CE), // 1-bit clock enable input 
.D1(D1), // 1-bit data input (positive edge) 
.D2(D2), // 1-bit data input (negative edge) 
.R(R), // 1-bit reset 
.S(S) // 1-bit set 
);
VHDL
ODDR_inst : ODDR 
generic map( 
DDR_CLK_EDGE => "OPPOSITE_EDGE", 
INIT => '0', -- Initial value for Q port ('1' or '0') 
SRTYPE => "SYNC") -- Reset type ("ASYNC" or "SYNC") 
port map ( 
❶ Q => Q, -- 1-bit DDR output 
C => C, -- 1-bit clock input 
CE => CE, -- 1-bit clock enable input 
D1 => D1, -- 1-bit data input (positive edge) 
D2 => D2, -- 1-bit data input (negative edge) 
R => R, -- 1-bit reset input 
S => S -- 1-bit set input 
);
It’s not critical to understand every line here. The most important
connection is the output pin itself ❶ ; this is where the ODDR block is
connected to the pin. The two data inputs, D1 and D2, will be used in an
alternating pattern to drive the data to the output pin. D1 is driven on rising
(or positive) edges and D2 on falling (or negative) edges.

--- Page 345 ---
Double data rate allows you to speed up data transmission, but if you
really want to get your data flying, some FPGAs have a specialized type of
interface called SerDes that allows for even speedier input and output. We’ll
examine this exciting FPGA feature next.
SerDes
A SerDes, short for serializer/deserializer, is a primitive of some (but not
all) FPGAs responsible for inputting or outputting data at very high speeds,
into the gigabits per second (Gb/s). At a high level, it works by taking a
parallel data stream and converting it into a serial data stream for high-
speed transmission. On the receiving end, the serial data is converted back
to parallel. This is how the FPGA can exchange data with other devices at
very fast data rates. It may sound counterintuitive that sending data serially,
one bit at a time, is faster than sending data in parallel, several bits at a
time, but that’s the magic of SerDes. We’ll discuss why this works soon.
SerDes primitives are sometimes called SerDes transceivers, which
reflects that they can send and receive data. That said, SerDes transceivers
are almost always full-duplex, meaning they don’t have to switch back and
forth between being a transmitter and a receiver like we saw previously
with bidirectional communication. You usually set up one data path as a
transmitter out of your FPGA, and another as a receiver into your FPGA.
SerDes transceivers help FPGAs excel at sending or receiving very
large amounts of data at a rate that wouldn’t be possible with other devices.
This is a killer feature that makes FPGAs attractive for use cases such as
receiving data from a video camera. A high-resolution camera might have a
pixel space of 1,920×1,080, with 32 bits of data per pixel, and new images
captured at a rate of 60 Hz. If we multiply those numbers, that translates to
3.9Gb of uncompressed raw data per second—quite a lot!—and some
cameras can go even higher, up to 4K and 120 Hz. SerDes transceivers
allow an FPGA to receive an absolute firehose of data and unpack it in such
a way that the FPGA can process it correctly. Another common use case is
networking, where you have Ethernet packets flying around at hundreds of
gigabits per second. You might have multiple SerDes transceivers working
together on a single device to route packets correctly, again at very fast data
rates that wouldn’t be possible to achieve on a standard I/O pin.

--- Page 346 ---
At its heart, SerDes revolves around converting between parallel and
serial data. To understand why this conversion is necessary, we need to take
a closer look at the differences between serial and parallel data transfer.
Parallel vs. Serial Communication
Parallel communication means we’re using multiple communication
channels (usually wires) to send data, with the data split up across the
different channels. Serial communication means we’re sending the data on a
single channel, one bit at a time. Figure 11-5 illustrates the difference.
Figure 11-5: Parallel vs. serial interfaces
The top half of the figure shows an 8-bit-wide synchronous parallel
interface. Synchronous means that we have a clock signal sent between the
devices, and the data is aligned with the clock. With this interface, we can
send a whole byte of data on a single clock cycle, with one bit on each of
the eight wires. In this case, we’re sending the value 01100011, or 0x63.
While we have eight parallel data paths in this example, you could
theoretically create a parallel interface with any width—you could have a 2-
bit-wide interface, a 32-bit-wide interface, a 64-bit-wide interface, or any
other arbitrary size.
The bottom half of the figure shows the same data transfer of the value
01100011, but it’s sent in a synchronous serial stream. Once again, there’s a

--- Page 347 ---
clock signal shared between the devices, but now the data is sent across a
single wire, one bit per clock cycle. This way, it takes eight clock cycles to
send 0x63, rather than just one clock cycle in the parallel case.
Since parallel communication allows you to send multiple bits in a
single clock cycle, it might seem logical that transmitting data in parallel
will always allow you to send more data per unit time than sending the data
serially. In fact, parallel data transfer runs up against some serious
limitations as the bandwidth increases. The physics can’t easily scale to
support today’s high-speed data needs, which is why parallel interfaces are
far less common today than they used to be.
If you’re old enough to remember the days of ribbon printers, those
would connect to your computer using an LPT port, which is a type of
parallel interface. Another example was the old PCI bus that was a common
way to plug devices like modems and sound cards into your desktop
motherboard. Neither of these interfaces is used very much anymore; they
couldn’t keep up with our need for faster data.
To illustrate why, let’s consider how your data transfer speed (or
bandwidth) is calculated on a parallel interface like PCI. The first version of
PCI operated at a clock rate of 33 MHz and was 32 bits wide, meaning
there were 32 individual data wires that needed to be connected between
two devices. Multiplying the numbers out, we get 1,056Mb/s, or 132
megabytes per second (MB/s), of bandwidth. This was sufficient for the
computing needs of the 1990s, but the demand for more data soon began to
increase. We wanted better graphics cards, for example, and the bus to
support that data transfer needed to grow accordingly. PCI designers
answered the demand by doubling the clock rate to 66 MHz, which doubled
the total bandwidth from 132MB/s to 264MB/s. That bought a few years,
but it wasn’t enough, so PCI next doubled the width of the connector from
32 bits to 64 bits, meaning now we have 64 data wires. This provided
around 528MB/s of bandwidth, which again bought a few years, but still it
wasn’t enough.
By this time, PCI was reaching a point of diminishing returns. There
are only two ways to increase data throughput with a parallel interface like
PCI: make the bus wider or increase the clock speed. At 64 bits wide, PCI
connectors were already a few inches long. To go any wider—say, to 128

--- Page 348 ---
bits—the connectors would need to be enormous. Routing all those
connections in the circuit board gets very challenging, too. It simply doesn’t
make sense to continue to widen the bus.
There are also big challenges with increasing the clock speed. When
you have a wide data bus and you’re sending a clock signal alongside the
data, as in the synchronous parallel interface in Figure 11-5, you need to
maintain a tight relationship between the clock and the data. The clock will
be fed into the clock input of each flip-flop on the receiving side: for a 128-
bit-wide bus, for example, there are 128 individual flip-flops that all need
that same clock. With so many parallel flip-flops, however, you start to run
into problems with clock skew, a phenomenon where the same clock arrives
at different times to each flip-flop due to propagation delay.
As we discussed in Chapter 7, signals don’t travel instantly; rather,
there’s some delay, and the longer the signals have to travel (that is, the
longer the wire) the longer the propagation delay becomes. With a 128-bit-
wide bus, the distance the clock signal travels to get to the bit-0 flip-flop
can be quite different from the distance the clock signal travels to get to the
bit-127 flip-flop. As the clock frequency increases, this difference can
create enough clock skew to trigger metastable conditions and corrupt the
data.
Clearly, parallel communication has issues. There are fundamental
limits to how fast you can go and how many bits you can send at once.
Ultimately, the problem comes down to the need to send a separate clock
signal alongside the data. The solution is to send the clock and the data
together, serially, as part of a single combined signal.
Self-Clocking Signals
Combining the clock and the data into one signal gives you something
called a self-clocking signal. The process of creating this signal is
sometimes referred to as embedding the clock in the data, and it’s the key
technique that makes high-speed serial data transfer via SerDes possible. If
you send the clock and the data together as one signal, then the issue of
clock skew is no longer a problem, since your clock is received exactly
when your data is received; they’re the same signal! With clock skew out of

--- Page 349 ---
the picture, you’re able to increase the clock frequency (and therefore the
data frequency) tremendously.
There are many different systems, called encoding schemes, for
embedding the clock in the data. Common ones include Manchester code,
High-Level Data Link Control (HDLC), and 8B/10B. We’ll focus on
Manchester code, since it’s a relatively simple encoding scheme, to
illustrate one way to create a self-clocking signal. Figure 11-6 shows how
Manchester code works.
Figure 11-6: Embedding the clock in the data with Manchester code
To implement Manchester code, you take the XOR (exclusive OR) of
the clock and data signals, producing a new signal that combines the two. In
any given clock period, the data signal will be a 1 or a 0, while the clock
signal is a 1 for the first half of the period and a 0 for the second half of the
period. The resulting Manchester code signal thus changes halfway through
the clock period as well, in response to the transition in the clock signal.
Depending on the data value in that period, the Manchester signal will
either be low then high (when the data is a 1) or high then low (when the
data is a 0). Table 11-2 is a truth table for the Manchester signal based on
the different data/clock combinations. You can use this table to understand
the Manchester signal pattern in Figure 11-6.
Table 11-2: Truth Table for Manchester Code
Data Clock Manchester encoding
0 0 0
0 1 1
1 0 1
1 1 0

--- Page 350 ---
This is simply a truth table for a two-input XOR logic gate, where the
inputs are the data and clock signals. As we discussed in Chapter 3, XOR
performs the operation either/or, but not both, so the output is high when
exactly one input is high, but not when both or neither are high. Looking at
the waveforms in Figure 11-6, notice that whenever the clock and data are
both high, the encoded value is low. The encoded value is also low when
the clock and data are both low, and it’s high when only one of the two is
high.
The Manchester encoded signal allows you to send the clock and data
signals together on a single wire. As mentioned previously, this is the key
enabler of high-speed serial data transfer. You no longer need to worry
about the alignment of the clock to the data, because the clock is the data
and the data is the clock.
On the receiving side, you need to separate the clock back out from the
data, a process called clock data recovery (CDR). This is achieved using an
XOR gate and some small, additional logic at the receiver. Then you can
use the recovered clock as your clock input to a flip-flop, and feed the
recovered data into the data input of that same flip-flop. This way you have
perfect synchronization between the clock and the data. The issue of clock
skew that we saw with parallel data goes away, enabling you to crank up the
data rates far beyond what parallel data transfer could ever achieve.
Manchester code is just one way to generate a self-clocking signal, and
it’s a simple encoding scheme. It isn’t used for modern, more complicated
SerDes applications, but it does have some features that are critical. For
one, the Manchester encoded signal is guaranteed to transition on each
clock cycle. If you’re sending a continuous stream of 0s in the data, for
example, there will still be transitions in the encoded signal. These
transitions are essential for performing CDR on the receiving side. Without
guaranteed transitions, the receiver wouldn’t be able to lock onto the input
stream. It wouldn’t know if the data was being sent at 3 gigabits per second
(Gb/s), or 1.5Gb/s, or if it was running at all.
Another important feature of Manchester code is that it’s DC balanced,
meaning there are an equal number of highs and lows in the resulting data
stream. This helps maintain signal integrity and overcome non-ideal
conditions on the wire during high-speed data transfer. We normally
consider wires to be perfect conductors, but in reality they aren’t; every

--- Page 351 ---
wire has some capacitance, inductance, and resistance. At slow data rates
these don’t matter much, but when we get into the Gb/s range, we need to
consider these effects. For example, since there’s some capacitance in the
wire, it makes sense that the wire can be charged up like a capacitor. When
a wire becomes slightly charged, for example to a high state, then it requires
more energy to discharge it to a low state. Ideally, you don’t want to charge
up your wires at all: in other words, you want to maintain a DC balance.
Sending an equal number of high and low transitions in SerDes is critical to
maintaining good signal integrity, and all clock and data encoding schemes
have this feature.
How SerDes Works
Now that we’ve covered the speed advantages of serial communication over
parallel communication and examined how to combine the clock and data
into one signal, we’re ready to look at how SerDes actually works. Figure
11-7 shows a simplified block diagram of a SerDes interface.
Figure 11-7: A simplified SerDes block diagram
Looking at the image as a whole, we have a serializer on the left that
acts as a transmitter, and a deserializer on the right that acts as a receiver.
We have clock and data signals going into the serializer on the left, and
clock and data signals coming out of the deserializer on the right. That’s
really all we’re trying to do with SerDes: send some data and a clock signal
from a transmitter to a receiver. However, doing this at fast data rates
requires a lot more functionality than we’ve seen in simpler input and
output buffers.

--- Page 352 ---
First, notice that there’s a phase-locked loop on the transmit side, in the
lower-left corner of Figure 11-7. Usually this is a dedicated PLL specific to
the SerDes transceiver that uses a reference clock (Clk In) to generate the
clock that will run the serializer. This clock dictates the overall rate at
which your SerDes will run. The data that you actually want to send (Data
In) comes into the SerDes block in parallel. I’ve drawn four lines here, but
there could be any number of wires. The serializer takes the output of the
PLL and the parallel data, encodes it using an encoding protocol, and
generates a serial data stream at the desired SerDes rate. For example, if
you have a parallel interface that takes 4 bits at a time at a 250 MHz clock
rate, then the serializer will generate a serialized version of this data that
can be transferred at 1Gb/s, four times that speed.
NOTE
Depending on the encoding scheme, the actual serial stream will likely be
running at above 1Gb/s. For example, the 8B/10B scheme takes 8-bit data
and encodes it into 10-bit data. It does this for two purposes: to ensure
transitions in the clock so we can do clock data recovery at the receiver,
and to maintain a DC balance. Going from 8-bit data to 10-bit data adds a
20 percent overhead, however, so to send data at a rate of 1Gb/s we need to
send the actual serial stream at 1.2Gb/s.
The output stage is next. Notice that the output stage contains a
differential output buffer. For the reasons discussed previously, such as the
ability to send data at high rates, at lower power, and with noise immunity,
SerDes transceivers use differential data. The output stage also performs
some extra signal conditioning to improve the signal integrity. Once the
signal is as conditioned as it can be, it passes through the data channel.
Sending data at high speeds requires optimizations in all parts of the
data path, including the data channel itself. For copper wires, the impedance
of the material must be controlled to ensure good signal integrity. The
channel can also be made from a different material than copper. For
example, fiber optics can be used, where light rather than electricity is sent
down thin glass or plastic wires. Fiber optics provides excellent signal
integrity and is immune to EMI, but it’s a more expensive solution than
traditional copper wires.

--- Page 353 ---
On the receive side, the input stage performs its own signal
conditioning to extract the best-quality signal possible. The data is then sent
to both a CDR block and the serial-to-parallel conversion and decoder
block. The CDR recovers the clock signal from the data stream, and then
the deserializer uses that extracted clock to sample the data. It might seem a
bit odd that you can recover the clock and then use that clock to sample data
from the same signal, but that’s the magic of how SerDes works! Finally, at
the output side, the data is again converted to parallel. Continuing with the
previous example, you would recover your 250 MHz data stream across the
four parallel output wires.
This example referred to a 1Gb/s data rate, but that isn’t really that fast
anymore. As data rates keep increasing, we need to keep optimizing each
part of this whole process. Maintaining high signal integrity is critical for
SerDes applications. At fast data rates, small resistances, capacitances, and
inductances can affect the signal integrity of the line. Passing data through a
connector (for example, a USB plug) causes small imperfections in the data
path that affect the signal integrity too, so optimizing every aspect of the
process becomes critical.
SerDes is one of the killer features of modern FPGAs, but there’s a lot
of complexity involved. As you’ve just seen, something as simple-sounding
as high-speed data transfer involves a number of steps, including serializing
data, transmitting it, receiving it, and then deserializing it again. Even with
that process, we’re fighting physics to get data to travel at faster and faster
rates.
Summary
To be a successful FPGA designer, it helps to have a strong understanding
of I/O. This is where the FPGA engineer works at the intersection of
electrical engineering and software engineering. This chapter explained
how FPGAs use buffers to bring data in and send data out and explored
some of the more common settings that FPGA designers need to be aware
of when configuring I/O, including the operating voltage, drive strength,
and slew rate. You learned about the difference between single-ended and
differential communication, and you saw how DDR uses both rising and
falling clock edges to send data more quickly. We also explored SerDes, a

--- Page 354 ---
powerful input/output feature that allows FPGAs to excel at high-speed data
applications.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 355 ---
A
FPGA DEVELOPMENT BOARDS
This appendix lists a few example
FPGA development boards that you can
use to work on the projects in this book. A dev board
that you can program is a valuable learning tool.
There’s nothing more satisfying than blinking LEDs,
pushing buttons, and interfacing to external devices!
You can certainly learn a lot from this book without
completing the practical examples. But to really
unlock its value I recommend purchasing a board,
such as one of the devices mentioned here, and
working through all of the projects using physical
hardware.
In Chapter 2 we discussed some criteria for selecting a board, including
the features required to complete the book’s projects as written. In
particular, I recommend choosing a board with a Lattice iCE40 FPGA, a
USB connection, and peripherals such as LEDs, push buttons, and a seven-
segment display. The boards covered here either meet these requirements
off-the-shelf or allow you to meet them by connecting a few extra
peripherals. There are other boards that will work, too; you can use any of

--- Page 356 ---
these or use these recommendations as a starting point for your own
research.
The Nandland Go Board
I created the Nandland Go Board (Figure A-1) as a part of a successful
Kickstarter campaign in 2016 to fill a gap in the market: a lack of FPGA
development boards that were fun, affordable, and easy to use for
beginners. I designed the board with many peripherals, to allow for a wide
range of interesting projects. The Go Board has everything you need to
work on all of the projects in this book without any modifications.
Figure A-1: The Nandland Go Board
The FPGA on the Go Board is an iCE40 HX1K, which is small
compared to modern AMD and Intel FPGAs but powerful enough to create
the game Pong on a VGA monitor. The board has four LEDs, four push-
button switches, two seven-segment displays, a Pmod connector, a VGA
connector, and a USB connector for power, programming, and
communication. At about $65 at the time of writing, it’s an affordable board
that will allow you to try many different projects in either Verilog or
VHDL. It’s available through https://nandland.com.
The Lattice iCEstick
Lattice designed the iCEstick FPGA development board to be plugged
directly into the USB port of a computer, like a thumb drive. It has the same

--- Page 357 ---
FPGA as the Go Board (an iCE40 HX1K), but it’s a bit more limited in
terms of built-in peripherals. There are five LEDs available, a Pmod
connector, and an IrDA transceiver for sending and receiving infrared data.
At the time of writing the iCEstick is priced at around $50, and it can
be purchased directly from Lattice’s website (https://latticesemi.com) or
through electronics distributers such as Digi-Key (https://digikey.com). To
use this development board for the projects in this book, you’ll need to
make use of the Pmod connector to expand its capabilities. At a minimum, I
would recommend purchasing a breakout board with additional button
inputs; for example, Digilent (https://digilent.com) sells a Pmod module
with four push-button switches.
The iCEstick doesn’t have enough Pmod connectors to interface to a
seven-segment display and a button module at the same time for the state
machine project in Chapter 8. However, if you want to implement the
seven-segment display portion of the project, you can connect an individual
display using some of the 16 through-hole I/O connections on the sides of
the board.
The Alchitry Cu
The Alchitry Cu is similar to the iCEstick in that it’s a relatively simple
board with a single FPGA and connectors, and not many on-board
peripherals. The difference is that the Alchitry Cu has many more
connectors available, so you can interface to more peripherals. Additionally,
it uses a larger FPGA, the iCE40 HX8K, which has more resources
available for larger, more complicated projects.
The Alchitry Cu can be paired with the Alchitry Io Element Board to
expand its capabilities: the Io mounts directly on top of the Cu, similar to an
Arduino shield, and adds 4 seven-segment displays, 5 push buttons, 24
LEDs, and 24 switches. This option is the most expensive of the three
discussed here; the Cu and Io together cost around $85 as of this writing.
You can purchase the boards at https://sparkfun.com.
Switching Between Boards
As I mentioned in Chapter 2, the beauty of Verilog and VHDL is that
they’re FPGA-agnostic. The code that you write for one development board

--- Page 358 ---
will translate very well to another board, often with no modifications
needed, provided you aren’t using device-specific hard IP features like the
ones discussed in Chapter 9. This makes it quite natural to start your FPGA
journey on a low-cost, easy-to-use iCE40-based board like the ones
described here, and then level up to a fancier development board as you
gain experience. You’ll be able to take all the projects you developed for
your first board and port them to a new, more advanced board with minimal
revision.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 359 ---
B
TIPS FOR A CAREER IN FPGA
ENGINEERING
Perhaps this book has whetted your
appetite for FPGA design to the point
where you’re considering making a career out of it.
Working with FPGAs is a truly rewarding job: you
get to wake up each day and solve interesting and
relevant problems. Just as designing FPGAs takes
practice, applying for jobs is a skill that you can
refine. This appendix discusses strategies for getting
a great job as an FPGA engineer.
I’ve been on both sides of the job search process, as both an
interviewee and an interviewer, so I’ve identified some techniques that
work to secure a fulfilling job, and I also understand what employers are
looking for. In this appendix, I’ll share some tips first on how to improve
your resume so you can land an interview, then on how to perform well
during the interview to boost your chances of getting the job. Finally, we’ll
discuss how to negotiate for your best possible offer.
The Resume

--- Page 360 ---
The purpose of a resume is to get you in the door for an interview. That’s
really it. Once you’re in the door, your resume’s work is complete. In my
career, I’ve reviewed hundreds of resumes while trying to fill job positions,
and only a small fraction of them have led to an interview. Let’s explore
some techniques you can use to get your resume to stand out.
Keep It Short
A good engineer knows how to quickly show what’s important and what
isn’t. Demonstrate that by getting straight to the point in your resume. If
you have less than five years’ experience, there’s no reason why your
resume should be longer than a single page. Many job seekers think that a
longer resume will make them seem more experienced, but padding your
resume with fluff will only do you a disservice. Recruiters know filler when
they see it. For example, a sentence like “Coordinated with teams from
around the world to share responsibilities and tasks” means absolutely
nothing. Cut out the fat, and get to the meat.
Instead of including empty platitudes, use your resume to highlight
tangible skills, successes, and achievements. If you have no previous work
experience, that’s fine, but you’ll need to demonstrate your qualifications in
other ways. For example, describe specific skills you picked up and
technologies you learned about in undergraduate classes. If you worked on
a large project with a group, that should likely get its own section on your
resume.
Include Academic Information
Many companies require a four-year undergraduate degree in engineering as
a minimum qualification for a job, so your resume should include
information about your education. However, one of the things that I like
most about engineering is that it’s very much a meritocracy. What counts
most isn’t which school you went to; it’s your knowledge and competency.
This means that you shouldn’t worry if you didn’t go to the most
prestigious private school (and if you did, it may not give you the leg up
that you expect). When I’m looking at resumes, I usually don’t even look at
what school the applicant attended. I’m much more interested in seeing

--- Page 361 ---
evidence of what they’ve learned and what they’ve accomplished with that
knowledge.
People often wonder if they should include their GPA on their resume.
Personally, I would recommend including it if it’s above a 3.0, and leaving
it off if it’s below that. Some companies have GPA requirements (they
won’t even look at your resume if your GPA isn’t listed, or if it’s below
some threshold), but this appears to have become less common in recent
years. Hiring managers understand that being a successful engineer doesn’t
always correlate with having the best grades in your philosophy class.
If you don’t have an undergraduate degree in engineering, your job
hunt will be more challenging. Not all companies have a degree
requirement, though. Smaller companies, in particular, are often less strict
about their minimum requirements. You may be able to compensate for the
lack of relevant educational experience by highlighting your practical
experience. Be sure to describe projects you’ve worked on that illustrate
your mastery of the field.
Tailor Your Resume to the Job Description
A job description details all the roles and responsibilities that the company
expects the new hire to take on. The company is describing their ideal
candidate, so you should try to reflect those ideals as much as possible
through your resume. This means you should be prepared to tweak your
resume for each job you apply for. Highlight areas that match the needs of
the company, and consider removing areas that are less of a match. Include
relevant buzzwords and specific technologies that you have experience
with. Acronyms, in particular, stand out and are eye-catching.
Think about your resume from the hiring manager’s perspective. The
job description is a list of elements that they’re looking for. Don’t make it
hard for them to find those elements. The more keywords from the job
description that show up prominently in your resume, the better. However,
keep in mind that you should be able to back up anything you put down on
your resume with detailed knowledge during an interview. There’s no better
way to bomb an interview than demonstrating that you’ve made false
claims of proficiency.

--- Page 362 ---
To illustrate how to tailor your resume, let’s assume most of your
experience has been in Verilog, but you also understand VHDL. An FPGA
job description will typically state which language the company uses. If you
come across a job that requires VHDL, you should adjust your resume to
highlight your VHDL projects. It might even be worth converting some of
your Verilog code to VHDL to hone your skills. As another example, the
company might want someone with image processing experience. In this
case, you should add a bullet to your resume identifying any work you’ve
done in this area. Conversely, if the job posting is from a company building
a wireless product, highlight anything you’ve done with wireless
communication instead. Make sure you’re specific when highlighting your
skills: “FPGA experience with BLE over UART” is much better than
“Worked with wireless communications.”
Critiquing an Example Resume
Let’s look at an example resume for a recent college graduate named
Russell Merrick to see what can be improved. Figure B-1 shows my actual
resume when I was applying for my first job after college.

--- Page 364 ---
Figure B-1: An example resume
It wasn’t horrible, but in hindsight there’s certainly a lot of room for
improvement. The biggest problem is that there isn’t enough technical
content or eye-catching buzzwords. I learned a lot about engineering in
college, but based on this resume, you wouldn’t know it. I didn’t include
any details of specific projects that I worked on during my undergrad
education that would demonstrate my experience; all I did was list the titles
of the courses I took. Additionally, I went into significant detail about non-
engineering work that wasn’t relevant to the job I was applying for. Let’s fix
it up.
First, we can remove “Background in Engineering Management” from
the Education section. At the time, I thought that having completed some
management classes would be an asset, but I quickly realized that as an
entry-level employee, you’re at the bottom of the totem pole. There’s
nobody to manage, so your leadership skills aren’t relevant. Someday in the
future you may advance to the point that you have people working under
you, but that certainly wasn’t going to be the case in the job I was going for
at the time. By the same token, I would remove “Management, Marketing,
Accounting, Finance” from the Coursework section. It’s just not very
relevant for an entry-level FPGA engineer.
In the Related Work Experience section, I describe a brief internship I
had working in information technology (IT). This was a valuable
experience for me because it taught me one important lesson: I didn’t want
to work in IT! Here, it would be helpful to use more buzzwords and
concrete detail. I worked with Linux computers and Cisco routers, for
example, but I didn’t write that anywhere on my resume.
The other work experience item, about my time as an RA, could be
pared down. It’s too long and not especially relevant to FPGA work. The
Abilities section can likewise be trimmed. It’s taken for granted that job
applicants can use Microsoft Word at this point, so don’t bother including it.
With these cuts, there will be more room to highlight some technical
projects I worked on as part of my degree.
Now let’s look at an improved version of the resume. The version in
Figure B-2 implements these suggested changes.

--- Page 366 ---
Figure B-2: An example resume, improved
This revised version is a big improvement. I’ve added a section
detailing a few projects I worked on to illustrate through concrete examples
what I learned in college. In describing these projects, I’ve named many
specific technologies that I worked with, like UART, PID, LDO, IR, and so
on. Acronyms like these help to grab the attention of the hiring manager.
I’ve also cut parts that were too general, while getting more specific in
other sections, such as the description of my IT internship. With this new
and improved resume, past Russell could have gotten so many more
interviews!
The Interview
Your resume is all about getting your foot in the door, but the interview is
where you really need to shine in order to beat the competition and secure
the job. An interview is really just an oral test, and as with all tests, it helps
to be prepared. You should practice implementing the tips in this section
until you’re comfortable with them. As awkward as it might feel, find a
friend or relative to try out these skills with. It really makes a difference
practicing out loud, with another person, as opposed to in your head.
Show Your Enthusiasm
Beyond proving your technical qualifications, an interview is an
opportunity to demonstrate your enthusiasm for the job at hand. To do this,
it’s useful to research the company beforehand. Make sure you understand
the company’s products, as well as the overall industry they’re part of. This
way you can impress the interviewers with your level of engagement and
your knowledge of the problems the company faces. You might even have
some ideas for solutions to a few of these problems!
It also never hurts to contact people at the company directly in advance
of an interview. You might think this would be annoying to the people
hiring at the company, but it can be hard for them to tell which resumes are
submitted by people who are responding to every single job posting they
come across, and which people are really excited about the specific open
position. I’ve had job applicants reach out to me on LinkedIn or via email

--- Page 367 ---
directly, and I’m always impressed when a candidate takes this extra step. It
shows they’re really interested in the job and driven to achieve their goals.
The most driven candidate I’ve ever come across literally started a
podcast about the space industry to get a job working for my company. He
wrote, edited, and published a dozen episodes, just so he could get his foot
in the door. I’m not suggesting you need to create a podcast to get a job at
your dream company, but just know that nobody has ever been turned away
for excess enthusiasm.
Anticipate Questions
As you prepare for an interview, it helps to anticipate the sorts of questions
that will be asked. The first thing I recommend doing is reviewing the job
description. The topics mentioned there are the ones that are most likely to
come up in the interview, as they’re the ones the hiring manager is most
interested in for that particular position. You probably won’t have
experience in every single area mentioned in the job description, and that’s
totally fine. However, I recommend doing some research and learning a bit
about any topic you’re unfamiliar with, so you at least have some
background if that topic comes up in conversation. Make sure you can also
speak fluently about anything that you highlight on your resume as a skill.
The job description is always a good place to start, but if you’re
looking for more ways to prepare, here’s a list of some common questions
that come up in interviews for FPGA-related positions:
Describe the difference between a flip-flop and a latch.
Why might you choose an FPGA over a microcontroller?
What does a for loop do in synthesizable code?
What is the purpose of a PLL?
Describe the difference between inference and instantiation.
What is metastability, and how would you prevent it?
What is a FIFO?
What is a block RAM?
Describe how a UART works, and where might one be used.
What is the difference between synchronous and asynchronous logic?

--- Page 368 ---
What is a shift register?
Describe some differences between Verilog and VHDL.
What should you be concerned about when crossing clock domains?
Describe setup and hold time. What happens if they are violated?
What is the purpose of a synthesis tool?
What happens during the place and route process?
What are SerDes transceivers and where are they used?
What is the purpose of a DSP block?
If I were interviewing someone for an intro-level FPGA job, I would
absolutely ask these types of questions. The good news is that each of them
has been answered in this book. So study up and crush that job interview!
Pivot
When you don’t know the answer to a question, I suggest you pivot by
giving the interviewer some information that you do know that’s relevant in
some way. For example, let’s say that you only have experience using SVN
for version control, and you’ve never used Git. If the interviewer asks,
“How would you create a branch in Git?” don’t just say, “I don’t know, I’ve
never used Git before.” That answer won’t be sufficient. Instead, you could
say something like, “Well, I haven’t used Git for version control yet, but in
SVN I use branches to track independent lines of development—for
example, when I fix a bug or add a feature. In SVN, this can be done with
the command SVN COPY.”
This is a fantastic answer. Despite not having the information the
interviewer was looking for, you’ve demonstrated that you understand the
purpose of branching and have experience with it. Interviewers get that you
won’t know all the answers, and that new tools and skills can be learned on
the job. Always take the opportunity to explain what you know about a
question posed to you, even if you don’t know the complete answer.
The Job Offer and Negotiation
At this point, you’ve beaten the competition and the hiring manager has
decided to make you a job offer. Congratulations, you’re a professional

--- Page 369 ---
engineer now! It’s time to celebrate. Then, once you’ve calmed down, I
always recommend that you ask for a better offer. You’re probably thinking,
“But Russell, that’s ungrateful. I should be happy that I got any offer at all.
What if they pull my offer because I asked them to do better?”
Here’s a life lesson that you can take from this book: it never hurts to
ask. Checking into a hotel? Ask if they have any room upgrades available.
Buying something expensive from a store? Ask if they have any coupons or
discounts that could be applied. Got your first job offer? Ask if they can
increase the salary, stock options, or sign-on bonus. The company will
never take back a job offer if you’re polite and professional, but every
single time I’ve asked a company for a better offer, they’ve given it. HR
will never give you their best offer first. They expect that a little negotiation
will be a part of the process. They want to get you to work for as little
money as possible (without insulting you, of course). They always leave
money on the table, but it’s up to you to get that money. So be polite, but
don’t be afraid to ask if there’s any way that they can increase the offer.
Summary
My goal in writing this book is to spread the knowledge that I’ve
accumulated over my career as an engineer. I hope the book will help you
strengthen your FPGA skills and become a world-class performer. Shoot me
a message when you’ve made it. You’ve got this!
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 370 ---
GLOSSARY
application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC)   An integrated circuit
that’s customized for a particular use, rather than a general use.
bidirectional   Describes an FPGA pin that can both send and receive data,
often in half-duplex communication.
blocking assignment   An assignment that prevents the execution of the
next statement until the current assignment is executed. The blocking
assignment operator is = in Verilog and := in VHDL, but in VHDL you can
only create blocking assignments on variables, not signals.
block RAM   A common FPGA primitive used for larger pools of memory
storage and retrieval.
Boolean algebra   Equations where inputs and outputs are represented with
true/false, or high/low, or 1/0 only.
buffer   An electronic circuit element that isolates its input from its output.
clock   A digital signal that steadily alternates between high and low at a
fixed frequency, coordinating and driving the activity of an FPGA.
clock data recovery (CDR)   The process of extracting the clock and data
signals from a combined clock/data signal sent through SerDes. The
extracted clock signal can be used to sample the data at the SerDes receiver.
clock enable (to a flip-flop)   Labeled En, an input that allows the flip-flop
output to be updated when active. When the clock enable is inactive, the
flip-flop will retain its output state.
clock input (to a flip-flop)   Labeled >, the input that takes in a clock
signal, allowing a flip-flop to work.

--- Page 371 ---
combinational logic   Logic for which the outputs are determined from the
present inputs, with no memory of past states (also called combinatorial
logic). Combinational logic generates LUTs within an FPGA.
constraints   Rules about your FPGA that you provide to the synthesis and
place and route tools, such as the pin locations for signals and the clock
frequencies used in your design.
core voltage   The voltage at which an FPGA performs all of its internal
digital processing.
data input (to a flip-flop)   Labeled D, the input to a flip-flop that will be
propagated to the output, usually on the rising edge of the clock.
data output (from a flip-flop)   Labeled Q, the output of the flip-flop,
usually updated on the rising edge of the clock.
datasheet   A collection of information about an electronic component.
FPGAs often have several datasheets, and more complicated FPGAs can
have a few dozen.
DC balance   Sending an equal number of high and low bits, in order to
improve digital signal integrity in high-speed communications.
debounce   A technique for removing bounces or glitches to get a stable
signal. Often used on mechanical switches, which can introduce glitches
when a switch is toggled.
demultiplexer (demux)   A design element that can select a single input to
one of several outputs.
device under test (DUT)   The block of code being tested by a testbench.
Also called the unit under test (UUT).
differential signaling   A method of transmitting electrical signals with two
wires by evaluating the difference between them. A reference to ground
isn’t required.
digital filter   A system that performs mathematical operations on a digital
signal to reduce or enhance certain features of that signal.
double data rate (DDR)   Sending data on both the rising and falling edges
of each clock cycle. Allows for twice the data throughput compared to

--- Page 372 ---
single data rate (SDR).
drive strength   A setting that controls the level of source or sink current
(in mA) for a pin.
DSP block   A primitive used to accelerate math operations for digital
signal processing (DSP), in particular multiplication and addition, in an
FPGA. Also called a DSP tile.
duty cycle   The percentage of time a signal is high versus low. Clock
signals usually have a 50 percent duty cycle.
edge   The point at which a signal, such as a clock, transitions from one
state to another. A transition from low to high is called a rising or positive
edge, and a transition from high to low is called a falling or negative edge.
edge detection   The process of finding either a rising edge or a falling edge
and triggering some action based on that edge.
electromagnetic interference (EMI)   A phenomenon caused by changing
electrical and magnetic fields (for example, from a nearby microwave oven,
cell phone, or power line) that can cause disturbances in other systems.
event   An action that a state machine responds to, such as a timer expiring,
a button being pressed, or some input trigger.
first in, first out (FIFO)   A common type of buffer, where the first word
written is the first word read out.
flip-flop   The critical component inside an FPGA responsible for storing
state. Uses a clock as an input and passes the signal from its data input to its
data output, usually on the rising edge of the clock. Also called a register.
FPGA   Short for field programmable gate array, a digital circuit that can
be programmed with Verilog or VHDL to solve a wide array of digital logic
problems.
FPGA development board   A printed circuit board (PCB) with an FPGA
on it that allows you to program the FPGA and test your code.
frequency   The number of cycles (high/low alternations) per second of a
signal (such as a clock signal), measured in hertz (Hz).

--- Page 373 ---
full-duplex   A communication mode between two systems where data can
be sent and received at the same time.
generics   Used in VHDL to make code more flexible and reusable by
overriding behaviors of low-level code at a higher level. Equivalent to
parameters in Verilog.
GPIO   A general purpose input/output pin, which serves to interface an
FPGA to other components on a circuit board.
guard condition   A Boolean expression that determines the flow of
operations in a state machine. Can be drawn in a state machine diagram
using a diamond.
GUI creation   The process of using the GUI in an FPGA development tool
to create your primitives. This is often the best approach to creating
primitives for beginners, as it’s the least error prone.
half-duplex   A communication mode between two systems where only one
system can send data at a time. Also referred to as bidirectional data
transfer.
hard IP   A component within your FPGA dedicated to a particular task,
such as a block RAM, PLL, or DSP block. Also called a primitive.
high impedance   The state of a buffer in which the output accepts very
little input current, which effectively shuts the output off and disconnects it
from the circuit.
hold time   The amount of time the input to a flip-flop should be stable
after a clock edge to avoid a metastable condition.
inference   The process of creating a primitive using Verilog or VHDL and
trusting the synthesis tools to understand your intent.
integrated circuit (IC)   Often referred to as a chip, a type of electronic
circuit in a single package.
linear feedback shift register (LFSR)   A special type of shift register that
produces pseudorandom patterns by passing certain flip-flops through a
logic gate and sending the result back into the input.

--- Page 374 ---
logic analyzer   A tool used for debugging that analyzes many digital
signals at once.
logic gates   Devices that perform common Boolean operations like AND,
OR, and XOR. Each type of logic gate has a distinctive symbol.
look-up table (LUT)   A dedicated component inside an FPGA that
performs all Boolean logic operations.
metastability   A condition in which the output of a flip-flop is unstable
and unpredictable for a period of time.
microcontroller   A small computer on an integrated circuit, with a CPU
and external peripherals that can be programmed using a language like C.
multiplexer (mux)   A design element that can select several inputs to a
single output.
non-blocking assignment   An assignment in Verilog or VHDL using <=,
where these statements execute at the same instant in time. Commonly used
to create sequential logic (flip-flops) on an FPGA.
operating voltage   The voltage at which a 1 or a 0 appears on a GPIO pin.
Common values for a 1 are 3.3 V, 2.5 V, and 1.8 V.
parallel communication   A method of transmitting data where multiple
bits are sent simultaneously.
parameters   Used in Verilog to make code more flexible and reusable by
overriding behaviors of low-level code at a higher level. Equivalent to
generics in VHDL.
period   The time between rising edges of a clock cycle, often measured in
nanoseconds. A clock’s period is calculated as 1 ÷ frequency.
phase   The characteristic of a signal that describes the current position of
its waveform, or its relationship in time to another signal.
phase-locked loop (PLL)   A primitive commonly used as the main clock
generator for an FPGA. It can generate multiple clock signals at different
frequencies and manage the relationships between them.
physical constraint file   A file that maps the signals in your design to
physical pins on the FPGA.

--- Page 375 ---
place and route   The design tool that takes your synthesized design and
maps it to physical locations on your specific FPGA. Also performs timing
analysis, which reports if a design can run successfully at the requested
clock frequency.
primitive   A component within your FPGA dedicated to a particular task,
such as a block RAM, PLL, or DSP block. Also called hard IP.
primitive instantiation   Directly creating a primitive FPGA component by
using its template. This method allows you to get exactly the primitive you
want, without relying on the tools to make any assumptions for you.
propagation delay   The amount of time it takes for a signal to travel from
a source to a destination.
protocol   A system of rules defining how two or more devices
communicate.
random-access memory (RAM)    Memory that can be accessed in any
order, often from one port (single-port) or two ports (dual-port).
register   Another word for a flip-flop.
routing   Wiring inside an FPGA that gives it its flexibility, but at a higher
dollar cost. Also called interconnect.
sampling   The process of converting an analog signal into a digital signal
by taking discrete measurements of it over time.
self-checking testbench   A testbench that automatically reports if a design
is behaving as expected, without your having to inspect the resulting
waveform.
self-clocking signal   A signal that uses an encoding scheme to combine a
clock and data signal together, such that separate clock and data paths can
be merged into a single interface. This technique is essential for SerDes.
sequential logic   Logic for which the outputs are determined both from
present inputs and previous outputs (also called synchronous logic).
Sequential logic generates flip-flops in an FPGA.
SerDes (serializer/deserializer)   An FPGA primitive used to send data at
high rates between a transmitting and receiving device. Parallel data is

--- Page 376 ---
converted to serial data and embedded with a clock signal before
transmission. On the receiving end, the clock and data signals are extracted,
and the serial data is converted back to parallel.
serial communication   A method of transmitting data where bits are sent
one at a time.
set/reset   An input that, when active, will reset the flip-flop to a default
value.
setup time   The amount of time the input to a flip-flop should be stable
before a clock edge to avoid a metastable condition.
shift register   A chain of flip-flops where the output of one flip-flop is
connected to the input of the next.
sign bit   The most significant bit in a signed number that indicates whether
the number is negative (sign bit is 1) or positive (sign bit is 0).
signed   Refers to a signal that can hold positive or negative data.
sign extension   The operation of increasing the number of bits of a binary
number while preserving the number’s sign and value.
simulation   The process of using a computer to inject test cases into your
FPGA code to see how the code responds.
single data rate (SDR)   Sending data on only one edge of each clock
cycle, most often the rising edge.
single-ended signaling   A method of transmitting electrical signals where
one wire carries the signal, which is referenced to ground.
slew rate   The rate of change allowed for an output signal, usually
specified in qualitative terms, such as fast, medium, or slow.
state   In a state machine, a status where the system is waiting to execute a
transition. A state can be changed when an event triggers a transition, or if
the state itself creates a transition to another state.
state machine   Sometimes called a finite state machine (FSM), a method
of controlling the flow through a sequence of operations inside an FPGA.

--- Page 377 ---
synthesis   The design tool that turns your VHDL or Verilog code into low-
level components within your FPGA, such as LUTs, flip-flops, and block
RAMs. Similar to a compiler for a programming language like C.
system on a chip (SoC)   An integrated circuit that combines many
components of an electronic system into a single package. For example, an
FPGA that has a dedicated CPU might be considered an SoC.
SystemVerilog   A programming language that is a superset of Verilog,
with added features that make it useful for verification.
testbench   Test code that exercises your FPGA design code in a simulation
environment so you can analyze the design to see if it’s behaving as
expected.
timing errors   An output of the place and route process that shows signals
that might be subject to metastability issues, which could cause your FPGA
design to behave unpredictably.
trade study   The act of selecting a technical solution in engineering by
examining multiple possibilities and weighing each by its strengths and
weaknesses.
transceiver   A device that can both transmit and receive communications.
transition   The action of moving from one state to another in a state
machine.
truth table   A table representation of a Boolean equation, listing all
possible input combinations and the corresponding outputs.
two’s complement   A mathematical operation that converts between
positive and negative binary numbers. To take the two’s complement, you
invert the bits and add 1.
unit under test (UUT)   The block of code being tested by a testbench.
Also called the device under test (DUT).
universal asynchronous receiver transmitter (UART)   An interface
where data is transmitted or received asynchronously, meaning without the
use of a clock. Common for exchanging low data rate information, for
example between an FPGA and a computer.

--- Page 378 ---
unsigned   Refers to a signal that can hold only positive data, not negative
data.
utilization report   An output of the synthesis tool that tells you what
percentage of your FPGA resources you’ve used up.
verification   The process of thoroughly testing an FPGA or ASIC design
to ensure it’s working as intended.
waveform   A feature of an FPGA simulation tool that shows a visual
representation of the signals in your test environment over time.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 379 ---
INDEX
Symbols
& (AND, Verilog), 42
= or := (blocking assignment), 22, 214
# (delay, Verilog), 76, 128
%f (formatter), 233
<, > (comparison), 122
{} (concatenation, Verilog), 101
& (concatenation, VHDL), 101
<= (non-blocking assignment), 54, 214
| (OR, Verilog), 42
<< (shift left, Verilog), 225
>> (shift right, Verilog), 226
? (ternary operator, Verilog), 93, 178
^ (XOR, Verilog), 42
A
Actel, 3, 5
addition, 215–219, 232
Alchitry Cu, 257
almost empty (AE), 118, 145
almost full (AF), 118, 145
Altera, 3, 16, 69
ALU (arithmetic logic unit), 197
always block, 53, 57
one vs. two, 149–157
AMD, 3, 16, 46, 64, 69, 87, 144, 188–189, 197, 246, 256
analog-to-digital converter (ADC), 5, 191, 195, 240
AND gate, 32, 40–42, 54, 58, 71
and keyword, 42
application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs), 7–8, 89
arbiter, 127, 228
architecture keyword, 22
Arduino, 5, 16, 257
arithmetic logic unit (ALU), 197
artificial intelligence (AI), 4

--- Page 380 ---
ASCII, 97–98
assertions, 84
assert keyword, 85–86, 128, 157
assign keyword, 22
assignment operators
blocking (=, :=), 22, 214
non-blocking (<=), 54, 214
Atmel. See Microchip Technology
B
bandwidth, 6, 249
bank (pins), 242
bidirectional pin, 240
binary, 33, 162
Binary_To_7Segment module, 161, 169
Bitcoin, 8
black box, 68
block RAM, 115–116, 186, 188, 191–194
creation, 193
error detection and correction, 193
features and limitations, 192
initializing, 128, 193
instantiation template, 186
precalculated table, 227
size, 192
Boolean algebra, 31–32, 36–40
on FPGA, 39
order of operations, 36
symbols, 36
bouncing of switch, 75
BRAM. See block RAM
buffers, 238–239, 246, 253
bugs, 67, 89, 117
C
career tips, 259–267
case statement, 152–153, 164, 172
clock data recovery (CDR), 251–253
clocks, 47
constraints, 131
counting cycles, 77, 80, 96, 102, 108, 182
creation via PLL, 199–204
crossing domains, 141–146
reference, 200
skew, 249–251
$clog2() function, 80, 114
coding style, 78. See also naming convention

--- Page 381 ---
combinational logic, 57–59, 122
concatenation, 101, 107
constraints, 54–55, 131, 145–146
Coordinate Rotation Digital Computer (CORDIC), 229
cores, 185
core voltage, 32
counter
LFSR, 102
signed, 206
traditional, 107
traditional vs. LFSR, 110
wraparound, 208
cyclic redundancy check (CRC), 35
D
datasheets, 63
data types, 206–209
converting, 210–211
data valid (DV) signal, 112
DC balance, 251–253
debounce filter, 76
debouncing of switch, 75–84, 161, 169
debugging, 87–88
decimals, 33, 230
delay, 50, 61, 73, 96. See also propagation delay
De Morgan’s law, 40
demultiplexer (demux), 92, 94–95, 106
depth, 112, 114
development board, 14, 255–259
device under test (DUT), 70
D flip-flop (DFF), 46, 64
Diamond Programmer, 14–15, 20
installation, 18
programming, 26–28
differential signaling, 243–245
Digilent, 16, 257
digital signal processing (DSP), 194. See also DSP block
$display() function, 128
division, 225–228
done pulse, 103, 105, 107
double-flopping, 141–142
double rate data (DDR), 245
drive strength, 242–243
DSP block, 194, 229
analog vs. digital signals, 194–196
arithmetic logic unit (ALU), 197
creation, 198–199

--- Page 382 ---
features, 197–198
multiplier, 197
pre-adder, 197
dual-port RAM, 111
$dumpfile() function, 73
duty cycle, 47
E
EDA Playground, 69–70, 72–74, 83, 211
edge detection, 51, 54, 179–180
electromagnetic interference (EMI), 244, 253
endmodule keyword, 22
entity keyword, 22
enumeration, 152, 171
EPWave, 74
Ethernet, 245, 247
events, state machine, 148–149
F
fab (ASIC foundry), 7, 89
falling edge, 47
fiber optics, 253
file_open() function, 128
files, working with, 128
filter, 196
finance, 4
finite state machine (FSM). See state machine
first in, first out (FIFO), 116–117, 144–145
AE (almost empty), 118, 145
AF (almost full), 118, 145
crossing clock domains, 144
implementation, 119–122
input and output, 117–119
interface, 117
fixed-point numbers, 230–236
flip-flops, 45–46
behavior of, 48–52, 57
clock enable (EN), 46, 48–49, 61
clock input (>), 46, 48–51
creation in Verilog or VHDL, 54
data input (D), 46, 48–51
data output (Q), 46, 48–51
double-flopping, 141–142
edge detection, 51, 54
instantiation template, 189
JK and T flip-flops, 51
physical component, 63

--- Page 383 ---
register, 48, 53
reset, 61–63, 87, 152
synchronous vs. asynchronous resets, 62
use in RAM, 115
floating-point numbers, 230
floating (isolated) electrical ground, 245
$fopen() function, 128
for loops, 128–131
FPGAs (field programmable gate arrays), 1–2
applications, 4, 89
vs. ASICs, 7–9
history, 2–3
languages, 9–11
vs. microcontrollers, 5–8
picking a family and package, 126
full adder, 229
full-duplex communication, 240, 247
$fwrite() function, 128
G
gain, applying to a signal, 196
general purpose input/output. See GPIO
generics, 78, 109, 114, 169
Go Board, 23, 47, 102, 256
GPIO, 238–239
differential signaling, 243–245
drive strength, 242–243
operating voltage, 242
output enable (OE), 239
single-ended, 242–243
slew rate, 243, 245
guard condition, 160
GUI approach, 190–191
H
half adder, 229
half-duplex communication, 240
hard IP, 3, 185
hard processors, 3
hardware debugging, 67
hardware description language (HDL), 9
hertz (Hz), 47
hexadecimal, 98
high impedance (aka hi-Z or tri-state), 239–240
high-speed data, 247, 251, 253
hold time (th), 133–135

--- Page 384 ---
I
I2C (inter-integrated circuit), 240
iCE40 (FPGA family), xxi–xxiii, 14–16, 63
iCEcube2, 14–15, 20, 55–56, 190
building, 25
creating a project, 22–24
installation, 16–18
iCEstick, 256–257
ieee library, 22
if statement, 81
inference, 186
infrared (IR) cameras, 4
initial block, 73, 213
input, 239. See also GPIO
instantiation, 186–189
integrated circuit (IC), 1
Intel, 3, 16, 64
intellectual property (IP), 3
interview tips, 265–267
input/output (I/O). See GPIO
isolated (floating) electrical ground, 245
K
Karnaugh maps, 40
L
latches, 59–61, 124, 155
Lattice Diamond, 16, 190, 198–199
Lattice Semiconductor, 3, 14, 257
least significant bit, 98
LEDs, 15
blinking, 51–56
blinking selectively, 101–111
lighting with logic gate, 40–42
memory game, 158–183
seven-segment display, 161
showing pattern, 178–179
wiring to switch, 19
linear feedback shift register (LFSR), 99–101
applications, 100, 107
code, 106
counter, 102
pseudorandom pattern generation, 171, 177
localparam keyword, 152
logic analyzer, 87–88
logic cell, 64

--- Page 385 ---
logic gates, 32–36, 38
logic minimization, 40, 124
look-up table (LUT), 38–40, 54
physical component, 63
shortcomings, 45
low-pass filter (LPF), 196
low-power double data rate (LPDDR), 116, 118, 148, 246
LVCMOS25, 242
LVCMOS33, 242, 245
LVDS (low-voltage differential signaling), 244
M
Manchester code, 250–252
math
precalculating results, 227
rules, 236
memory blocks, 192. See also RAM
metastability, 133–134, 141–142, 145, 191, 250
Microchip Technology, 3, 5
microcontroller, 2, 5–7
offloading math operations, 229
Microsemi. See Microchip Technology
Microsoft, 20
minimum clock period (tclk(min)), 136
ModelSim, 69
module keyword, 21
most significant bit, 98–99, 207, 215–217
multiplexer (mux), 92–94
multiplication, 221–225, 234
multiplier, 197
multiply–accumulate (MAC) operation, 194, 197
N
naming convention, 22, 62, 78, 96, 121, 158, 213, 232
NAND (not and) gate, 35–36
negotiating a job offer, 267
nonrecurring engineering (NRE) cost, 7
non-synthesizable code, 127
NOR (not or) gate, 36
NOT gate, 34, 103
now keyword, 76, 128
numbers, 206, 208–211
negative, 206
representing in FPGA, 208
signed vs. unsigned, 206–208
numeric_std package, 206

--- Page 386 ---
O
one-time programmable (OTP) FPGAs, 89
open keyword, 105, 182
operating voltage, 242
optimization, 124
OR gate, 33, 42
or keyword, 42
output enable (OE), 239
output keyword, 21–22, 239
overloading functions, 213–214
P
parallel communication, 248–250
parallel thinking, 2, 54
parameters, 78, 109, 114, 169
path slack, 139
.pcf file, 20, 24
PCI, 249
period (of clock), 47–48, 55, 80, 135
phase-locked loop (PLL), 142, 185, 199–204, 252
creation, 202
inputs, 200
locked signal, 202
operation, 200
phase of a signal, 201
physical constraints file, 20, 24
pipelining, 136–140
place and route, 20, 131
constraints, 24, 55, 131, 145, 183, 245
mapping, 24
pin report, 56
timing errors, 56, 131–141, 145
timing report, 56, 138
Pmod (peripheral module) connector, 16
positive edge, 54
pre-adder, 197
primitives, 144, 185–186, 190–191, 247
printed circuit board (PCB), 14
printing to console, 128
process block, 53, 57–58, 73, 213
one vs. two, 149–155
Programmable Array Logic (PAL), 39
projects
blinking an LED, 51–57
creating a memory game, 158–183
debouncing a switch, 75–84

--- Page 387 ---
lighting an LED with logic gates, 40–42
selectively blinking an LED, 101–111
wiring switches to LEDs, 19–28
propagation delay (tp), 135–136, 249
protocol, 240, 245
pulse, 103, 107
stretching, 144
push-button switch, 15, 101
debouncing, 75, 161, 169
edge detection, 180
selector, 102
wiring to LED, 19
Q
Q notation, 231
Quartus, 16, 18
Quine–McCluskey algorithm, 40
R
radar, 4
radiation, 4, 89
radix, 230
RAM (random-access memory), 111–116
depth, 112, 114
dual-port, 111
single-port, 111
width, 112, 114
range keyword, 80
real data type, 233
reg keyword, 53, 213
register, 48
replicated logic, 128
report keyword, 128
resetting a flip-flop. See flip-flops
resize() function, 217, 219
resource utilization. See synthesis
resume tips, 260–265
rising edge, 47–49, 54, 133, 152
routing, 5
S
sampling (analog to digital), 195
schematic, 25, 131
.sdc file, 55
selector inputs, 92–93
self-checking testbenches, 84–86

--- Page 388 ---
sensitivity list, 53–54, 58
sequential logic, 57–58, 61
SerDes (serializer/deserializer), 247–250, 252–253
8B/10B, 253
clock data recovery (CDR), 251, 253
DC balance, 251
encoding scheme, 250, 253
self-clocking signals, 250
speed, 247, 250
transceiver, 247
serial communication, 248–250
serial thinking, 2
set_io keyword, 24
set/reset pin, 61–63
setup time (tsu), 133–136
seven-segment display, 15, 159, 161–165
shift_left() function, 224–226
shift register, 50, 95–101, 129, 224–225
converting between serial and parallel, 97
creating delay, 96
divide by two, 225
multiply by two, 224
signals, 21–22
address, 114
analog vs. digital, 194–196
asynchronous, 141–146
clock, 47
data valid, 112, 117
declaring, 21
differential vs. single-ended, 243–245
dynamic sizing, 209
gain, applying, 196
initial condition, 86–87
input and output, 117–119
mapping to pin, 24–25
monitoring, 74–75
self-clocking, 250–252
synchronous vs. asynchronous, 248
toggling, 101–111
sign bit, 207
signed data type, 206–207, 210
signed() function, 211, 221
sign extension, 216–219
Simon (game), 158. See also testbench
simulation, 68–75
tools, 69–70
single-ended signaling, 243

--- Page 389 ---
single-port RAM, 111
slew rate, 243
state machine, 147–149, 152, 155, 157–160, 184
best practices, 157–158
diagram, 148–149, 158–159
events, 148–149
guard condition, 160
implementation, 149–155
initial state, 149, 152, 160
memory game project, 158–183
states, 148
transitions, 148
turnstile example, 148–152
std_logic_1164 package, 22
std_logic_arith package, 206
std_logic data type, 22
std_logic_vector data type, 206, 210
subtraction, 219–221, 232–234
switches. See push-button switch
synchronous logic, 57
syntax errors, 125
synthesis, 20, 124–127
constraints, 54–55
inference, 186
logic minimization, 40
notes, 124
pruning, 105, 208
report, 42, 55, 60, 84, 124, 183
syntax errors, 125
translate directives, 127
utilization, 42, 84, 110, 183, 194, 204
errors, 125–127
warnings, 124
synthesizable code, 77, 87, 127–130
system on a chip (SoC), 229
SystemVerilog, 70, 86, 89, 152
T
tclk(min) (minimum clock period), 136
telecommunications, 4
ternary operator, 93, 179, 241
testbench, 70–72
creating, 81–83
clock creation, 82
math operations, 211–228
running, 74–75
self-checking, 84–86

--- Page 390 ---
speeding up, 83
state machine, 155–158
writing, 71–73
th (hold time), 133
$time, 76, 128
time, measuring, 76–77
timing. See place and route
toggle a signal, 101–111
to_integer() function, 210–211
to_signed() function, 211
to_unsigned() function, 211
tp (propagation delay), 135–136, 249
transceiver, 240, 247
transition, 148
tri-state, 239
truncation, 233–234
truth tables, 32–39, 41
AND, 33
multiple gates, 37
NAND, 35
NOT, 34
OR, 34
three-input, 37
XOR, 35
tsu (setup time), 133–136
TTL (transistor–transistor logic), 242
Turing, Alan, 33
TWI (two-wire interface), 240
two-dimensional (2D) array, 115, 175
two’s complement, 207–208
U
unit under test (UUT), 70–75, 83
universal asynchronous receiver-transmitter (UART), 97–99
unsigned data type, 210
unsigned() function, 211
USB requirements, 15
utilization errors, 125–127. See also synthesis: utilization
V
variable keyword, 213
verification, 8, 88–89
Verilog
background, 9–11
enumeration support, 152
weak typing, 10

--- Page 391 ---
VHDL
2008 version, 109
attributes, 211, 219
background, 9–11
data type conversions, 210–211
strong typing, 10, 178, 182, 210, 213, 217
verbosity, 22
Visual Studio Code (VS Code), 20
Vivado, 16, 18
voltage, 46. See also GPIO
W
wait keyword, 73, 76, 128
waveforms, 74–75, 83–84
when keyword, 61
width, 112, 114
wraparound, 208
write() function, 128
X
Xilinx, 2–3, 16, 69
XNOR (exclusive not or) gate, 36, 99–100, 107
XOR (exclusive or) gate, 35–36, 39, 42, 99, 250–251
xor keyword, 42
Z
Z (high impedance), 239
OceanofPDF.com