--- Page 3 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 4 ---
 
Creating iOS
apps with Xcode
 
Learn how to develop your own app
 
Aaron L Bratcher
 
www.bpbonline.com
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 5 ---
First Edition 2024
 
Copyright © BPB Publications, India
 
ISBN: 978-93-55516-695
 
All Rights No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed
or transmitted in any form or by any means or stored in a database or
retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher
with the exception to the program listings which may be entered,
stored and executed in a computer system, but they can not be
reproduced by the means of publication, photocopy, recording, or by
any electronic and mechanical means.
 
LIMITS OF LIABILITY AND DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY
 
The information contained in this book is true to correct and the best of
author’s and publisher’s knowledge. The author has made every effort
to ensure the accuracy of these publications, but publisher cannot be
held responsible for any loss or damage arising from any information
in this book.
 
All trademarks referred to in the book are acknowledged as properties
of their respective owners but BPB Publications cannot guarantee the
accuracy of this information.

--- Page 6 ---
 
 
www.bpbonline.com
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 7 ---
 
Dedicated to
 
My beloved wife,
Pamela
 
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 8 ---
 
About the Author
 
Aaron L Bratcher has over 20 years of development experience in a
variety of programming languages and industries. After working on
database applications, he spent a small amount of time writing web
applications with Microsoft’s .Net. From there he found his niche in
iOS programming where he has happily remained for over 10 years.
From the day the Swift language was introduced, he strove to make it
his primary development language. He has used it to create iOS apps
for airlines, home automation, the hotel industry, banking, and more.
He has also professionally used SwiftUI in multiple apps. In each
organization he pushed for modernizing and simplifying the code. He
is currently a Senior iOS Developer at JP Morgan Chase & Co.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 9 ---
 
About the Reviewers
  
Edgar Nzokwe is a versatile polyglot programmer with expertise
across various domains. His proficiency spans frontend technologies
like JavaScript, React, and Angular, as well as backend development
using Python and Java. Edgar is also well-versed in mobile
development, working with frameworks like SwiftUI, UIKit, Java, and
Kotlin.
 
In the realm of DevOps, Edgar is adept at utilizing tools such as
Bitbucket pipelines, Jenkins, Terraform, Docker, Helm, Kubernetes,
ArgoCD, and AWS to streamline and automate processes, ensuring
efficient application deployment and management.
 
Outside of programming, Edgar indulges in his love for reading,
delving into books on philosophy, politics, and fiction during his free
time. This diverse range of interests enriches his knowledge and fuels
his creativity and critical thinking, making him a well-rounded and
insightful professional in the tech industry.
  
Roman Zakharov is an experienced QA and Release Manager at
Yousician, fostering collaboration with mobile app development teams

--- Page 10 ---
to ensure smooth user experiences. His expertise lies in testing with
Xcode and quality assurance within mobile application development.
With an automation-based approach and a dedication to excellence,
Roman crafts robust release processes and delivers high-quality apps
using Xcode, Unity, JUCE, and other modern tools.
 
Additionally, Roman has authored several open-source tools for iOS
development, showcasing his commitment to the mobile development
community. Beyond his role, he also participates as a speaker in game
development and testing conferences across European countries.
 
With a passion for ensuring flawless functionality across various
platforms, Roman continues to make significant contributions to
software engineering and quality assurance. His commitment to
staying ahead of industry trends positions him as a trusted expert in the
dynamic realm of mobile application testing and development.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 11 ---
 
Acknowledgement
 
This book could not have been written without the constant support of
my wife, Pamela. It is her continued encouragement that keeps me
learning and writing.
 
I also thank BPB Publications for their guidance and expertise in
bringing this book to publication. The editors and reviewers helped
make this the best book it could possibly be.
 
Finally, I thank all those who have taken an interest in this book. It is
my genuine desire for anyone who reads this book to learn and grow in
the capacity of an iOS developer.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 12 ---
 
Preface
 
There’s always room for improvement - this statement is a guiding
light to everyone in the software business. It drives the industry
forward as new features are added, bugs are fixed, or new ideas
explored. It encourages hardware manufacturers to make more things
possible than were available before. It sparks the imagination of those
who wish to make their own software and make that glimmer of a
vision come to reality.
 
The aim of this book is to help anyone, from the experienced
professional moving to iOS development to the daring entrepreneur
who has a bold idea on a new app, approach the task of iOS
development with more confidence and an understanding of what it
takes to make an app.
 
Starting with an overview of the deceptively easy-to-approach Swift
language and moving on to the Apple provided way of displaying
items on-screen and interacting with the user with SwiftUI. From there
on, several concepts are introduced to give the reader the necessary
tools to make an improvement to the world of iOS apps.
 

--- Page 13 ---
Chapter 1: Introduction to Swift – Explores the Swift programming
language through the use of a playground, an environment that allows
the quick entry of code with immediate feedback. We learn about
variables, object types, flow control, and more.
 
Chapter 2: Learn SwiftUI Basics for Creating a User Interface – After
reviewing the basics of the Xcode workspace, we learn how to create a
user interface with SwiftUI utilizing several basic generic elements.
We also take advantage of nearly instant previews, eliminating the old
edit, compile, and run cycle for simple changes.
 
Chapter 3: Creating Reusable SwiftUI Views – We learn to small
views that can be reused throughout the app, giving utility and
consistency for both the developer and the end-user.
 
Chapter 4: Design the Household Chores App – In this chapter we
understand the first of the three apps; the household chores app which
is used to assign chores to family members. Review the concept and
create a project that shows the basic interface and interactions along
with the process of localizing text and making an app accessible to all
possible users.
 
Chapter 5: Managing Data and Assets – Building on the previous
chapter, we learn about data models and how to organize assets like
colors and icons.

--- Page 14 ---
 
Chapter 6: Creating Units of Code that can be Shared – This chapter
explores the modularity for the separation of concerns and ease of
giving distinct areas of work to different developers is a common
developmental goal. It also covers how to create a module that houses
specific code that can be integrated into multiple apps.
 
Chapter 7: Saving Data – Leverage Apple’s recently introduced
SwiftData to save data to the local device. Also discover how to create
user defaults that can be set in the iOS Settings app.
 
Chapter 8: Charting Your Progress – Learn about Apple’s Swift Charts
and the variety of ways they can be used. Then update the chores app
to chart family member’s progress on completing their chores.
 
Chapter 9: Create the New York City Schools App – The next app
allows the user to see a list of schools in New York City along with
their associated SAT scores. Create a new project with the appropriate
interface and data structures based on the presented concept.
 
Chapter 10: Testing and Debugging – We learn how to ass unit and UI
tests to ensure the app works as expected and continues to function
properly as changes are made in the future.
 

--- Page 15 ---
Chapter 11: Networking – We learn how to download data from an
internet resource asynchronously and parse it using Apple’s built-in
libraries.
 
Chapter 12: Make it Public – We get familiar with the easy way of
creating test users and publishing the app to them, and the general
public.
 
Chapter 13: Make a Generic App – We learn how to build an app that
can be branded and differentiated across multiple companies. We also
use a modular approach to separate the UI and business logic and
utilize asset catalogs to manage the distinct personality of each
company.
 
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 16 ---
Code Bundle and Coloured Images
 
Please follow the link to download the
 
Code Bundle and the Coloured Images of the book:
 
https://rebrand.ly/szq1xtr
 
The code bundle for the book is also hosted on GitHub at GitHub Link
:- In case there’s an update to the code, it will be updated on the
existing GitHub repository.
 
We have code bundles from our rich catalogue of books and videos
available at Check them out!
 
Errata
 
We take immense pride in our work at BPB Publications and follow
best practices to ensure the accuracy of our content to provide with an
indulging reading experience to our subscribers. Our readers are our
mirrors, and we use their inputs to reflect and improve upon human
errors, if any, that may have occurred during the publishing processes
involved. To let us maintain the quality and help us reach out to any

--- Page 17 ---
readers who might be having difficulties due to any unforeseen errors,
please write to us at :
 
errata@bpbonline.com
 
Your support, suggestions and feedbacks are highly appreciated by the
BPB Publications’ Family.
 
Did you know that BPB offers eBook versions of every book
published, with PDF and ePub files available? You can upgrade to the
eBook version at www.bpbonline.com and as a print book customer,
you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us
at :
 
business@bpbonline.com for more details.
 
At you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a
range of free newsletters, and receive exclusive discounts and offers on
BPB books and eBooks.
 
Piracy
 
If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the
internet, we would be grateful if you would provide us with the

--- Page 18 ---
location address or website name. Please contact us at
business@bpbonline.com with a link to the material.
 
If you are interested in becoming an author
 
If there is a topic that you have expertise in, and you are interested in
either writing or contributing to a book, please visit We have worked
with thousands of developers and tech professionals, just like you, to
help them share their insights with the global tech community. You can
make a general application, apply for a specific hot topic that we are
recruiting an author for, or submit your own idea.
 
Reviews
 
Please leave a review. Once you have read and used this book, why not
leave a review on the site that you purchased it from? Potential readers
can then see and use your unbiased opinion to make purchase
decisions. We at BPB can understand what you think about our
products, and our authors can see your feedback on their book. Thank
you!
 
For more information about BPB, please visit
 
Join our book’s Discord space
 

--- Page 19 ---
Join the book’s Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the
Authors:
 
https://discord.bpbonline.com
 
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 20 ---
 
Table of Contents
  
1. Introduction to Swift
  
Introduction
 
Structure
 
Objectives
 
Download Xcode
 
Time to play
 
Variables
 
Collections
  
Optionals
  
Custom types

--- Page 21 ---
  
Structs
 
Enums
 
Classes
 
Protocols
  
Closures
 
Flow control
 
Order of operation
 
Conclusion
 
Exercises
  
2. Learn SwiftUI Basics for Creating a User Interface
  
Introduction
 
Structure

--- Page 22 ---
 
Objectives
 
Your first project
 
Interface basics
  
Navigators
 
Editing
 
Project structure
 
Canvas
 
Running your app
  
SwiftUI basics
  
The view
 
Layout
 

--- Page 23 ---
Modifiers
 
Controls
 
Slider
  
Toggle
 
Stepper
 
TextField
 
Picker
 
DatePicker
  
Extended content
 
ScrollView
  
ForEach
 
List
  

--- Page 24 ---
Drawing
  
Circle
 
Rectangle
 
Rounded rectangle
 
UnevenRoundedRectangle
 
Capsule
 
Ellipse
 
Custom shape
 
Effects
  
SF Symbols
 
Conclusion
 
Answers
 

--- Page 25 ---
 
3. Creating Reusable SwiftUI Views
  
Introduction
 
Structure
 
Objectives
 
Cards
  
Plain card
 
Disclosure card
  
Text styles
 
Buttons
 
Conclusion
 
Answers
  
4. Design the Household Chores App

--- Page 26 ---
  
Introduction
 
Structure
 
Objectives
 
User interface design
 
Localization of text
 
Accessibility
 
Conclusion
  
5. Managing Data and Assets
  
Introduction
 
Structure
 
Objectives
 
Data modeling

--- Page 27 ---
  
Hashable objects
  
Design patterns
  
Builder
 
Factory
 
Singleton
 
Delegation
  
Step 1: Create data structs
 
Step 2: Create a protocol
 
Step 3: Create a singleton
  
Memory management
  
Step 1: Adjust CommonUI to use the singleton
 

--- Page 28 ---
Step 2: Create the delegate class in Household Chores
  
Assets
  
Colors
 
Images
  
Conclusion
  
6. Creating Units of Code that can be Shared
  
Introduction
 
Structure
 
Objectives
 
Source Control
  
Local repository
  
Create a Git repository
  

--- Page 29 ---
Branches
 
Tags
 
GitHub
  
Create an SSH Key
 
Create a token
 
Add GitHub account to Xcode
 
Pushing CommonUI to GitHub
  
Swift Package Manager
  
Remote packages
 
Local packages
  
Conclusion
  
7. Saving Data

--- Page 30 ---
  
Introduction
 
Structure
 
Objectives
 
SwiftData
  
Deleting data
 
Assigning chores
 
Visual cleanup
 
Fix previews
 
Daily chores
  
User preferences
  
Integrating user preferences
  
Conclusion

--- Page 31 ---
  
8. Charting your Progress
  
Introduction
 
Structure
 
Objectives
 
Explore Swift Charts
  
Bar charts
 
Line graphs
 
Charting different sets
 
Proportional charts
  
Integrating a chart into the Chores app
 
Conclusion
  
9. Create the New York City Schools App

--- Page 32 ---
  
Introduction
 
Structure
 
Objectives
 
Interface design
 
Model design
  
Scores
 
Search bar
  
Conclusion
  
10. Testing and Debugging
  
Introduction
 
Structure
 

--- Page 33 ---
Objectives
 
Tests
 
UI tests
 
Unit tests
 
Breakpoints
 
Debugger commands
 
Logging
 
Conclusion
  
11. Networking
  
Introduction
 
Structure
 
Objectives
 

--- Page 34 ---
Codable models
  
Decoding
  
Downloading data
 
Generics
 
Async / await
 
Error handling
 
Cleanup
  
Testing
  
Conclusion
  
12. Make it Public
  
Introduction
 
Structure

--- Page 35 ---
 
Objectives
 
App icon
 
Using physical devices
  
No developer accounts
 
With a developer account
  
App Store Connect
  
Preparing the app for upload
  
Test users
  
Submitting to the App Store
  
Conclusion
  
13. Make a Generic App
  
Introduction

--- Page 36 ---
 
Structure
 
Objectives
 
Designing the app
 
App structure
 
Create target application
 
Defining customizable options
  
Card colors
 
Countdown timer
 
Toppings
 
Crust
 
Text
  

--- Page 37 ---
Bundles
 
Create the common interface elements
  
Card
 
Progress bars
 
Add button
 
Text style
  
Create the primary app
  
Data model
 
Order view
 
App utility
 
Order list
 
Foundation extensions
 

--- Page 38 ---
Add order sheet
 
Localization
  
Running the app
  
The other app
  
Conclusion
  
Index
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 39 ---
 
C
HAPTER
1
Introduction to Swift
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 40 ---
 
Introduction
 
In 2014, at the Worldwide Developers Conference, Apple introduced
the world to the new Swift programming language with great fanfare.
Since then, the language has been adopted as the premier language for
creating apps not only for Apple products, but for servers and other
platforms too. The future and direction of this language is publicly
presented and debated. See https://swift.org for more information.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 41 ---
 
Structure
 
This chapter contains the following topics:
  
Download Xcode
 
Time to play
 
Variables
 
Custom types
 
Closures
 
Flow control
 
Order of operation
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 42 ---
 
Objectives
 
By the end of this chapter, the reader should know the basic syntax of
the Swift language, some commonly used types, how to create custom
types, and how to manage the flow of how code runs.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 43 ---
 
Download Xcode
 
The App Store is the best place to securely download and install
applications to your computer. After installation, launch the app.
Because Xcode is used to develop apps for all Apple platforms, an
initial set of devices to develop for must be specified. Make sure iOS
is selected and click the Download & Install button, as shown in
Figure 1.1 below:
 

--- Page 44 ---
 
Figure Platform selection dialogue
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 45 ---
 
Time to play
 
From the File menu, select New and then Select the iOS template at the
top and the Blank Playground, then click the Next button on the bottom.
Specify the location to save the playground and, if desired, change the
name. Then click the Create button. In moments a screen that looks like
Figure 1.2 will be shown:
 
 
Figure New Blank Playground
 
The playground is a great way to try some quick code without creating a
full project. The bulk of the display is the editor. To the right, is the Live
In the editor, two lines of code have been provided. For now, we will
ignore the import statement at the top.
 

--- Page 46 ---
Below the import we see: var greeting = "Hello, playground"
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 47 ---
 
Variables
 
A significant goal of programming is to manipulate the environment on
the device or react to a change in the environment. To achieve this, the
app needs to store and manipulate data using values and types. For
instance, the value “Hello, playground” shown above is a string type. The
var keyword declares a mutable variable called When an object is created
and assigned to a variable, it is said to be instantiated.
 
On the bottom-left of the window is the execute button. Click and hold it
to see a pop-up menu. Select Automatically Run and the screen will
change. In the live view, to the right, the same string that was assigned,
“Hello, playground” is displayed with a small square next to it.
 
- this square is the results toggle button. Clicking it will toggle the results
display in the editor.
 
On a blank line at the bottom, enter the following lines of code:
 
greeting = "Swift is easy"
 
var now = Date()
 
let isRunning = true

--- Page 48 ---
 
let maxLength = 256
 
let avgNumberOfChildren = 2.2
 
It may be necessary to disable the automatic running of code while typing
this in. After all the lines of code are entered, make sure to re-enable
Automatically Run or click on the Run button to the left of the last line of
code. When entering a lot of code, the second option may be best. In the
live view, values that are assigned to the variables will be displayed.
Notice how the greeting shows two values? The initial value and then the
new one. If you hover the pointer over any of the values, the line of code
responsible for it will be highlighted in the editor. On the right side of the
value is a preview icon. Click the results toggle or the preview icon. For
now, a repeat of the value is shown. As Swift is explored, this will give
more information.
 
In the code entered, the value type was not specified. Swift will implicitly
assign the type based on the value initially given to it. To see the type,
hold down the option key ( ) and click on the variable name to see a more
formal declaration as shown in Figure Explicitly specifying the type will
be shown later in the chapter.
 

--- Page 49 ---
 
Figure Variable definition popover
 
The keyword let was used instead of var for three of the lines above. What
does this mean? On a blank line, at the bottom of the variable
declarations, try adding a line to change the value of isRunning to I am
now
 
What happens? Figure 1.4 illustrates the error:
 
 
Figure (Immutable variable error)
 
A variable defined using the let syntax makes it immutable, or constant,
after a value has been assigned. When a variable’s value does not need to
change, use let. To allow isRunning’s value to change, go to the
declaration and change it to
 
What happens? Figure 1.5 shows an additional error:

--- Page 50 ---
 
 
Figure (Variable type error)
 
Some languages allow the value type of a variable to be changed after it
has been set. However, Swift is a strongly typed language, which means
the value type cannot change. The variable isRunning is a Bool type so it
can only hold the values of true or false. Remove the errant line of code.
 
When the first error was displayed, a debug area was shown to give
additional information. To show or hide this area, click the Debug area
toggle button below the Live View panel.
 
The names used for the variables are arbitrary. Swift convention says
variable names start with a lowercase letter and an uppercase for
concatenated words in the variable name. This is called camel case. In
Swift, variable names can be any combination of letters, numbers, and
even emojis. Names have these primary restrictions: They cannot begin
with a number and must not contain mathematical symbols or white space
characters, that is, spaces, tabs, newlines, and so on. Try it now. Change
the names of the variables and introduce numbers in the middle or at the
end of the names or try an emoji character. What works and what does
not?
 

--- Page 51 ---
So far, we have been assigning values to variables at the time of
declaration. While this may work in limited cases, the value is usually not
known until a later time. On a blank link, enter these lines of code and run
by either setting the playground to run automatically or clicking the Run
button to the left of the last line of code:
 
let maxToppings: Int
 
var useBox: Bool
 
maxToppings = 10
 
useBox = false
 
When a value is not immediately assigned to the variable, the type must
be specified at the time of declaration. But wait, there is more.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 52 ---
 
Collections
 
When deciding on the name of a variable, it is important to describe
the type of value and what the value represents. For instance, if the
name maxLength were changed to dogNames how would your
expectations of the value change?
 
The first expectation is for the variable to hold String values. The
second is to hold multiple values because of the plurality in the name.
When a variable holds multiple values, it is called a collection. The
three principal collection types in Swift are array, dictionary and set.
Type in the following line of code on a blank line and run:
 
var dogNames = ["Daisy", "Caesar", "Luna"]
 
var dogAges = [2, 5,  7]
 
See how the Live View shows array of 3 elements?
 
Now, click on the results toggle to see the values. Try different values
inside the square brackets. Notice how there is always a comma
between each value and how the types must match. Use Boolean,
string, integer, or floating-point numbers. Some languages would call

--- Page 53 ---
these primitive types, however in Swift they are treated just like any
other object type we will learn about later.
 
There are different ways of accessing the data in an array. The easiest
is to use the ordinal position. On the line after the dogAges variable,
type in: let firstDog = Notice that array index starts at zero.
 
Like any other variable, a collection can have values assigned after the
declaration. Remove the values between the square brackets and watch
what happens. An error is displayed. Swift does not know what type of
values the variable will store. It needs to be specified either by the
developer or by the compiler. Here, the compiler does not know what
type to assign so you need to.
 
Change the line of code to look like this:
 
var dogNames: [String] = []
 
Now we have an empty array for strings. Let us explore different ways
of assigning and removing values to this variable. Type in these lines
of code and run:
 
dogNames = ["Daisy", "Caesar", "Luna"]
 
dogNames.append("Ralph")

--- Page 54 ---
 
dogNames.insert("Sparky", at: 0)
 
dogNames.remove(at: 1)
 
let sortedNames = dogNames.sorted()
 
Before looking at the results, what do you think each line of code
does? The first and last lines are probably obvious, but what about the
others? After giving it some thought, click on the results toggle button
next to each entry in the Live View. Are the results what you expected?
 
Something that may be surprising is the value shown for the remove
statement because it shows the value affected by the statement instead
of the changed variable. The returned value is being ignored. It can be
captured by changing the line to something like this: let removedDog =
dogNames.remove(at: may have been surprised that Daisy was
removed and not Remember, arrays start at index zero.
 
In the code above for inserting, change the 0 to 5 and see what
happens. We will explore debugging in a later chapter.
 
The next collection to discuss is the dictionary. It uses a unique
identifier, or key, and associates it with a value. On a blank line, enter
the following lines of code and run:

--- Page 55 ---
 
let stations = [2: "Shell", 16: "BP", 32: "Chevron"]
 
print(stations[2])
 
Like arrays, each entry is separated by a comma. Each entry consists
of the key, a colon, then the value. The type for all provided values
must match. If you are wondering why the print statement said then
you are in for a treat. That will be discussed soon. To get a preview, try
changing the 2 to
 
The type used for this dictionary’s key is however AnyHashable type
can be used. In fact, when declaring the dictionary variable,
AnyHashable can be specified as the type. Change the let statement to
the following and run:
 
var stations: [AnyHashable: String]
 
stations = [2:"Shell", "16":"BP", 32:"Chevron"]
 
The declaration specifies the key type and the value type. Later, we
will look at using other types for the values. Notice how the keys used
on the second line are now Int and Print the BP value by changing the
key used in the print statement to In Swift, Int and String are hashable

--- Page 56 ---
types. As it is possible to make custom types they can also serve as
keys, if desired. Most often Int and String are used as the key type.
 
Like arrays, dictionaries are not always populated at declaration and
instantiation. Enter the following lines of code and run:
 
1. stations[55] = "Phillips 66"
 
2. stations[55] = "PetroChina"
 
3. stations.removeValue(forKey: 2)
 
4. let stationCount = stations.count
 
5. print(stations.keys)
 
6. print(stations.values)
 
7. stations = [:]
 
There is a lot happening here, so let us dissect it one line at a time. The
first line assigns the value Phillips 66 to the dictionary with the key
The second line assigns the value PetroChina to the dictionary with the
key However, we must wonder, how is that that possible? Keys are
supposed to be unique.

--- Page 57 ---
 
The second line replaces the value associated with the key This is
confirmed with the last print statement. Line three completely removes
the key, and the value associated with it.
 
The fourth line assigns the number of dictionary entries to the variable
All collections have the count property. In Swift, properties are
variables associated with an object. Other helpful properties for
collections are: and
 
The print statements on lines five and six above print out the keys and
values properties respectively. Note that they are arrays. The keys and
values printed may or may not be in the order entered because, unlike
an array, a dictionary is an unordered collection. The last statement
instantiates an empty dictionary and assigns it to the variable.
 
The final collection type we will cover is the With the dictionary, any
object type that is hashable can be used as the key that is associated
with some data. What if we do not have any associated data? A
situation where the key is the data, and we need a unique collection of
these objects. This is the perfect time to use a Let us try it.
 
Type in the following lines and run:
 
var partyGuests: Set = []

--- Page 58 ---
 
partyGuests.insert("Aaron L Bratcher")
 
partyGuests.insert("Anne McCaffrey")
 
partyGuests.insert("Douglas Adams")
 
partyGuests.insert("Richard Castle")
 
print(partyGuests)
 
partyGuests.remove("Douglas Adams")
 
print(partyGuests)
 
let insertResults = partyGuests.insert("Richard Castle")
 
print(insertResults)
 
To limit the output in the Debug area, remove all code entered before
or create a new playground. Again, we see something new in the
declaration and initialization of the variable. A Set can hold any
hashable type. Like the dictionary, the type must be specified. The type
to be stored, in this case a is specified in the angle brackets. Set utilizes

--- Page 59 ---
generics, a feature covered later in this book. The square brackets
initialize the variable with an empty set.
 
As a Set is not ordered, the concept of appending is not logical.
Instead, an object is inserted into the set and conversely, a known
object can be removed. When an object is inserted, the response can be
ignored, as was shown the first several times or captured. One could
initially think the returned value of an insert would be a Bool type to
indicate the success of the insert, however upon inspection you will
find something new. Option-click on the variable and you will see this
definition:
 
let insertResults: (inserted: Bool, memberAfterInsert: String)
 
The parenthesis around two element definitions is a Tuple. Tuples can
have one or multiple elements with, or without, a name. If a name is
included, each element is like a variable definition. Here are two
examples:
 
Example 1:
 
    let someData: (String, String, String)
 
    someData = (“first element”, “second object”, “third”)
 

--- Page 60 ---
Example 2:
 
  var moreData: (name: String, city: String)
 
  moreData = ("Thomas", "New York City")
 
  moreData = (name: "Roger", city: "Los Angeles")
 
It can be easy to forget what each value represents without a name, so
names are recommended. However, when a name is not available, the
ordinal index can be used. Like arrays, the index of tuple elements is
zero based.
  
print(someData.1)
 
print(moreData.0)
 
print(moreData.city)
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 61 ---
 
Optionals
 
An optional starts with a question. Does a value exist? Remember
when stations [2] was printed earlier? The output was
Optional("Shell")\n and when stations [5] was printed, the output was
Why? Because when an attempt to retrieve a value from a dictionary is
performed, the key or the value associated with it may not exist. It is
only appropriate that a question mark is used to define when a variable
or property is optional. Here is a declaration of a variable/property that
may or may not have a String value:
 
let crust: String?
 
An attempt to print the value of crust, will generate an error. An
immutable optional needs to be initialized. In this case either with a
string or nil. Nil indicates no value exists. If the let was to be changed
to a then it would compile and run properly as it starts with nil
assigned.
 
To properly retrieve the value, the optional must be unwrapped or
coalesced to a non-optional value. Here are a few accepted ways of
doing this:
 
let crust: String?

--- Page 62 ---
 
crust = "thin"
 
if let crust {
 
  print(crust)
 
}
 
if var crust {
 
  crust = "altered crust"
 
  print(crust)
 
}
 
let crustType = crust ?? ""
 
The first option is to use the if let syntax. This checks if a value exists
and, if one does, assigns it to a variable of the same name. This new
variable is limited to the scope of the if statement, that is, between the
curly braces. The variable can now be used safely. Outside of the
scope, the original optional variable still exists.

--- Page 63 ---
 
The second option uses the if var syntax. It is like the first option, but
it gives a mutable variable that can be used within the scope of the if
statement. Also, while the value of the new variable may be changed
within the scope, it does not affect the original variable or property.
 
The last option shown here is to coalesce. When the original variable
has no value, the option after the coalesce operator is used instead.
Multiple coalesce operators can be used in the same expression to
chain multiple optionals together. Add a print statement to see what the
value of crustType is. There is also the use of a guard statement, but it
will be shown in a later segment because of how it is used.
 
Something not shown, because it is frowned on, however sometimes it
is needed, is the force-unwrap operator. This will attempt to unwrap
the variable and assign the value. However, if it fails, the app will
crash. Remove the assignment of thin to the variable and then run the
statement below and an error will appear.
 
let crustType = crust!
 
A lot has been covered for how a variable is defined and used with
some built-in types. We have also looked at collections and optionals.
These basics are used in all aspects of Swift development and needs to

--- Page 64 ---
be completely understood. Try to do the following on your own
(answers are at the end of the chapter):
  
Create a variable that holds an array of optional strings.
 
Create a variable that holds a dictionary with an integer key and an
optional tuple of two strings.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 65 ---
 
Custom types
 
When designing an app, it is a common task to structure the data into
logical units for storage and manipulation. In this section, the most
common ways of creating custom types will be explored.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 66 ---
 
Structs
 
A struct is a way to organize naturally related data elements together
and, optionally, provide ways of manipulating them. They are very
efficient for this task. For instance, a pizza representation may have a
struct like this:
 
struct Pizza {
 
  let crust: String?
 
  Let sauce: String
 
  let toppings: [String]
 
}
 
The key word struct specifies what kind of custom type we are
creating. Notice the name, is capitalized. When creating a new type,
Swift convention is to capitalize the name of the type. When creating
an instance object of the type, the variable or property starts with a
lowercase letter.
 

--- Page 67 ---
Some properties were created to describe a typical pizza. What kind of
crust? Thin, hand-tossed, cheese filled, or, maybe, none. Some sauce
and toppings.
 
Like a string or dictionary, Pizza is now a type that can be created and
assigned to a variable or property. The struct elements are properties
that must be initialized with values. Swift helps us out by
automatically creating an initializer for the struct so we can simply do
this to instantiate the object:
 
let pizza = Pizza(crust: nil, sauce: "tomato", toppings: ["onion", "green
pepper", "mushroom", "black olive"])
 
print(pizza.toppings)
 
This creates a Pizza object and assigns it to our variable, This could be
a pizza bowl, where no crust exists. Like many programming
languages, Swift is case-sensitive. It is very common to have a variable
name that closely matches the type name.
 
There are times a coded initializer is needed. An initializer provides a
point where parameters may be passed to make a valid object. It
consists of the keyword, followed by an open parenthesis, maybe some
parameters, then the closing parenthesis.
 

--- Page 68 ---
The first case, shown below, is a one-to-one mapping of the init
parameters to the properties that need a value. Swift implicitly
provides this case for simple structs. The parameters provided to the
init can also have default values assigned. Add the init code so the
struct looks like this:
 
struct Pizza {
 
  let crust: String?
 
  let sauce: String
 
  let toppings: [String]
 
  init(crust: String? = nil, sauce: String = "tomato",
 
toppings: [String]) {
 
      self.crust = crust
 
      self.sauce = sauce
 
      self.toppings = toppings
 

--- Page 69 ---
  }
 
}
 
What is the first thing you notice? That the parameter declarations look
remarkably like the variable work done earlier. The first parameter, is
an optional string. A default value of nil is given. This would be
helpful for pizza bowls where a crust does not exist. The default value
for sauce is tomato and toppings does not have a default value so it
must be specified when creating the object. Using this initializer, the
creation of the pizza bowl can now look like this:
 
let pizza = Pizza(toppings: ["onion", "green pepper", "mushroom",
 
"black olive"])
 
The default values are for convenience but do not keep the developer
from using the parameters. Any or all the parameters may be used for
the instantiation of the
 
let pizza = Pizza(crust: "thin", sauce: "tomato",
 
toppings: ["onion", "green pepper", "mushroom", "black olive"])
 

--- Page 70 ---
The second thing to be noticed, may be the use of self. This is a
reference to the one specific object and the items inside it. Remember
when the dictionary keys were printed? The code referenced the keys
property of the single dictionary object. The initializer is assigning
values to the properties of self. When there is a need to reference
something within the object itself, self is used when there is ambiguity.
Otherwise, it is implied, (there is another use for it that will be looked
at later in the book). For instance, what if the first parameter in init had
been called base instead of crust? If that were done, then base could
have been assigned to the crust property without use of the self
designation.
 
Immutable properties on this struct were used. We can also use
mutable properties that have a default value, so they are changeable
from outside the struct. When all the properties have a default value, a
second init without parameters can be created. Adjust your code like
so:
 
struct Pizza {
 
  var crust: String?
 
  var sauce: String = "tomato"
 
  var toppings: [String] = []
 

--- Page 71 ---
  init(crust: String? = nil, sauce: String = "tomato",
 
toppings: [String]) {
 
      self.crust = crust
 
      self.sauce = sauce
 
      self.toppings = toppings
 
  }
 
  init() { }
 
}
 
let pizza = Pizza()
 
pizza.toppings = ["onion", "green pepper", "mushroom", "black olive"]
 
print(pizza.sauce)
 

--- Page 72 ---
When using a mutable, optional property, the default value is nil, so it
does not need to be assigned. The second init function has an empty
body. It is provided so an instance of Pizza can be created without
using any parameters. Now a pizza can be instantiated using the init
with parameters or the one without. Swift will determine,
automatically, which one to use at the point of instantiation. When you
make these changes and attempt to run, you will get an error. Do you
know why? The pizza variable is an immutable struct. Changes cannot
be made to it. Change the let to a var on line sixteen and the problem
will be fixed. There is so much more to structs that we will look at
later. For now, it is time to fix another problem.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 73 ---
 
Enums
 
The Pizza struct uses String properties. However, each one has a
limited number of options. When the is a known, fixed, number of
options, it is best to enumerate them. Clear your playground of all
code, except the import at the top, and add this:
 
enum Crust {
 
  case thin
 
  case handTossed
 
  case deepDish
 
  case none
 
}
 
enum Sauce {
 
  case tomato, white, arrabbiata, none

--- Page 74 ---
 
}
 
let crust = Crust.handTossed
 
let sauce: Sauce
 
sauce = .tomato
 
Like a struct, you start with your keyword then the name of your
custom type. Again, the name of the type is capitalized. See how each
name assigned is singular, not plural. When creating a variable, you
can use implicit type allocation if you give a value immediately or
assign the type and give a value later. Notice how the full enum name
Sauce.tomato is not required when assigning the value to the sauce
variable? Swift is contextually aware of the Sauce type so only the
specific enumeration is necessary.
 
It was mentioned above that a pizza may not have a crust. While an
optional enum is possible, it is best to have an enumeration when
possible. Below the Crust and Sauce enums, enter these lines of code
and run:
 
enum Size: Int {

--- Page 75 ---
 
  case six = 6
 
  case twelve = 12
 
  case eighteen = 18
 
}
 
let size = Size.twelve
 
print(size.rawValue)
 
let size2 = Size(rawValue: 16)
 
print(size2?.rawValue ?? "unknown")
 
if size == .six {
 
  print("personal size")
 
}
 

--- Page 76 ---
If you know another language, this may be more familiar to you. The
:Int indicates an enumeration with an integer raw type. If values are
not assigned, as done here, they are automatically assigned
sequentially starting with zero. Raw values are useful when retrieving
data from a server or using input from the user, but what makes Swift
especially great is that it is not limited to integers. Strings are another
popular raw data item for enumerations. In fact, with some extra work,
any object can be the raw type.
 
The rawValue property is available on a variable or property that is a
raw type Conversely, an instance of the enum can be created from a
raw value. However, because there is no guarantee that it will match,
the result is an optional as shown on lines ten and eleven.
 
See how there is a question mark when printing size2? It is an
optional, the rawValue property may not be accessible because size2
has no value to get the raw value from. The question mark is a
reminder that you are working with an optional variable. To guarantee
a value, we have coalesced to a non-optional value. The last part tests
if the size is equal to In Swift, the == operator tests for equality. Note
that the rawValue was not tested. Do you think the print statement will
execute?
 
Another great feature of enums on Swift is the ability to associated
data with the enumeration. Add this but do not force the playground to
run yet:

--- Page 77 ---
 
enum Topping {
 
  case sausage(isSpicy: Bool, grade: String)
 
  case cheese, onion, mushroom, greenPepper
 
}
 
The sausage enumeration has a tuple next to it. As discussed before, a
tuple can have one or more values with or without a name given to
each value. The name makes the code easier to read. When
programming, remember that others may need to read your code, so it
must be as concise and as easy-to-understand as possible. Enter the
following code below the enum declaration and run to see this
variation of the enum in action:
 
let topping: Topping = .sausage(isSpicy: true, grade: "hot")
 
switch topping {
 
case .cheese:
 
print("add cheese")

--- Page 78 ---
 
case .sausage(let spicy, _):
 
  print("sausage is spicy: \(spicy)")
 
  print("how spicy isn’t unspecified")
 
case .greenPepper:
 
  fallthrough
 
case .onion, .mushroom:
 
  print("veggies!")
 
default:
 
  break
 
}
 
The assignment on the first line is straightforward with the associated
values. Below that is a switch statement. A switch statement allows the

--- Page 79 ---
developer to test an object against all possible values. After the switch
keyword, specify the object to test. Each test has the word followed by
what the object is tested against, then ends with a colon. One or more
statements to be executed are in the subsequent lines.
 
Each case statement must have an executable statement below it. If
there is nothing to do, simply add the break command. If a case is to
execute the same commands as the subsequent one, you can use the
fallthrough command as shown with Also, a test against multiple items
can be part of the same case statement.
 
When an enum with associated values is being used, there must be a
way of extracting those values. Note the use of a tuple in the .sausage
case. The names here do not need to match the original definition
because they are only used in the scope of the case statement. If one of
the elements is not being used, an underline can be used to indicate no
use. If none of the elements are to be used the tuple portion does not
need to be used at all.
 
There is something new on line eight above. It is called string
interpolation. It allows the developer to put an expression in the
middle of a string. This is an easy way of putting data from variables
or properties into a string. There are some caveats that we will explore
later in the book.
 

--- Page 80 ---
Switch statements are very flexible and can be used in a variety of
ways. For instance, a switch on a string could be used to test against
multiple values, because a switch must be exhaustive, a default
statement would be required. Or, for numbers, a range of values can be
tested as shown here:
 
let waistSize = 32
 
switch waistSize {
 
case 0..<20:
 
  print("tiny")
 
case 20..<40:
 
  print("medium")
 
case 40...60:
 
  print("large")
 
default:
 
  print("not stocked")

--- Page 81 ---
 
}
 
Here, an integer value is assigned to waistSize and tested against some
ranges. The ..< operator is a non-inclusive range. That is to say, the
first case starts at 0 and includes every integer up to, but not including,
The same for the next case statement. It starts at 20 and includes every
integer up to, but not including The … operator is an inclusive range.
It starts at 40 and includes all integers up to and including A default
was provided because a switch must include all the possibilities. With
the topping example mentioned earlier, a warning would be shown
because the switch is already exhaustive without the use of the default
option.
 
Here are a couple more ways of extracting the associated value from
an enum assignment:
 
let topping2: Topping = .sausage(isSpicy: true, grade: "hot")
 
if case .sausage = topping2 {
 
  print("some sort of sausage")
 
}

--- Page 82 ---
 
if case let .sausage(isSpicy, grade) = topping2 {
 
  print("is spicy: \(isSpicy) grade: \(grade)")
 
}
 
Earlier a variable was compared to a specific enumeration,
if size == .six . However, when an enum case has associated values,
this is not possible. Instead, we must use either a switch statement, as
shown with the topping switch earlier, or if case statements as shown
here. The syntax for if case can be confusing, however it may help to
remember that a new variable, is being created and assigned
conditionally based on the enumeration.
 
With their incredible flexibility and utility, enums make Swift a great
language to work with. In fact, you may find yourself making an enum
of enums or instead of using case statements, use static values for
organizational purposes like this:
 
enum Preference {
 
  enum Color {
 

--- Page 83 ---
      static let blue = "Blue"
 
      static let green = "green"
 
      static let red = "red"
 
  }
 
enum Length {
 
      static let small = 20
 
      static let medium = 35
 
      static let large = 60
 
  }
 
  enum Thickness {
 
      static let thin = 0.1
 
      static let normal = 0.25
 

--- Page 84 ---
      static let thick = 0.5
 
  }
 
}
 
let color = Preference.Color.green
 
let length = Preference.Length.medium
 
let thickness = Preference.Thickness.thin
 
Alter the Pizza struct to use enumerations instead of strings. A possible
answer is at the end of the chapter.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 85 ---
 
Classes
 
Clear the code entered into the playground or create a new one.
Classes are the foundation of object-oriented programming. They are
like structs with some key differences. Class objects are referenced
objects versus value, and they can be subclassed, inheriting the
properties and methods of the parent class while gaining new ones
specific to them.
 
Properties have been discussed, but not methods or functions. A
function is a piece of code that can accept data, performs some work,
and may return a result. A method is a function within the context of an
object. The method has access to the object’s properties and other
methods and can change the state of the object. There are many times a
method accepts no parameters, nor returns a result because its goal is
to change the state of the object or, possibly, the environment of where
the code is being run. In Swift, even structs and enums can have
methods.
 
Here is an example of a class with a subclass. Enter this code, without
the line numbers, and run:
  
class Map {
 

--- Page 86 ---
  func canMove(_ player: Player, to position: CGPoint) -> Bool {
 
      return true
 
  }
 
}
 
class Player {
 
  var numberOfLives: Int
 
  var positionOnMap: CGPoint
 
  init() {
 
      numberOfLives = 3
 
      positionOnMap = .zero
 
  }
 
  init(numberOfLives: Int, positionOnMap: CGPoint) {

--- Page 87 ---
 
      self.numberOfLives = numberOfLives
 
      self.positionOnMap = positionOnMap
 
  }
 
  func moveTo(_ position: CGPoint) -> Bool {
 
      positionOnMap = position
 
      return true
 
  }
 
}
 
class Soldier: Player {
 
  private var numberOfMoves: Int = 0
 
  override func moveTo(_ position: CGPoint) -> Bool {
 

--- Page 88 ---
      if numberOfMoves < 5 {
 
        positionOnMap = position
 
        numberOfMoves += 1
 
        return true
 
      } else {
 
        return false
 
      }
 
  }
 
}
 
let map = Map()
 
let player1 = Player()
 
let player2: Player = Soldier(numberOfLives: 5, positionOnMap:
CGPoint(x: 20, y: 5))

--- Page 89 ---
 
var position = CGPoint(x: 1, y: 2)
 
var didMove: Bool = false
 
if map.canMove(player1, to: position) {
 
  didMove = player1.moveTo(position)
 
}
 
print("player 1 did move: \(didMove)")
 
position = CGPoint(x: 20, y: 6)
 
didMove = false
 
if map.canMove(player2, to: position) {
 
  didMove = player2.moveTo(position)
 
}
 

--- Page 90 ---
print("player 2 did move: \(didMove)")
 
print(player1.positionOnMap)
 
print(player2.positionOnMap)
  
The same pattern as the other custom types is used. Like a struct, start
with the keyword, class, then the name of the custom type. The name
of the class is capitalized. The Map class does not have any properties
so it does not need an However, even without properties, there may be
cases where an initializer is needed. This will be explained further
when libraries are studied. It has one method that takes two parameters
and returns a Bool. For simplicity, it just returns a Interestingly, in
Swift, when a function has only one line of code, you can omit the
return statement. It is implied.
 
Try it. Remove the word return on line three and then run all the code.
Again, this only works when there is one line of code that returns a
value.
 
The CGPoint is a built-in struct that is used to identify the coordinates
on a 2D plane. This book will cover a limited set of items like this.
Each OS in Apple’s array of devices has a rich supply of libraries and
types, many of them shared, to help you achieve great things.
 

--- Page 91 ---
The function type on line two, the unique name, parameters, and return
type, has some new items to discuss. An underscore in the first
parameter. This means that there is no name used at the call-point. The
word after the underscore is name of the variable to be used inside the
scope of the function. The second parameter has two names. The first
is to be used at the call-point and, again, the second is the name of the
variable to be used inside the function. Lines forty-seven and fifty-five
above show how we call this function. In the English language, the
call-point reads like a sentence.
 
The player class looks a lot like a struct. There are two One provides
some default values for the properties, while the other needs them to
be passed in as the object is instantiated. Lines forty-one and forty-two
show this in action.
 
The Soldier class is where we see object-oriented programming in
action. The colon followed by Player indicates that the Soldier class is
a subclass of It has the same properties and methods as the parent
class, but has the option of having additional properties, publicly
available or private to use only within the class, or even overriding the
parent’s items.
 
After instantiating two players, the code checks if the map will allow
the player to move to the proposed position, and if possible, tells the
object to move to that position. Player2 is typed as Player on line
forty-three but assigned a Soldier class object. This is because the

--- Page 92 ---
Soldier class is a type of Any place where a Player is wanted, an
instance of the Soldier class can be used. Like the call to the map
function.
 
Line forty-seven assigns the return value of the method call to the
didMove variable. The method definition is simple, assign the new
position to the property and return true. Line fifty-five is where we see
object-oriented programming at its best. As player2 is the Player type.
You can test this by option-clicking on the player2 variable, but
because it was assigned a Soldier class object, the code inside Soldier
will run. This is called polymorphism.
 
With polymorphism, the subclass code is run even when the variable
type is of the superclass. How would you verify the code inside the
Soldier class is run? Of course, the easy way would be to simply put a
print statement inside the method. But how would you get the
didMove variable to be false? Each time the moveTo method is called,
a private property is incremented. If that value is equal to or more than
five, then a false is returned. Knowing this, we can repeat the code on
line fifty-six several more times and run. The output should now show
a false for player2 being moved.
 
What if the developer needs to access a specific property or method of
the soldier object? An attempt to reassign the variable as the desired
class could be tried, as shown here:
 
if let soldier = player2 as? Soldier {

--- Page 93 ---
 
  print("Yes, sir!")
 
}
 
Here, the code checks if player2 is the soldier type and if so, create a
scope-specific variable called soldier. The soldier variable is only valid
in the scope between the curly braces. The illustration here is not good
programming, however, because a variable was created and never
used. A better way, in this case, would be to test the type directly:
 
if player2 is Soldier {
 
  print("I'm a soldier")
 
}
 
One last thing about the Soldier class. It has a private declaration. This
is called access control. By default, properties and methods are
internal, meaning they are accessible by everything in the same
module, a concept covered later in the book. Private is only accessible
from within the object itself, and public is everywhere the object is
instantiable.
 

--- Page 94 ---
Classes are reference types. This means that any variable for a class
object holds a reference to the object. Reassigning to another variable
will point to the same object in memory. Here is an easy way to see
this in action. At the bottom of your playground, keeping all the
existing code, type and run this:
 
let player3 = player2
 
player3.numberOfLives = 5
 
print("player3 lives: \(player3.numberOfLives)")
 
print("player2 lives: \(player2.numberOfLives)")
 
The printout will show both players having the same number of lives.
This is the reference semantic of classes. When player2 is assigned the
Soldier object, it occupies space in memory and when player2 is no
longer in scope, the object referenced is removed from memory.
However, when the variable is passed to a method, or assigned to
another variable, then additional references to that object exist. The
object cannot be removed from memory until all the references are
gone. This technique of memory management is called reference
counting.
 

--- Page 95 ---
One last comment on reference types. The player3 was declared with a
let statement and the property was still updated. This is because the
actual value held by player3 is a reference to the object, not the object
itself. This reference will not change unless a new object, of the same
type, is assigned to it. Swift knows the object is by reference and
dereferences it for us. This is a convenience of having a modern
language.
 
Structs, arrays, and dictionaries are value types. They occupy memory,
usually less than reference types because they do not need the
management data used behind the scenes as classes have, and when the
variable goes out of scope the memory is released. If one of these is
assigned to another variable, then it is copied so any changes made
through the second variable are specific to that variable. Here is a good
example:
 
struct Gamer {
 
  var numberOfLives = 0
 
}
 
var gamer1 = Gamer()
 
gamer1.numberOfLives = 3

--- Page 96 ---
 
var gamer2 = gamer1
 
gamer2.numberOfLives = 10
 
print("gamer1 lives: \(gamer1.numberOfLives)")
 
print("gamer2 lives: \(gamer2.numberOfLives)")
 
The output varies from gamer1 to When should a struct or a class be
used? If data is being downloaded to be presented to the user, that is an
ideal time to use a If an object that may be altered by different points
of the program is needed, that is the perfect case for using a
Experiment and see what works best for code readability and
simplicity.
 
Note: Technically, a struct object is not copied until the data needs to
change. This is called copy on write. Doing this allows the code to run
faster at times when an actual copy is not necessary.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 97 ---
 
Protocols
 
With subclassing available, it is fun to look for ways of utilizing it.
Make a superclass with all the basic properties and methods then make
subclasses for the variants. However, sometimes, situations arise
where similar functionality exists for classes that do not fit together.
When this happens, more properties and methods are added to the
superclass that do not belong in an effort of supporting the disparate
subclasses.
 
A protocol provides a way of defining a collection of properties and/or
methods that a class, struct, enum, and several other object types can
implement. This decouples the complex logic each type would require
implementing the functionality from a single superclass while keeping
the strong type system in-place. Also, protocols allow for extensions so
default implementations can be provided in the definition itself. Add
the following code in the same playground or a new one:
 
UsesFuel {
 
  var fuelType: String { get }
 
  var percentRemaining: Double { get set }

--- Page 98 ---
 
}
 
extension UsesFuel {
 
  mutating func consumeFuel(percent: Double) {
 
      percentRemaining -= percent
 
  }
 
}
 
protocol Flies {
 
  var prefilghtComplete: Bool { get }
 
  func performPreflight()
 
}
 
In the body of the protocol, properties and/or methods are declared that
must be defined in whatever object conforms to this protocol. For

--- Page 99 ---
properties there are two options: Readable { get } or readable /
writeable { get set
 
As the code was entered, you may have noticed line six declares an
extension to the UsesFuel protocol and the function is not declared
anywhere else. The extension deserves some explanation. Any object
type can have an extension where calculated properties or methods can
be added. An extension can even be created for the built-in types. The
caveat of an extension is that it cannot declare properties that store
data. However, computed properties can be declared. These properties
use existing data or methods to compute and return a result. Extensions
are also a great way of breaking up the definition of a custom type. For
instance, you could declare your enum or then use an extension to
conform to a protocol, or to simply add convenience properties or
methods.
 
Below the Flies protocol, add this code and run:
 
class Jet: UsesFuel, Flies {
 
  var prefilghtComplete: Bool = false
 
  var fuelType: String {
 
      "Jet Fuel"

--- Page 100 ---
 
  }
 
  var percentRemaining: Double = 1
 
  func performPreflight() {
 
      prefilghtComplete = true
 
  }
 
}
 
let jet = Jet()
 
jet.performPreflight()
 
print(jet.prefilghtComplete)
 
The method in the UsesFuel protocol extension has the word mutating
in front of it. This is so a struct can also conform to this protocol, as
struct methods must declare they are mutating the values of the object.
With this declaration, multiple kinds of objects can use this protocol.
Try removing the word mutating and see what happens.

--- Page 101 ---
 
To conform to a protocol, the developer places a colon, then the name
of the protocol after the name. Subclasses must add a comma after the
superclass name, then the name of the protocol or protocols. This is
shown with the struct and class declarations above. If you try to
remove the properties defined in these object types, an error will be
displayed.
 
Protocols are types, they can be used wherever a type is declared. Here
is a simple example. Add this to the bottom of your playground and
run:
 
class Hangar {
 
  func repairPlane(plane: Flies) {
 
      print("plane repaired")
 
  }
 
}
 
let hangar = Hangar()
 

--- Page 102 ---
hangar.repairPlane(plane: jet)
 
jet) jet) jet) jet) jet) jet) jet) jet) jet) jet) jet) jet)
  
Object-oriented programming is about organizing data and structures.
The methods can be used to change the state of the objects, return
information, or both. It is a system of programming that has been
around for a long time and there is still a place for it in today’s code. It
is a tool in the box along with structs, protocols, actors, and so on.
Protocols allow a way to define a type that is focused and can be
applied across a broad set of various kinds of objects that may have no
relationship to each other avoiding the overly complex superclass.
And, because your custom type can conform to multiple protocols,
your types can be given additional complexity, as needed.
 
Another style of programming is called functional programming. The
basic premise is that you do not change the state. Everything needed
for the function to work is passed in and, for a given state of
parameters, the output is always the same. Testing is a lot easier with
this form of programming and it can be applied to other areas of Swift.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 103 ---
 
Closures
 
Functions are used everywhere. From the built-in frameworks to
libraries you download to your own code, functions are the backbone
of code execution. It should be no surprise that Swift can treat
functions as first-class objects. They can be passed as parameters to
other functions, assigned to variables, or even returned from functions.
 
Below is an example of how this can be beneficial and how Swift
makes it easier to code. Erase your playground or create a new one and
add the following code after the import:
 
typealias Weight = Double
 
typealias FermentProcess = () -> Void
 
struct PizzaDough {
 
let grams: Weight
 
  init(grams: Weight) {
 

--- Page 104 ---
      self.grams = grams
 
  }
 
  func ferment(process: FermentProcess) {
 
      process()
 
  }
 
}
 
Again, the code here starts with something new. The keyword typealias
allows us to declare a new type as a shortcut to something easily
expressed, because it is a type, it is capitalized. Code after the equal
sign is what the compiler replaces the alias with. This is a great way to
take something that may easily lose its meaning when read in code and
give a context. Here, the Double type can be expressed as
 
The next alias is for a function. The empty parenthesis, arrow, and
Void are the definition of a function that takes no parameters and does
not return anything. This is used on line eleven of the code entered.
Now enter this code and run:
 

--- Page 105 ---
let dough = PizzaDough(grams: 500)
 
let fermentProcess: FermentProcess = {
 
  print("saved function to ferment pizza dough")
 
}
 
dough.ferment(process: fermentProcess)
 
dough.ferment(process: {
 
  print("fermenting dough with weight of \(dough.grams) grams")
 
})
 
dough.ferment {
 
  print("fermenting more dough with weight of \(dough.grams) grams")
 
}
 

--- Page 106 ---
Like we have done with other types, PizzaDough is instantiated and
assigned to the dough variable. Below that, on lines three through five,
a function is created and saved to the fermentProcess variable. Stop
and scrutinize this. Understand it. FermentProcess is a stand-alone
function type that takes no parameters and does not return anything. It
just has a body, the content between the curly braces. In Swift, having
a function outside of an object like this is called a closure. The
advantage is that a closure can have access to local properties of the
parent context.
 
On line seven, the variable is passed to another function. The ferment
function expects only one parameter that is also a function. This is a
powerful feature that can be utilized in many ways. However, to make
it easier, a variable does not need to be created first, the closure can be
passed in-line as done on lines nine through eleven. The open brace
indicates the start of the function body, and a closing brace ends it.
This is followed by the closing parenthesis for the parameter list.
 
This can be simplified even more. In Swift, when the last parameter of
a function call is a closure, the parameter can be left out of the
initialization list and expressed outside of the parameter list. This is
called a trailing closure. If there are no other parameters required, the
parenthesis can also be dropped. This is illustrated on lines thirteen
through fifteen.
 

--- Page 107 ---
Closures can also accept their own parameters. Unfortunately, they
cannot be labeled at the point of use. Still, a name can be given in the
definition to make the code more easily read. Enter this:
 
typealias BakeTechnique = (_ pizzaSize: Weight) -> Void
 
struct PizzaOven {
 
  let bake: BakeTechnique
 
  init(bake: @escaping BakeTechnique) {
 
      self.bake = bake
 
  }
 
}
 
The BakeTechnique type is an alias for a function that takes one
parameter of type and does not return anything. The closure is saved as
a local property to the struct. Because this function can be called at any
time in the future, the parameter is marked as escaping.
 
With code completion, Xcode is helpful when typing in code as
illustrated in Figure 1.6 below. As you start to enter a type, Xcode will

--- Page 108 ---
give a suggestion with possible parameters. Even with the misspelling,
it showed the custom type. After pressing the type and parameter list is
filled in with the type highlighted. Pressing Enter again will resolve
BakeTechnnique to a trailing closure with the variable to be used in the
body.
 
 
Figure Auto completion
 
Continue until the entered code looks like the following and run:
  
let oven = PizzaOven { pizzaSize in
 
  print("baking pizza")
 
}
 
oven.bake(400)
  

--- Page 109 ---
Line five illustrates the closure taking the value, without a label. How
could the function type be altered to return a Bool? On your own, alter
the BakeTechnique function type to return number of minutes required
to bake and use it in the PizzaOven struct. A possible answer is at the
end of the chapter.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 110 ---
 
Flow control
 
Until now, only the if and switch statements have been used to control
what code is executed. Clearly, more options are needed.
 
There are times code needs to be repeated a fixed number of times.
This can be based on a count or on the number of elements in a
collection:
 
for index in 10..<40 {
 
  print(index)
 
}
 
for index in stride(from: 10, through: 40, by: 5) {
 
  print(index)
 
}
 

--- Page 111 ---
for name in ["Apple", "Amazon", "Oracle", "Facebook", "Microsoft"]
{
 
  print(name)
 
}
 
In all of these, the for keyword is used, then the name of the variable to
use in the scope, the keyword followed by the source of the values to
assign to the variable. The source could be a range, which we covered
with the switch statement above, a function like stride that can give us
values, or a collection. If the variable is unused, substitute it with an
underscore.
 
Sometimes the code is not run a specific number of times, but, instead,
it is repeated until a logical condition is true. For this while or repeat-
while loops are used. The difference between the two is when the
Boolean expression is checked for conformance. Using while tests the
expression before executing any of the instructions in the scope
whereas the second option executes the instructions before testing.
Add this code, but do not run yet:
 
var testValue = true
 
while !testValue {

--- Page 112 ---
 
  print("running some code")
 
}
 
repeat {
 
  print("running extra code")
 
} while !testValue
 
The exclamation point is a not operator. It reverses the Boolean value
of what follows. Hence, would be true and !true is false. Before
running it, try to determine what will print.
 
The return statement has been shown as the way of returning a value
from a method or calculated property, however it can also be used to
exit the flow in a method that does not return a value.
 
Sometimes, specific conditions must be met before subsequent
statements can be executed. To achieve this, use guard. The guard
command followed by let or var syntax tests if the following optional
variable can be unwrapped and assigned to a variable of the same

--- Page 113 ---
name. A comma delimited list of Boolean expressions to test can also
be used. Here is an example:
 
struct Book {
 
  let author: String?
 
  func promoteAuthor() {
 
      guard let author, !author.isEmpty else { return }
 
      print("\(author) is a great author!")
 
  }
 
}
 
let book = Book(author: "Aaron L Bratcher")
 
book.promoteAuthor()
 
The method in the struct checks if author can be unwrapped into a
variable called author and, additionally, checks that the value is not
empty. A string is a collection of characters so we can use the isEmpty

--- Page 114 ---
property. What would happen if the author were given an empty string
on line eight? An empty string is two quotes with nothing in between
 
The guard statement requires an else clause that must eventually
return. A popular use of the guard statement is to simply check
conditions without unwrapping optionals.
 
Finally, there is the very useful defer command. This is for code that
must be executed before exiting the scope regardless of any other code
that may or may not execute. For instance, if a file is opened must be
closed or a memory intensive object must be released. This is easily
illustrated in this code:
 
struct Book2 {
 
  let author: String?
 
  var bigData: Data?
 
  mutating func promoteAuthor() {
 
      bigData = "This is a large data object".data(using: .utf8)
 
      defer {

--- Page 115 ---
 
bigData = nil
 
        print("big data removed")
 
      }
 
      guard let author, !author.isEmpty else {
 
        print("Author not specified")
 
            return
 
        }
 
        print("\(author) is a great author!")
 
      }
 
}
 
var book2 = Book2(author: "Aaron L Bratcher")
 

--- Page 116 ---
book2.promoteAuthor()
 
First, this is a good use of a mutating method. Inside the method, a
large block of data is assigned to the struct’s property and, unless we
do something to remove it, the data will remain with the Book2 object.
Second, the defer command is introduced. Everything in the defer
command’s scope is executed before exiting the current scope. In this
case the current scope is the method, but it could be the commands in
any of the flow control statements too. Test this by running as
presented here, then run again using an empty string for the author
parameter.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 117 ---
 
Order of operation
 
Without cheating, identify the value of 4 + 8 / 22 - ( 2 * 2 Enter this
code into your playground and see the answer:
 
let x = 4 + 8 / pow(2,2) - (2 * 2)
 
To guarantee the same answer, regardless of environment, a standard
was decided upon long ago. It goes like this: Parenthesis, exponents,
multiplication/division, then addition/subtraction. After these are the
comparison operators like greater than less than greater than or equal
less than or equal <= or equal Using this information, we can break
down the expression into steps. Notice how the operators have a space
on either side:
 
let  parenthesisResult: Decimal = (2 * 2)
 
let step1 = 4 + 8 / pow(2,2) - parenthesisResult
 
let exponentResult = pow(2,2)
 
let step2 = 4 + 8 / exponentResult - parenthesisResult

--- Page 118 ---
 
let divisionResult = 8 / exponentResult
 
let step3 = 4 + divisionResult - parenthesisResult
 
When more than one expression of the same priority exists, they are
evaluated in left to right order.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 119 ---
 
Conclusion
 
In this chapter the basics of the Swift language were presented. The
great thing about this language is that a little knowledge can be used to
create some great programs. As you use Swift, more of its features will
be discovered. Seeing your dream come to fruition is exhilarating.
 
The next chapter will cover a technique of creating the user interface
using SwiftUI.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 120 ---
 
Exercises
 
Throughout the chapter, you were asked to provide your own code.
Here are some ways you could have answered:
  
Create a variable that holds an array of optional strings.
 
 
print("Contributors:")
 
let contributorNames: [String?] = ["Arthur C Clarke", nil, "Isaac
Asimov"]
 
for name in contributorNames {
 
  print(name)
 
}
 
Create a variable that holds a dictionary with an integer key and an
optional tuple of two strings.

--- Page 121 ---
 
 
print("\n\nCaptains:")
 
let captains: [Int: (String, String)?] = [1773: ("Nathaniel",
"Bowditch"),
 
1668: ("Thomas","Coram"), 1966: nil]
 
for (key, value) in captains {
 
  print("\(key): \(value)")
 
}
 
Alter the Pizza struct to use enumerations instead of strings.
 
 
enum Crust {
 
  case thin
 
  case handTossed

--- Page 122 ---
 
  case deepDish
 
  case none
 
}
 
enum Sauce {
 
  case tomato, white, arrabbiata, none
 
}
 
enum SpicyGrade {
 
  case mild, medium, hot, notApplicable
 
}
 
enum Topping {
 
  case sausage(isSpicy: Bool, grade: SpicyGrade)
 
  case cheese, onion, mushroom, greenPepper

--- Page 123 ---
 
}
 
struct Pizza {
 
  var crust: Crust
 
  var sauce: Sauce
 
  var toppings: [Topping] = []
 
  init(crust: Crust = .none, sauce: Sauce = .tomato,
 
toppings: [Topping]) {
 
      self.crust = crust
 
      self.sauce = sauce
 
      self.toppings = toppings
 
  }
 

--- Page 124 ---
}
 
let pizza = Pizza(toppings: [.cheese, .greenPepper, .mushroom, .onion,
 
.sausage(isSpicy: true, grade: .medium)])
 
Alter the BakeTechnique to return number of minutes required to bake
and use it in the PizzaOven struct.
 
 
typealias Weight = Double
 
typealias Minutes = Int
 
typealias BakeTechnique = (_ pizzaSize: Weight) -> Minutes
 
struct PizzaOven {
 
  let bake: BakeTechnique
 
  init(bake: @escaping BakeTechnique) {
 
      self.bake = bake

--- Page 125 ---
 
  }
 
}
 
let oven = PizzaOven { pizzaSize in
 
  print("baking pizza")
 
  return 10
 
}
 
let minutes = oven.bake(400)
 
print("it took \(minutes) minutes to bake")
  
Review the answers here and play with them. Try running it multiple
times to see if the output from the captain’s dictionary is always in the
same order.
 
Join our book’s Discord space
 

--- Page 126 ---
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the
Authors:
 
https://discord.bpbonline.com
 
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 127 ---
 
C
HAPTER
2
Learn SwiftUI Basics for Creating a User Interface
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 128 ---
 
Introduction
 
In 2019, at the Worldwide Developers Conference, Apple introduced
the world to a new way of designing the user interface for all its
products — SwiftUI. Every year since then, Apple has enhanced and
expanded on its capabilities. SwiftUI makes it easy to describe how the
interface should look and act. The new framework provides all the
elements necessary to create great-looking apps with minimal work.
What makes it especially powerful is the near-immediate preview of
the interface created by the Swift code for different scenarios that are
bult-in or developer-provided.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 129 ---
 
Structure
 
The following chapter includes the following topics:
  
Your first project
 
Interface basics
 
SwiftUI basics
 
Extended content
 
Drawing
 
SF symbols
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 130 ---
 
Objectives
 
By the end of this chapter the reader should know how to create a
SwiftUI project and understand the common interface elements used
when creating the views of an app. The reader will also know how to
display, color, and do a couple of animations to symbols found in SF
Symbols.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 131 ---
 
Your first project
 
The first chapter was about developing basic skills with the Swift
language. That will be used to define the logical part of how the project
operates. This chapter is about creating the visual interface. This is the
first thing the user sees so it is important to put thought into what is
displayed and, sometimes even more importantly, what is not displayed.
  
After opening Xcode, click on the Create New Project… button or from
the File menu, select New followed by Xcode helps you get started for
several types of platforms, apps, and libraries. Verify the iOS platform and
the App template options are chosen as shown in Figure
 
 
Figure Template selection dialog

--- Page 132 ---
 
Click Next and the options dialog will be shown. The product name is the
name of the app being created. Yes, it can have spaces. Do not worry
about the team currently. The Organization Identifier is the prefix for the
bundle name used to identify the app, or other things that may built in the
project. When the app is built, it consists of one, or more, bundles. These
must be uniquely named and identified not only within this project, but
also on the app store. The organization identifier is prepended to each
name and is usually in reverse domain order, for example How all this
come together is shown in the dialog by the label Bundle Identifier. The
SwiftUI Interface option is used in this book as well as the Swift
language. Verify these are selected. For now, do not select any storage or
include tests. These last two options will be explored later. When finished,
your options dialog should look like Figure
 

--- Page 133 ---
 
Figure Project options dialog
   
Click the Next button and the standard save dialog will be presented.
Specify where you want to save the project. Over time it may be easier to
create a folder called Projects that houses all your Xcode projects. There
is no need to create a Git repository currently. When saved, a folder will
be created that contains all the files and a new window like Figure 2.3 will
be displayed.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 134 ---
 
Interface basics
 
Before diving into SwiftUI, a review of Xcode’s interface when editing
and running a project is necessary. Figure 2.3 shows a typical Xcode
window when editing a project:
 
 
Figure Xcode project window
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 135 ---
 
Navigators
 
Area 1 is the navigator selection bar. Use this to control or see different
aspects of the project like the source files, source control, global
search, warnings and errors, runtime information, and so on. When the
pointer is hovered over each button in the selection bar, the name of
the navigator it represents is displayed.
 
The pane in area 2 shows the selected navigator. Initially, the project
navigator is selected so the files for the project are shown. At the
bottom, multiple ways to filter the display are available from
specifying part of the file name to seeing recently edited or files that
have changed source control status.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 136 ---
 
Editing
 
Area 3 is the editor pane. Use this area to edit source code, manage
assets, see runtime details and so on. This usually takes up the bulk of
the window. Area 4 is the Canvas. It shows a preview for SwiftUI
views. In some situations, it may show below the editor pane. If the
Canvas is not shown, enable it by clicking the Editor Options button
on the upper right and selecting
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 137 ---
 
Project structure
 
Open the Learn SwiftUI folder in See how the structure closely
matches what is shown in the Project navigator as illustrated in Figure
 
 
Figure Finder and project hierarchy comparison
 
As you add more files to your project, their position in the Finder
hierarchy will continue to match. While it is possible to override this
behavior, it makes file management much easier when you keep this
default behavior.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 138 ---
 
Canvas
 
Return to Xcode and verify if the ContentView file is selected. The
Canvas gives us nearly immediate feedback on any changes we make on a
SwiftUI If, at any time, you see the Preview paused message, click on the
Resume button.
 
When creating an app, a wide variety of users must be considered. From
individuals who use small devices to those that use large. Those with good
eyesight that can easily read small text to people who need larger text.
Some prefer dark mode while others, light. Instead of requiring us to
launch the app and navigating to the screen being developed, Xcode
provides the tools to test these factors quickly.
 
Below the is the toolbar shown in Figure
 
 
Figure Canvas toolbar
 
The first two buttons on the left in Figure 2.5 allow the developer to
interact with the controls as the immediate code is running or as a means
of selecting items for editing. The grid-like button is of great interest for
this discussion. Click it and options for displaying your view in a variety

--- Page 139 ---
of ways is shown. Try each one and explore what is shown. How will this
help you as when creating your screen? Play with the other buttons to
discover what they do. Be sure to take advantage of these tools during
development.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 140 ---
 
Running your app
 
At the top of the window is the project toolbar. To the right of the
project name is the current scheme followed by the run destination.
This is shown in Figure
 
 
Figure Project window toolbar
 
The developer can specify which simulator is used by clicking on the
currently shown destination and choosing a simulator. To launch the
app, click on the Run button in the tool bar, to the left of the project
name, or from the Product menu, select After the app has compiled, the
simulator of choice will launch and display the same screen shown on
the Canvas.
 
In select the Debug navigator . Below, you will see the Debug
navigator as shown in Figure
 

--- Page 141 ---
 
Figure Debug navigator
 
This displays a quick overview on the critical aspects of the app when
it was launched from Xcode. In general, the CPU should be dormant
when the user is not interacting with the app. Memory should be as
low as possible. When memory is used to load or show items on-
screen and the user moves away from that screen, the memory should
quickly drop back to where it was before. Disk and network should
also be used only as necessary. Clicking on any of these entries will fill
the editor pane with additional details.
 
Click the Stop button in the project window toolbar. The Debug
navigator will show a message indicating that there is no active debug
session. The editor pane should show the contents of the file
previously showing before running the app. As your project grows, and
you quickly move from editing one file to another, it can become
difficult to find the file being edited in the project navigator. To
quickly highlight the file in the project navigator, do this: from the

--- Page 142 ---
Navigate menu, select Reveal in Project navigator. This will show the
Project navigator and select the file showing in the editor pane.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 143 ---
 
SwiftUI basics
 
Look at the list of files in the Project navigator. Two of them show
with the Swift icon next to the name. Select the one called The name is
based on the name given in the project options dialog. This is the code
that, in essence, launches the app. It imports the SwiftUI library and
contains a The WindowGroup returns an instance of ContentView
(remember, when only one line is used to return something, the return
statement is not necessary.) This is the View used when the app
launches.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 144 ---
 
The view
 
Select ContentView in the project navigator so the file shows in the
editor pane. By default, new files have a standard comment at the top
with the name of the file and the user who created it. After this is the
import SwiftUI statement. Most programming languages have an
import or include syntax giving access to libraries of code that can be
utilized by the rest of the file. Here, the SwiftUI library is imported.
More libraries or modules will be used throughout the book.
 
At last, we see a called and it conforms to a protocol called When
working within SwiftUI, it can be easy to forget that views are structs.
The View protocol has one requirement: a property called body that is
of type View. How do we know this? Hold the command key ( ) and
click on the name of the protocol. Xcode will jump to its definition.
Viewing Apple’s documentation for the frameworks provides a wealth
of knowledge. Look at it often while working through the example
projects and creating your own.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 145 ---
 
Layout
 
The body can have only one view returned. However, that view can
contain other views. Here, the VStack is returned and it, in turn,
contains Image and Text objects. Below the struct is a #Preview area to
define what is shown in the canvas. Even with these few things in the
file, there is a lot to discuss.
 
The VStack is a way of showing items vertically. Change it to HStack
and the items will be displayed horizontally. Do it now. The order that
the views are given in the stack dictate the order they are presented to
the user. Move the entire line for the text view over the image and see
how the preview changes.
 
Right now, the items are centered. This is the default alignment for
items on the screen and in stacks. There are a couple of ways to shift
the items. One is to add a spacer. Insert Spacer() on the line after the
opening brace of the See how this forces everything over? Move it
after the Text line, like below, and see what happens.
 
HStack {
 
  Text("Hello, world!") 

--- Page 146 ---
 
  Spacer()
 
  Image(systemName: "globe")
 
      .imageScale(.large)
 
      .foregroundStyle(.tint)
 
}
 
Default values for spacing and alignment have been used so far.
Remove the spacer line and add the following parameters to HStack
before the opening brace:
 
(alignment: .bottom, spacing: 25)
 
See how the text and image are now bottom aligned? The default
alignment for stacks is center while the default spacing is eight. Stacks
can also be nested for better control of the layout. To layer elements
one on top of the other, the ZStack can be used.
 
The value for the spacing parameter is in points. A point is a unit of
measure for distance or size. Because screen densities vary, pixels are

--- Page 147 ---
not used. There are 72 points in an inch or about 28.35 points in a
centimeter.
 
The VStack and HStack attempt to layout all elements before
displaying anything. This may be time consuming and give the
application the appearance of not running well. If there are many
elements to display, especially in a scroll view, a better option may be
LazyVStack or These stacks process just enough information to create
the visual elements for the screen and the immediate scrollable area.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 148 ---
 
Modifiers
 
The image object has three lines dictating how it is presented. First is
the image object itself using a systemName parameter, and the next
two lines are modifiers.
 
Image(systemName: "globe")
 
   .imageScale(.large)
 
   .foregroundStyle(.tint)
 
Modifiers are a great way to customize objects and finetune the
presentation. If you comment these two lines by highlighting the lines
and pressing command you will see what the image would look like
without these modifiers.
 
The imageScale modifier does not seem to do anything. When it is
commented out, the display appears the same. Where a big difference
is shown is when dynamic type is employed. Remove the comment
slashes and change the imageScale from .large to . and the available
enumerations are displayed. Select small or large and see how it

--- Page 149 ---
changes in the type variants. The type variants can be displayed by
choosing the grid on the canvas toolbar and selecting Dynamic Type
 
In the canvas toolbar, select the Live button on the left. The scale
presets may be useful for some situations; however it is a reasonable
expectation to give a precise size for the image. Remove the
imageScale modifier and replace it with resizable() so the code looks
like this:
 
Image(systemName: "globe")
 
  .resizable()
 
  .foregroundStyle(.tint)
 
The canvas now looks like Figure
 

--- Page 150 ---
 
Figure Resizable image
 
The image is attempting to fill the available space allowed. If you were
to remove the modifier from the bottom of the stack, it will fill even
more space. To fix this, add a frame modifier to the image so the code
looks like this:
 
Image(systemName: "globe")
 
  .resizable()
 
  .foregroundStyle(.tint)
 

--- Page 151 ---
  .frame(width: 50, height: 50) 
 
That is more reasonable. The order modifiers are given is important.
For instance, if you were to move the resizable modifier below the
frame, you would see an error as shown in Figure
 
 
Figure Resizable error
 
Modifiers take the previous object as input, makes modifications, then
generates an output. The output may be a specific SwiftUI object or a
generic view. The frame modifier outputs a generic view; however, the
resizable modifier expects an image as the input. The order is
important because you have a flow from one view to another until you
the final output has been created.
 
Make the text more vibrant by adding these three lines under the Text
object one at a time and watch how the preview changes:
 
.bold()
 
.font(.title)
 
.foregroundStyle(Color(.darkGray))

--- Page 152 ---
 
Try switching the order to see which ones can be directly under the
text object. In this case, they can be in any order. Select the Color
Scheme Variants from the grid button in the canvas toolbar. Play with
the color options to see which are visible on both the light and dark
scheme. Later in the book, custom colors that work with color scheme
variants will be defined.
 
Another way to see how the order affects modifiers is to add a border
at different places. Add these lines of code after the frame:
 
.border(Color.red)
 
.padding(.top, 50)
 
.border(Color.green)
 
Play with the padding values, especially the first one. Valid options are
all, top, bottom, horizontal, vertical, leading, and trailing. These
parameters specify where the padding should be and how much.
Adding borders of different colors is a great technique to see how the
layout is working, though it does not work with a spacer. When you
are done exploring, remove these three lines.
 

--- Page 153 ---
The normal convention of SwiftUI is to put each modifier on its own
line as shown in the code examples.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 154 ---
 
Controls
 
Earlier the frame modifier was used to size the image. Let us make
some adjustments so the size is user selectable. To accomplish this, a
property to hold the user-selected size is needed. The collective
property values of an object define its state. In SwiftUI, when a View
property that can change is used, it is prefixed with The image frame
will use this property to specify its size. When using it is a good policy
to make it private.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 155 ---
 
Slider
 
First, an interface the user can manipulate for adjusting values is
needed. SwiftUI has a slider control that is perfect for the task.
 
Earlier the text and image objects were put into a horizontal stack. This
looks good, but if a slider is added below the image object, it would
appear to the right of the image. As mentioned earlier, stacks can be
nested. Wrap the HStack with a VStack and put the slider below the
When done, the code will look like this:
 
struct ContentView: View {
 
  @State private var imageSize: Double = 50
 
  var body: some View {
 
      VStack {
 
        HStack {
 
Text("Hello, world!")

--- Page 156 ---
 
              .bold()
 
              .font(.title)
 
              .foregroundStyle(Color(.darkGray))
 
            Image(systemName: "globe")
 
              .resizable()
 
              .foregroundStyle(.tint)
 
              .frame(width: imageSize, height: imageSize)
 
        }
 
        Slider(value: $imageSize, in: 25...50, step: 5)
 
      }
 
      .padding()
 

--- Page 157 ---
  }
 
}
 
Now the frame uses the imageSize property to specify the width and
height. The slider has this syntax for the value, The dollar sign
indicates this is a binding. This means the Slider can both read and
write to the imageSize state property. The second parameter identifies
the valid range. Recall from chapter one that this is an inclusive range.
The last parameter is optional and makes the slider jump between
values. To interact with this view, the Live button must be selected on
the canvas toolbar.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 158 ---
 
Toggle
 
The toggle control acts as a switch to show a property is set to Add a
new state property called showImage under imageSize with a type of
Bool and set its value to
 
@State private var showImage: Bool = true
 
Then, as the first line in the add this code:
 
Toggle(isOn: $showImage) {
 
  Text("Show Image")
 
}
 
Again, the dollar sign indicates a binding. This time to the showImage
property. The label must return a Text view. It can be plain, as used
here, or it can be modified to enhance how it appears. To take
advantage of this new control, wrap the Image with an if statement so
it looks like this:
 

--- Page 159 ---
if showImage {
 
  Image(systemName: "globe")
 
      .resizable()
 
.foregroundStyle(.tint)
 
      .frame(width: imageSize, height: imageSize)
 
}
 
Do the same with the slider control. Whenever a bound property
changes, the view is rebuilt to reflect the new state.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 160 ---
 
Stepper
 
Below the slider, inside if statement, add the following code:
 
Stepper(value: $imageSize, in: 25...50, step: 5) {
 
  Text("Image Size")
 
      .bold()
 
}
 
The same bound property is used for the stepper and the slider, the
value change caused by using the stepper control will be reflected in
the slider. Also, see how both are using the same range specifier? On
your own, create a nonmutable property for the range and use that
property for the slider and stepper. The answer is shown at the end of
the chapter.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 161 ---
 
TextField
 
The TextField is used to allow the user to enter textual content. Like
other controls, the value must be stored in a property. Either in the
view itself as a state property, or in a class defined elsewhere and used
as a view model. For now, create a new state property called greeting
with a string type. Set the default value to match what is shown with
the Text view. Then, alter the text view to use this new property.
Finally, add a TextField over the When complete, your view will have
this content:
 
@State private var greeting: String = "Hello, world!"
 
. . .
 
TextField(text: $greeting) {
 
  Text("Enter greeting here")
 
}
 
HStack {

--- Page 162 ---
 
  Text(greeting)
 
  . . .
 
Any text entered the TextField control will be displayed by the Text
view. While interacting with the view on the canvas, removing the text
from the text field will show the prompt, enter greeting here. Because
the prompt is a text view, it can be styled as needed. As presented on
the canvas, the TextField control is difficult to differentiate from the
Text below it. Add the following modifiers to the text field:
 
.padding(6)
 
.overlay(
 
  RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius: 4)
 
      .stroke(Color.purple, lineWidth: 1)
 
)
 
The overlay modifier draws its content over the view being modified.
In this case, it is drawing a rounded rectangle with its own modifier.

--- Page 163 ---
The prompt can be easily missed if there is text entered. On your own,
find a way of adding a text label under the text field so it is understood
what is to be entered. A suggestion is at the end of the chapter.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 164 ---
 
Picker
 
Like an enum can help the developer write clear code when working a
known list of items, a picker can help the user select from a list of
items. Below the view’s state properties, add the following:
 
let imageNames = ["globe", "globe.americas", "globe.europe.africa",
"globe.asia.australia", "globe.central.south.asia"]
 
@State private var imageIndex: Int = 0
 
The imageNames property is an array of strings. The property is an
integer with a default value of zero. In the body property, below the
toggle, add this picker:
 
if showImage {
 
  Picker(selection: $imageIndex, label: Text("Globe Image")) {
 
      ForEach(0..id: \.self) { index in
 
   Text(imageNames[index])

--- Page 165 ---
 
      }
 
  }
 
}
 
The user’s selection is stored in the imageIndex property. The label
will not show on iOS, because this control is available for all of
Apple’s products, it will show in some scenarios and it will be used for
VoiceOver. ForEach is new. It returns multiple views based on the
source. Here, the source is a non-inclusive range of integers starting at
zero and ending at, but not including the number of entries in The id
parameter is needed so if the number of entries changes, the app does
not crash. It uses a keypath to the array entry itself.
 
Then we have a trailing closure with an integer as the parameter. The
name, index, is arbitrary. It is defined by the developer for the scope of
the closure. Like any variable name, its name should have meaning to
what role it plays and the type of value it holds. For each index, a text
value is provided using the index of the array to retrieve a name.
 
Further down, for the image element, replace "globe" with Now when
you select an entry, the globe image will change accordingly.
 

--- Page 166 ---
If a list of options is already known, then a different approach may
work better. Above the struct, add this enum:
 
enum GlobeImage: String, CaseIterable {
 
  case globe
 
  case americas = "globe.americas"
 
  case europeAfrica = "globe.europe.africa"
 
  case asiaAustralia = "globe.asia.australia"
 
  case centralSouthAsia = "globe.central.south.asia"
 
}
 
A raw value based enum was discussed in the first chapter. Here, a
string based enum is created. When the raw value matches the case
value, the raw value is automatically assigned. The CaseIterable
protocol automatically assigns an allCases property to the enum for
simple iteration through the cases. In more complex enums, like those
with associated values, the property must be created by the developer.
 

--- Page 167 ---
Add these extensions below the enum definition:
 
extension GlobeImage: Identifiable {
 
  var id: GlobeImage {
 
      self 
 
  }
 
}
 
extension GlobeImage: CustomStringConvertible {
 
  var description: String {
 
      switch self {
 
      case .globe: return "Wire Globe"
 
      case .americas: return "Americas"
 
      case .europeAfrica: return "Europe - Africa"
 

--- Page 168 ---
      case .asiaAustralia: return "Asia - Australia"
 
      case .centralSouthAsia: return "Central South Asia"
 
      }
 
  }
 
}
 
Using an extension for each protocol conformance is a common
practice. The first one is to get a unique id for each enumeration.
Simply returning the enumeration works. CustomStringConvertible
gives a human readable description to each enumeration. Now, create a
state property called image of type GlobeImage and give it a default
value of It will look like this:
 
@State var image: GlobeImage = .globe
 
Further down, for the Image element, replace "globe" with
 
Finally, replace the picker code you entered above with this:
 
  Picker(selection: $image, label: Text("Globe Image")) {

--- Page 169 ---
 
      ForEach(GlobeImage.allCases) { image in
 
        Text(String(describing: image))
 
      }
 
  }
 
If you feel you have done something wrong, download the code for
this chapter and reference the Learn SwiftUI 1 project folder. The
picker is using the image property to store the selected value. Again,
the label will not show on iOS. Then, ForEach is used to return a text
view describing each image in the GlobalImage enum. Try each option
and watch the globe image change based on the selection. You may
also add the pickerStyle modifier to change how the picker looks.
After the open parenthesis, type in a period to see valid options. The
reference project uses
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 170 ---
 
DatePicker
 
Selecting a date is a very common app feature and the last of the
controls reviewed here. Add a state property called date and make it a
Date type. Assign it the default value of Date(). Then, above the
toggle, add the date picker code:
 
DatePicker(selection: $date, displayedComponents: [.date]) {
 
  Text("Target Date")
 
}
 
The displayed components, if used, is a comma-delimited list of the
components to display. There are only two options: and Like the
generic picker, a datePickerStyle is an available modifier.
 
After entering all these controls, your screen may look like Figure
Obviously, this not something that should be presented to the user.
Subsequent chapters will show how to organize and move between
views:
 

--- Page 171 ---
 
Figure Controls demonstration
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 172 ---
 
Extended content
 
Regardless of the device used, the screen has a limited amount of
space to show content. A way of allowing the user to scroll through
content, vertically, and/or horizontally, is required. In the ContentView
file, remove the enum, its extensions, and all the content from the
body. For now, add EmptyView() as the body content.
 
An EmptyView is what its name implies. A view that has no content.
Were you to add a frame and a colored border, you would still not see
anything displayed. The file should look like the import statement
here:
 
struct ContentView: View {
 
  var body: some View {
 
    EmptyView()
 
  }
 
}

--- Page 173 ---
 
#Preview {
 
  ContentView()
 
}
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 174 ---
 
ScrollView
 
For a simple situation, the ScrollView is an easy way of giving the user
a scrollable area. Replace the empty view with this simple code:
 
ScrollView {
 
  ForEach(0..<1000, id: \.self) { index in
 
      Text("\(index)")
 
        .bold()
 
  }
 
}
 
Besides there should be nothing new here. While not shown,
ScrollView can take an axis parameter defining which way the content
scrolls. Try it by adding after It is now showing the content
horizontally as expected. Wrap the ForEach block with HStack and it

--- Page 175 ---
will work as expected. If you are unsure about how to do this, open the
project file in the Learn SwiftUI 2 folder for this chapter.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 176 ---
 
ForEach
 
Used a couple of times already, ForEach uses the source for the
creation of unique views, like the integers as used for the scroll view,
items from an array, or even a dictionary. The trailing closure’s
parameter is the element given from the source. In the example above,
each integer value was passed as the parameter to the closure. The
closure must return a view. Add these two properties to the struct:
 
let destinations = ["Boston", "New York", "Philadelphia", "Chicago"]
 
let trainDestinations = [12: "Boston", 104: "New York", 110:
"Philadelphia", 126: "Chicago"]
 
Wrap the scroll view with a VStack then below the existing
ScrollView add this:
 
ScrollView {
 
  ForEach(destinations, id: \.self) { destination in
 
      Text(destination)
 

--- Page 177 ---
  }
 
}
 
.fixedSize(horizontal: false, vertical: true)
 
.border(Color.green)
 
It is best to be in the practice of using the id parameter of the ForEach
or make sure the source conforms to the identifiable protocol like the
enum did for the picker example. Arrays can use the \.self Here, each
entry in the array is passed to the trailing closure and then printed.
 
Now add this ScrollView inside the VStack below the one you just
added:
 
ScrollView {
 
  ForEach(trainDestinations.sorted(by: <), id: \.key) { train, destination
in
 
     Text("train #\(train) – \(destination)")
 
  }

--- Page 178 ---
 
}
 
.fixedSize(horizontal: false, vertical: true)
 
.border(Color.red)
 
By itself, a dictionary cannot be used as the source. However, by
calling the sorted method, a result is returned that can be used. The id
is using key from each dictionary entry. Remember, a dictionary entry
consists of a key and a value where each key is unique. The key and
value are both passed as parameters to the trailing closure where string
interpolation is used to print the train and destination.
 
Finally, add this scroll view:
 
ScrollView {
 
  ForEach(trainDestinations.keys.sorted(), id: \.self) { train in
 
      trainText(for: train)
 
  }
 

--- Page 179 ---
}
 
.fixedSize(horizontal: false, vertical: true)
 
.border(Color.blue)
 
Once you add this, an error will show: Cannot find ‘trainText’ in This
needs to be provided. Below the closing curly bracket for the body
property, add this:
 
@ViewBuilder
 
func trainText(for train: Int) -> some View {
 
  if let destination = trainDestinations[train] {
 
   Text("train #\(train) – \(destination)")
 
  } else {
 
   EmptyView()
 
  }
 
}

--- Page 180 ---
 
The @ViewBuilder attribute allows the code to be clearer when
creating a view. Not discussed before is the keyword some. When a
method returns something that conforms to a protocol, this keyword
indicates that an object that of this kind will be returned.
 
If you entered the code as specified, your canvas should look like
Figure If it does not, open the sample project and see what you did
wrong:
 

--- Page 181 ---
 
Figure ForEach Demo
 
The border is illustrative of what space each scroll view occupies on
the screen. Remove the fixedSize modifiers to see dramatic change
they make. Sometimes fixedSize is needed to force a view to its
optimal size. Sometimes a different approach is needed.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 182 ---
 
List
 
Clear out the file as before, leaving only an EmptyView() for the body
and the preview. In the next chapter the preview and ways to take
better advantage of it will be explored.
 
A list is a scroll view with the ability to enable the user to delete or
reorder entries. It also provides a way of showing the information
hierarchically. Like a ScrollView wrapping a the List is often
combined with a ForEach to provide the items displayed. Enter this
code or copy it from the project in the Learn SwiftUI 3 folder:
 
enum Crust: String {
 
  case thin, handTossed, deepDish, none
 
}
 
enum Sauce: String {
 
  case tomato, white, arrabbiata, none
 
}

--- Page 183 ---
 
enum Topping: String {
 
  case sausage, pepperoni, cheese, onion, mushroom, greenPepper
 
}
 
struct Pizza: Identifiable {
 
  let id = UUID()
 
  var crust: Crust
 
  var sauce: Sauce
 
  var toppings: [Topping]
 
  var toppingsDescription: String {
 
      toppings.map { $0.rawValue }.joined(separator: ", ")
 
  }
 

--- Page 184 ---
  #if DEBUG
 
  static func samplePizzas() -> [Pizza] {
 
      let p1 = Pizza(crust: .handTossed, sauce: .tomato, toppings:
[.cheese, .pepperoni])
 
      let p2 = Pizza(crust: .none, sauce: .white, toppings:
 
[.cheese, .mushroom, .onion, .greenPepper])
 
      let p3 = Pizza(crust: .thin, sauce: .arrabbiata,
 
toppings: [.cheese, .sausage])
 
      return [p1, p2, p3]
 
  }
 
  #endif
 
}
 

--- Page 185 ---
The Identifiable protocol on the Pizza struct indicates there must be a
property called id. This assigns an instance of a unique identifier for
each instance, to the property. The calculated property,
toppingsDescription uses an array method called map. All the
collections have these useful methods: and For more information on
this, look at the documentation in Xcode.
 
A static property can be used without an object instantiation as you
will see below. In this case, it will only be in the compiled product if a
debug scheme is being used.
 
The map function iterates over each entry in the collection, does some
manipulation, and creates a new collection from these items. Normally,
the map function would look like this:
 
toppings.map { topping in
 
  topping.rawValue
 
}
 
However, Swift provides a shortcut for trailing closures that is helpful
when they are short like this. The parameters can be referenced by
zero-based index and used directly, skipping the ‘ in’ syntax.
 

--- Page 186 ---
The next item that is new is the #if DEBUG syntax. Any code between
that and the #endif is only included in the compilation when running in
debug mode. This provides a good way of creating sample data that
can be used for development with the assurance it will not be included
in the final product.
 
Now add the rest of the structs needed for this example:
 
struct OrderType: Identifiable {
 
  let id = UUID()
 
  var name: String
 
  var pizzas: [Pizza]
 
  #if DEBUG
 
  static func sampleOrderTypes(type: String) -> [OrderType] {
 
      return [OrderType(name: type, pizzas: Pizza.samplePizzas())]
 
  }
 

--- Page 187 ---
  #endif
 
}
 
struct Restaurant {
 
  var orderTypes: [OrderType]
 
  #if DEBUG
 
  static func sampleRestaurant() -> Restaurant {
 
      let ot1 = OrderType.sampleOrderTypes(type: "delivered")
 
      let ot2 = OrderType.sampleOrderTypes(type: "pickup")
 
      return Restaurant(orderTypes: ot1 + ot2)
 
  }
 
  #endif
 
}

--- Page 188 ---
 
Note the use of the addition operator for the two arrays in the
Restaurant struct. It is an easy way of creating a single array from two,
or more, source arrays.
 
Above the body property, add this property:
 
let restaurant = Restaurant.sampleRestaurant()
 
Then, inside the body of the remove the empty view and add the
following:
 
NavigationView {
 
  List {
 
      ForEach(restaurant.orderTypes) { orderType in
 
        Section(header: headerText(for: orderType.name)) {
 
            ForEach(orderType.pizzas) { pizza in
 
              VStack(alignment: .leading) {
 
                  Text("Crust: \(pizza.crust.rawValue)")

--- Page 189 ---
 
                  Text("Sauce: \(pizza.sauce.rawValue)")
 
                  Text("Toppings: \(pizza.toppingsDescription)")
 
              }
 
            }
 
        }
 
      }
 
  }
 
  .navigationBarTitle(Text("Pizza Orders"))
 
}
 
This code will show an error when it gets compiled. In the section, we
reference a method that we have not created. To fix the error, enter this
below the body property:
 

--- Page 190 ---
func headerText(for name: String) -> Text {
 
  Text(name)
 
      .bold()
 
      .font(.title3)
 
}
 
Instead of returning some view, this method returns a Text type. This
makes it easy to format the text and use the method as a parameter.
 
The NavigationView is needed to allow the navigation to other
screens, to provide a title, and provide a place for toolbar items. Note
how the modifier for the title is attached to the list, not the navigation
view. By default, the title is shown with large type, and it goes to a
smaller one as the user scrolls the content up. Nested ForEach items
allow the hierarchical display of contents within sections.
 
To allow the user to delete or move items, modifiers are used to run
code. As stated before, a property that can be mutated must have the
@State attribute. Replace the restaurant property with this one:
 

--- Page 191 ---
@State private var customers = ["Michael Jackson", "John Lennon",
"Johnny Cash", "Frank Sinatra", "Jimi Hendrix"]
 
Then, replace the content inside the navigation view with this:
 
List {
 
  ForEach(customers, id: \.self) { customer in
 
      Text(customer)
 
  }
 
  .onDelete { indexSet in
 
    indexSet.forEach { index in
 
      customers.remove(at: index)
 
      }
 
  }
 
  .onMove { indices, newOffset in

--- Page 192 ---
 
    customers.move(fromOffsets: indices, toOffset: newOffset)
 
  }
 
}
 
.navigationBarTitle(Text("Customers"))
 
.toolbar {
 
  EditButton()
 
}
 
This code is also available inside the project in the Learn SwiftUI 4
folder. The list is a simple one. The onDelete and onMove modifiers
execute the code in the trailing closures to perform the work needed.
To delete an entry, swipe the entry to the left and tap the delete button.
To move an entry, press and hold the entry and move it. This will not
work properly in the canvas. Run the project to see it work properly.
 

--- Page 193 ---
properly. properly. properly. properly. properly. properly. properly.
properly. properly. properly. properly. properly. properly. properly.
properly. properly. properly. properly. properly. properly. properly.
properly.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 194 ---
 
Drawing
 
SwiftUI provides some basic shapes that can be used alone or in
combination with other screen elements to create a great user interface.
Reset your file as before leaving only an empty view for the body.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 195 ---
 
Circle
 
The Circle is a very simple shape that is either filled or stroked. If it is
not modified with a frame, it will fill the parent area. Here is an
example code:
 
HStack {
 
  Circle()
 
      .stroke(Color.blue)
 
      .frame(height: 30)
 
  Circle()
 
      .foregroundStyle(Color.red)
 
      .frame(height: 30)
 
  ZStack {
 

--- Page 196 ---
      Circle()
 
        .foregroundStyle(Color.red)
 
        .padding(5)
 
        .frame(height: 30)
 
      Circle()
 
        .trim(from: 0.1, to: 0.9)
 
        .stroke(Color.blue, style: StrokeStyle(lineWidth: 4, lineCap:
.round))
 
        .frame(height: 30)
 
  }
 
}
 
Trim allows the stroke to start at a specific percentage point and stop at
another. By default, the trim is zero to one. The StrokeStyle has several

--- Page 197 ---
parameters that affect how the shape is stroked. See the documentation
for more details.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 198 ---
 
Rectangle
 
The Rectangle acts very much like the It will even use the same
modifiers. In the code above, replace with Play with the trim and
stroke modifiers. Note how the trim starts and stops at a different
location than the circle. Change the frame sizes so it has different
widths than height.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 199 ---
 
Rounded rectangle
 
To function properly, the RoundedRectangle must be passed a
parameter. It can be a cornerRadius or a Also note in this code example
how a gradient is being used for the color in the Play with the
startPoint and endPoint parameters of the gradient. Options are: and
Other gradient types are and
 
HStack {
 
  RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius: 6)
 
      .stroke(Color.blue)
 
      .frame(width: 50, height: 30)
 
  RoundedRectangle(cornerSize: CGSize(width: 20, height: 10))
 
      .foregroundStyle(Color.red)
 
      .frame(width: 50, height: 30)
 

--- Page 200 ---
  ZStack {
 
      RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius: 6)
 
        .foregroundStyle(
 
            LinearGradient(gradient:Gradient(colors: [.green, .white]),
startPoint: .top, endPoint: .bottom)
 
        )
 
        .frame(width: 50, height: 30)
 
      RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius: 6)
 
        .stroke(Color.green, style: StrokeStyle(lineWidth: 4))
 
        .frame(width: 50, height: 30)
 
      RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius: 6)
 
        .trim(from: 0.1, to: 0.9)
 

--- Page 201 ---
        .stroke(Color.red, style: StrokeStyle(lineWidth: 4, lineCap:
.round))
 
        .frame(width: 50, height: 30)
 
  }
 
}
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 202 ---
 
UnevenRoundedRectangle
 
This shape allows the developer to use a different corner radius for
each corner. The same modifiers can also be applied. Here is a simple
example:
 
UnevenRoundedRectangle(cornerRadii:
RectangleCornerRadii(topLeading: 2, bottomLeading: 8,
bottomTrailing: 2, topTrailing: 16))
 
  .foregroundStyle(Color.orange)
 
  .frame(width: 50, height: 30)
 
As the parameter type is known, the init of that type can be called
directly. Replace RectangleCornerRadii with This is a stylistic opinion
and is left to the reader to choose which is easier to read.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 203 ---
 
Capsule
 
Commonly used to shape buttons, an extensive topic that will be
explored in the next chapter, the Capsule is a popular shape.
Syntactically, it is the same as the Rectangle and takes the same
modifiers as shown here:
 
Capsule()
 
  .stroke(Color.blue)
 
  .frame(width: 60, height:
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 204 ---
 
Ellipse
 
Syntactically, the Ellipse is the same as the Rectangle and takes the
same modifiers as shown here:
 
Ellipse()
 
  .stroke(Color.blue)
 
  .frame(width: 50, height: 30)
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 205 ---
 
Custom shape
 
The Apple provided shapes are easy to use and follow a simple pattern.
The name of the shape and any parameters needed to guide the path of
the shape. That path is then filled or stroked at the point of use. These
simple shapes can be stacked using the ZStack or by using the overlay
modifier. When these provided shapes do not work, a mechanism is
available for creating custom shapes. Any struct that conforms to the
SwiftUI Shape protocol can be used as a custom shape. The Shape
protocol requires a path function that takes a CGRect parameter and
returns a Path object. The rect gives a width and height the shape
should fit into. Here is a sample shape:
 
struct Star: Shape {
 
  func path(in rect: CGRect) -> Path {
 
      let point1 = CGPoint(x: rect.midX, y: 0)
 
      let point2 = CGPoint(x: rect.width * 0.62, y: rect.height * 0.375)
 
      let point3 = CGPoint(x: rect.width, y: rect.height * 0.375)
 

--- Page 206 ---
      let point4 = CGPoint(x: rect.width * 0.694, y: rect.height * 0.613)
 
      let point5 = CGPoint(x: rect.width * 0.804, y: rect.height)
 
      let point6 = CGPoint(x: rect.midX, y: rect.height * 0.762)
 
let point7 = CGPoint(x: rect.width * 0.196, y: rect.height)
 
      let point8 = CGPoint(x: rect.width * 0.306, y: rect.height * 0.613)
 
      let point9 = CGPoint(x: 0, y: rect.height * 0.375)
 
      let point10 = CGPoint(x: rect.width * 0.38, y: rect.height * 0.375)
 
      var path = Path()
 
      path.move(to: point1)
 
      path.addLine(to: point2)
 
      path.addLine(to: point3)
 
      path.addLine(to: point4)

--- Page 207 ---
 
      path.addLine(to: point5)
 
      path.addLine(to: point6)
 
      path.addLine(to: point7)
 
      path.addLine(to: point8)
 
      path.addLine(to: point9)
 
      path.addLine(to: point10)
 
      path.closeSubpath()
 
      return path
 
  }
 
}
 
This Star type can be used in a view just like the Apple provided
shapes. The path object has many methods to define the path from

--- Page 208 ---
simple lines, as used here, to more complex. When using lines and arcs
the closeSubpath method needs to be used at the end. See the code
example in the Learn SwiftUI 5 code folder.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 209 ---
 
Effects
 
Effects are modifiers that alter a view’s geometry. Clear your file,
making this the content of the body property:
 
VStack(spacing: 100) {
 
  Text("This is rotated text")
 
    .rotationEffect(Angle(radians: -0.3))
 
  RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius: 6)
 
    .stroke(Color.blue)
 
    .frame(width: 30, height: 30)
 
    .overlay {
 
      RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius: 6)
 
.stroke(Color.red)

--- Page 210 ---
 
        .frame(width: 30, height: 30)
 
        .offset(x: 5, y: 5)
 
    }
 
  Circle()
 
    .stroke(Color.green)
 
    .frame(width: 30, height: 30)
 
    .scaleEffect(2.0)
 
}
 
The and scaleEffect are the most often used in apps. While the code
shows the effect, the presentation is dull. Animating these effects will
bring life to the app.
 
The key thing to remember when adding animation is that a property
must change so there is something to animate. A state property is

--- Page 211 ---
needed to hold an effect’s value or an indication that an animation is
occurring. Add this property:
 
@State private var offset: Double = 0
 
Then, replace the RoundedRectangle shape with this:
 
Text("Tap Here")
 
  .bold()
 
  .font(.title3)
 
  .padding(8)
 
  .overlay {
 
    RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius: 6)
 
      .stroke(Color.blue, style: StrokeStyle(lineWidth: 2))
 
  }
 
  .offset(x: offset)

--- Page 212 ---
 
  .onTapGesture {
 
    withAnimation(.snappy) {
 
      if offset > 100 {
 
        offset = 0
 
      } else {
 
        offset += 20
 
      }
 
    }
 
  }
 
The onTapGesture modifier is new. With this modifier, anything can be
a button. There is also a Button control that will be covered in the next
chapter. The trailing closure is the code to run when the user taps on
the screen element. Here, the offset is being updated within a
withAnimation function. The optional parameter is the type of

--- Page 213 ---
animation to use. There are several, but the easy-to-use animations are
smooth, snappy, and bouncy. Each of these can also take parameters
for duration which is measured in seconds and extraBounce which
takes a value from -1 to
 
Tapping the button will cause it to smoothly move across the screen,
then back to its starting position. Change the animation to see the
different kinds. To see even more, replace your entire struct with this
code:
 
struct ContentView: View {
 
  @State private var isAnimating = false
 
  @State private var offset: Double = 0
 
  var body: some View {
 
      VStack(spacing: 100) {
 
        Text("This is rotated text")
 
            .rotationEffect(Angle(radians: isAnimating ? -0.3 : 0.3))
 

--- Page 214 ---
        Text("Tap Here")
 
            .bold()
 
            .font(.title3)
 
            .padding(8)
 
            .overlay {
 
              RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius: 6)
 
                  .stroke(Color.blue, style: StrokeStyle(lineWidth: 2))
 
            }
 
            .offset(x: offset)
 
            .onTapGesture {
 
              withAnimation(.snappy) {
 
                  if offset > 100 {

--- Page 215 ---
 
                    offset = 0
 
                  } else {
 
                    offset += 20
 
                  }
 
              }
 
            }
 
        Circle()
 
.stroke(Color.green)
 
            .frame(width: 30, height: 30)
 
            .scaleEffect(isAnimating ? 2.0 : 1.0)
 
        Text(Image(systemName: "arrow.triangle.2.circlepath"))
 
            .foregroundStyle(Color.orange)

--- Page 216 ---
 
            .font(.title)
 
            .rotationEffect(Angle.degrees(isAnimating ? 360 : 0))
 
            .onAppear {
 
              withAnimation(.linear(duration:
2.0).repeatForever(autoreverses: true)) {
 
                  isAnimating = true
 
              }
 
            }
 
      }
 
  }
 
}
 

--- Page 217 ---
If you have not seen this kind of syntax before: isAnimating ? -0.3 :
the ? true value> : false value> is called a ternary It tests the value of
the first expression then uses either the true value or false value
accordingly. In Swift, if the test expression is false, the true value is
not evaluated at all. Same for when the test expression is true, the false
value is not evaluated. This is important to know because in some
languages, both true and false expressions are evaluated on a ternary
operator, and it can cause the program to crash.
 
We also see something new with the last Text element. Instead of
displaying a string, it is showing an image. This is a good way of
making the system symbols scale with the surrounding text when the
user is using dynamic sizing.
 
On your own, add a new property and make the spinning arrow work
with the autoreverses parameter set to false without affecting how the
other elements animate. A possible answer is at the end of the chapter.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 218 ---
 
SF Symbols
 
The images shown have been using systemName to define what image to
show. Another source for images is from local assets. Assets will be
covered in chapter Literally thousands of images are available from the
operating system and the SF Symbols app is the best place to discover the
symbols that can be included in your own project. Download the SF
Symbols app here: This book uses version 5.0.
 
Install and launch the app. After entering heart in the search bar, a screen
like Figure 2.12 will show:
 

--- Page 219 ---
 
Figure SF Symbols Window
 
The toolbar has buttons to show left and right panels. The left panel shows
a list of categories. Selecting a category will show symbols for that
category. The right panel shows information for a selected symbol. Select
the heart.circle symbol.
 
On the right pane, the tab bar has three tabs. The first gives information on
the minimal version of the operating system needed to display the symbol
and the rendering modes available for it. Figure 2.13 compares two
symbols. The older heart symbol has more modes and has been around

--- Page 220 ---
since iOS 13.0 whereas the arrows shape, from the automotive category, is
only available for iOS 17 and higher with one rendering mode. The
number to the right of each rendering mode is the minimal SF Symbols
application version for that mode.
 
 
Figure Symbol comparison in SF Symbols app
 
The next tab provides a place to explore how the symbol looks under
different rending modes and colors. The final tab shows animations, a
feature that is new in SF Symbols 5.
 
Create a new, empty, playground and enter the following code and run:

--- Page 221 ---
 
import SwiftUI
 
import PlaygroundSupport
 
struct Images: View {
 
  @State private var isFavorite = false
 
  var body: some View {
 
      VStack(spacing: 32) {
 
        Image(systemName: "heart")
 
            .symbolRenderingMode(.palette)
 
            .resizable()
 
            .foregroundStyle(.red, .mint, .mint)
 
            .symbolVariant(isFavorite ? .circle : .circle.fill)
 
            .symbolEffect(.bounce, options: .repeat(2), value: isFavorite)
 

--- Page 222 ---
            .font(.system(size: 100))
 
            .aspectRatio(contentMode: .fit)
 
            .onTapGesture {
 
              isFavorite.toggle()
 
            }
 
}
 
      .padding()
 
      .frame(width: 300)
 
  }
 
}
 
PlaygroundPage.current.setLiveView(Images())
 
Immediately below the image the rendering mode is specified. The default
mode is automatic. Palette allows for multiple colors to be specified.
Depending on the symbol, this can be up to three colors. Some symbols

--- Page 223 ---
have variants. By using the base name of the variant can be
programmatically selected based on a condition.
 
New to SF Symbols 5, animations can be applied with the symbolEffect
modifier. For the bounce effect, a value is provided that will trigger the
animation when the value changes. The options parameter is optional but
used here to make the symbol bounce two times.
 
Below the isFavorite property, add these two properties:
 
@State private var population = 1.0
 
@State private var isTalking = false
 
Then below the heart image, add this code and run:
 
Image(systemName: "person.3.sequence", variableValue: population)
 
  .imageScale(.large)
 
  .font(.largeTitle)
 
  .foregroundStyle(.red, .mint, .orange)
 
  .padding(.bottom, -32)

--- Page 224 ---
 
Slider(value: $population)
 
Image(systemName: "ellipsis.message")
 
  .symbolEffect(.variableColor.iterative.dimInactiveLayers.nonReversing,
isActive: isTalking)
 
  .imageScale(.large)
 
  .font(.largeTitle)
 
  .foregroundStyle(.red, .mint, .orange)
 
  .onTapGesture {
 
    isTalking.toggle()
 
  }
 
The variableValue parameter for the person image is dramatic even
without the use of the There are nearly two hundred symbols in the
Variable Color category that can take advantage of this variation
technique. The final image shows a sample animation. When the desired

--- Page 225 ---
animation in SF symbols has been crafted, click on the copy to clipboard
button. The value can then be pasted into the symbolEffect modifier.
 
Using SF Symbols improves your project by allowing existing
iconography to be used in common use cases. More animation options
will be explored later in the book.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 226 ---
 
Conclusion
 
SwiftUI is a rich and powerful way to express how an interface should
be presented to the user. By using stacks with text, images, controls,
and the plethora of symbols available through SF Symbols, an
interface that is easy to use becomes an impressive tool to achieve the
desired outcome.
 
The next chapter shows how to create reusable elements that can be
used through an app or framework and how to create a theme, so the
product has continuity. There will also be a focus on buttons and the
variety of ways they can be used.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 227 ---
 
Answers
 
Throughout the chapter, you were asked to provide your own code.
Here are some ways you could have answered:
  
Create a nonmutable property for the range and use that property for
the slider and stepper:
 
struct ContentView: View {
 
  @State private var imageSize: Double = 50
 
  @State private var showImage: Bool = true
 
  let stepRange: ClosedRange = 25...50
 
  var body: some View {
 
      VStack {
 
        Image(systemName: "globe")

--- Page 228 ---
 
            .resizable()
 
            .foregroundStyle(Color.green)
 
            .frame(width: imageSize, height: imageSize)
 
                  Slider(value: $imageSize, in: stepRange, step: 5)
 
        Stepper(value: $imageSize, in: stepRange, step: 1) {
 
            Text("Image Size")
 
              .bold()
 
        }
 
}
 
      .padding()
 
  }
 

--- Page 229 ---
}
 
Find a way of adding a text label under the text field so it is understood
what is to be entered:
 
struct ContentView: View {
 
  @State private var greeting: String = "Hello, world!"
 
  var body: some View {
 
      VStack {
 
        VStack(alignment: .leading, spacing: 0) {
 
            TextField(text: $greeting) {
 
              Text("Enter greeting here")
 
            }
 
            .padding(6)
 
            .overlay(

--- Page 230 ---
 
              RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius: 4)
 
                  .stroke(Color.purple, lineWidth: 1)
 
            )
 
            Text("World Greeting")
 
              .font(.footnote)
 
              .foregroundStyle(Color(.lightGray))
 
              .padding(.top, 2)
 
              .padding(.leading, 6)
 
        }
 
        HStack {
 
            Text(greeting)
 

--- Page 231 ---
              .bold()
 
              .font(.title)
 
              .foregroundStyle(Color(.darkGray))
 
            Image(systemName: "globe")
 
              .resizable()
 
              .foregroundStyle(Color.mint)
 
              .frame(width: 50, height: 50)
 
}
 
      }
 
      .padding()
 
  }
 
      }

--- Page 232 ---
 
Add a new property and make the spinning arrow work with the
autoreverses parameter set to false without affecting how the other
elements animate:
 
struct ContentView: View {
 
  @State private var isAnimating = false
 
  @State private var offset: Double = 0
 
  @State private var isLoading = false
 
  var body: some View {
 
      VStack(spacing: 100) {
 
        Text("This is rotated text")
 
            .rotationEffect(Angle(radians: isAnimating ? -0.3 : 0.3))
 
        Text("Tap Here")
 
            .bold()

--- Page 233 ---
 
            .font(.title3)
 
            .padding(8)
 
            .overlay {
 
              RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius: 6)
 
                  .stroke(Color.blue, style: StrokeStyle(lineWidth: 2))
 
            }
 
            .offset(x: offset)
 
            .onTapGesture {
 
              withAnimation(.snappy) {
 
                  if offset > 100 {
 
                    offset = 0
 

--- Page 234 ---
                  } else {
 
                    offset += 20
 
                  }
 
              }
 
            }
 
Circle()
 
            .stroke(Color.green)
 
            .frame(width: 30, height: 30)
 
            .scaleEffect(isAnimating ? 2.0 : 1.0)
 
            .onAppear {
 
              withAnimation(.linear(duration:
2.0).repeatForever(autoreverses: true)) {
 

--- Page 235 ---
                  isAnimating = true
 
              }
 
            }
 
        Text(Image(systemName: "arrow.triangle.2.circlepath"))
 
            .foregroundStyle(Color.orange)
 
            .font(.title)
 
            .rotationEffect(Angle.degrees(isLoading ? 360 : 0))
 
            .onAppear {
 
              withAnimation(.linear(duration:
2.0).repeatForever(autoreverses: false)) {
 
                  isLoading = true
 
              }
 
            }

--- Page 236 ---
 
      }
 
  }
 
}
 
Join our book’s Discord space
 
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the
Authors:
 
https://discord.bpbonline.com
 
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 237 ---
 
C
HAPTER
3
Creating Reusable SwiftUI Views
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 238 ---
 
Introduction
 
In the last chapter, common SwiftUI elements and controls provided
by Apple were introduced. They provide the primitives needed to
create the visual appearance and interactions of apps and libraries.
Application designers combine these stylistically to give a theme
throughout the product, so users have a cohesive experience while
using the app.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 239 ---
 
Structure
 
This chapter includes the following topics:
  
Cards
 
Text styles
 
Buttons
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 240 ---
 
Objectives
 
By the end of this chapter the reader should understand how to create
common elements that can be used throughout the app to promote
faster development and encourage a common theme for a consistent
user experience and how multiple SwiftUI views can be created with
sample data and combined to form more complex screens.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 241 ---
 
Cards
 
When designing an interface, two things are considered: How to make it
look visually appealing and how to make it easily understood by the user.
This is why careful thought is put into what the user sees and, sometimes
even more importantly, what is not shown. Visual arrangement and
grouping are a common way to achieve this. The terms and card are nearly
synonymous to define a rectangular area that shows elements and
controls.
 
Figure 3.1 shows some common card designs. The corners can be sharp or
curved. Sometimes a header is shown to identify the content or have an
icon that may or may not respond to user interaction. A card that can
collapse or expand is also common.
 
 

--- Page 242 ---
Figure Common card designs
 
When a visual element or customized control is used several times, it is
best to define it in a central area so it can be reused without copying the
code and to provide a single place where changes can be made when the
styling needs to change.
 
From the File menu, select New and then Project. Select Framework then
the Next button on the bottom. Enter CommonUI for the Product Use the
same organization identifier as before and verify the language is Swift. No
tests are needed here, however click the Include Documentation Your
project options dialog should look like Figure Click the Next button and
create the project:
 


--- Page 243 ---
 
Figure New project options dialog
 
A library is independent code that can be included into other products. It
allows for focused programming that has a single responsibility. In this
case, to deliver common UI elements. The subsequent window will look
like Figure Note the target CommonUI has an icon that looks like a
toolbox. A library cannot be run by itself. However, because of previews
in SwiftUI, how the elements look, and work can be known.
 
 
Figure Framework project window

--- Page 244 ---
 
Select the CommonUI folder in the project navigator then click the +
symbol on the lower left. Select then select Swift File and click Specify
UI Constants.swift as the file name then click the Create button.
 
This will be used to hold values needed for the elements created. Add this
code:
 
import SwiftUI
 
enum UI {
 
  enum Card {
 
      static let cornerRadius = 6.0
 
  }
 
}
 
When creating constants, it is best to use names that express how the
constant is used. Now create a SwiftUI View file and name it Instead of
clicking the + symbol to create a new file, other options include right
clicking the folder to add the file to and selecting New File… or selecting
the folder and selecting New and then File… from the File menu.

--- Page 245 ---
 
If the file is ever saved in the wrong place, it can be moved in the project
navigator to a different folder. Files can also be rearranged in the same
folder for clarity.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 246 ---
 
Plain card
 
In the new file, replace the entire struct and preview with this code:
 
public struct CardView>: View {
 
  private let content: Content
 
  public init(@ViewBuilder content: () -> Content) {
 
      self.content = content()
 
  }
 
  public var body: some View {
 
      VStack(alignment: .center, spacing: 0) {
 
        content
 
      }
 

--- Page 247 ---
      .frame(maxWidth: .infinity)
 
      .background(
 
        RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius: UI.Card.cornerRadius)
 
            .stroke(.black, lineWidth: 1)
 
      )
 
  }
 
}
 
#Preview {
 
  Card() {
 
      HStack {
 
        Image(systemName: "figure.run")
 
        Text("Body of the card")

--- Page 248 ---
 
      }
 
  }.padding()
 
}
 
Making the struct public will allow its use outside of the library. If an
access level is not specified, the default access is internal. It would
only be usable from within the library itself. This is the minimum
generic Card that will accept any content as shown in the Next to the
struct name is this: View>. This view is using generics. Content is the
new type to be used in the rest of the object definition and it must be of
a View type. The body is a stack that allows the content to go as wide
as it can. The background modifier shows the border. Figure 3.4 shows
the preview:
 
 
Figure Basic Card preview
 
Any padding within the card would need to be done at the point of use.
Usually, there is a stylistic guideline that specifies how much padding
should be done. In the UI Constants file, add this entry to the card

--- Page 249 ---
enum: static let bodyPadding = Then add an appropriate padding
modifier to the body content: Figure 3.5 shows the new preview:
 
 
Figure Basic Card with padding preview
 
For the background, a static color and line width was provided in the
code. Update the constants file to include these values and reference
the constants instead. This basic shape and ability to handle any
content is very useful. Eventually other decisions need to be made:
  
Should the card integrate a shadow and if so, should the color vary
based on the content?
 
Will the card have a header and is the header optional?
 
Can the header show without a body?
 
Is there any standard iconography and is it user intractable?
 
What color should the background be?
 
The last question is important because the card is currently transparent.
Update the preview to see the problem:

--- Page 250 ---
 
#Preview {
 
  ZStack {
 
      Color.cyan
 
      Card() {
 
        HStack {
 
            Image(systemName: "figure.run")
 
            Text("Body of the card")
 
        }
 
      }
 
        .padding()
 
  }
 

--- Page 251 ---
}
 
The immediate concern is to address the transparency. Add a new entry
into the UI Constants enum for the card’s background color then add
the following modifier to the RoundedRectangle: After adding this,
closely looking at the preview will reveal the background color is
bleeding past the rounded corners. Add this final modifier to the
RoundedRectangle to cut the view to the desired shape:
.clipShape(RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius:
 
The other questions will be addressed as needed throughout the book.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 252 ---
 
Disclosure card
 
A disclosure card has a header, optionally a sub header, and a button
that enables the user to show or hide the card’s content. This element
will be broken into two separate files.
  
First, let us create a folder to store the card files. In the project
navigator, right-click on Card and select New Group from Name the
new folder After creating the new folder, create a new SwiftUI file
inside it called Replace the struct and preview with this:
 
public struct DisclosureCardHeader: View {
 
  let title: String
 
  let subTitle: String?
 
  @Binding var showingDetails: Bool
 
  public init(title: String, subTitle: String? = nil, showingDetails:
Binding) {
 
      self.title = title

--- Page 253 ---
 
self.subTitle = subTitle
 
      self._showingDetails = showingDetails
 
  }
 
  public var body: some View {
 
      HStack(spacing: 0) {
 
        VStack(alignment: .leading, spacing: 0) {
 
            Text(title)
 
              .font(.headline)
 
            if let subTitle {
 
              Text(subTitle)
 
                  .font(.callout)
 

--- Page 254 ---
                  .foregroundColor(.gray)
 
            }
 
        }
 
        Spacer(minLength: UI.Card.headerIconLeadingSpace)
 
        Image(systemName: "chevron.up")
 
            .frame(width: 36, height: 36)
 
            .rotationEffect(.degrees(showingDetails ? 180 : 0))
 
            .padding(.trailing, -UI.Card.headerPadding)
 
      }
 
      .padding(UI.Card.headerPadding)
 
      .contentShape(Rectangle())
 
      .onTapGesture {

--- Page 255 ---
 
        withAnimation {
 
            showingDetails.toggle()
 
        }
 
      }
 
  }
 
}
 
#Preview("Hiding details") {
 
DisclosureCardHeader(title: "Tap for more", subTitle: "Tap here for
more information", showingDetails: .constant(false))
 
}
 
#Preview("Showing details") {
 
  DisclosureCardHeader(title: "Tap for more", subTitle: "Tap here for
more information", showingDetails: .constant(true))

--- Page 256 ---
 
}
 
Before discussing the new items here, verify your constants file. It
should look like this:
 
import SwiftUI
 
enum UI {
 
  enum Card {
 
      static let cornerRadius = 6.0
 
      static let bodyPadding = 8.0
 
      static let backgroundColor = Color.white
 
      static let borderColor = Color.black
 
      static let borderThickness = 1.0
 
      static let headerIconLeadingSpace = 16.0

--- Page 257 ---
 
      static let headerBorderColor = Color.gray
 
      static let headerPadding = 2.0
 
  }
 
}
 
The @Binding attribute allows a two-way binding between this view
and its parent. The initializer expects a Binding of type Bool that is
then assigned to the local property’s base value. When multiple
parameters are available that change how the view looks or operates,
multiple previews give the developer a way of verifying the options
work properly. The DisclosureCardHeader file has two previews: One
for when the detail content is to be hidden and one for when it is
shown. Above the canvas, a tab is shown for each preview as shown in
Figure
 
 
Figure Preview tabs
 

--- Page 258 ---
The preview shows the content as expected; however, the padding is
too small. Figure 3.7 shows how the text is too close to the edge:
 
 
Figure Header preview
 
Click on the pushpin to the left of the preview tabs. This will keep the
canvas fixed on the current file while editing another. Select the
constants file and change headerPadding to 8.0. The tap gesture will
not do anything here because a constant is used for the preview.
However, when this is used in the card with a binding, the preview will
work properly. The contentShape modifier will set the enclosed shape
as the tappable area.
 
Now create a new SwiftUI file in the Cards folder and name it
Disclosure Replace the struct and preview with the following:
 
public struct DisclosureCardView>: View {
 
  private let title: String
 
  private let subTitle: String?
 
  @State private var showingDetails: Bool

--- Page 259 ---
 
  private let detailContent: Content
 
  public init(title: String,
 
              subTitle: String? = nil,
 
              showingDetails: Bool = false,
 
              @ViewBuilder detailContent: () -> Content
 
  ) {
 
      self.title = title
 
      self.subTitle = subTitle
 
      self._showingDetails = State(wrappedValue: showingDetails)
 
      self.detailContent = detailContent()
 
  }
 

--- Page 260 ---
  public var body: some View {
 
      VStack(alignment: .center, spacing: 0) {
 
        DisclosureCardHeader(title: title, subTitle: subTitle,
showingDetails: $showingDetails)
 
        if showingDetails {
 
            Divider()
 
              .frame(height: UI.Card.borderThickness)
 
              .overlay(UI.Card.headerDividerColor)
 
              .padding(.bottom, UI.Card.headerPadding)
 
            detailContent
 
              .frame(maxWidth: .infinity, alignment: .center)
 
              .padding([.bottom, .leading, .trailing], UI.Card.bodyPadding)
 

--- Page 261 ---
}
 
      }
 
      .background(
 
        RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius: UI.Card.cornerRadius)
 
            .stroke(UI.Card.borderColor, lineWidth:
UI.Card.borderThickness)
 
            .background(UI.Card.backgroundColor)
 
      )
 
      .clipShape(RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius:
UI.Card.cornerRadius))
 
  }
 
}
 
#Preview("Simple disclosing call") {
 
  ZStack {

--- Page 262 ---
 
      Color.cyan
 
      DisclosureCard(title: "Information – tap here") {
 
        VStack {
 
            Image(systemName: "figure.run")
 
        }
 
      }
 
      .padding()
 
  }
 
}
 
#Preview("With subtitle") {
 
  ZStack {
 

--- Page 263 ---
      Color.cyan
 
      DisclosureCard(title: "Information", subTitle: "Click for more
details") {
 
        VStack {
 
            Image(systemName: "figure.run")
 
        }
 
      }
 
      .padding()
 
  }
 
}
 
#Preview("Showing details") {
 
  ZStack {
 

--- Page 264 ---
      Color.cyan
 
      DisclosureCard(title: "Information", subTitle: "Click for more
details", showingDetails: true) {
 
        VStack {
 
            Image(systemName: "figure.run")
 
        }
 
      }
 
      .padding()
 
  }
 
}
  
Note that the DisclosureCardHeader is used in the body. Creating
small views that can be previewed and tested then used in a parent
view is called composition. The rule of threes is a good guide of when
to use this technique. If you have three or more lines of code used
three or more times, then it should be considered for separating out to

--- Page 265 ---
its own view. Also note how the showingDetails state is sent as a
binding. The three previews show the possible uses of the
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 266 ---
 
Text styles
 
The Text element is the way of showing text to the user. In the last
chapter basic styling and font selection was shown with this code:
 
Text("Hello, world!")
 
  .bold()
 
  .font(.title)
 
  .foregroundStyle(Color(.darkGray))
 
Besides bold, italics is also available, and they can both be used at the
same time. Using the built-in fonts gives text that is dynamically sized
for accessibility. The font modifier has even more flexibility to what
font and size is used. In the CommonUI project navigator, select the
top level and from the File menu, select New | Playground. Select the
Blank template and click the Next button. Specify a name and on the
bottom, make sure CommonUI is selected for the Add to option.
Create the playground. After creating the playground, your project
navigator should look like Figure

--- Page 267 ---
 
 
Figure Playground in project
 
An advantage of using a playground in your project is that it will have
access to all the objects contained therein. Replace the contents of the
file with this then run:
 
import SwiftUI
 
import CommonUI
 
import PlaygroundSupport
 
struct TextStyles: View {

--- Page 268 ---
 
  var body: some View {
 
      Card {
 
        Text("Hello, world!")
 
            .bold()
 
            .font(.title)
 
            .foregroundStyle(Color(.darkGray))
 
      }
 
  }
 
}
 
PlaygroundPage.current.setLiveView(TextStyles())
 
Note the import CommonUI statement at the top. The library is a
module that needs to be imported for use. Adding a playground

--- Page 269 ---
provides a great avenue of testing your views at the point of use. Try
adding an italic modifier after the bold to see how it looks. Then
remove bold and in its place add a fontWeight modifier.
 
A couple of other ways of customizing the font is to use one of these
modifier variants:
 
.font(.system(size: 12, weight: .light, design: .serif))
 
.font(.custom("AmericanTypewriter", fixedSize: 24))
 
For the first one, the weight and design are optional. Try each one
without any other modifiers except the color. Valid font weights are:
thin, light, regular, medium, semibold, bold, heavy, and black. Designs
include: default, serif, rounded, and A list of built-in fonts can be found
on Apple’s website:
 
Because adherence to text styles is critical in the development of a
project, it is recommended to have a custom view or Text modifier to
enforce the styles.
 
To create a modifier, add a new SwiftUI file in the CommonUI folder
and name it Add this code:
 
extension Text {

--- Page 270 ---
 
  public func style(_ style: TextStyle, color: Color = .black) -> Text {
 
      font(style.font)
 
        .foregroundStyle(color)
 
  }
 
}
 
Extensions were covered in chapter one. This new function can be
called as a modifier to Text views. Because it returns a Text view,
additional Text modifiers can be applied. For this to work, the
TextStyle type must be defined. Add this
 
public enum TextStyle {
 
  case h1, h2, paragraph, footer
 
  var font: Font {
 
      Font.custom(fontName, size: fontSize, relativeTo: textStyle)

--- Page 271 ---
 
  }
 
  var fontName: String {
 
      switch self {
 
      case .h1:
 
        return "Arial Black"
 
      case .h2:
 
        return "Arial Black"
 
      case .paragraph:
 
        return "Avenir Light"
 
      case .footer:
 
        return "Avenir Medium"
 
      }

--- Page 272 ---
 
  }
 
var fontSize: Double {
 
      switch self {
 
      case .h1:
 
        return 36
 
      case .h2:
 
        return 24
 
      case .paragraph:
 
        return 16
 
      case .footer:
 
        return 12
 

--- Page 273 ---
      }
 
  }
 
  // so the text will grow as defined in accessibility
 
  var textStyle: Font.TextStyle {
 
      switch self {
 
      case .h1:
 
        return .largeTitle
 
      case .h2:
 
        return .headline
 
      case .paragraph:
 
        return .body
 
      case .footer:
 

--- Page 274 ---
        return .footnote
 
      }
 
  }
 
}
 
Now replace the body with the following code:
 
VStack {
 
  Text("Header")
 
      .style(.h1)
 
  Text("Header 2")
 
      .style(.h2)
 
  Text("paragraph")
 
.style(.paragraph, color: .orange)
 

--- Page 275 ---
  Text("Footer")
 
      .style(.footer, color: .secondary)
 
}
 
The preview shows each style in use. On your own, remove the font
name and size constants from this code and move them into the
constants file. A possible solution is included in the source code
downloaded for this chapter.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 276 ---
 
Buttons
 
From identifying a favorite item to choosing a course of action when
prompted, buttons are used everywhere in a product. SwiftUI has a
plethora of options for displaying a button and customizing its
appearance. In the project playground, replace the body with this code:
 
Button(action: {
 
  print("hello")
 
}) {
 
  Text("link button")
 
}
 
This is an example of a very basic button. The action is the Swift code
to run when the button is tapped. The trailing closure is the appearance
of the button, and it can be a a combination of these in a stack, or a The
advantage of using a button over an .onTapGesture modifier is that the
appearance of a button can change according to the platform it is being

--- Page 277 ---
run on, it can be disabled, and a specialized styling modifier, can be
applied.
 
In the code above, the normal modifiers can be applied to the text. Wrap
the button in a VStack with a spacing of 24 so that other buttons can be
shown. Then add these buttons:
 
Button(action: {
 
  print("hello")
 
}) {
 
  Text("Hello World")
 
      .bold()
 
      .foregroundColor(.white)
 
      .font(.title)
 
      .padding()
 
      .background(Color.mint)

--- Page 278 ---
 
      .padding(10)
 
.border(Color.red, width: 5)
 
      .padding(10)
 
      .border(Color.blue, width: 5)
 
}
 
Button(action: {
 
  print("hello")
 
}) {
 
  Text("Tap Me")
 
      .foregroundColor(.black)
 
      .fontWeight(.bold)
 

--- Page 279 ---
      .font(.title)
 
      .padding()
 
      .frame(maxWidth: .infinity)
 
      .foregroundColor(.white)
 
      .overlay(
 
        RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius: 5)
 
            .stroke(Color.gray, lineWidth: 2)
 
      )
 
}
 
If you are uncertain if you did it right, look at the code available for this
chapter. For the remaining examples, add a Boolean state property
called isFavorite with a default value of false.
 
Then add this button:
 

--- Page 280 ---
Button(action: {
 
  isFavorite.toggle()
 
}) {
 
  Image(systemName: "heart")
 
      .font(.largeTitle)
 
      .symbolVariant(isFavorite ? .fill : .none)
 
}
 
Click the button to see it in action. As said earlier, the image can be
combined with text in a stack, or a label can be used. Add these buttons
to see these possibilities:
 
Button(action: {
 
  isFavorite.toggle()
 
}) {
 

--- Page 281 ---
HStack {
 
      Image(systemName: "heart")
 
        .font(.largeTitle)
 
        .symbolVariant(isFavorite ? .fill : .none)
 
      Text("Mark Favorite")
 
        .font(.headline)
 
        .fontWeight(.heavy)
 
        .foregroundStyle(Color.gray)
 
  }
 
  .padding(8)
 
  .overlay(
 
      RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius: 5)
 

--- Page 282 ---
        .stroke(Color.mint, lineWidth: 2)
 
  )
 
}
 
Button(action: {
 
  isFavorite.toggle()
 
}) {
 
  Label("Favorite", systemImage: "heart")
 
      .symbolVariant(isFavorite ? .fill : .none)
 
        .font(.callout)
 
        .fontWeight(.medium)
 
  .padding(8)
 
  .overlay(
 

--- Page 283 ---
      RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius: 5)
 
        .stroke(Color.mint, lineWidth: 2)
 
  )
 
}
 
These are great examples of buttons, except possibly the one with
multiple borders, that can be used in any app. The Label will change the
image size according to the text size. For the final example, add a new
Boolean state property called loadingResource with a default of false
then add this button:
 
Button(action: {
 
  loadingResource.toggle()
 
}) {
 
HStack {
 
      if loadingResource {
 

--- Page 284 ---
        ProgressView()
 
            .tint(.white)
 
      } else {
 
        Text("Load Resource")
 
            .bold()
 
      }
 
  }
 
  .frame(minWidth: 0, maxWidth: .infinity)
 
  .padding(12)
 
  .foregroundColor(.white)
 
  .background(LinearGradient(gradient: Gradient(colors: [Color.green,
Color.mint]), startPoint: .top, endPoint: .bottom))
 
  .cornerRadius(40)

--- Page 285 ---
 
}
 
  .disabled(loadingResource)
 
This is a colorful button that automatically shows a progress indicator
and becomes disabled when the state property is true. This is good for
two reasons:
  
First it gives immediate feedback to the user that the action was
recognized. When an interface is slow to respond, the user feels the
action was not accepted.
 
Second, disabling the button keeps the user from accidentally tapping
twice when it can be problematic. Remember, you can always stop and
start a playground to reset values.
 
Like text styles, the appearance of the buttons should be standardized to
maintain the theme of the project. Three button views will be created
that can take parameters with a final parameter for the action. Using this
format will make it easier at the point of use. The button styles will look
like Figure The option for showing the progress wheel will be available
for the primary and secondary buttons with the button being inoperative,
even if the button is enabled, when showing the progress wheel.
 

--- Page 286 ---
 
Figure Button styles
 
As it is too long to print here, copy the button enum from the chapter’s
downloaded source code and add it to the constants file. Then, in the
CommonUI folder, create a new folder called Buttons. Copy the code
from the chapter three folder with the same name. Drag all three files to
the new Buttons folder and make sure Copy items if needed is checked
in the subsequent dialog, as shown in Figure
 


--- Page 287 ---
 
Figure Add files dialog
 
Each button has multiple previews to test all the possible states. From
enabled and disabled to showing the progress or not for the primary and
secondary buttons.
 
On your own, create a new SwiftUI view called The view needs to take
a double value called progress. It does not need to be a binding because
this view cannot change the value. The value is 0…1 where 1 is equal to
100%. Four bars will be shown in this fashion:
  
When the percent 0…33 only one bar will show red, the others white.
 
When the percent is 34…66 then two bars will show orange, the others
white.
 
When the percent is 67..<99 then three bars will show yellow, and the
last one as white.
 
Otherwise all four bars will show green.
 
These explained states are shown in Figure
 

--- Page 288 ---
 
Figure ProgressBars example
 
Add this enum to the constants file and use it in the new view. A
possible solution is included in the source code for this chapter.
 
enum ProgressBars {
 
  static let indicatorHeight = 12.0
 
  static let indicatorPadding = 4.0
 
  static let indicatorBorderColor = Color.gray
 
  static let indicatorBorderThickness = 0.5
 
  static let cornerRadius = 3.0
 
  static let padding = 4.0
 
  static let borderWidth = 1.0
 

--- Page 289 ---
  static let borderColor = Color.gray
 
}
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 290 ---
 
Conclusion
 
In this chapter thematic views were created that can be used to make a
project consistent in the style given to the user. Composition of simpler
views into a larger view was described and illustrated with the
disclosure tile header. Views should have one or more previews that
show the possible states. They should also be viewed with the different
color schemes and dynamic type variants.
 
In the next chapter, a new app will be designed where these skills and
more will be utilized.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 291 ---
 
Answers
 
Solutions for reader problems are in the source code for this chapter.
 
Join our book’s Discord space
 
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the
Authors:
 
https://discord.bpbonline.com
 
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 292 ---
 
C
HAPTER
4
Design the Household Chores App
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 293 ---
 
Introduction
 
In the last chapter, text and button styles were created, along with tiles,
so the app is properly styled and organized. In this chapter a turn is
made to actual app development and the normal process of going from
concept to complete app. This is the first of three chapters that cover a
wide range of subjects which must be considered while creating an
app.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 294 ---
 
Structure
 
This chapter includes the following topics:
  
User interface design
 
Localization of text
 
Accessibility
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 295 ---
 
Objectives
 
By the end of this chapter the reader should understand how to layout a
split view navigation app. The reader will also understand how to
localize between languages and consider different aspects of
accessibility. This will involve working with different simulator
devices to ensure the app will appear as expected.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 296 ---
 
User interface design
 
There is a cycle when designing and maintaining an app. First, a goal is
created. What is the desired objective? The goal should be simple and
focused. With that goal in mind, an interface is created so the user can
clearly identify the goal and easily see a way to achieve it. Then data is
considered. What needs to be collected from the user? What needs to be
presented to the user? Everything the app does is in support of achieving
this goal.
 
Once an app is created that achieves the goal, the cycle starts all over
again. Either the original goal may be modified, a better way is found to
achieve the same goal, or a new goal that is directly related to the original,
is added. When this cycle is ignored, the focus is lost and the app becomes
confusing to the user.
 
The goal for our first app is to track household chores, including what the
chores are and who is assigned to each of them. Normally chores are
assigned to household members and are designated as daily, weekly,
monthly, or seasonal. There may be variations, but this is sufficient. The
design can be chore focused or household member focused. Figure 4.1
and Figure 4.2 show the concept of how it could look with a focus on
chores and a focus on family members. Figure 4.1 shows the list of chores
in the master view, on the left, and the selected chore in the detail view, on
the right:

--- Page 297 ---
 
 
Figure App concept with chore focus
 
In Figure the master view is similar but with the family members listed.
The detail view shows a simple concept of what could be displayed for the
selected family member:
 
 
Figure App concept with family member focus

--- Page 298 ---
 
These are rough ideas that will need to be fleshed out as progress is made
in the next few chapters. The NavigationSplitView can provide this design
and it adapts itself to the platform being run on. The list can show chores
or family members. A way to add and remove these items is needed. The
detail side can show the appropriate information based on what is
selected. Follow these steps:
  
Create a new project using the iOS App template, in Xcode.
 
On the options page, give it the name Household Chores and choose None
for the storage option. Make sure SwiftUI is selected for the interface.
Tests do not need to be included for this project either.
 
To see the split view in action, replace the ContentView struct with the
following code. This small sample will not be in the downloaded source
code:
 
struct Author: Identifiable {
 
  let id = UUID()
 
  let name: String
 
  #if DEBUG

--- Page 299 ---
 
  static var sampleAuthors: [Author] {
 
      return [
 
        Author(name: "Mark"),
 
        Author(name: "Peter"),
 
        Author(name: "James"),
 
        Author(name: "John")
 
        ]
 
  }
 
  #endif
 
}
 
struct ContentView: View {
 
  @State private var names = Author.sampleAuthors

--- Page 300 ---
 
  @State private var selectedAuthorId: Author.ID?
 
  var body: some View {
 
      NavigationSplitView {
 
        List(names, selection: $selectedAuthorId) { author in
 
            Text(author.name)
 
            }
 
          .navigationTitle("Split View")
 
      } detail: {
 
if let selectedAuthorId, let author = authorData(from: selectedAuthorId) {
 
            Text(author.name)
 
              .font(.title)
 
        } else {

--- Page 301 ---
 
            Text("Please select an author")
 
        }
 
      }
 
  }
 
  func authorData(from id: UUID) -> Author? {
 
      names.filter({ $0.id == id }).first
 
  }
 
}
 
If you find the preview is not updating as expected, select Clean Build
Folder… from the Product menu. This is necessary sometimes, especially
when items have been compiled and the source has changed, without
Xcode recognizing the change.
 
The NavigationSplitView has two components: The master list and the
detail
 

--- Page 302 ---
Run the sample on multiple simulator devices. For the phone, the master
list will show and tapping on an entry will navigate to a subordinate view.
However, on the iPad or a Plus size iPhone in landscape orientation, the
detail will show next to the master list. On the simulator, the phone
orientation can be changed by clicking the rotate button in the title bar.
When the master list is hidden on the iPad or large iPhone, click the reveal
master button on the upper left.
 
The list used is a variant that includes a selection as a selection may not be
made, an optional is used to store the selected value. This list variant also
allows for multiple selections when a set is used to identify what is
selected, however on the split view a single selection is required.
  
Before going further, a review of how data flows is required. In the last
chapter, in the playground, an isFavorite state property was used across
multiple buttons and an image. All these items updated automatically
when the property value changed. The single property is the source of
truth. It can be read and modified directly and if another view or control
needs to update it, then a binding is used. Bindings can traverse through
multiple layers.
 
With the original concept, when a family member or chore is selected, the
detail of the selected item is shown and can be edited. This means the
specific chore or family member is the source of truth. When a class
becomes the source of truth and it must be monitored for changes like a
state property does, it is marked with
  

--- Page 303 ---
In the Household Chores folder, create a new group called This group will
be used to house the model, view, and any other items directly related to
chores. In the new group, create a Swift file called This is the model for
the chore data. It represents a single chore with its pertinent data.
Reviewing the concept, a chore consists of a name, how often it must be
accomplished, who it is assigned to and if it has been completed. Make a
class that looks like this:
 
import Observation
 
@Observable
 
class Chore {
 
  var name = ""
 
  var frequency = ""
 
  var assignedTo = ""
 
  var complete = false
 
}
 
This is a valid start that allows the construction of a view. To use the UI
elements created in the CommonUI project, it must be added to the

--- Page 304 ---
current project and then made available to the application.
 
From the File menu, select Add Files to “Household Chores”… and in the
subsequent dialog, select the CommonUI.xcodeproj file and verify
Household Chores is checked in the Add to targets region.
 
To make it available in our app, select Household Chores at the top of the
project navigator. In the main panel, under select Household
 
Using Figure 4.3 as a guide, under the and Embedded Content section,
click the plus button, select and click the Add button.
 
 
Figure Frameworks, Libraries, and Embedded Content section of target

--- Page 305 ---
 
Figure 4.4 illustrates the framework selection dialog. When done, the will
appear in the section shown in Figure 4.3 with the embed option set to
Embed &
 
 
Figure Framework selection
 
In the Chores group, create a View This will be the detail view of the
chore. At the top add the import CommonUI line. This will import the
module for use in the view. Replace the rest of the file with this code:

--- Page 306 ---
 
struct ChoreView: View {
 
  @Binding var chore: Chore
 
  var body: some View {
 
      Card {
 
          Form {
 
            Section("Name") {
 
                TextField("Name", text: $chore.name)
 
            }
 
            Section("Frequency") {
 
                TextField("Frequency", text: $chore.frequency)
 
            }
 
            Section("Assigned to") {

--- Page 307 ---
 
                TextField("Assigned to", text: $chore.assignedTo)
 
            }
 
            Section("Complete") {
 
                Toggle("Complete", isOn: $chore.complete)
 
            }
 
          }
 
          .frame(maxHeight: 400)
 
          .padding(-6)
 
      }
 
    }
 
}
 
struct ChoreView_Previews: PreviewProvider {

--- Page 308 ---
 
  static var previews: some View {
 
      ChoreView(chore: .constant(Chore()))
 
        .previewLayout(.sizeThatFits)
 
  }
 
}
 
The Form view is a scrollable area that is ideal for data entry. It will style
itself according to the platform it is run on and has a way of scrolling to
specific items. It will, however, take up all available space so the frame is
used in the sample code to limit the size. The negative padding is to
compensate for the card’s built-in padding for internal elements. Remove
these modifiers to see what it looks like. Try it with differently sized
devices.
 
Instead of using the #Preview macro, the older style of preview is used
here. This can be useful in two situations:
  
First, should the target operating system be less than iOS 17 then this style
of preview is required.
 

--- Page 309 ---
Second, can be used this way. Choose the Selectable mode on the canvas
and the preview will resemble Figure Both styles of showing a preview
can be used together to create multiple previews:
 
 
Figure Preview that fits the content size
  
This may change as progress is made. Earlier in the book lists and used
with objects that adopted the identifiable protocol. When the identifier
was unavailable, some other means of uniquely identifying each item was
needed. To make the chore model work easily, add this property: var id =
UUID() and specify that the class conforms to the Identifiable protocol.
And because sample data is helpful, create Xcode will auto complete an
option that populates all the properties. You can delete the id parameter.

--- Page 310 ---
Like Chapter Learn SwiftUI Basics for Creating a User add a static
sample data property. When you are done, it will look like this:
 
@Observable
 
class Chore: Identifiable {
 
  var id = UUID()
 
  var name = ""
 
var frequency = ""
 
  var assignedTo = ""
 
  var complete = false
 
  init(name: String = "", frequency: String = "", assignedTo: String = "",
complete: Bool = false) {
 
      self.name = name
 
      self.frequency = frequency
 
      self.assignedTo = assignedTo

--- Page 311 ---
 
      self.complete = complete
 
  }
 
#if DEBUG
 
  static var sampleChores: [Chore] {
 
      let c1 = Chore(name: "Bedroom – Pickup", frequency: "daily",
assignedTo: "Liam")
 
      let c2 = Chore(name: "Living space – Pickup", frequency: "daily",
assignedTo: "Maria")
 
      let c3 = Chore(name: "Kitchen – Dishes", frequency: "daily",
assignedTo: "Amir")
 
      let c4 = Chore(name: "Bathroom – Pickup", frequency: "daily",
assignedTo: "Liam")
 
      let c5 = Chore(name: "Bedroom – Clean Floor", frequency: "weekly",
assignedTo: "Maria")
 
      let c6 = Chore(name: "Kitchen – Clean Floor", frequency: "weekly",
assignedTo: "Amir")

--- Page 312 ---
 
      let c7 = Chore(name: "Home – Wipe baseboards & door frames",
frequency: "monthly", assignedTo: "Liam")
 
      let c8 = Chore(name: "Home – Clean under furniture", frequency:
"seasonal", assignedTo: "Maria")
 
      return [c1, c2, c3, c4, c5, c6, c7, c8]
 
  }
 
#endif
 
}
 
Next, in the Chores group, create a new SwiftUI View called Replace the
struct and preview with this code:
 
struct ChoreList: View {
 
  let chores: [Chore]
 
var body: some View {
 
      List(chores) { chore in

--- Page 313 ---
 
        Text(chore.name)
 
      }
 
  }
 
}
 
#Preview {
 
  ChoreList(chores: Chore.sampleChores)
 
}
 
The preview canvas should show a list of chore names. In the body, a list
without ForEach is used because the source of items is specified in the list
parameter. Moreover, because the list is incapable of altering the chores,
we do not need to use a binding.
 
The text is a placeholder for a more expressive view of each chore. In the
Chores group, create another called This will be the view shown for each
chore in the list. There are several options on how to present each chore in
the list.
 

--- Page 314 ---
For now, enter this code:
 
struct ChoreListItem: View {
 
  let chore: Chore   
 
  var body: some View {
 
      VStack(alignment: .leading) {
 
        Text(chore.name)
 
            .style(.h2)
 
        Text(chore.assignedTo)
 
            .style(.paragraph, color: .gray)
 
            .bold()
 
      }
 
  }
 

--- Page 315 ---
}
 
#Preview {
 
  ChoreListItem(chore: Chore.sampleChores[0])
 
}
 
Play with the text styles and colors to find what is appealing. The spacing
can also be changed. To see how this looks in the list, select the ChoreList
file and replace the Text view with ChoreListItem(chore:
 
With some basic views created, the next step is to update the ContentView
and integrate the new views into the It is good to work with just chores to
validate the idea works and add any necessary details before integrating
the family members. Select the ContentView file, remove the Author
struct at the top, and replace the ContentView struct with this:
 
struct ContentView: View {
 
  @State private var chores = Chore.sampleChores
 
  @State private var selectedChoreId: Chore.ID?
 
  var body: some View {
 

--- Page 316 ---
      NavigationSplitView(columnVisibility: .constant(.all)) {
 
        List(chores, selection: $selectedChoreId) { chore in
 
            ChoreListItem(chore: chore)
 
        }
 
      } detail: {
 
        if let selectedChoreId {
 
            if let chore = choreData(from: selectedChoreId) {
 
              ChoreView(chore: chore)
 
            }
 
        } else {
 
            Text("Please select a chore")
 
              .style(.h1)
 

--- Page 317 ---
        }
 
      }
 
      .navigationSplitViewStyle(.balanced)
 
  }
 
  private func choreData(from id: UUID) -> Binding? {
 
      guard var filter = chores.filter({ $0.id == id }).first else { return nil }
 
      return Binding(get: { filter }, set: { filter = $0 })
 
  }
 
}
 
Running this on an iPhone or an iPad will show the list, properly.
Selecting an entry will show the chore in the detail pane. Success! Now a
way to add new chores must be programmed. The concept shows a plus
sign at the bottom. This can be achieved with a button that shows an
image. The button will add a new entry into chores and select it. In the
ContentView file, wrap the list with a VStack and add the button below
the list so the code now looks like this:

--- Page 318 ---
 
VStack {
 
  List(chores, selection: $selectedChoreId) { chore in
 
      ChoreListItem(chore: chore)
 
  }
 
  HStack {
 
      Button {
 
        let newChore = Chore(name: "new chore")
 
        chores.append(newChore)
 
        selectedChoreId = newChore.id
 
      } label: {
 
        Image(systemName: "plus")
 
            .resizable()

--- Page 319 ---
 
            .tint(Color.black)
 
            .frame(width: 25, height: 25)
 
      }
 
      .padding()
 
      Spacer()
 
  }
 
}
  
Now when the app is run, the plus button shows and will create the new
chore when tapped. The details of the chore can be edited, and the new
chore will be reflected on the list. Now the picker and the family details
need to be added.
 
Adding these additional items would make our view unnecessarily large.
Composition allows smaller views to be put together into larger views.
Even the view above can take advantage of composition. The list can be
put into its own file so it can be previewed. The button can be pulled into
a property, so it is not crowding the body.
 

--- Page 320 ---
 
created earlier, needs to be updated so it can be used Select ChoreList and
add a binding property for the Also, update the list so it uses the optional
selection parameter passing the selectedChoreId property. When complete,
the file will look like this:
 
struct ChoreList: View {
 
  let chores: [Chore]
 
  @Binding var selectedChoreId: Chore.ID?
 
var body: some View {
 
      List(chores, selection: $selectedChoreId) { chore in
 
        ChoreListItem(chore: chore)
 
      }
 
  }
 
}
 
#Preview {

--- Page 321 ---
 
  ChoreList(chores: Chore.sampleChores, selectedChoreId: .constant(nil))
 
}
 
ContentView can use this altered view. Replace the list element and move
the button to a new property called the VStack will look like this:
 
VStack {
 
  ChoreList(chores: chores, selectedChoreId: $selectedChoreId)
 
  HStack {
 
      addChoreButton
 
        .padding()
 
      Spacer()
 
  }
 
}
 

--- Page 322 ---
Additionally, the addChoreButton property, below the body, looks like
this:
 
private var addChoreButton: some View {
 
  Button {
 
      let newChore = Chore(name: "new chore")
 
      chores.append(newChore)
 
      selectedChoreId = newChore.id
 
  } label: {
 
      Image(systemName: "plus")
 
        .resizable()
 
        .tint(Color.black)
 
        .frame(width: 25, height: 25)
 
  }

--- Page 323 ---
 
}
 
All this code is specific to chores. It can be moved into its own file. In the
Chores group, add a new SwiftUI View called Move the two state
properties into it, the contents of the body, and the Then replace the
ContentView body with:
  
If you missed something, compare your work with the project in the folder
named Chores Complete in this chapter’s code. Now, on your own,
attempt to create similar views for family members so that if the
ContentView body were to be replaced with it would show the family
members and the associated detail view. Use FamilyMember as the name
of the model class. A folder named FamilyMembers Complete with the
work done is in this chapter’s code.
 
With the chore and family member views complete, the picker across the
main list needs to be added.
  
In the Household Chores group, create a new SwiftUI View called
Replace the contents of the file below the import statement with this:
 
enum MemberChore: String, CaseIterable, Identifiable {
 
  case members = "Family Members"
 

--- Page 324 ---
  case chores = "Chores"
 
  var id: MemberChore { self }
 
}
 
struct MemberChorePicker: View {
 
    @Binding var pickerSelection: MemberChore
 
    var body: some View {
 
        Picker(selection: $pickerSelection, label: EmptyView()) {
 
          ForEach(MemberChore.allCases) { memberChore in
 
              Text(memberChore.rawValue).tag(memberChore.rawValue)
 
            }
 
        }
 
        .pickerStyle(.segmented)
 
        .padding(.horizontal)

--- Page 325 ---
 
    }
 
}
 
#Preview {
 
  MemberChorePicker(pickerSelection: .constant(.members))
 
}
 
The selection is a binding, meaning the source of truth must be stored
someplace. In file, add a state property called type MemberChore and give
it a default value of Then, replace the body of ContentView with this
code:
 
switch membersOrChores {
 
case .members:
 
  MemberSplitView(membersOrChores: $membersOrChores)
 
case .chores:
 
  ChoreSplitView(membersOrChores: $membersOrChores)

--- Page 326 ---
 
}
 
This change will immediately show errors because the split views do not
have this new property. At the top of each split view’s state properties, add
this new binding property: @Binding var membersOrChores: This will
remove the error from For each split view file, inside the above the list,
add this line: MemberChorePicker(pickerSelection: The preview in each
will also need to be updated. For set it to:
ChoreSplitView(membersOrChores: and for set it to:
MemberSplitView(membersOrChores: .constant(.members)).
  
So far @State and @Observable have been used to create a source of
truth. The state property is local to a view and can be extended to
subviews through the use of binding. However, sometimes there is a need
to have data available to the app’s entire environment. One may consider a
global static variable, but SwiftUI has a more elegant solution. First, a
data model will be created.
  
In the Household Chores group, create a new Swift file called DataModel
and create a class of the same name. Make it observable.
 
Then add two mutable properties, one for chores and one for the sample
data to each. When finished, it should look like this:
 
@Observable

--- Page 327 ---
 
class DataModel {
 
  var chores: [Chore] = Chore.sampleChores
 
  var familyMembers: [FamilyMember] =
FamilyMember.sampleMembers
 
}
 
In create a new, private, state property called assign it a new instance of
the DataModel class.
 
Add this modifier Now this data model can be used anywhere in the app.
 
In ChoresSplitView and replace the state property for chores and members
with @Environment(DataModel.self) private var The parameter is the
type of object to expect.
 
Then, in the rest of each file add before each reference to chores or The
previews will also need to have the added. If you are uncertain if you did
it right, check the project in the folder called Chapter
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 328 ---
 
Localization of text
 
Before moving too far into the app’s development, some additional things
need to be discussed. The first is localization. The definition for the Text
element shows this initializer: public init(_ key: LocalizedStringKey, …
Of note is the type used, LocalizedStringKey. When a literal string is
used, then an attempt will be made to localize the text. When a variable is
used, then the value is not localized. To perform a conversion, the literal
string is used as a key to search for content in the string catalog. If no
entry is found, then the literal string is presented.
  
Add a new file of type String Catalog to the project. As Figure 4.6 shows,
the catalog will be initially empty:
 
 

--- Page 329 ---
Figure Initial String Catalog
 
When the project is built, unique strings where the LocalizedStringKey
type is used to update the catalog. The Build command is in the Product
menu. If needed, the + and – buttons above the list of entries can be used
to add and remove entries. At the bottom of the language list, the + button
can be used to add a new language. Next to the new language a percentage
is shown of how much has been updated. As translations are entered, the
percentage is updated.
 
Three states are shown for each string in the alternate language as shown
in Figure They are, respectively, for new entries that do not have a
translation, entries that have a translation, entries that do not exist in the
source code anymore, and entries where the localization value has been
updated somewhere:
 
 
Figure Translation states
 
There are few ways to test translations.
 
Update the preview with the environment modifier like this:
 
MemberChorePicker(pickerSelection: .constant(.members))

--- Page 330 ---
 
    .environment(\.locale, .init(identifier: "de"))
 
The list of language identifiers can be found at
 
Update the schema with the preferred language.
 
In the project toolbar, to the right of the project name, is the current target
when running, testing, and so on. See Figure
  
 
Figure Scheme options
 
Click it to see a popup of options. Choose Edit Scheme… and a window
like Figure be shown. At the bottom, change the App language to the
desired language. Now, when the app is run, the selected language will be
used:
 

--- Page 331 ---
 
Figure Edit scheme
 
Switching between languages in this manner can be tedious if it is done
often. Another way is to create a simulator that has its language set. Then
just the simulator must be chosen for the language of choice. To do this,
select Devices and Simulators from the Window menu, then select
Simulators from the tab at the top. Click the + button at the bottom and a
new window will show. Enter iPhone 14 Plus – Spanish for the simulator
name, select the iPhone 14 Plus for the device, and click the Create
button. Now the device is available to run the app on as shown in Figure
  

--- Page 332 ---
 
Figure Simulator selection
 
Before running the app on the new simulator, change the schema language
back to System then run the app on the newly created simulator. As the
app is running, click the home button on at the top of the simulator
window. Then, at the bottom of the screen, click the search bar, and enter
In the Settings app, click then Language & Change the preferred language
as needed. The simulator will restart. Now whenever this simulator is
used, the set language will also be used.
 
To get the picker selections localized, a different approach must be used.
Create a new group called Foundation Extensions and inside of it create a
new Swift file called String Add this code:

--- Page 333 ---
 
extension String {
 
  var localized: String {
 
      return String(format: NSLocalizedString(self, comment: ""))
 
  }
 
}
 
Then, in change the Text value to memberChore.rawValue.localized and
preview or run on the alternate language.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 334 ---
 
Accessibility
 
Another important part of designing an app is to make it as usable as
possible by everyone. In Chapter Learn SwiftUI Basics for Creating a
User the canvas toolbar was highlighted as a way to preview dynamic
type variants. The views should be tested against these variants to
verify that the text is changing size as necessary and that the layout
works.
 
Dynamic type is one aspect of incorporating accessibility into the app.
Another is choice of color. When choosing colors, there are a few
things that need to be remembered:
  
Colors should not be too similar as the user may have difficulty seeing
the difference. This is especially true with greens and blues.
 
Text over a background color should have a high contrast so it is easily
visible. For instance, black text over dark blue is not considered
legible.
 
The significance of information should not be tied to color only. For
instance, if some value has been validated, changing the color from
black to green should not be the only indication. Another visual

--- Page 335 ---
element, like a checkmark, should be used because the user may be
color blind.
 
If the user is visually impaired, voice-over on the device may be used.
It would be wise to get acquainted with it on your iOS device. How to
deploy to a physical phone will be learned in a later chapter. For now,
the tools built-in to Xcode will be used to check the accessibility
properties.
  
To get started, and make sure the preview is up-to-date. Then, on the
canvas toolbar, click the selectable tool followed by the inspectors
toggle button on the top-right of the window.
 
When using the selectable tool, properties of the item selected can be
viewed and changed. Should the developer forget the modifier name
for an element or control, it may be available in the attributes
inspector.
 
The accessibility inspector will show details on any item selected in
code or the canvas. Click on either text element showing on the canvas
or in the code. Figure 4.11 is an example of what the inspector will
show:
 

--- Page 336 ---
 
Figure Accessibility Element
 
The label is what is spoken to the user. The built-in elements and
controls usually provide what is desired. One item that will not is the
image. To see this, add Image(systemName: "plus") to the bottom of
and select the image. The label reads but what if it should say Add
Chore? The accessibility modifier has a label parameter that takes a
Text value. Add this below the image: .accessibility(label: Text("Add
There are other accessibility modifiers for different use cases such as
hint, various traits, and even specifying the order when the default is
not appropriate to the circumstance.
 
After validating this works as expected, remove the image and its
modifier from this view. Update the image in the addButton property
of each split view file to the appropriate label. While this technique is
useful, there are some difficulties. For instance, selecting the image of
the button does not show any information in the inspector.
 

--- Page 337 ---
Another way of checking accessibility is to launch the Accessibility
Inspector app. Run the app on a simulator, then switch to Xcode and
from the Xcode menu, select Open Developer Tools followed by
Accessibility Figure 4.12 shows the inspector app:
 
 
Figure Accessibility Inspector App
 
From the menu on the upper-left select Simulator. Bring the simulator
to the foreground, then on the accessibility inspector, click on the
target button at the upper-right. Now, when you hover the cursor over

--- Page 338 ---
an element on the app it will be highlighted, and the accessibility
inspector will show relevant information. Move it down to the add
button to see the new label.
 
Below the target button are controls that allow the developer to move
between items manually or automatically on the simulator screen. The
items are normally presented in order of top-left to bottom-right. If an
item is not presented in the proper order, then the be used with the
accessibility modifier. The higher the number, the earlier in will be
presented to the user. The default sortPriority is zero.
  
To hear how the element is presented with toggle the speech bubble to
the left of the play controls.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 339 ---
 
Conclusion
 
This chapter covered a lot, from concept to a mostly functional app
with localization and a tweak for accessibility. While the app is not yet
complete, this chapter showed the general flow of taking a concept and
slowly adding and adjusting models and views to get the desired result.
 
In the next chapter, traditional patterns will be explored and the
organization of assets. Beyond this, ways of persisting data will be
explored, graphing progress, and then finishing the app so it is
completely usable.
 
Join our book’s Discord space
 
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the
Authors:
 
https://discord.bpbonline.com

--- Page 340 ---
 
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 341 ---
 
C
HAPTER
5
Managing Data and Assets
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 342 ---
 
Introduction
 
In the previous chapter, an app concept was presented, and some
models and views were created to give a proof of concept. As an app
grows and becomes more refined, the structure of the data and the
ways of manipulating it must also be refined. This ensures that not
only the original developer can easily find and follow how the code
works, but also any other developer that needs to alter the code.
 
This chapter will go deeper into data modeling, code design patterns,
and asset management. Some of these items will be applied to the
Household Chores while others will be informational only.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 343 ---
 
Structure
 
This chapter includes the following topics:
  
Data modeling
 
Design patterns
  
Builder
 
Factory
 
Singleton
 
Delegation
 
Assets
  
Colors
 
Images

--- Page 344 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 345 ---
 
Objectives
 
By the end of this chapter the reader should understand how to create
efficient models, along with some traditional design patterns. Readers
will not only learn how they may be used in the Household Chores but
also how to add color and image assets while considering color
schemes and accessibility.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 346 ---
 
Data modeling
 
Creating efficient data models is an important part of creating an app.
Forethought needs to be applied to each object type and the relationships
between them. Types and names should be meaningful with the data held
and names between types should be consistent. The importance of a
variable or property name was also covered in Chapter
 
Open the Household Chores project and select the Chore file from the
project navigator. It was stated earlier that chores can fall into distinct
frequencies. As these frequencies are known, finite values, an enum can
be used. Also, the chore may be assigned to a known family member or
not assigned at all. An ideal place to use an optional. Add this enum above
the chore class:
 
enum ChoreFrequency: String, CaseIterable, Identifiable {
 
  case daily, weekly, monthly, seasonal
 
  var id: ChoreFrequency { self }
 
}
 

--- Page 347 ---
When a string enum does not have values assigned, the case name is used
as the raw value. Considerations also need to be taken for when a chore is
due or archived. Adjust the class to look like this:
 
@Observable
 
class Chore: Identifiable {
 
  var id = UUID()
 
  var name: String
 
  var location: String
 
  var frequency: ChoreFrequency
 
  var assignedTo: FamilyMember?
 
var isComplete: Bool
 
  var isArchived: Bool
 
  var dueDate: Date
 

--- Page 348 ---
  init(name: String = "", location: String = "", frequency: ChoreFrequency
= .daily, assignedTo: FamilyMember? = nil, isComplete: Bool = false,
isArchived: Bool = false, dueDate: Date = Date()) {
 
      self.name = name
 
      self.location = location
 
      self.frequency = frequency
 
      self.assignedTo = assignedTo
 
      self.isComplete = isComplete
 
      self.isArchived = isArchived
 
      self.dueDate = dueDate
 
  }
 
}
 
The property complete was renamed to isComplete so it reads better as a
sentence, The chore is Similarly, an app may have a Person class with a

--- Page 349 ---
property called A location was also added so similarly named chores, like
pickup floor can be targeted to a specific room.
 
Due to this class property changes, the sampleChores property needs to be
updated:
 
static var sampleChores: [Chore] {
 
  let liam = FamilyMember(name: "Liam")
 
  let maria = FamilyMember(name: "Maria")
 
  let amir = FamilyMember(name: "Amir")
 
  let c1 = Chore(name: "Pickup", location: "Bedroom", frequency: .daily,
assignedTo: liam)
 
  let c2 = Chore(name: "Make Bed", location: "Bedroom", frequency:
.daily, assignedTo: liam)
 
  let c3 = Chore(name: "Pickup", location: "Living space", frequency:
.daily, assignedTo: maria)
 
  let c4 = Chore(name: "Dishes", location: "Kitchen", frequency: .daily,
assignedTo: amir)
 

--- Page 350 ---
  let c5 = Chore(name: "Pickup", location: "Bathroom", frequency: .daily,
assignedTo: liam)
 
  let c6 = Chore(name: "Clean Floor", location: "Bedroom", frequency:
.weekly, assignedTo: maria)
 
let c7 = Chore(name: "Clean Floor", location: "Kitchen", frequency:
.weekly, assignedTo: amir)
 
  let c8 = Chore(name: "Wipe baseboards & door frames", location:
"Home", frequency: .monthly, assignedTo: liam)
 
  let c9 = Chore(name: "Clean under furniture", location: "Home",
frequency: .seasonal, assignedTo: maria)
 
  return [c1, c2, c3, c4, c5, c6, c7, c8, c9]
 
}
 
For the FamilyMember class, using an empty string as the default for the
name or using an optional value depends on the expectation. As a name is
always be expected, then an empty string is best. Looking at the class, a
circular problem quickly presents itself. Should the family member have
the list of chores, or should the family member be assigned to the chore?
Or can it be both ways?
 

--- Page 351 ---
Having a family member assigned to the chore is a good example of a
one-to-many relationship. The one family member may be assigned to
many chores while the chore has only one family member assigned to it.
However, for the purpose of displaying the data to the user, it also makes
sense to have an array or set of chores in the FamilyMember class. The
way to have both is shown later in the book.
 
After these changes, compiling the app will generate some errors. Here is
how they can be addressed:
  
In a way of using the dataModel needs to be added. At the top, below the
chore property, add this environment property:
@Environment(DataModel.self) var
 
The text fields need to be changed to pickers and a location text field
needs to be added. Change the form to this:
 
Form {
 
  Section("Name") {
 
      TextField("Name", text: $chore.name)
 
  }
 
  Section("Location") {

--- Page 352 ---
 
      TextField("Location", text: $chore.location)
 
  }
 
  Section("Frequency") {
 
      Picker(selection: $chore.frequency, label: EmptyView()) {
 
        ForEach(ChoreFrequency.allCases) { frequency in
 
            Text(frequency.rawValue.localized).tag(frequency.rawValue)
 
}
 
      }
 
  }
 
  Section("Assigned to") {
 
      Picker(selection: $chore.assignedTo, label: EmptyView()) {
 
        Text("Unassigned".localized).tag(Optional(nilLiteral: ()))

--- Page 353 ---
 
        ForEach(dataModel.familyMembers) { member in
 
            Text(member.name).tag(member as FamilyMember?)
 
        }
 
      }
 
  }
 
  Section("Complete") {
 
      Toggle("Complete", isOn: $chore.isComplete)
 
  }
 
}
 
The Picker control needs to uniquely identify each entry shown. When an
identifier is unavailable, each entry can specify a unique tag. This is
especially useful when using an optional property to hold the selected
value, like the chore assignedTo property.
 
Some items of note regarding the Picker:

--- Page 354 ---
  
The label parameter allows for a Text item to be used for the purpose of
accessibility. Because the picker is in a section, when VoiceOver is used,
the user knows what to enter. However, if this were not the case, then a
Text item should be used with the picker to identify what is to be entered.
 
Inside the picker, a text view is used to show additional options before the
ones provided by the The ForEach provides a convenient way of adding
entries for the picker, but other options can be added separately.
   
This gives the picker an unassigned option for when the family member is
not assigned and a list of family members to choose from. Optionally, a
divider could be placed between the unassigned option and list.
 
After these changes one more error remains that must be addressed.
Figure 5.1 shows the error:
 
 
Figure Hashable required error

--- Page 355 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 356 ---
 
Hashable objects
 
A hash is an integer derived by a mathematical computation on an
object. The hash, along with an equality test, is used to quickly identify
an object in a collection. A Hashable object is one that can create this
hash value and has an equality test. Most types in Swift and the
Foundation library are already hashable.
 
A Hashable object is required to generate the same hash value within a
given run-instance of the app. To make the FamilyMember class
hashable, add this extension in the bottom of the FamilyMember file:
 
extension FamilyMember: Hashable {
 
  static func == (lhs: FamilyMember, rhs: FamilyMember) -> Bool {
 
      lhs.id == rhs.id
 
  }
 
  func hash(into hasher: inout Hasher) {
 

--- Page 357 ---
      hasher.combine(id)
 
  }
 
}
 
After this has been added, the ChoreView should now be error-free.
However, there is still a compilation error preventing the preview from
working. In the ChoreListItem View, change the second text to this:
 
Text(chore.assignedTo?.name ?? "Unassigned".localized)
 
This may, in turn show a chore that is either assigned or not, a second
preview should be created to view the unassigned option.
 
Perform a clean by selecting Clean Build Folder… from the Product
menu and run the app. As most of the changes revolved around the
chores, select the Chores tab and then select an entry from the list.
Note how the frequency and assignment pickers work and look. Try
again with another language. Figure 5.2 shows a newly discovered
issue. The picker selections are not localized.
 

--- Page 358 ---
 
Figure Picker selections not localized
 
To address the lack of localization, select the Localizable file and
manually add the entries into the native language list, giving a user-
presentable form for the translation. For instance, add daily as a key
and Daily for the English translation. The key must match exactly.
After these entries are done, switch to the alternate language and add
the appropriate localizations. When complete, the frequency options
should be localized.
 
Adjusting models and updating the views is part of the development
cycle. As the developer gets more experienced, then the model design
gets easier.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 359 ---
 
Design patterns
 
Design patterns provide a template for how code can be structured
when approaching specific situations. While this book focuses on a
select few, there are many patterns that can be used when developing
an app.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 360 ---
 
Builder
 
The builder pattern uses a class to slowly add or remove items to an
object before it is usable. There is no use of this design pattern in the
Family Chores Using the pizza example from chapter one, here is an
example of the builder in use. Open a new playground and enter the
following:
 
enum Crust {
 
  case thin
 
  case handTossed
 
  case deepDish
 
  case none
 
}
 
enum Sauce {
 

--- Page 361 ---
case tomato, white, arrabbiata, none
 
}
 
enum Size: Int {
 
  case six = 6
 
  case twelve = 12
 
  case eighteen = 18
 
}
 
enum Topping {
 
  case sausage, cheese, onion, mushroom, greenPepper, ham, pineapple
 
}
 
struct Pizza {
 
  var crust: Crust

--- Page 362 ---
 
  var sauce: Sauce
 
  var size: Size
 
  var toppings: Set
 
}
 
class PizzaBuilder {
 
  private(set) var pizza: Pizza
 
  init() {
 
      pizza = Pizza(crust: .none, sauce: .tomato, size: .twelve, toppings:
[])
 
  }
 
  func setSauce(to sauce: Sauce) {
 
      pizza.sauce = sauce
 

--- Page 363 ---
  }
 
  func setSize(to size: Size) {
 
      pizza.size = size
 
  }
 
  func setCrust(to crust: Crust) {
 
      pizza.crust = crust
 
  }
 
  func addToppings(_ toppings: Topping...) {
 
      for topping in toppings {
 
        pizza.toppings.insert(topping)
 
}
 
  }

--- Page 364 ---
 
  func removeToppings(_ toppings: Topping...) {
 
      for topping in toppings {
 
        pizza.toppings.remove(topping)
 
      }
 
  }
 
}
 
let builder = PizzaBuilder()
 
builder.setSize(to: .six)
 
builder.setCrust(to: .handTossed)
 
builder.setSauce(to: .arrabbiata)
 
builder.addToppings(.sausage, .onion, .mushroom)
 

--- Page 365 ---
let pizza = builder.pizza
 
The private(set) var pizza line in the Pizza class creates a property that
is accessible throughout the rest of the module, but only settable from
within the class. The use of this builder class starts with let builder =
From here, the builder object is called to set crust and topping options.
At the end, the builder’s pizza property is copied to a new variable.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 366 ---
 
Factory
 
A factory is great when a specific subclass is required, but the parent
class is used as the type. For instance, a shipyard may sell three kinds
of boats: Sail, motor, and row all with a parent class of The factory
may take a model number and other parameters and return the
appropriate kind of object. Here is a simple example:
 
class Boat {
 
  var length: Int = 16
 
  var weight = 4_000
 
  static func makeBoat(model: Int) -> Boat {
 
      switch model {
 
      case 1: return SailBoat()
 
      case 2: return MotorBoat()
 

--- Page 367 ---
      default: return RowBoat()
 
      }
 
  }
 
}
 
class SailBoat: Boat { }
 
class MotorBoat: Boat { }
 
class RowBoat: Boat { }
 
let boat = Boat.makeBoat(model: 2)
 
A factory is especially useful when multiple properties must be set as
the factory can reliably create the object without the user of the object
needing to know all the logistics. There is no use of this design pattern
in the Family Chores app.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 368 ---
 
Singleton
 
The singleton pattern is used when there is no reason to have multiple
instances of a class. Consider the file manager on the phone. It handles
the files on the device and does not need multiple instances to do so. If
one were to write a data management class that only needed the single
instance, then it could be done using the singleton pattern or the
environment method used before. Here is a singleton example:
 
class GameManager {
 
  static var shared = GameManager()
 
  func saveGame() {
 
      print("data saved")
 
  }
 
}
 
GameManager.shared.saveGame()

--- Page 369 ---
 
The shared property is static, so it is accessible without creating an
instance of the class. It is initialized with an instance of the class so it
can be used freely. Singletons can be useful, but can be problematic
when unit testing classes they are used in. Instead of using the
singleton directly, a protocol that mimics the singleton should be used.
This technique will be shown later in the book.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 370 ---
 
Delegation
 
Delegation is used when a helper, or delegate, object is needed to
execute code or return data. The CommonUI framework can take
advantage of the Singleton and Delegation patterns. Adopting these
patterns will allow the CommonUI framework to be used in multiple
projects, allowing each to give specific details on colors, line
thicknesses, images, and font styles.
 
The following steps will be taken:
  
Create style data structs in CommonUI.
 
Create a protocol in CommonUI for receiving the style data.
 
Create a singleton in CommonUI that will house the delegate property.
 
Adjust CommonUI to use the new style information.
 
Create a class in Household Chores that will provide style information.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 371 ---
 
Step 1: Create data structs
 
A variety of ways can be used to pass style data from text files to
structures. The granularity of which can vary. In this project, structs
will be used to house the style data. The approach works well with the
delegate pattern.
  
In the CommonUI project, inside the CommonUI folder, create a new
group called
 
Inside the delegate group, create a new Swift file called
 
Add an import SwiftUI statement at the top, then add this struct:
 
public struct CardStyle {
 
  public var cornerRadius: Double = UI.Card.cornerRadius
 
  public var bodyPadding: Double = UI.Card.bodyPadding
 
  public var backgroundColor: Color = UI.Card.backgroundColor
 

--- Page 372 ---
  public var borderColor: Color = UI.Card.borderColor
 
  public var borderThickness: Double = UI.Card.borderThickness
 
  public var headerDividerColor: Color = UI.Card.headerDividerColor
 
  public var headerPadding: Double = UI.Card.headerPadding
 
  public var titleFont: Font = .headline
 
  public var titleColor: Color = .black
 
  public var subtitleFont: Font = .callout
 
  public var subtitleColor: Color = .gray
 
  public init(cornerRadius: Double, bodyPadding: Double,
backgroundColor: Color, borderColor: Color, borderThickness:
Double, headerDividerColor: Color, headerPadding: Double, titleFont:
Font, titleColor: Color, subtitleFont: Font, subtitleColor: Color) {
 
      self.cornerRadius = cornerRadius
 
      self.bodyPadding = bodyPadding

--- Page 373 ---
 
      self.backgroundColor = backgroundColor
 
      self.borderColor = borderColor
 
      self.borderThickness = borderThickness
 
self.headerDividerColor = headerDividerColor
 
      self.headerPadding = headerPadding
 
      self.titleFont = titleFont
 
      self.titleColor = titleColor
 
      self.subtitleFont = subtitleFont
 
      self.subtitleColor = subtitleColor
 
  }
 
}
 

--- Page 374 ---
By providing default values, either in the struct or through the
construction of the elements, the consumer of the library does not need
to implement the delegate.
 
In the same group, create a new Swift file called FontStyle and add
this for the font styles:
 
import SwiftUI
 
public struct FontStyle {
 
  public let name: String
 
  public let size: Double
 
  public let relativeStyle: Font.TextStyle
 
  public init(name: String, size: Double, relativeStyle: Font.TextStyle)
{
 
      self.name = name
 
      self.size = size
 
      self.relativeStyle = relativeStyle

--- Page 375 ---
 
  }
 
}
 
The buttons are a lot more complex, requiring a more complex model.
Yes, even creating styles is about manipulating data and the structure
needs to cover all the possible scenarios and still be efficient. The
original designs had the primary button use a background, the
secondary a border, and the tertiary is only the text. However, the user
of the library may want to change that.
 
Create a new Swift file called ButtonStyle and add this code:
 
import SwiftUI
 
public enum ButtonType: CaseIterable {
 
      case primary, secondary, tertiary
 
}
 
The previously created TextStyle enum provides the style options for
text, however, before now, there was no such option for buttons. This

--- Page 376 ---
will become necessary so the delegate can return information relevant
to the specific button type.
 
The button style must be designed to allow the delegate to choose
between background, border, border with background, or just text. The
perfect place to use optionals.
 
In the same file, add this code:
 
public struct ButtonStyle {
 
  public let cornerRadius: Double
 
  public let padding: Double
 
  public let progressViewColor: Color
 
  public let enabledLabelStyle: ButtonLabelStyle
 
  public let disabledLabelStyle: ButtonLabelStyle
 
  public let enabledBackgroundStyle: ButtonBackgroundStyle?
 
  public let disabledBackgroundStyle: ButtonBackgroundStyle?

--- Page 377 ---
 
  public let enabledBorderStyle: ButtonBorderStyle?
 
  public let disabledBorderStyle: ButtonBorderStyle?
 
  public init(cornerRadius: Double, padding: Double,
progressViewColor: Color, enabledLabelStyle: ButtonLabelStyle ,
disabledLabelStyle: ButtonLabelStyle, enabledBackgroundStyle:
ButtonBackgroundStyle?, disabledBackgroundStyle:
ButtonBackgroundStyle?, enabledBorderStyle: ButtonBorderStyle?,
disabledBorderStyle: ButtonBorderStyle?) {
 
    self.cornerRadius = cornerRadius
 
    self.padding = padding
 
    self.progressViewColor = progressViewColor
 
    self.enabledLabelStyle = enabledLabelStyle
 
    self.disabledLabelStyle = disabledLabelStyle
 
    self.enabledBackgroundStyle = enabledBackgroundStyle
 

--- Page 378 ---
    self.disabledBackgroundStyle = disabledBackgroundStyle
 
    self.enabledBorderStyle = enabledBorderStyle
 
    self.disabledBorderStyle = disabledBorderStyle
 
  }
 
}
 
Note the properties for both enabled and disabled states.
 
Finally, the structures referenced in ButtonStyle need to be defined.
Add these final structs to the same file:
 
public struct ButtonLabelStyle {
 
  public let style: Font
 
  public let weight: Font.Weight
 
  public let color: Color
 
  public init(style: Font, weight: Font.Weight, color: Color) {

--- Page 379 ---
 
      self.style = style
 
      self.weight = weight
 
      self.color = color
 
  }
 
}
 
public struct ButtonBackgroundStyle {
 
  public let gradientColorStart: Color
 
  public let gradientColorEnd: Color
 
  public let gradientPointStart: UnitPoint
 
  public let gradientPointEnd: UnitPoint
 
  public init(gradientColorStart: Color, gradientColorEnd: Color,
gradientPointStart: UnitPoint = .top, gradientPointEnd: UnitPoint =

--- Page 380 ---
.bottom) {
 
      self.gradientColorStart = gradientColorStart
 
      self.gradientColorEnd = gradientColorEnd
 
      self.gradientPointStart = gradientPointStart
 
      self.gradientPointEnd = gradientPointEnd
 
  }
 
}
 
public struct ButtonBorderStyle {
 
  public let thickness: Double
 
  public let gradientColorStart: Color
 
  public let gradientColorEnd: Color
 
  public let gradientPointStart: UnitPoint
 

--- Page 381 ---
  public let gradientPointEnd: UnitPoint
 
  public init(thickness: Double, gradientColorStart: Color,
gradientColorEnd: Color, gradientPointStart: UnitPoint = .top,
gradientPointEnd: UnitPoint = .bottom) {
 
      self.thickness = thickness
 
      self.gradientColorStart = gradientColorStart
 
      self.gradientColorEnd = gradientColorEnd
 
      self.gradientPointStart = gradientPointStart
 
      self.gradientPointEnd = gradientPointEnd
 
  }
 
}
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 382 ---
 
Step 2: Create a protocol
 
The delegate needs a protocol to conform to so the CommonUI
framework can retrieve the style information. In the delegate group,
create a new Swift file called CommonUIDelegate and add this code:
 
public protocol CommonUIDelegate: AnyObject {
 
  func fontStyle(for style: TextStyle) -> FontStyle
 
  func buttonStyle(for type: ButtonType) -> ButtonStyle
 
  var cardStyle: CardStyle { get }
 
}
 
A protocol is a contract. Any class, struct, or enum can normally
conform to the protocol, however here AnyObject is specified. The
AnyObject protocol limits the use of the defined protocol to class
objects. This is especially useful for delegates and will be explained
further down.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 383 ---
 
Step 3: Create a singleton
 
The delegate needs to announce itself with the CommonUI library so it
can be called. A class will be created that will act as a singleton. In the
CommonUI group, create a new Swift file called then add this code:
 
import SwiftUI
 
public class CommonUI {
 
  static public let shared = CommonUI()
 
  public weak var delegate: CommonUIDelegate? {
 
      didSet {
 
        setStyleData()
 
      }
 
  }
 

--- Page 384 ---
  var cardStyle = CardStyle(cornerRadius: 6, bodyPadding: 8,
backgroundColor: .white, borderColor: .black, borderThickness: 1,
headerDividerColor: .gray, headerPadding: 8, titleFont: .headline,
titleColor: .black, subtitleFont: .callout, subtitleColor: .gray)
 
  var fontStyles: [TextStyle: FontStyle] = [:]
 
  var buttonStyles: [ButtonType: ButtonStyle] = [:]
 
  private func setStyleData() {
 
      guard let delegate else { return }
 
      cardStyle = delegate.cardStyle
 
      for textStyle in TextStyle.allCases {
 
        fontStyles[textStyle] = delegate.fontStyle(for: textStyle)
 
      }
 
      for button in ButtonType.allCases {
 
        buttonStyles[button] = delegate.buttonStyle(for: button)

--- Page 385 ---
 
      }
 
  }
 
}
 
To fix the error regarding select the TextStyle files and set the
enumeration to be CaseIterable as shown here:
 
public enum TextStyle: CaseIterable
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 386 ---
 
Memory management
 
Normally, a developer does not have to worry about memory
management. An object is created and takes up space in memory.
When it goes out of scope, the memory used is returned to the
available pool and the object is destroyed. Any references to the object
are tracked so the object and its data will remain in memory until there
are not other references. This is called reference
 
When Object A references Object B and it references Object this is a
circular reference. Neither object can be destroyed because a reference
to it exists. To break this cycle, either one of the references must be
removed or a weak reference must be used, instead. The CommonUI
singleton above has a weak property. This means, that if a class that
conforms to the protocol is given as a reference, this property will not
increase the reference count. Instead, should the class go away, the
delegate property will be set to nil. Using a weak, optional, reference
for delegates is a common way of avoiding memory problems.
 
The cardStyle property is provided with a default value. This allows
the Card element to draw all styling values from the singleton. When
programming, there will always be a choice between two or more
options in obtaining the same goal. Sometimes, it is a matter of where

--- Page 387 ---
the code will be placed or how complex it is. Ideally, no more than two
or three levels of abstraction is used.
 
When a delegate is assigned, the didSet property observer is called. It
calls the setStyleData method which, in turn, calls the delegate to get
style information.
 
By using dictionaries for the font and button styles, the TextStyle and
new ButtonType enumerations can be used as the keys for the
associated style information. If an init method were provided, default
information could also be provided here. It is a trade-off of where the
complexity will reside.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 388 ---
 
Step 1: Adjust CommonUI to use the singleton
 
The card, text, and button elements need to be updated to refer to the
CommonUI singleton for styling information and, in the case of the
text and buttons, use the built-in styling if the dictionary does not have
any information. Because the card styling was provided with the
default style data, the card can use the singleton without concern of
default information. Select the Card file and replace the Card struct
with this:
 
public struct CardView>: View {
 
  private let content: Content
 
  public init(@ViewBuilder content: () -> Content) {
 
      self.content = content()
 
  }
 
  public var body: some View {
 

--- Page 389 ---
      VStack(alignment: .center, spacing: 0) {
 
        content
 
            .padding(CommonUI.shared.cardStyle.bodyPadding)
 
      }
 
      .frame(maxWidth: .infinity)
 
      .background(
 
        RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius:
CommonUI.shared.cardStyle.cornerRadius)
 
            .stroke(CommonUI.shared.cardStyle.borderColor,
 
                    lineWidth: CommonUI.shared.cardStyle.borderThickness)
 
            .background(CommonUI.shared.cardStyle.backgroundColor)
 
            .clipShape(RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius:
CommonUI.shared.cardStyle.cornerRadius))

--- Page 390 ---
 
      )
 
  }
 
}
 
The private, computed properties provide a clean way of using the
necessary information in the body property. The DisclosureCard and
DisclosureCardHeader are similar. Copy the code for these from the
downloaded source code for this chapter and replace the contents of
those files.
 
The text styling is even easier because references for style are called
from one place. In the TextStyle enum, replace the font property with
this:
 
var font: Font {
 
  let name = CommonUI.shared.fontStyles[self]?.name ?? fontName
 
  let size = CommonUI.shared.fontStyles[self]?.size ?? fontSize
 

--- Page 391 ---
  let relativeStyle = CommonUI.shared.fontStyles[self]?.relativeStyle
?? textStyle
 
  return Font.custom(name, size: size, relativeTo: relativeStyle)
 
}
 
By using optional coalescing, the singleton is referred to for style
information and if it is not available then the previously used code for
the data is used.
 
The buttons, as exemplified by the structs created for the style data, are
a lot more complex. Each type has its own set of expectations on
background, border, or whether it has an in-progress option. By
allowing the delegate to choose how the buttons will look, they are all
almost the same. Except for the tertiary button not showing the
progress indicator, they are all the same in how they might be
displayed. However, the default style information must also be
considered should a delegate not be used. Using the rule of three,
where if code is repeated three or more times it should be refactored so
it can be written once and reused, it becomes obvious the buttons need
to be refactored.
 
In the buttons group, create a new SwiftUI file called Replace the
struct with this one:
 

--- Page 392 ---
struct ButtonView: View {
 
  private let buttonType: ButtonType
 
  private let action: Action
 
  private let text: LocalizedStringKey
 
  @Binding var inProgress: Bool
 
  @Environment(\.isEnabled) private var isEnabled
 
  public init(_ text: LocalizedStringKey, buttonType: ButtonType,
inProgress: Binding, action: @escaping Action) {
 
      self.text = text
 
      self.buttonType = buttonType
 
      self._inProgress = inProgress
 
self.action = action
 

--- Page 393 ---
  }
 
  public var body: some View {
 
      Button(action: {
 
        if !inProgress {
 
            action()
 
        }
 
      }) {
 
        HStack {
 
            if inProgress {
 
              ProgressView()
 
                  .tint(.white)
 
                  .frame(maxWidth: .infinity)

--- Page 394 ---
 
                  .padding(UI.Button.Primary.padding)
 
                 
.background(UI.Button.Primary.Enabled.Background.gradientColorSta
rt)
 
            } else {
 
              Text(text)
 
                  .foregroundStyle(UI.Button.Primary.Enabled.Label.color)
 
                  .font(UI.Button.Primary.Enabled.Label.style)
 
                  .fontWeight(UI.Button.Primary.Enabled.Label.weight)
 
                  .frame(maxWidth: .infinity)
 
                  .padding(UI.Button.Primary.padding)
 
                 
.background(UI.Button.Primary.Enabled.Background.gradientColorSta
rt)
 

--- Page 395 ---
            }
 
        }
 
      }
 
      .disabled(inProgress ? true : !isEnabled)
 
  }
 
}
 
ButtonView now has the basic framework for showing any of the three
buttons. The styling needs to be changed to support the types and the
enabled state. Change the preview to reflect the primary button’s
preview, but with the name of the view changed and with the
additional parameter so the preview will properly show:
 
#Preview("Enabled - No Progress") {
 
  ButtonView("Primary Button", buttonType: .primary, inProgress:
.constant(false)) {
 
      print("tapped")

--- Page 396 ---
 
  }
 
  .disabled(false)
 
  .padding()
 
}
 
The styling will be handled soon. For now, simplify the primary,
secondary, and tertiary buttons by stripping almost everything away
and calling the new view in the body. The PrimaryButton will now
look like this:
 
public struct PrimaryButton: View {
 
  private let action: Action
 
  private let text: LocalizedStringKey
 
  @Binding var inProgress: Bool
 
  public init(_ text: LocalizedStringKey, inProgress: Binding, action:
@escaping Action) {

--- Page 397 ---
 
      self.text = text
 
      self._inProgress = inProgress
 
self.action = action
 
  }
 
  public var body: some View {
 
      ButtonView(text, buttonType: .primary, inProgress: $inProgress,
action: action)
 
  }
 
}
 
Replace the struct of the SecondaryButton to the following:
 
public struct SecondaryButton: View {
 
  private let action: Action
 

--- Page 398 ---
  private let text: LocalizedStringKey
 
  @Binding var inProgress: Bool
 
  public init(_ text: LocalizedStringKey, inProgress: Binding, action:
@escaping Action) {
 
      self.text = text
 
      self._inProgress = inProgress
 
      self.action = action
 
  }
 
  public var body: some View {
 
      ButtonView(text, buttonType: .secondary, inProgress: $inProgress,
action: action)
 
  }
 
}

--- Page 399 ---
 
Replace the TertiaryButton struct with this code:
 
public struct TertiaryButton: View {
 
  private let action: Action
 
  private let text: LocalizedStringKey
 
  public init(_ text: LocalizedStringKey, action: @escaping Action) {
 
      self.text = text
 
      self.action = action
 
  }
 
  public var body: some View {
 
      ButtonView(text, buttonType: .tertiary, inProgress: .constant(false),
action: action)
 
  }

--- Page 400 ---
 
}
 
The previews will all look the same until the styling information in
ButtonView is fixed. Instead of using the constants, computed
properties will be used that take the enabled state and the button type
into consideration while also using the CommonUI singleton as the
source of truth for style information when possible. The complete code
is too long to include directly here, but the finished result can be found
in the downloaded code for the chapter inside the End folder.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 401 ---
 
Step 2: Create the delegate class in Household Chores
 
In the Household Chores group, create a new group called UI In there,
create a new Swift file called Style This will conform to the protocol
defined earlier and acts as the delegate. Add the import CommonUI
statement at the top then add this code:
 
class StyleManager: CommonUIDelegate {
 
  init() {
 
      CommonUI.shared.delegate = self
 
  }
 
  func fontStyle(for style: TextStyle) -> FontStyle {
 
switch style {
 
      case .h1:
 
        FontStyle(name: "Arial Black", size: 42, relativeStyle: .largeTitle)

--- Page 402 ---
 
      case .h2:
 
        FontStyle(name: "Arial", size: 28, relativeStyle: .headline)
 
      case .paragraph:
 
        FontStyle(name: "Baskerville", size: 18, relativeStyle: .body)
 
      case .footer:
 
        FontStyle(name: "Baskerville SemiBold", size: 12, relativeStyle:
.caption)
 
      }
 
  }
 
  func buttonStyle(for type: ButtonType) -> ButtonStyle {
 
      switch type {
 
      case .primary:

--- Page 403 ---
 
        let enabledLabelStyle = ButtonLabelStyle(style: .body, weight:
.bold, color: .white)
 
        let enabledBackgroundStyle =
ButtonBackgroundStyle(gradientColorStart: .blue, gradientColorEnd:
.blue)
 
        let disabledLablStyle = ButtonLabelStyle(style: .body, weight:
.bold, color: .gray)
 
        let disabledBackgroundStyle =
ButtonBackgroundStyle(gradientColorStart: .teal, gradientColorEnd:
.teal)
 
        return ButtonStyle(cornerRadius: 0, padding: 8,
progressViewColor: .white, enabledLabelStyle: enabledLabelStyle,
disabledLabelStyle: disabledLablStyle, enabledBackgroundStyle:
enabledBackgroundStyle, disabledBackgroundStyle:
disabledBackgroundStyle, enabledBorderStyle: nil,
disabledBorderStyle: nil)
 
      case .secondary:
 

--- Page 404 ---
        let enabledLabelStyle = ButtonLabelStyle(style: .body, weight:
.bold, color: .blue)
 
        let enabledBorderStyle = ButtonBorderStyle(thickness: 2,
gradientColorStart: .blue, gradientColorEnd: .blue)
 
        let disabledLablStyle = ButtonLabelStyle(style: .body, weight:
.bold, color: .gray)
 
        let disabledBorderStyle = ButtonBorderStyle(thickness: 1,
gradientColorStart: .gray, gradientColorEnd: .gray)
 
        return ButtonStyle(cornerRadius: 0, padding: 8,
progressViewColor: .gray, enabledLabelStyle: enabledLabelStyle,
disabledLabelStyle: disabledLablStyle, enabledBackgroundStyle: nil,
disabledBackgroundStyle: nil, enabledBorderStyle:
enabledBorderStyle, disabledBorderStyle: disabledBorderStyle)
 
      case .tertiary:
 
        let enabledLabelStyle = ButtonLabelStyle(style: .body, weight:
.bold, color: .blue)
 
        let disabledLablStyle = ButtonLabelStyle(style: .body, weight:
.bold, color: .gray)

--- Page 405 ---
 
        return ButtonStyle(cornerRadius: 0, padding: 0,
progressViewColor: .gray, enabledLabelStyle: enabledLabelStyle,
disabledLabelStyle: disabledLablStyle, enabledBackgroundStyle: nil,
disabledBackgroundStyle: nil, enabledBorderStyle: nil,
disabledBorderStyle: nil)
 
      }
 
  }
 
  var cardStyle: CardStyle {
 
      CardStyle(
 
        cornerRadius: 20,
 
        bodyPadding: 16,
 
        backgroundColor: .white,
 
        borderColor: .cyan,
 
        borderThickness: 3.0,

--- Page 406 ---
 
        headerDividerColor: .black,
 
        headerPadding: 8,
 
        titleFont: .headline,
 
        titleColor: .black,
 
        subtitleFont: .callout,
 
        subtitleColor: .gray
 
      )
 
  }
 
}
 
The code deliberately uses different values than the defaults used in
the library, however a way of viewing the elements would be more
useful. In the same group, create a SwiftUI file called Add the import
CommonUI statement at the top then replace the struct with this code:

--- Page 407 ---
 
ragraph")
 
                  .style(.paragraph)
 
                Text("Footer")
 
                  .style(.footer)
 
            }
 
          }
 
          Card {
 
            VStack {
 
                PrimaryButton("Primary", inProgress: .constant(false)) { }
 
                PrimaryButton("Primary", inProgress: .constant(true)) { }
 
                PrimaryButton("Primary", inProgress: .constant(false)) { }
 
                  .disabled(true)

--- Page 408 ---
 
                PrimaryButton("Primary", inProgress: .constant(true)) { }
 
                  .disabled(true)
 
            }
 
          }
 
          Card {
 
            VStack {
 
                SecondaryButton("Secondary", inProgress: .constant(false))
{ }
 
                SecondaryButton("Secondary", inProgress: .constant(true)) {
}
 
                SecondaryButton("Secondary", inProgress: .constant(false))
{ }
 
                  .disabled(true)

--- Page 409 ---
 
                SecondaryButton("Secondary", inProgress: .constant(true)) {
}
 
                  .disabled(true)
 
            }
 
          }
 
          Card {
 
            VStack {
 
                TertiaryButton("Tertiary") { }
 
                TertiaryButton("Tertiary") { }
 
                  .disabled(true)
 
}
 
          }

--- Page 410 ---
 
      }
 
        .padding()
 
    }
 
}
 
After building and resuming the preview, the canvas should look like
the figure below:
 

--- Page 411 ---
 
Figure Style View preview
 
Like described before, the thumb-tack button can be toggled, and the
values adjusted in the StyleManager class. Run the app on the
simulator and select a family member. The new styles are not shown.
Why?
 
Look at the StyleManager code. In the the CommonUI delegate
property is set. However, when running the code normally the
StyleManager class is not instantiated. The preview only worked

--- Page 412 ---
because the StyleManager was instantiated at the top. To fix the lack of
changing styles at runtime, add this property at the top of the
Household_ChoresApp file below the dataModel property: private let
styleManager = Running the app now will provide the new styles to
the CommonUI library.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 413 ---
 
Assets
 
The asset catalog is a convenient place to store color definitions,
images, icons, and more. The colors can be defined for both light and
dark color schemes, images can be pixel-based, like or vector like Icon
sets provide the template for all the icons needed to submit an app to
the app store.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 414 ---
 
Colors
 
Apple provides a range of built-in colors. To see the list of colors type in
Color. in a Swift file where SwiftUI has been imported. There are times
when custom colors are desired, instead. These will be created and stored
in an asset catalog.
 
If the Assets folder is not in the project navigator, add a new file of type
Asset Catalog and give the name, When working on an app, it is common
for a color palette to be used. Figure 5.4 shows an example palette. The
palette reflects the brand or the style of the app:
 
 
Figure Color palette
 
When adding color assets, it is best to not give a name that reflects the
color, but, instead, a generic name, that is, or
 
Select Assets in the project navigator, click on the + button on the bottom,
then select Color Name the new color, Figure 5.5 shows the new color

--- Page 415 ---
definition with the Any Appearance option selected, and the attributes
inspector shown:
 
 
Figure Color definition
 
The color definition is set on the bottom of the info panel. The dark color
is usually, though not always, a shade lighter. Set the red, green, and blue
values to 233, 112, and 167 respectively. For the dark option use the
values 246, 142, and 218. With the primary color set, add a new color
named BrandSecondary using the values 77, 77, and 157 for the

--- Page 416 ---
AnyAppearance option. When defining the dark color, click the Show
Color Panel button at the bottom of the inspector. After entering the same
values using the RGB sliders, use the HSV sliders to increase the
brightness to 100%. The appropriate values should be reflected to the
attribute’s inspector.
 
Not all colors are suited to have a dark appearance option. Use the
Appearance selector to select None when only the one color is required.
For cultural considerations, use the Localization option to specify color
definitions in localized copies of the app.
 
To use the color, open the StyleManager file and for the
enabledBackgroundStyle variable in the primary case, change the
gradientColorStart parameter from .blue to This type of safety feature
works for colors and images.
 
Colors should rarely be the sole identifier of important information. Icons,
and accessibility text should combine with color to enhance the user
experience. Multiple colors on-screen should not be so similar that the
meaning might be confused. Text color should contrast any color behind
the text so the text can be easily seen.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 417 ---
 
Images
 
SF Symbols provides a comprehensive collection of icons that can be
used in any app. However, there are many times a custom image is
needed. A company logo, custom icons for the app, and so on. Like
colors, the asset catalog provides a place to add and organize images.
 
The simplest way to add an image asset is to drag the desired image
onto the master pane of the asset catalog. The source code folder for
this chapter has two images. Drag the one called Pizza Icon.svg onto
Xcode as shown in the figure below:
 
 
Figure Adding image asset
 

--- Page 418 ---
Once the image is added, the properties can be adjusted. By default,
three size options are shown. 1x is a one-to-one correlation of pixel to
point. The next option is 2x, where the image is twice the original size,
and, finally, 3x for an image that is three times the original size. These
are useful when an image does not scale well, and the image needs to
be manipulated for details at different sizes.
 
When an image is vector-based and can scale easily, select Single
Scale from the Scales option in the inspector.
 
Use this syntax when referencing an image from the asset catalog in a
View: Like other images, modifiers can be applied to specify the
image is resizable and limited with a frame. It will be explored further
in the book.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 419 ---
 
Conclusion
 
In this chapter, data modeling was explored in a couple of ways,
focusing on efficiency of structure and data types. A few design
patterns were introduced, and the singleton and delegate patterns were
applied to the CommonUI library and the Household Chores project.
Finally, how to use the asset catalog for colors and images was
demonstrated. More on the asset catalog will be shown in an upcoming
chapter.
 
In the next chapter, Apple’s Swift Package Manager is introduced and
the CommonUI library will be converted to a package that can be
pushed onto GitHub for use by the creator or by the public at large.
 
Join our book’s Discord space
 
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the
Authors:
 
https://discord.bpbonline.com

--- Page 420 ---
 
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 421 ---
 
C
HAPTER
6
Creating Units of Code that can be Shared
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 422 ---
 
Introduction
 
In the last chapter, the importance of efficient data models was
described with examples. A few design patterns were introduced with a
focus on singleton and delegate patterns that were applied to
CommonUI and Household Chores. The CommonUI library could be
something shared through GitHub, or similar service, with other team
members or the public at-large. In this chapter Xcode’s ability to work
with source control will be shown and the CommonUI library will be
converted to a Swift Package.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 423 ---
 
Structure
 
This chapter includes the following topics:
  
Source Control
 
Swift Package Manager
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 424 ---
 
Objectives
 
By the end of this chapter the reader should understand how to enable
source control with the project, create an account with GitHub, and
perform basic branching and tagging. The reader should also
understand how to create a Swift Package and use one locally and
from a remote source.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 425 ---
 
Source Control
 
Git has been around since the year 2005. Its speed and ability to
facilitate parallel development has made it the de facto means of
handling source control. Having source control has several benefits:
  
Ease of working with multiple developers.
 
Provides a mechanism for delaying code from being included in the
product until the code is ready.
 
Keeps track of changes.
 
Allows a rollback to previous versions of the code.
 
What makes these benefits possible is the use of branches. Branches
house code separately from each other. One developer could be
working on a branch of code for some files to implement a new feature
while another developer works on bug fixes using a separate branch.
When the feature is complete, the branch is then merged into the
branch designated for the app’s delivery. This merge process is usually
a straight-forward mechanism of getting one branch’s changes,
additions, and deletions of code into another. Even while working

--- Page 426 ---
alone, it is a good practice to use source control, so code is properly
managed, and changes are not lost.
 
When a Git repository is created, it has one branch which is the main
branch. Typically, the main branch represents the code in production.
Other branches are created according to an adopted branch strategy.
Like everything in this book, the strategy illustrated here is one of
several that may be considered. Figure 6.1 shows a simple branching
strategy. See below for an explanation of each point in the figure:
 
 
Figure Branching strategy

--- Page 427 ---
  
Repository is created with main branch.
 
Develop branch is created from main branch. The develop branch is
used while work is done on the next release of the project.
 
Bug fix branch is created from the develop branch to house the code
changes needed to fix the bug. The branch at this step could also be a
simple feature branch or could be a branch used to remove unused
code. Several such branches may be used while preparing for the next
app release.
 
Large feature branch is created. The work could be for the next release
or may be for a future release. Code changes are also committed to the
branch as parts of the feature are completed.
 
Feature or bug fix is complete. Code changes are merged into the
develop branch, normally through the use of a pull request. After the
feature branch is merged, it is deleted.
 
Repeat of number 5 with a different branch. Several branches like this
can be created in parallel. While work can be done on a single file in
multiple branches, it is ill-advised as this can lead to merge conflicts.
 

--- Page 428 ---
All work for the release is complete. No more code is merged into the
develop branch, until the release is complete. Testing is completed
with any bug fixes done through a branch/merge process. When the
release is complete, the code is merged into main, a tag is created, and
the branch is unlocked.
  
The main branch has no special properties. It is just another branch
that is treated differently than the others by how it is used. Just as the
main and develop branches can have branches created from them,
branches can be created from any other branch, too. The goal is to
keep the process as simple as possible while achieving the goals of
creating and updating the project.
 
A tag represents the state of code at a particular commit. Tags normally
follow the versioning convention of When working with libraries, a
major version increment signifies a weighty change has taken place
with several new features or API changes that may or may not be
backward compatible. When incorporating a library with this kind of
update, code changes are likely.
 
A minor increment has new features, bug fixes, and possibly some API
additions, but existing users of the library should be able to use the
library without changing the existing code. A minor release is
considered backward compatible.
 

--- Page 429 ---
A patch represents a bug-fix release with no API changes. A patch, or
point, release is considered backward compatible.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 430 ---
 
Local repository
 
When creating a new project in Xcode, in the save dialog, the option
Create Git repository on my Mac will create a repository as the project
is created. There is also an option called New Git Repository in the
Integrate menu for a project that does not already have a repository.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 431 ---
 
Create a Git repository
 
Close all open projects in Xcode and move your CommonUI project
folder to a safe place. The code will be copied from there later in this
chapter.
  
In from the File menu, select New and then Keep the Library template
selected and click
 
Name the package CommonUI and click the Create Git repository on my
Mac checkbox as shown in Figure Save the package in the same folder the
Household Chores app:
  
 

--- Page 432 ---
Figure Save package dialog
 
The structure of the package will be explored later in this chapter as this is
a new Git repository, only the main branch exists.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 433 ---
 
Branches
 
With the repository established, a develop branch must now be created.
Follow these steps:
  
Select the Source Control navigator followed by the Repositories tab. The
Xcode navigators were shown in Chapter
 
Open the hierarchy so the main branch is shown, right-click on the main
branch, then select New Branch from “main” as shown in Figure
 
 

--- Page 434 ---
Figure New branch menu option
 
Name the new branch develop and click The new branch is shown in the
navigator with two places indicating that the develop branch is the current
branch:
 
At the top next to the name of the project, the name of the current branch
is shown.
 
Next to the current branch is displayed.
  
With the creation of the develop branch complete, features can be worked
on.
 
Create a new branch off develop called Branch names must be composed
of alphanumeric characters a–z, and or underscores. No spaces are
allowed. The CreateLibrary branch is where all the work will be done in
recreating the
 
Now, select CommonUI in the project navigator. Find the old CommonUI
folder and copy the contents of the file, then paste them into the new
package file of the same name. Besides the expected errors, the changes
bar, to the left of the code, shows a hollow rectangle. This indicates that
the changes are unstaged, or, changes not tracked by Git. Only staged
changes can be committed. Once changes are committed, they are

--- Page 435 ---
available for restoring from, merging into other branches, and viewing in
the history of changes.
 
In the project navigator, a modified symbol is shown next to the file.
Change to the Source Control navigator, select the Changes tab to see a
list of modified files.
 
Click the hollow rectangle in the changes bar and select Stage Note how
the icon in the Source Control navigator changed. To remove the block of
code from staging, click the filled rectangle in the changes bar and select
Unstage There is also an option in the Integrate menu to stage or unstage
all changes in the entire project or just the current file.
 
Verify all changes have been staged and select Commit from the Integrate
menu. Figure 6.4 shows the commit pane. Here differences from all
changed files can be viewed and a commit message is entered before
committing. The code can also be edited on the commit pane:
 

--- Page 436 ---
 
Figure pane
 
Select the Respositories tab in the Source Control navigator and click on
the CreateLibrary branch. The editor pane will show the history of
commits recognized in the branch. Double-click on the commit just made
and the code changes will be shown. As illustrated in Figure drag the
remaining folders and files onto the CommonUI folder in Xcode. Omit the
CommonUI.h and CommonUI.swift files:
 

--- Page 437 ---
 
Figure Add necessary files
 
Again, stage and commit all the changes with a message indicating the
work done.
 
Commit messages should be one to two sentences indicating the overall
work done in that commit. For instance, a bug-fix commit may say
Display alert when user input is Or a feature commit may say Add dates
to completed The details of the commit are in the code differences.
 

--- Page 438 ---
Should you attempt to build the package, several errors will show
regarding needing a minimum iOS version. In the Package file, add these
lines after the name:
 
platforms: [
 
  .iOS(.v17)
 
],
 
Other valid platforms are .macOS, .tvOS, and .watchOS. This change will
also need to be committed. After this commit, the package should build,
and the previews should operate properly.
 
In the Source Control navigator, right-click the develop branch on the
repositories tab and select Now look at the project navigator. Seeing the
missing files, a person could become alarmed. Switch back to the Source
Control navigator, right-click on the CreateLibrary branch, and select
Merge “Create Library” into Confirm the merge. The files will now
appear in the project navigator. Again, right-click on the CreateLibrary
branch and delete it.
 
Merging code moves files and blocks of code into the target branch.
Modified lines of code can replace what was in the target file, delete, or
add lines, too.
  

--- Page 439 ---
Development for version 1.0.0 is now complete. As done for the feature
branch, merge develop into main, but do not delete the develop branch.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 440 ---
 
Tags
 
A tag marks a specific commit. It is not related to a branch. Change
between the main and develop branches to see how the commits are
now the same because of the merge. To the right of each commit is the
first few characters of the commit id. Right-click the last commit and
select Tag xxx where xxx is the id shown next to the commit. Give the
name 1.0.0 and click The new tag will show under Tags on the
navigator.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 441 ---
 
GitHub
 
GitHub is a common place for public and private repositories. If not
previously done, visit https://github.com and create an account. After
this is complete, the account must be added to Xcode.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 442 ---
 
Create an SSH Key
 
Open the Mac’s Terminal application and enter the following two
commands, watching that you use your own email address in the first
command. You will be asked to enter a pass phrase. It does not need to
be your computer password, but it will be used later. The second
command copies the key to the computer clipboard:
  
ssh-keygen -o -a 100 -t ecdsa -f ~/.ssh/id_github -C
"my.email@me.com"
 
pbcopy < ~/.ssh/id_github.pub
 
On GitHub, select Settings from the account menu on upper-right
corner of the window. Then, on the left, select SSH and GPG Click the
New SSH Key button and give a title, such as Xcode SSH and paste
the key into the provided textbox. Then, add the SSH key.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 443 ---
 
Create a token
 
Next, select Developer Settings on the left, followed by Personal
access tokens and then Tokens Click the Generate new token button
and select the classic option. The minimal options needed are repo, and
After the token is generated, copy it to the clipboard.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 444 ---
 
Add GitHub account to Xcode
 
In select Settings from the Xcode menu, select and add a new account.
Select GitHub from the list and continue. Sign in with the GitHub
account name and the token that was just generated. To make
communication secure, select SSH on the right pane and click The
passphrase used to make the SSH Key needs to be entered twice.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 445 ---
 
Pushing CommonUI to GitHub
 
Select the Source Control navigator followed by the Repositories tab.
Right-click on Remotes and select New “CommonUI” As shown in
Figure fill out the dialog. Keep the Remote Name as After creating the
repository on the Remotes in the navigator will be updated with the
main branch:
 
 
Figure Create CommonUI Repository on GitHub

--- Page 446 ---
 
On the GitHub website, the new repository can be found, however the
number of tags is zero. Tags are not automatically pushed to the server.
To remedy this, switch to Xcode and select Push from the Integrate
menu. In the dialog, the current branch name will be displayed. To
push the tags to the server, select the Include Tags checkbox then push.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 447 ---
 
Swift Package Manager
 
The Swift Package Manager is a dependency manager. When using a
package from the internet, it too, may have its own set of packages it
depends on to function. Each package uses tags to identify its version
and the version of any dependencies it relies on.
 
A package is a lightweight means of sharing libraries. It consists of
source code, resources, and a manifest file. The manifest file, called
defines the products to be created, the targets for execution or testing,
dependencies, and any resources provided by the package. The
package for CommonUI looks like this:
 
// swift-tools-version: 5.9
 
// The swift-tools-version declares the minimum version of Swift
required to build this package.
 
import PackageDescription
 
let package = Package(
 

--- Page 448 ---
  name: "CommonUI",
 
  platforms: [
 
      .iOS(.v17)
 
  ],
 
products: [
 
      // Products define the executables and libraries a package produces,
making them visible to other packages.
 
      .library(
 
        name: "CommonUI",
 
        targets: ["CommonUI"]),
 
  ],
 
  targets: [
 

--- Page 449 ---
      // Targets are the basic building blocks of a package, defining a
module or a test suite.
 
      // Targets can depend on other targets in this package and products
from dependencies.
 
      .target(
 
        name: "CommonUI"),
 
      .testTarget(
 
        name: "CommonUITests",
 
        dependencies: ["CommonUI"]),
 
  ]
 
)
 
The top comment specifies the version of Swift required to read the
package because the package manifest is Swift, the code should look
familiar. It begins with an import after which the variable instantiation
let package = Package(… occurs. The parameters used for this

--- Page 450 ---
example are the name of the package, an array of platforms it works
on, an array of products, and an array of targets. Note that all strings
are static, not variables.
 
While the package cannot be run directly on a simulator, the SwiftUI
code can be previewed on the canvas and unit tests can be run. Testing
will be covered later in the book.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 451 ---
 
Remote packages
 
The ability to incorporate packages from or other sources, adds great
flexibility to Xcode and project management. Using remote packages
makes it easy to incorporate work done by thousands of developers. When
incorporating the work of others, the terms of the license must be adhered
to.
  
Close all projects in Xcode and open the Household Chores project. In the
project navigator, the CommonUI reference is red and non-expandable.
This is because the CommonUI project was removed from the original
location and cannot be found by Xcode. Click on the reference and hit the
delete key on the keyboard. As shown in Figure click the Household
Chores project in the navigator and select the Package Dependencies tab
on the right panel:
 
 
Figure Package dependencies for project

--- Page 452 ---
 
Use this panel to add top-level packages. Any dependent packages will be
automatically added as necessary. Click the plus button to add a package.
Common packages provided by Apple are available and others that have
been used recently. In the upper-right corner of the dialog, enter the
GitHub URL to your space. It is in the format The list of available
packages is shown in the middle pane. When a file called README.md is
included with the package, its contents are rendered on the third pane. The
README file gives information about the package: What it is, how it
works, and sometimes some information on its images.
 
Select the CommonUI package, click the Add Package button, then in the
confirmation dialog add the package. The list of dependencies is updated
and shows the added package. The dependency rule bears some
explanation. By default, the rule will either show the main branch or Up to
Next Major Version depending on whether tags exist or not on the server.
Using up to next major version is the best practice so any updates to the
package by its developer are least likely to negatively impact the project.
The available rules are as follows:
 
Up to next major Using the tags of the repository, all minor and patch
versions from the set major version are considered. If the base version is
set to 1.0.0, then all available 1.x.x versions are considered.
 
Up to next minor All patch versions from the set major and minor version
are considered. If the base version is set to 1.1.0, then all available 1.1.x
versions are considered.

--- Page 453 ---
 
Exact A specific tagged version is used. This is commonly used when a
release of the project is being created so are no surprises occur as final
testing is made.
 
Range of A given range is considered. Useful when using a subset of
features in the package that are backward compatible and other packages
are also dependent on the same package.
 
The specified branch is used.
 
A given commit is used.
   
When multiple packages are used, it is possible that circular dependencies
will occur. Swift Package Manager considers all the rules, to determine
what version of each package to use. Added packages are shown in the
project navigator at the bottom in the Package Dependencies section. With
the package added, the project can be compiled and run.
 
There may be times the locally cached copy of a package does not match
what is on the server. The cache has become stale. To remedy this, from
File menu in select Packages and then Reset Package After choosing any
of the options from the Packages menu, select Clean Build Folder from
the Product menu.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 454 ---
 
Local packages
 
Packages not only provide a great way of sharing code with others, but
also a way of separating code into manageable modules that are self-
contained. Using modules provides structure and separation of
responsibility. As before, click the Household Chores project in the
navigator. Switch to the Find and drag the CommonUI package folder
to the project navigator into the Frameworks group.
 
As this package is already used from a remote location, using a local
copy replaces the one used by the project. The one listed in the bottom
section disappears. Any changes made to the source code will be
recognized immediately in the Household Chores app.
 
However, as the CommonUI package is a repository that is linked to
GitHub, the Source Control navigator will also change. To switch back
to the server version of the package, select the package in the project
navigator and press the delete key on the keyboard. When the dialog
appears, click Remove The Package Dependencies section of the
project navigator will update to show the package retrieved from the
server.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 455 ---
 
Conclusion
 
This chapter introduced the Swift Package Manager, a dependency
management system that uses packages as a means of modularizing
and sharing code and resources. Also taught in this chapter was source
control and the means of making, merging, and deleting branches. Tags
are used to version packages and strongly integrated into the
dependency resolution process.
 
The next chapter introduces SwiftData, a modern way for storing data
onto the device the project is running on.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 456 ---
 
C
HAPTER
7
Saving Data
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 457 ---
 
Introduction
 
Until now, the Household Chores app has been a proof of concept.
Several elements are needed to make the app useful. Foremost, the
data needs to be saved, or persisted, after the app has been closed. This
chapter will focus on saving application data directly on the device
using a database and enabling user preferences in the iOS Setting app.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 458 ---
 
Structure
 
This chapter includes the following topics:
  
SwiftData
 
User preferences
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 459 ---
 
Objectives
 
By the end of this chapter the reader should understand how to save
data using SwiftData and how to set and read user preferences.
 
To make the Household Chores app fully operational, mechanisms
must be in-place to store the data, refresh the chore list automatically
based on how frequently each chore must be completed, and make the
app more usable by allowing the chore list to be focused on what needs
to be completed.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 460 ---
 
SwiftData
 
A variety of packages exist on GitHub to make it easier to save data on
the user’s device or on the cloud. Examples range from AgileDB to
Realm to YapDatabase, each with its own features and complexity.
Utilizing the new macro system, Apple’s SwiftData provides a means
to easily create, update, retrieve, and delete data from a persistent
storage.
 
To utilize SwiftData and complete the app, many changes need to be
done. In the Chore file:
  
add an statement at the top
 
Add @Model above the class declaration in place of
 
This marks the class as a SwiftData model. By default, all the
properties will be saved, however annotations can be placed in front of
properties to change the behavior of how they are handled. Examples
include specifying the unique identifier with @Relationship to specify
the relationship between two classes, and @Transient to specify a
property that is not stored permanently but is still available for use in
the app.

--- Page 461 ---
 
It is a good practice to specify the unique identifier when using
persisted data as it helps facilitate internal optimizations for the data.
 
In front of the id property add this annotation:
 
@Attribute(.unique)
 
Add Codable to the end of the ChoreFrequency definition. This will
allow objects that use the enumeration to save properly.
  
Make the same changes in the FamilyMember file:
  
Add import the top,
 
Change @Observable to @Model
 
Add the unique attribute to the id property.
 
SwiftData has three layers: The models, a context, and a container. The
models define the data to be stored and, possibly, how they relate to
each other. The context is a space for relationships between models
and data to be managed. The context also provides a space for data to
be read from, saved to, modified, and deleted.

--- Page 462 ---
 
By providing relationship information, SwiftData becomes an object
graph management system.
 
Above the chores property, add @Relationship(deleteRule: .nullify,
inverse:
  
The relationship annotation specifies a one-to-many relationship
between the family member and the chores that may be assigned to the
person. The delete rule, nullify, sets the chore.assignedTo property to
nil for each chore the family member is assigned to.
 
To make data access and updating easy, SwiftUI can now reference the
context as part of the environment. Follow these steps:
  
In the ChoreSplitView file, import SwiftData at the top. Then replace
the @Environment…dataModel line with:
@Environment(\.modelContext) private var
 
With the dataModel no longer being used to get chores, a new way
must be specified to reference them. SwiftData introduces the @Query
macro. By itself or with a filter, the query provides an easy and
powerful way to retrieve and sort data.
 

--- Page 463 ---
Below the new context property add: @Query(sort: \Chore.dueDate)
private var chores:
  
A query can only be used in a SwiftUI view. Without any additional
data, this query returns all chores sorted by the due date. However, a
predicate can be applied as a filter. For instance, it may be beneficial to
have only chores that are not marked as complete, returned for use. To
accomplish this, alter the chores property to look like this:
 
@Query(
 
  filter: #Predicate{ chore in
 
      !chore.isComplete
 
  },
 
  sort: \Chore.dueDate
 
)
 
private var chores: [Chore]
 

--- Page 464 ---
The predicate is using generics to identify the model’s type. Like any
other closure, a value can be passed and used in the body. Swift
provides a shortcut to simplify short code blocks. Instead of specifying
variable names, placeholders can be used. $0 is used for the first
variable, $1 for the second, etcetera. Using this information, the query
above can be rewritten:
 
@Query(
 
  filter: #Predicate{ !$0.isComplete },
 
  sort: \Chore.dueDate
 
)
 
private var chores: [Chore]
 
So new chores can be added, replace the dataModel.chores.append line
with Because the dataModel property was removed, passing it as an
environmental modifier in the preview can also be removed.
 
Working with the selected chore can also be much easier when using a
model. Instead of storing an identifier, the selected chore itself can be
referenced. Follow these steps:
  

--- Page 465 ---
Right-click the selectedChoreId property name and select Rename
from the Refactor menu. Remove Id from the end of the property name
and click the Rename button. Anywhere the rename did not work,
manually change the reference to
 
Remove .ID from the value type as well. Remove .id wherever it is
referenced and delete the entire choreData method.
 
Replace the contents of the detail area with this code:
 
if let selectedChore {
 
  ChoreView(chore: selectedChore, selectedChore: $selectedChore)
 
} else {
 
  Text("Please select a chore")
 
      .style(.h1)
 
}
  
Errors will appear regarding the selected chore. To address them, the
corresponding files need to be updated, too.

--- Page 466 ---
  
In change the selectedChoreId property name and type to match the
definition in The preview will also need to be changed.
 
In change the attribute of the chore property from @Binding to Then
remove the entire dataModel line and add the following binding
property: @Binding var selectedChore: Chore?. Where the dataModel
property was referenced below for family members, remove so it
simply reads
 
Like earlier, import SwiftData at the top of the file and below the
selectedChore property add: @Query private var familyMembers:
[FamilyMember]. The preview also needs to be updated. Change it to
ChoreView(chore: Chore(), selectedChore: .constant(nil)).
 
The changes made for chores also need to be applied to the family
member files. In
  
Add import SwiftData at the top
 
Replace the dataModel environment property with
@Environment(\.modelContext) private var
 
Remove where it is referenced in the file.

--- Page 467 ---
 
Remove the dataModel environment modifier in the preview.
 
Rename selectedMemberId to selectedMember and remove .ID from
the type and .id where it is referenced further in the file.
 
Remove the memberData method and replace the split view detail
with:
 
if let selectedMember {
 
  MemberView(member: selectedMember)
 
} else {
 
  Text("Please select a family member")
 
      .style(.h1)
 
}
 
Add @Query private var familyMembers: [FamilyMember] below the
selectedMember property.
 

--- Page 468 ---
Finally, for this file, replace familyMembers.append(newMember)
with
  
In only two changes are needed. Replace @Binding with @Bindable
and remove the constant reference in the preview.
 
An attempt to run the program now would yield the error shown in
Figure 7.1 printed in the console:
 
 
Figure Model context error
 
The container is the last of the three layers and may be permanent
storage on the device, an in-memory storage that goes away when the
app quits, or in the cloud using CloudKit. Establishing the model
container will also set the model context.
 
In remove the state property for the dataModel and the environment
modifier. After the closing brace for the WindowGroup add this
modifier: .modelContainer(for: However, due to the relationship
between Chore and only the one needs to be specified. With no more
references, the DataModel file can be deleted. Select the file and press
the delete key on the keyboard. When prompted, select Move to

--- Page 469 ---
 
Run the app on the simulator, add a family member, then stop the app
by clicking the stop button in Xcode. Run the app again. The new
family member is shown, however tapping on it does not display the
member view. To fix the problem, change the List in
MemberSplitView to this:
 
List(familyMembers, selection: $selectedMember) { member in
 
  NavigationLink {
 
      MemberView(member: member)
 
  } label: {
 
      Text(member.name)
 
        .style(.h2)
 
  }
 
}
 

--- Page 470 ---
The NavigationLink is a way of navigating to a new view. The label is
displayed to the user and when it is tapped on, the view, in this case is
pushed onto the navigation stack. Now when the app is run, and a user
is selected, the details are properly shown.
 
The same issue must be fixed for chores, too. However, instead of
using the ChoreList view, simply remove that file from the project
navigator. Replace the reference in ChoreSplitView with the following:
 
List(chores, selection: $selectedChore) { chore in
 
  NavigationLink {
 
      ChoreView(chore: chore, selectedChore: $selectedChore)
 
  } label: {
 
      ChoreListItem(chore: chore)
 
  }
 
}
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 471 ---
 
Deleting data
 
Due to how our list is shown, the onDelete modifier is unavailable for
use. However, buttons can easily be added to a list item by using the
swipeActions modifier. In the ChoreSplitView file, after the closing
curly bracket for the add this code:
 
.swipeActions(edge: .trailing) {
 
  Button(role: .destructive) {
 
      context.delete(chore)
 
  } label: {
 
      Image(systemName: "trash.fill")
 
  }
 
}
 

--- Page 472 ---
When defining the FamilyMember class as a model, a relationship was
assigned to the chore’s property with a deletion rule to nullify the
assignedTo property in the appropriate chore objects. Alternately, the
cascade rule could have been used to delete all chores assigned to the
family member or deny keeping the family member object from being
deleted at all. For this app, the nullify option works best. In the
MemberSplitView file, add the swipeActions modifier using member
instead of chore in the delete command.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 473 ---
 
Assigning chores
 
The chore view allows a specific family member to be assigned to the
chore. The next step is to assign a chore to the family member in the
member view. This will enhance our original concept by placing an
add button on the section header.
 
Placing another button will make three separate areas where a button is
used to add an object: and now This makes the perfect time to refactor
and make a separate AddButton view. In the project navigator’s UI
Style group, create a new SwiftUI view called Replace the struct and
preview with this:
 
struct AddButton: View {
 
  let accessibilityText: LocalizedStringKey
 
  let action: () -> Void
 
  init(_ accessibilityText: LocalizedStringKey, action: @escaping () ->
Void) {
 
      self.accessibilityText = accessibilityText

--- Page 474 ---
 
      self.action = action
 
  }
 
  var body: some View {
 
      Button {
 
        action()
 
      } label: {
 
        Image(systemName: "plus.circle.fill")
 
            .resizable()
 
            .tint(Color.green)
 
            .frame(width: 25, height: 25)
 
            .accessibility(label: Text(accessibilityText))
 

--- Page 475 ---
      }
 
  }
 
}
 
#Preview {
 
  AddButton("Tester") { }
 
}
 
In the initializer, note the @escaping clause. If the action was used
immediately, this would not be necessary. A calculation or function
could be performed and then the action called. However, the action
here is saved to a local property and run an arbitrary time. The
compiler must optimize the code for this scenario and the escaping
clause prompts this optimization. Should it be left out, an error will be
shown indicating it must be added.
 
The LocalizationStringKey passed is used in the accessibility label
modifier for the visual impaired. To use the add button in the
MemberView chores section, first add this code below the body
property:

--- Page 476 ---
 
@ViewBuilder
 
var sectionHeader: some View {
 
  HStack {
 
      Text("Chores")
 
      Spacer()
 
      AddButton("Add Chore") {
 
        addingChore.toggle()
 
      }
 
      .popover(isPresented: $addingChore) {
 
        VStack {
 
            Text("Select chore to assign")
 
              .style(.footer, color: .gray)

--- Page 477 ---
 
            List(unassignedChores) { chore in
 
              ChoreListItem(chore: chore)
 
                  .onTapGesture {
 
                    chore.assignedTo = member
 
                    addingChore.toggle()
 
                  }
 
            }
 
        }
 
            .frame(minWidth: 200, minHeight: 300)
 
            .padding()
 
      }
 

--- Page 478 ---
  }
 
}
 
The @ViewBuilder annotation makes it easier to use the SwiftUI code
by processing the UI components and any logical conditions and
automatically returning the result as a View without using a return
statement. It is called a result builder.
 
To remove the first error, add this property: @State private var
addingChore: Bool = The second error, Cannot find
'unassignedChores' in will require a couple more changes:
  
Add import SwiftData at the top of the file
 
Add this property:
 
  @Query(filter: #Predicate{ $0.assignedTo == nil })
 
  private var unassignedChores: [Chore]
 
The query annotation can be above the property declaration or in-line.
The result is the same.
 

--- Page 479 ---
Replace Section("Chores") with Section(header:
  
Now when the app is run, chores can be assigned to the selected family
member. The popover is presented on a phone as a sheet. However,
without the frame modifier, the presentation on an iPad is very small.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 480 ---
 
Visual cleanup
 
While cards can be useful in a lot of situations, especially for the
grouping elements on the screen, in this app they are limiting. Remove
the references to cards in the ChoreView and MemberView files.
Moreover, you can also remove the max frame height and padding
modifiers. So what looked like this:
 
Card {
 
  Form {
 
      . . .
 
  }
 
}
 
.frame(maxHeight: 400)
 
.padding(-6)
 

--- Page 481 ---
Would now look like this:
 
Form {
 
  . . .
 
}
 
A title over each screen helps orient the user to their place in the app.
In SwiftUI, the content defines the title. After the last closing curly
brace of the form in ChoreView add this modifier:
.navigationTitle("Chore") and similarly in after the last curly brace for
the form add: .navigationTitle("Family Now when the app is run, a
navigation title is shown over each view as illustrated in Figure
 

--- Page 482 ---
 
Figure Navigation title displayed
 
When using a navigation controller, it is common to place elements
such as text or buttons at the top. This is called the toolbar. In fact, it is
one of a few. To use the new select MemberSplitView and remove the
and its components, along with the private AddMemberButton
property.
 
Below the closing curly brace of the VStack, add this code:
 
.toolbar {
 
  AddButton("Add Family Member") {

--- Page 483 ---
 
      let newMember = FamilyMember(name: "new family member")
 
      context.insert(newMember)
 
      selectedMember = newMember
 
  }
 
}
 
In ChoreSplitView make the same changes. Remove the HStack and
the add button property and add code after the VStack closing brace.
Almost anything can be put into the toolbar. By default, items are
showing on the trailing side, however elements can be put into a
ToolbarItem and a placement explicitly stated. To show the number of
chores on the leading side and the add button on the trailing, replace
the toolbar modifier with this:
 
.toolbar {
 
ToolbarItem(placement: .topBarLeading) {
 
      Text("Chores: \(chores.count)")
 

--- Page 484 ---
  }
 
  ToolbarItem(placement: .topBarTrailing) {
 
      AddButton("Add Chore") {
 
        let newChore = Chore(name: "new chore")
 
        context.insert(newChore)
 
        selectedChore = newChore
 
      }
 
  }
 
}
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 485 ---
 
Fix previews
 
The views that depend completely on SwiftData cannot show a
preview without some extra work. A temporary data container can be
created with the sample data and can be used in the preview. In the
project navigator create a new Swift file called At the top, import
SwiftUI and SwiftData. By default, new Swift files import Foundation,
however, sometimes, when other frameworks like SwiftUI are
imported, this line can be deleted. Add this class:
 
class PreviewContainer {
 
  @MainActor
 
  static let container: ModelContainer = {
 
      do {
 
        let configuration = ModelConfiguration(isStoredInMemoryOnly:
true)
 
        let container = try ModelContainer(for: Chore.self,
configurations: configuration)

--- Page 486 ---
 
        for chore in Chore.sampleChores {
 
            container.mainContext.insert(chore)
 
        }
 
        return container
 
      } catch {
 
        fatalError("Cannot create container")
 
      }
 
  }()
 
}
 
The two views, and MemberSplitView need their previews updated to
use this container. To use the sample data, add the modelContainer
modifier to the view being called like this:
 

--- Page 487 ---
ChoreSplitView(membersOrChores: .constant(.chores),
showCompleted: false, showPastDue: false)
 
    .modelContainer(PreviewContainer.container)
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 488 ---
 
Daily chores
 
As the list of chores rarely changes, a mechanism must be added that
will automatically find expired chores, archive them, and create new
chores according to the frequency.
 
Several factors must be considered when using date math: Leap years,
time zones, daylight savings time, and more. To simplify the process, it
is always best to use the built-in methods provided by the operating
system. Follow these steps to get a list of expired chores and renew
them:
  
From this chapter’s End code folder, find the file called
DateExtensions.swift from
HouseholdChores/HouseholdChores/Foundation Extensions folder and
drag it to the Foundation Extensions group of the project navigator.
Make sure the Copy items if needed checkbox is selected.
 
Select ChoreSplitView and add this below the current properties:
 
@Query private var expiredChores: [Chore]
 

--- Page 489 ---
@AppStorage(ChorePreference.lastChoreRenew) var
lastChoreRenew: Int = 0
 
init(membersOrChores: Binding) {
 
  self._membersOrChores = membersOrChores
 
  let now = Date()
 
  let startOfDay = now.startOfDay
 
  let expiredChoresPredicate: Predicate = #Predicate {
 
      !$0.isArchived && $0.dueDate <= startOfDay
 
  }
 
  _expiredChores = Query(filter: expiredChoresPredicate)
 
}
 
The expiredChores query property is overridden by the initializer. Note
how it is not accessed directly, but it is prefixed with an underscore.
Using the underscore allows access directly to the value. This

--- Page 490 ---
technique allows the use of parameters in the query or more complex
predicates. Note that the startOfDay variable is created first and then
used in the predicate. Comparisons to fixed values normally require
this technique. Also, enumerations in predicates are not supported at
this time.
 
After the navigationSplitViewStyle modifier, add this one:
 
.onAppear {
 
  renewChores()
 
}
 
Every time the view is shown, the onAppear is invoked. This is a great
way to run code every time a view appears on-screen. It can be used to
change the value of a state property that causes an animation to start or
run a method, as done here.
 
Add the following methods below the body property:
 
private func renewChores() {
 
  // check if 4 hours have passed since last run

--- Page 491 ---
 
  let lastRenewDate = Date(rawValue: lastChoreRenew)
 
  let elapsedSeconds = abs(lastRenewDate.timeIntervalSinceNow)
 
  guard elapsedSeconds > (60 * 60 * 4) else { return }
 
  for chore in expiredChores {
 
      chore.isArchived = true
 
      for newChore in newChores(from: chore) {
 
        context.insert(newChore)
 
      }
 
  }
 
  lastChoreRenew = Date().rawValue
 
}
 

--- Page 492 ---
private func newChores(from chore: Chore, using now: Date = Date())
-> [Chore] {
 
  var newChores: [Chore] = []
 
  let endOfDay = now.endOfDay
 
  var newDate = chore.dueDate
 
  repeat {
 
      switch chore.frequency {
 
      case .daily:
 
        newDate = newDate.endOfNextDay
 
      case .weekly:
 
        newDate = newDate.endOfNextWeek
 
      case .monthly:
 
        newDate = newDate.endOfNextMonth

--- Page 493 ---
 
case .seasonal:
 
        newDate = newDate.endOfNextQuarter
 
      }
 
      let isArchived = newDate < endOfDay
 
      let newChore = Chore(name: chore.name, location: chore.location,
frequency: chore.frequency, assignedTo: chore.assignedTo,
isArchived: isArchived, dueDate: newDate)
 
      newChores.append(newChore)
 
  } while newDate < endOfDay
 
  return newChores
 
}
  
These methods cycle through the expired chores and create new chores
according to the frequency. If needed, more than one will be created
and archived until a valid one has been created. As chores are created

--- Page 494 ---
and added to the context, the chores query will automatically update
along with the list that it drives.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 495 ---
 
User preferences
 
Many apps have options available to the user that govern how the app
operates. Sometimes small bits of information need to be stored between
instances of the app. Often a screen is dedicated to setting user-defined
options, but for a single screen app such as the Household Chores app,
these options can be shown in the device’s Setting app.
 
A way to show past due or completed chores will be created.
  
In Xcode, add a new file of type Settings The two items added are the or
localization project, folder and Figure 7.3 shows the default root entries
after Preference Items has been expanded.
 
To expand an entry, click the chevron next to the name:
 

--- Page 496 ---
 
Figure Preference entries
 
Items are processed in the order of their appearance.
 
Run the app in the simulator and then open the Settings app in the same
simulator and select Household Note the label shown for the switch is
matching the Title entry in the bundle settings.
 
To make the chore list more focused, completed or past due items will be
hidden. The Root file is a plist, an organized way of storing static data
used by program. In the file, do the following:
  
Expand the Preference Items/Item 0 (Group…) entry and change the title
value to group.chores.title by double-clicking the existing value and
entering the new one.
 

--- Page 497 ---
Select the text field entry and press the delete key on the keyboard.
 
Select the slider entry and press the delete key.
 
In the toggle entry, change the title value to chores.showCompleted and
the identifier value to
 
Collapse the toggle entry and select it.
 
Add a new entry by either right clicking the entry and selecting Add Row
or simply pressing the return key on the keyboard.
 
On the new entry, select Toggle Switch as the type.
 
Set the new entry title to chores.showPastDue and the identifier value to
  
Figure 7.4 shows what it looks like after these changes have been made:
 

--- Page 498 ---
 
Figure Completed changes in the Root.plist file
 
Were the app run now, the settings for the app will resemble Figure
 
 
Figure Settings for Household Chores after initial changes
 
The titles need to be localized. Open the Root file in en.lproj folder and
change the contents of the file to the following:
 
"group.chores.title" = "Chores";
 

--- Page 499 ---
"chores.showCompleted" = "Show Completed";
 
"chores.showPastDue" = "Show Past Due";
 
The strings on the left match the preference title values and on the strings
on the right are displayed to the user.
 
To add a new language, right-click the Settings bundle and select New
The name must match the same format as the original language. Two
letters for the language followed by The ISO standard 639-1 lists valid
language codes. In this project es.lprog was created for a Spanish
translation.
 
Add a file called Root.strings inside the newly created folder, because the
localizable tables of Xcode used earlier are not available in the settings
bundle. Now, add the following entries:
 
"group.chores.title" = "Quehaceres";
 
"chores.showCompleted" = "Mostrar completado";
 
"chores.showPastDue" = "Mostrar vencida";
  
Note that each line must end with a semi-colon. Failure to add the semi-
colon will render the entire file unusable. Now run the app in the

--- Page 500 ---
simulator and open Household Chores entry in the Settings app to see how
the switch titles have been localized.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 501 ---
 
Integrating user preferences
 
To start the process of using the defined options in the app, open the
ContentView file and add the following two lines below the state
property:
 
@AppStorage("showCompleted") var showCompleted = false
 
@AppStorage("showPastDue") var showPastDue = false
 
The @AppStorage indicator is a property wrapper. Property wrappers
provide a way of easily wrapping code that can be run every time the
property changes or used as a means of changing the property value.
AppStorage allows the program to read and write values to user
defaults. The strings in the parenthesis match the identifier values used
in the preference items of the settings bundle. They indicate the key
used to store and retrieve the user preference values. As the app is run,
these properties act like state properties. When they are updated, the
user preferences are updated and vice versa.
 
In the ContentView file, change the call to ChoreSplitView in the
chores case of the switch statement to
ChoreSplitView(membersOrChores: $membersOrChores,
showCompleted: showCompleted, showPastDue:

--- Page 502 ---
 
In ChoreSplitView update the initializer to accept the additional
parameters and use them as follows:
 
Binding, showCompleted: Bool, showPastDue: Bool) {
 
  self._membersOrChores = membersOrChores
 
  let now = Date()
 
  let endOfDay = now.endOfDay
 
  let startOfDay = now.startOfDay
 
  let chorePredicate = #Predicate {
 
    ($0.dueDate <= endOfDay && !$0.isArchived && !$0.isComplete)
 
    || ($0.dueDate <= endOfDay && showCompleted &&
$0.isComplete)
 
    || ($0.dueDate <= startOfDay && showPastDue &&
!$0.isComplete)

--- Page 503 ---
 
  }
 
  _chores = Query(filter: chorePredicate, sort: \.dueDate)
 
  let expiredChoresPredicate: Predicate = #Predicate {
 
    !$0.isArchived && $0.dueDate <= startOfDay
 
  }
 
  _expiredChores = Query(filter: expiredChoresPredicate)
 
}
 
Like before, the predicate is using local variables to compare against,
and the query property is updated. With these final changes, family
members and chores can be created, and they will be automatically
updated as the app is used and the user preferences honored.
 
Update the preview to accept the new parameters, as the display can
change according to what the parameters are, it would be wise to
provide multiple previews:
 

--- Page 504 ---
#Preview("Current Chores") {
 
  ChoreSplitView(membersOrChores: .constant(.chores),
showCompleted: false, showPastDue: false)
 
      .modelContainer(PreviewContainer.container)
 
}
 
#Preview("Completed Chores") {
 
  ChoreSplitView(membersOrChores: .constant(.chores),
showCompleted: true, showPastDue: false)
 
      .modelContainer(PreviewContainer.container)
 
}
 
#Preview("Past Due Chores") {
 
  ChoreSplitView(membersOrChores: .constant(.chores),
showCompleted: false, showPastDue: true)
 
      .modelContainer(PreviewContainer.container)
 

--- Page 505 ---
}
 
To make the previews functional, the sample data needs to be dynamic,
meaning the dates cannot be static for the preview to work properly.
With the Completed Chores preview showing, toggle the pin button of
the preview. This will keep the preview pane active and visible while
changing the file to edit. Select the Chore file.
 
The selected preview should not show any chores that are completed
or past due. In the sampleChores property follow these steps:
  
Add a new variable below the family member variables: let lastWeek =
Calendar.current.date(byAdding: .day, value: -7, to: Date()) ??
 
Every time the sample chores are used, this will provide a date seven
days in the past. The byAdding method may fail to provide a valid date
if given invalid parameters, so coalescing operator, provides a concrete
value as a fallback option. This is unlikely to occur.
 
Update the first three chore variables as follows:
 
let c1 = Chore(name: "Pickup", location: "Bedroom", frequency:
.daily, assignedTo: liam, isComplete: true)
 

--- Page 506 ---
let c2 = Chore(name: "Make Bed", location: "Bedroom", frequency:
.daily, assignedTo: liam, isComplete: true)
 
let c3 = Chore(name: "Pickup", location: "Living space", frequency:
.daily, assignedTo: maria, isArchived: true, dueDate: lastWeek)
  
After saving the file, the preview will update. These specific chores
will no longer show. Select the Completed Chores preview and the
first two will now show. Select the last preview and the third chore
will show, but not the first two.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 507 ---
 
Conclusion
 
SwiftData provides advanced data handling in apps for all of Apple’s
ecosystem by taking advantage of the Swift language and SwiftUI. By
carefully creating the models and defining the relationships, data can
be easily added, viewed, and manipulated.
 
While an in-app preferences screen is useful for letting the user define
how the app should work, single-screen apps should place their
preferences into the device’s Settings app.
 
The next chapter dives into Apple’s charting system, Swift Charts.
 
Join our book’s Discord space
 
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the
Authors:
 
https://discord.bpbonline.com

--- Page 508 ---
 
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 509 ---
 
C
HAPTER
8
Charting Your Progress
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 510 ---
 
Introduction
 
Charts bring a great visual way of summarizing data to any data-heavy
app. In 2022, Apple introduced Swift Charts. This framework is a great
addition to SwiftUI as a way of defining a variety of charts for use in
an app. It is easy to use and has a lot of flexibility with options to give
stunning results involving little effort.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 511 ---
 
Structure
 
This chapter includes the following topics:
  
Explore Swift Charts
 
Integrating a chart into the Chores app
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 512 ---
 
Objectives
 
By the end of this chapter the reader should understand how to create a
variety of charts using simple principles that define most of the charts.
The reader will also know a variety of modifications to customize the
appearance of the charts.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 513 ---
 
Explore Swift Charts
 
Swift charts are tightly coupled with Swift UI, bringing a way to
describe the values that represent the chart along with the principal
way of displaying it. The charting system automatically applies
defaults to present a meaningful chart.
 
To get a grasp of how bar charts operate, follow these steps to explore
them in a playground:
  
In Xcode, create a new playground by selecting New and then
Playground from the File menu. Name it
 
Replace the contents of the file with the following for a clean start that
can be used for any SwiftUI playground:
 
import SwiftUI
 
import PlaygroundSupport
 
struct ChartSample: View {
 

--- Page 514 ---
  var body: some View {
 
  Text("Playground")
 
  }
 
}
 
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 515 ---
 
Bar charts
 
Swift charts uses the concept of a Mark to identify an element to be
displayed. For instance, a BarMark represents a single bar on the chart.
Follow these tseps to create a bar chart:
  
Add import Charts at the top of the file, below the other import
statements, then replace this:
 
Chart {
 
  BarMark(
 
      x: .value("Name", "Liam"),
 
      y: .value("% Complete", 40)
 
  )
 
  BarMark(
 
      x: .value("Name", "Maria"),

--- Page 516 ---
 
      y: .value("% Complete", 60)
 
  )
 
  BarMark(
 
      x: .value("Name", "Amir"),
 
y: .value("% Complete", 50)
 
  )
 
}
 
.frame(width: 500, height: 500)
 
.padding(32)
 
Each mark has an x and y value each of which has two parts: The label
for the value followed by the value itself. The first mark above shows
that Liam completed 40% of his chores and so on. The frame is needed
for the playground, but usually not needed within an app. The chart
should look like Figure

--- Page 517 ---
 
 
Figure 8.1: Sample bar chart
 
To display the bars horizontally, swap the x and y values inside each
While there are only three bars in this chart, it is possible to have
several. Looping through an array by using a ForEach statement allows
an arbitrary number of bars to be charted. Start by creating a structure
to hold the data. Add the following struct above
 
struct GraphData {
 
  let familyMember: String
 
  let percentComplete: Double

--- Page 518 ---
 
  init(_ familyMember: String, _ percentComplete: Double) {
 
    self.familyMember = familyMember
 
    self.percentComplete = percentComplete
 
  }
 
}
 
extension GraphData: Identifiable {
 
  var id: String { familyMember }
 
}
 
By specifying an init with underscores in the place of the parameter
names, data can be initialized without specifying the parameter names.
While used for brevity in this example, the technique should only be
used when the meaning of the parameter values is clear at the point of
use.
 

--- Page 519 ---
Above the body property of the ChartSample struct, create an array of
elements to be displayed in the chart:
 
let memberData = [
 
  GraphData("Liam", 40),
 
  GraphData("Maria", 60),
 
  GraphData("Amir", 50)
 
]
 
Finally, replace the chart with the following:
 
Chart {
 
  ForEach(memberData) { data in
 
      BarMark(
 
        x: .value("% Complete", data.percentComplete),
 
        y: .value("Name", data.familyMember)

--- Page 520 ---
 
      )
 
  }
 
}
  
This example has the x and y values swapped so the bar marks are
displayed horizontally. Note the scale is dynamically adjusted
according to the values being displayed. Change the percent completed
in the memberData to values below 20 to see how the scale adapts.
Sometimes it is best to not have dynamic range. In this chart, the
values represent percentages so a fixed scale of 0…100 would be
ideal. Below the closing brace of the chart, add this modifier:
.chartXScale(domain: If the values were vertical, then the chartYScale
modifier would be used.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 521 ---
 
Line graphs
 
Grouping values can also be temporal based instead of String.
Consider a line graph showing the output of solar panels throughout
the day. Measurements are made hourly and an average for the season
is graphed:
  
Replace the GraphData struct and its extension with the following:
 
struct GraphData {
 
  let hour: Date
 
  let kWhGenerated: Double
 
  init(_ hour: Date, _ kWhGenerated: Double) {
 
self.hour = hour
 
      self.kWhGenerated = kWhGenerated
 
  }

--- Page 522 ---
 
}
 
extension GraphData: Identifiable {
 
  var id: Date { hour }
 
}
 
extension Date {
 
  func timeFromString(_ timeString: String) -> Date {
 
      let calendar = Calendar.current
 
      var components = DateComponents()
 
      components.year = calendar.component(.year, from: self)
 
      components.month = calendar.component(.month, from: self)
 
      components.day = calendar.component(.day, from: self)
 

--- Page 523 ---
      let timeParts = timeString.split(separator: ":")
 
      components.hour = Int(timeParts.first ?? "") ?? 0
 
      components.minute = Int(timeParts.last ?? "") ?? 0
 
      return calendar.date(from: components) ?? self
 
  }
 
}
 
let winterAverage = [
 
  GraphData(Date().timeFromString("08:00"), 0.1),
 
  GraphData(Date().timeFromString("09:00"), 0.6),
 
  GraphData(Date().timeFromString("10:00"), 1.1),
 
  GraphData(Date().timeFromString("11:00"), 2.3),
 
  GraphData(Date().timeFromString("12:00"), 3.9),
 

--- Page 524 ---
  GraphData(Date().timeFromString("13:00"), 2.6),
 
  GraphData(Date().timeFromString("14:00"), 1.9),
 
  GraphData(Date().timeFromString("15:00"), 1.2),
 
  GraphData(Date().timeFromString("16:00"), 0.8),
 
  GraphData(Date().timeFromString("17:00"), 0.2),
 
  GraphData(Date().timeFromString("18:00"), 0)
 
]
 
The data represents the average amount of energy generated by some
solar panels at each hour. In practice, an actual timestamp and
measurement would be stored, and an average calculated at display
time.
 
In the ChartSample struct, replace the graph with the code below:
 
Chart {
 
  ForEach(winterAverage) { output in

--- Page 525 ---
 
      LineMark(
 
        x: .value("Hour", output.hour, unit: .hour),
 
        y: .value("Kwh Generated", output.kWhGenerated)
 
      )
 
  }
 
}
 
Figure 8.2 shows the resulting chart:
 

--- Page 526 ---
 
Figure Sample line chart
 
To give the chart a more natural look for the increase and decrease of
daylight, a modifier can be added to the ForEach statement. Below the
closing brace, add Make sure the modifier is added to the ForEach
element and not the
 
By default, information of the y-axis is placed on the trailing edge. To
show it on the leading edge, add this modifier below the chart’s closing
brace:
 
.chartYAxis {
 

--- Page 527 ---
  AxisMarks(position: .leading)
 
}
 
The chart clearly indicates that the output of energy is most abundant
between 11am and 2pm. To give a more appealing presentation, a
combination of chart types can be combined.
 
Make the line marks thicker by adding this modifier after the closing
parenthesis of the LineMark: .lineStyle(StrokeStyle(lineWidth:
 
Add this area mark below the line mark:
 
AreaMark(
 
  x: .value("Hour", output.hour, unit: .hour),
 
  y: .value("Kwh Generated", output.kWhGenerated)
 
)
 
.opacity(0.5)
 
.foregroundStyle(

--- Page 528 ---
 
  LinearGradient(gradient: Gradient(colors: [.green, .white]),
startPoint: .top, endPoint: .bottom)
 
)
 
Figure 8.3 illustrates the final solar output chart. Note how the area
overlaps to the center of the line. To see it more clearly, remove the
opacity modifier:
 
 
Figure Line chart with area chart superimposed over it

--- Page 529 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 530 ---
 
Charting different sets
 
Another common way of visualizing data is to compare between
multiple groupings. Salaries for groups of people in a company
compared to the industry standard, growth of various produce in
different regions, or the solar panel output in different seasons for the
same hours of the day.
  
Below winterAverage add this summer average information:
 
let summerAverage = [
 
  GraphData(Date().timeFromString("08:00"), 0.9),
 
  GraphData(Date().timeFromString("09:00"), 2.6),
 
  GraphData(Date().timeFromString("10:00"), 3.5),
 
  GraphData(Date().timeFromString("11:00"), 5.1),
 
  GraphData(Date().timeFromString("12:00"), 7.9),
 

--- Page 531 ---
  GraphData(Date().timeFromString("13:00"), 8.0),
 
  GraphData(Date().timeFromString("14:00"), 7.4),
 
  GraphData(Date().timeFromString("15:00"), 6.8),
 
  GraphData(Date().timeFromString("16:00"), 5.2),
 
  GraphData(Date().timeFromString("17:00"), 4.6),
 
  GraphData(Date().timeFromString("18:00"), 2.7)
 
]
 
To compare different sets, each must each be graphed as done above.
In this case, winter and then summer. Above the body of the
ChartSample struct, add this array of tuples:
 
let seasons = [
 
  (season: "Winter", data: winterAverage),
 
  (season: "Summer", data: summerAverage)

--- Page 532 ---
 
]
 
This could be an array of structs, too. Next, replace the graphing code
with the following:
 
Chart {
 
  ForEach(seasons, id: \.season) { season in
 
      ForEach(season.data) { output in
 
        LineMark(
 
            x: .value("Hour", output.hour, unit: .hour),
 
            y: .value("Kwh Generated", output.kWhGenerated)
 
        )
 
      }
 
      .foregroundStyle(by: .value("Season", season.season))
 

--- Page 533 ---
      .symbol(.cross)
 
  }
 
.interpolationMethod(.catmullRom)
 
}
 
.chartYAxis {
 
  AxisMarks(position: .leading)
 
}
 
The foregroundStyle modifier differentiates between seasons by giving
each one a distinct color and adding a legend. Finally, the symbol
modifier can be used to mark data points.
 
The following symbols can be specified: Asterisk, circle, cross,
diamond, pentagon, plus, square, and triangle.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 534 ---
 
Proportional charts
 
When the values for the graphed data are displayed as a proportion of
the whole, a couple of ways can be used. The first is a single, multi-
segmented bar chart. Reset the playground to the clean start given at
the beginning of this chapter and keep import Charts at the top of the
file.
  
Add this new struct that identifies what percentage of available chores
is assigned to each person:
 
struct GraphData {
 
  let familyMember: String
 
  let percentOfChores: Double
 
  init(_ familyMember: String, _ percentOfChores: Double) {
 
      self.familyMember = familyMember
 
      self.percentOfChores = percentOfChores

--- Page 535 ---
 
  }
 
}
 
extension GraphData: Identifiable {
 
  var id: String { familyMember }
 
}
 
Next, add this property of values to chart inside the ChartSample
struct, above the body property:
 
let memberData = [
 
  GraphData("Liam", 0.44),
 
  GraphData("Maria", 0.33),
 
GraphData("Amir", 0.22)
 
]

--- Page 536 ---
 
Finally, replace the body property with the following to get the results
shown in Figure
 
var body: some View {
 
  Chart(memberData) { data in
 
      BarMark(
 
        x: .value("% of Chores", data.percentOfChores),
 
        stacking: .normalized
 
      )
 
      .foregroundStyle(by: .value("Name", data.familyMember))
 
  }
 
  .chartXAxis(.hidden)
 
  .frame(width: 500, height: 50)
 

--- Page 537 ---
  .padding(32)
 
}
 
 
Figure Proportional bar chart
 
Each mark is proportional to the total. The chartXAxis modifier is used
to hide the axis information.
 
Another way to chart data proportionally is with a pie chart. Remove
the chartXAxis modifier, set the frame height to and replace the
BarMark with the following:
 
SectorMark(
 
  angle: .value("% of Chores", data.percentOfChores)
 
)
 
Instead of x and y values, an angle is used to represent the percentage
of the pie sector. The SectorMark component also takes innerRadius

--- Page 538 ---
and angularInset parameters. By adding an innerRadius parameter to
the the center of the pie chart is opened to create a donut chart. The
angularInset parameter adds space between each sector. Adjust the
code to match this:
 
SectorMark(
 
  angle: .value("% of Chores", data.percentOfChores),
 
innerRadius: .fixed(100),
 
  angularInset: 2.0
 
)
 
Change the parameter values to see how they affect the chart. The
inner radius can be a fixed number of points as shown above or a ratio
to the size of the graph by using .ratio(n) where n is a percentage from
zero to one. To round out the corners of each sector, add this modifier
after the sector mark:
 
With the center of the chart open, some text can be added as a
background. Add the chartBackground modifier to the chart. Figure
8.5 shows the result:

--- Page 539 ---
 
.chartBackground { chartProxy in
 
  GeometryReader { geometry in
 
      let frame = geometry[chartProxy.plotFrame!]
 
      VStack {
 
        Text("Chore")
 
        Text("Distribution")
 
      }
 
      .bold()
 
      .position(x: frame.midX, y: frame.midY)
 
  }
 
}
 

--- Page 540 ---
 
Figure Donut chart with center text
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 541 ---
 
Integrating a chart into the Chores app
 
With a basic understanding of charts, a bar chart can be added to the
app. Open the Household Chores project and select the Chore file.
When sample data is needed, keeping it with the model can be useful.
However, when it is only for the use of previews, there is a place in the
project it can be placed so the #if DEBUG directive is not needed.
Delete the directive and the sample data so the only thing remaining in
the file is the model.
  
In the project navigator, locate the folder called Preview In the folder,
create a Swift file called Sample Add the following content for a week
of daily chores:
 
extension Chore {
 
  static var sampleChores: [Chore] {
 
      let liam = FamilyMember(name: "Liam")
 
      let maria = FamilyMember(name: "Maria")
 

--- Page 542 ---
      let amir = FamilyMember(name: "Amir")
 
      var chores: [Chore] = []
 
      var isComplete: Bool {
 
        let random = Int.random(in: (0...100))
 
        return random > 30
 
      }
 
      for day in (-7...0) {
 
        let isArchived: Bool
 
        let dueDate: Date
 
        if day == 0 {
 
            dueDate = Date().endOfDay
 
            isArchived = false

--- Page 543 ---
 
        } else {
 
            dueDate = Calendar
 
                    .current
 
                    .date(byAdding: .day, value: day, to: Date())?
 
                    .endOfDay ?? Date()
 
            isArchived = true
 
        }
 
        let liamChore = Chore(
 
            name: "Pickup",
 
            location: "Bedroom",
 
            frequency: .daily,
 
            assignedTo: liam,

--- Page 544 ---
 
            isComplete: isComplete,
 
isArchived: isArchived,
 
            dueDate: dueDate
 
        )
 
        let mariaChore = Chore(
 
            name: "Pickup",
 
            location: "Living room",
 
            frequency: .daily,
 
            assignedTo: maria,
 
            isComplete: isComplete,
 
            isArchived: isArchived,
 

--- Page 545 ---
            dueDate: dueDate
 
        )
 
        let amirChore = Chore(
 
            name: "Dishes",
 
            location: "Kitchen",
 
            frequency: .daily,
 
            assignedTo: amir,
 
            isComplete: isComplete,
 
            isArchived: isArchived,
 
            dueDate: dueDate
 
        )
 
        chores.append(contentsOf: [liamChore, mariaChore, amirChore])

--- Page 546 ---
 
      }
 
      return chores
 
  }
 
}
 
Now whenever sample chores are needed, chores with relevant due
dates are returned. The sample family member data can also be moved
into a new file.
 
The next step is to create a chart. In the Chores group, add a new
SwiftUI file called The new view will show a bar chart of the percent
of chores completed by each family member for the past seven days.
 
At the top of the new file, update the imports and add a new struct as
shown here:
 
import SwiftUI
 
import SwiftData
 
import Charts

--- Page 547 ---
 
import CommonUI
 
struct CompletionRate {
 
  var name: String
 
  var percentComplete: Double
 
}
 
In the view, above the body property, add the following properties and
initializer:
 
@Binding var showingGraph: Bool
 
@State var completionRates: [CompletionRate] = []
 
@Environment(\.modelContext) private var context
 
@Query private var archivedChores: [Chore]
 
init(showingGraph: Binding) {

--- Page 548 ---
 
  self._showingGraph = showingGraph
 
  let startDate = Calendar
 
      .current
 
      .date(byAdding: .day, value: -7, to: Date())?
 
      .endOfDay ?? Date()
 
  let endDate = Date().startOfDay
 
  let predicate = #Predicate {
 
      ($0.dueDate >= startDate
 
      && $0.dueDate < endDate
 
      && $0.isArchived)
 
  }
 

--- Page 549 ---
  _archivedChores = Query(filter: predicate)
 
}
 
The technique of setting the query inside the initializer was used
before so it should not be new. The binding, allows the value passed
from the parent view to be updated. It will be used to hide the chart’s
enclosing sheet. Replace the body with the following:
 
var body: some View {
 
  VStack {
 
      header
 
      chart
 
  }
 
.onAppear {
 
      completionRates = calculateCompletionRates(from:
archivedChores)
 
  }

--- Page 550 ---
 
}
 
Using properties and functions in the body provides a clear intent on
how the view is to be composed. Add the following properties and
method below the
 
var header: some View {
 
  VStack {
 
      HStack {
 
        VStack(alignment: .leading) {
 
            Text("% Chores Complete")
 
              .style(.h2)
 
            Text("Last 7 Days")
 
              .style(.paragraph)
 

--- Page 551 ---
        }
 
        Spacer()
 
        TertiaryButton("Done") {
 
            showingGraph.toggle()
 
        }
 
        .fixedSize()
 
      }
 
      Divider()
 
        .frame(height: 1.0)
 
        .overlay(.gray)
 
  }
 
}

--- Page 552 ---
 
var chart: some View {
 
  Chart(completionRates, id: \.name) { rate in
 
      BarMark(
 
        x: .value("Name", rate.name),
 
        y: .value("Completed", rate.percentComplete)
 
      )
 
      .annotation(position: .overlay, alignment: .center) {
 
Text("\(rate.percentComplete, format:
.number.precision(.fractionLength(0)))")
 
                              .foregroundColor(.white)
 
                      }
 
  }
 

--- Page 553 ---
  .chartYScale(domain: 0...100)
 
}
 
func calculateCompletionRates(from chores: [Chore]) ->
[CompletionRate] {
 
  struct Amounts {
 
      var chores = 0
 
      var completed = 0
 
  }
 
  var choreAmounts: [String: Amounts] = [:]
 
  for chore in chores {
 
      let name = chore.assignedTo?.name ?? "Unassigned"
 
      var amounts = choreAmounts[name] ?? Amounts()
 

--- Page 554 ---
      amounts.chores += 1
 
      amounts.completed += chore.isComplete ? 1 : 0
 
      choreAmounts[name] = amounts
 
  }
 
  var completionRates: [CompletionRate] = []
 
  for (name, amounts) in choreAmounts {
 
      let completionRate = CompletionRate(name: name,
percentComplete: Double(amounts.completed) /
Double(amounts.chores) * 100)
 
      completionRates.append(completionRate)
 
  }
 
  return completionRates
 
}

--- Page 555 ---
 
The calculateCompletionRates function accepts an array of chores to
use for calculating and returns an array instead of directly updating the
struct’s completionRates property. Using this approach makes it easy
to add unit tests.
 
Finally, update the preview to pass a constant for the binding and
provide a context for the chores:
 
#Preview {
 
  PercentCompleteChart(showingGraph: .constant(true))
 
      .modelContainer(PreviewContainer.container)
 
}
 
Now, whenever the file is selected, a chart with random percentages
will be shown similar to Figure
 

--- Page 556 ---
 
Figure Bar chart showing percentage of completed chores
  
There should always be a title that clearly identifies what the chart
represents. Note how the view hugs the edge of the display. Seeing
this, it is tempting to add padding. However, never add an external
padding to a view when it designed to be embedded into another view.
Add padding at the point of use.
 
Suppose the design team decides a button should always have at least
sixteen points of padding between it and other elements. If the buttons
were designed to have sixteen points of external padding around it, the

--- Page 557 ---
placement inside a view may work well, but if used at the bottom
corner of a card that has its own internal padding specified, the button
would have too much padding as shown in Figure
 
 
Figure Improperly padded button placed in card
 
Let us now reasonably consider how components will be used and
make sample views to show its use. If enhancements are needed,
default parameters can be utilized so existing uses of the component
will not break or change behavior. Or modifiers can be used to enhance
the component’s utility.
 
Select ChoreSplitView in the project navigator. At the top of the before
the add a showingChart state property with a default value of
 
Update the toolbar to match the following:
 
.toolbar {

--- Page 558 ---
 
  Button(action: {
 
      showingChart.toggle()
 
  }, label: {
 
      Image(systemName: "chart.bar.fill")
 
  })
 
  AddButton("Add Chore") {
 
      let newChore = Chore(name: "new chore")
 
      context.insert(newChore)
 
      selectedChore = newChore
 
  }
 
}
 

--- Page 559 ---
Finally, below the onAppear modifier, add a sheet modifier:
 
.sheet(isPresented: $showingChart) {
 
  PercentCompleteChart(showingGraph: $showingChart)
 
      .padding()
 
}
 
Simple buttons are used for the toolbar without regard to a specific
placement, the ToolbarItems are no longer needed. Notice how
padding is used at the point of use in the sheet. Add the property, chart
button, and sheet in the MemberSplitView file, too.
 
Now when the app is run, the chart can be displayed regardless of
which tab is selected. Because the sheet is not modal, the user can
dismiss the sheet by dragging it down or tapping the button. In the
chapter’s code folder, the project is set to use the sample chores on the
initial launch of the program.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 560 ---
 
Conclusion
 
Charts give an app’s users a quick and easy-to-understand
representation of underlying data. While only one chart was
implemented, the sheet could show a tab bar with where each tab
shows a different view with its own query, processing method, and
chart.
 
The chore model could have estimated time for completion allowing
for a pie chart that presents the number of hours each family member
has assigned for a period. Or a line chart could be added that plots the
percent of chores completed by each family member by month or
quarter.
 
The next chapter starts a new app that utilizes several other aspects of
iOS development including networking, calling, dropping pins onto
the Maps app, and viewing external websites.
 
Join our book’s Discord space
 
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the
Authors:

--- Page 561 ---
 
https://discord.bpbonline.com
 
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 562 ---
 
C
HAPTER
9
Create the New York City Schools App
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 563 ---
 
Introduction
 
In this chapter a new app is created that gets its data from an external
source. Also, the MVVM, or Model, View, ViewModel design pattern
will be used. This pattern separates the logic, by use of a view model,
from model data and the view.
 
There is discussion within the Swift community if this pattern is valid
when using SwiftUI, however many companies and individuals still
use it. The city schools app introduces several useful techniques for
creating and structuring a network-based app.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 564 ---
 
Structure
 
This chapter includes the following topics:
  
User interface design of new app
 
Model design
 
MVVM
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 565 ---
 
Objectives
 
By the end of this chapter the reader should understand how to
optionally show visual elements based on device abilities or the state
of the app. The reader will also see how to update an existing package,
create models based on an API response, and use the MVVM pattern
in a SwiftUI app.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 566 ---
 
Interface design
 
The purpose of this app is to give a simple listing of schools with the
option to search. Each entry should have a website listing and the
results of SAT scores. If they do not exist, then the buttons to view
them should be hidden. The app must also provide the ability to view a
map showing each school’s location and call the school, but only if the
user is on a device that can make phone calls. Figure 9.1 gives a rough
sketch of the user interface to design:
 
 

--- Page 567 ---
Figure New York city schools app design
 
The third school does not have any scores to show so the button is
hidden. The last card is also missing the call button to illustrate how
the button is not shown if the device cannot make calls. When the
Scores button is tapped, the app will show a sheet with the scores.
 
Follow these steps to get started:
  
In Xcode, create a new iOS app project.
 
Name it NY City Schools
 
Verify the interface has SwiftUI selected
 
Select the Include Tests checkbox at the bottom
 
Click Next
 
Specify where to save the project and click Save
  
After the project has been created, select the ContentView file, right-
click on the struct’s name ContentView and select Refactor followed
by Figure 9.2 shows what will be renamed. If the Rename option is
unavailable, build the project and try again:

--- Page 568 ---
 
 
Figure Rename ContentView
 
Note that multiple files are reviewed for any use of If a file should not
be included, it can be omitted by unchecking the checkbox to the left
of the file. Because the file and struct names match, the file name will
also be updated. Change ContentView to
 
Follow these steps to add the CommonUI dependency to the project:

--- Page 569 ---
  
From the File menu select Add Package Dependencies.
 
As the package was used before, it may show automatically under
Recently If it is not, follow the steps provided in Chapter 6 under the
Remote Packages section to enter the URL to the package in the upper-
right corner of the dialog and add it.
 
Add the package.
 
At the top of the SchoolEntry file, add import CommonUI.
  
The card can be divided into three zones as shown in Figure
Recognizing these zones makes it easier to do the layout:
 
 
Figure Layout zones of school information
 

--- Page 570 ---
The school name, address, and phone are vertically aligned to each
other. The same for the map and call buttons. These two zones are then
horizontally aligned to each other. Likewise, the two bottom buttons
are aligned horizontally. Finally, the top zone, the divider, and the
bottom zone are all vertically aligned.
 
Knowing this, replace the existing SchoolEntry struct with the
following:
 
struct SchoolEntry: View {
 
  var body: some View {
 
      Card {
 
        VStack {
 
            HStack {
 
              VStack(alignment: .leading) {
 
                  Text("School Name")
 
                  Text("Address")

--- Page 571 ---
 
                  Text("Phone")
 
              }
 
              Spacer()
 
              VStack {
 
                  Button("Map") { }
 
                  Button("Call") { }
 
              }
 
            }
 
            Divider()
 
            HStack(spacing: 32) {
 
              Button("Website") { }
 

--- Page 572 ---
              Button("Scores") { }
 
            }
 
        }
 
      }
 
      .padding(8)
 
  }
 
}
 
The preview should now show something similar to Figure
 
 
Figure School entry preview
 
To better manage the organization of the project, multiple items will be
grouped together for the school view and associated information.

--- Page 573 ---
  
Right-click SchoolEntry in the project navigator and select New Group
from Name it The SchoolEntry file is automatically in the new group.
 
In the NY City School group, create another new group and name it
Scores If desirable, the groups and files within the project navigator
can be moved up or down in the hierarchy, or even in or out of other
groups.
  
To make the map and call buttons more appealing, change the code
inside the VStack that holds the Map and Call buttons to the following:
 
Image(systemName: "mappin.circle")
 
  .resizable()
 
  .frame(width: 35, height: 35)
 
  .foregroundColor(.blue)
 
  .padding(.bottom, 8)
 
  .onTapGesture() {
 

--- Page 574 ---
      // do tap gesture
 
  }
 
Image(systemName: "phone.circle")
 
  .resizable()
 
  .frame(width: 35, height: 35)
 
  .foregroundColor(.blue)
 
  .onTapGesture() {
 
      // do tap gesture
 
  }
 
After these changes, the preview will resemble Figure
 

--- Page 575 ---
 
Figure School Entry preview with changes
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 576 ---
 
Model design
 
The data is drawn from two data sources. One for test scores, and the
second provides a list of schools. Follow these steps to see the score data:
  
In a web browser, visit https://data.cityofnewyork.us/resource/f9bf-
2cp4.json
 
Click into the output displayed on-screen and select it all. (Safari has a
Select All option in the Edit menu).
 
Copy the text
 
In a separate browser tab, go to https://jsoneditoronline.org
 
Above the left-side panel, select the text tab
 
Paste the score information into the large text field below the tabs
 
Select the tree tab to see the JSON data in a hierarchical format.
  
See Figure 9.6 for the JSON Editor output:
 

--- Page 577 ---
 
Figure JSON Editor output
 
Keep the browser open along with the JSON Editor tab and switch to
Xcode. In the new Scores group, create a new Swift file called Scores and
add the following:
 
struct Scores: Decodable, Identifiable {
 
  var id: SchoolId {
 
  dbn
 
  }
 
  let dbn: String
 
  let schoolName: String
 

--- Page 578 ---
  let numTakers: Int?
 
  let readingAvgScore: Int?
 
  let mathAvgScore: Int?
 
  let writingAvgScore: Int?
 
}
 
Why the optional properties? Carefully looking through the data on the
JSON Editor website reveals that these fields may not always be present.
As before, sample data can be useful while creating the app. Before the
last closing curly brace, add this:
 
#if DEBUG
 
  static var mockScores: [Scores] {
 
      let s1 = Scores(dbn: "02M260",
 
            schoolName: "Clinton School Writers & Artists, M.S. 260",
 
            numTakers: 120,
 

--- Page 579 ---
            readingAvgScore: 355,
 
            mathAvgScore: 404,
 
            writingAvgScore: 363)
 
      let s2 = Scores(dbn: "21K728",
 
            schoolName: "Liberation Diploma Plus High School",
 
            numTakers: 50,
 
            readingAvgScore: nil,
 
            mathAvgScore: 375,
 
            writingAvgScore: nil)
 
      let s3 = Scores(dbn: "08X282",
 
            schoolName: "Women's Academy of Excellence",
 
            numTakers: 84,
 
            readingAvgScore: 380,

--- Page 580 ---
 
            mathAvgScore: nil,
 
            writingAvgScore: 372)
 
      return [s1, s2, s3]
 
  }
 
#endif
 
Note how some items have nil values allowing the test of these scenarios
while creating the screen. Follow these steps to see the school data:
  
In your web browser visit https://data.cityofnewyork.us/resource/s3k6-
pzi2.json
 
Copy the output
 
Switch to the JSON Editor tab.
 
Above the right-side panel, select the text tab
 
Paste the school data into the right panel’s text field

--- Page 581 ---
 
Select the tree tab to see the JSON data in a hierarchical format
  
Figure 9.7 shows the output of the score and school data side-by-side:
 
 
Figure Score and school data displayed
 
Each school entry has over sixty properties, but only a few will be used in
the app. Note how each side has a dbn property. This is the property that
matches the school to the SAT scores, if the scores exist.
 
In Xcode, in the Schools group, create a new swift file called School and
enter this struct with demo data:
 
typealias SchoolId = String
 
struct School: Decodable, Identifiable {

--- Page 582 ---
 
  var id: SchoolId {
 
      return dbn
 
  }
 
  let dbn: SchoolId
 
  let schoolName: String
 
  let location: String
 
  let phoneNumber: String
 
  let website: String?
 
  let lat: Double?
 
  let lon: Double?
 
#if DEBUG
 
  static var demoSchools: [School] {
 

--- Page 583 ---
      let s1 = School(dbn: "02M260",
 
        schoolName: "Clinton School Writers & Artists, M.S. 260",
 
        location: "10 East 15th Street, Manhattan NY 10003",
 
        phoneNumber: "212-524-4360",
 
website: "www.theclintonschool.net",
 
        lat: 40.736526,
 
        lon: -73.992727)
 
      let s2 = School(dbn: "21K728",
 
        schoolName: "Liberation Diploma Plus High School",
 
        location: "2865 West 19th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11224",
 
        phoneNumber: "718-946-6812",
 
        website: nil,
 

--- Page 584 ---
        lat: nil,
 
        lon: nil)
 
      let s3 = School(dbn: "08X282",
 
        schoolName: "Women's Academy of Excellence",
 
        location: "456 White Plains Road, Bronx NY 10473",
 
        phoneNumber: "718-542-0740",
 
        website: "schools.nyc.gov/SchoolPortals/08/X282",
 
        lat: 40.815043,
 
        lon: -73.85607)
 
      return [s1, s2, s3]
 
  }
 
#endif
 

--- Page 585 ---
}
 
Note the use of typealias above the school model. Typealiases are
encouraged to identify the meaning of basic types more clearly. A String
type could have been used for the id and however using SchoolId makes
the meaning of the value clearer when referenced throughout the rest of
the app.
 
With models and sample data, the view can be updated to use a school
entry. Follow these steps:
  
Select SchoolEntry in the project navigator
 
Inside struct, above the add this property: school: School
 
In where the school name, address, and phone are referenced, change the
contents of each Text entry to use the school model instance:
 
Text(school.schoolName)
 
Text(school.location)
 
Text(school.phoneNumber)
 
Update the preview so it passes a sample school: SchoolEntry(school:
School.demoSchools[0])

--- Page 586 ---
 
Select NY_City_SchoolsApp in the project navigator.
 
Change the SchoolEntry line to pass a sample school:
SchoolEntry(school: School.demoSchools[0])
  
With most of the school entry view complete, a way of showing the list is
required. In the Schools group create a new SwiftUI view called This will
show the list of schools. Replace the struct and preview with the
following. Warning, there will initially be an error shown, however this
will soon be remedied:
 
struct SchoolList: View {
 
  let schools: [School]
 
    var body: some View {
 
      NavigationView {
 
          ScrollView {
 
            ForEach(schools) { school in
 
              SchoolEntry(school: school)

--- Page 587 ---
 
            }
 
          }
 
            .navigationTitle(“Schools")
 
      }
 
    }
 
}
 
#Preview {
 
  SchoolList(schools: School.demoSchools)
 
}
 
The NavigationView is used to give a navigation stack so the user can
move from screen to screen and back again. It also provides a title for the
view. It is this second feature that is taken advantage of here. Note that the
title is not placed on the navigation view itself, but on the item it wraps.
This is because multiple views can be pushed onto the navigation stack

--- Page 588 ---
with each one showing its own title. On your own, add localization to this
project as described in Chapter Design the Household Chores
 
In the NY_City_SchoolsApp file, replace the SchoolEntry line with
SchoolList() so the app will launch directly into the school list.
 
When using the MVVM pattern, most of the logic and actions taken by
the user are handled in the view model. The view model will often hold
the values to be displayed to the user. In this case, the view model will
hold the list of schools and scores. To correlate scores to schools, follow
these steps:
  
Select Scores in the project navigator
 
Inside the #if DEBUG area, above the mockScores property, add this
property:
 
static var mockScoreDictionary: [SchoolId: Scores] {
 
  var scoreDict: [SchoolId: Scores] = [:]
 
  for scores in mockScores {
 
      scoreDict[scores.dbn] = scores
 

--- Page 589 ---
  }
 
  return scoreDict
 
}
  
In the schools group, create a new swift file called
 
The view model will do the following:
  
Hold the schools to be listed and the associated scores
 
Perform the appropriate action when a button is tapped
 
Request the school and score information from the server
 
In the new file, add this at the top: import Observation library and add this
initial code:
 
@Observable
 
class SchoolListViewModel {
 
  var schools: [School] = School.demoSchools
 
  var scores: [SchoolId: Scores] = Scores.mockScoreDictionary

--- Page 590 ---
 
}
 
Note the use of the SchoolId type. If a string were used, it would not be as
clear what the value represents.
 
To use the view model in the list, a few changes must be made:
  
Select the SchoolList file in the project navigator
 
Replace the schools property line with: let viewModel =
SchoolListViewModel()
 
Change ForEach(viewModel.schools)
 
Remove the schools parameter in the preview
  
With these changes done, the preview will work again. To make the
buttons function, a mechanism to call the view model’s methods must be
put into place. The delegate pattern is an easy way of accomplishing this.
In the delegate pattern, a separate object is referenced to handle business
logic or return data for use.
 
In the Schools group, create a new swift file called HandlesSchoolButtons
and in the file add the following protocol:

--- Page 591 ---
 
protocol HandlesSchoolButtons {
 
  func showMap(for school: School)
 
  func call(_ school: School)
 
  func showWebsite(for school: School)
 
}
 
The SchoolListViewModel will conform to the protocol and be the
delegate. At the top of the file, add this import statement: import then add
this extension to bottom of the file:
 
extension SchoolListViewModel: HandlesSchoolButtons {
 
  func showMap(for school: School) {
 
      guard let lat = school.lat, let lon = school.lon else { return }
 
      let regionDistance:CLLocationDistance = 10_000
 
      let coordinates = CLLocationCoordinate2DMake(lat, lon)

--- Page 592 ---
 
      let regionSpan = MKCoordinateRegion(center: coordinates,
latitudinalMeters: regionDistance, longitudinalMeters: regionDistance)
 
      let options = [
 
          MKLaunchOptionsMapCenterKey: NSValue(mkCoordinate:
regionSpan.center),
 
          MKLaunchOptionsMapSpanKey: NSValue(mkCoordinateSpan:
regionSpan.span)
 
      ]
 
      let placemark = MKPlacemark(coordinate: coordinates,
addressDictionary: nil)
 
      let mapItem = MKMapItem(placemark: placemark)
 
      mapItem.name = school.schoolName
 
      mapItem.openInMaps(launchOptions: options)
 
  }
 

--- Page 593 ---
  func call(_ school: School) {
 
      guard let url = URL(string: "tel://\(school.phoneNumber)"),
UIApplication.shared.canOpenURL(url)  else { return }
 
      UIApplication.shared.open(url, options: [:], completionHandler: nil)
 
  }
 
  func showWebsite(for school: School) {
 
      guard var ws = school.website else { return }
 
if !ws.starts(with: "http") {
 
        ws = "https://" + ws
 
      }
 
      guard let url = URL(string: ws),
UIApplication.shared.canOpenURL(url) else { return }
 
      UIApplication.shared.open(url, options: [:], completionHandler: nil)
 
  }
 

--- Page 594 ---
}
 
While this book does not get into the specifics of the showMap method
gets the school’s location, creates a marker, then shows it in the maps app
with a region area of 10,000 meters. The other two methods should be
easier to follow. The callSchool method creates a telephonic URL and
attempts to make the call. The final method, attaches the https protocol, if
it is missing, and opens the website if possible.
 
To call the delegate methods, the school entry must have a reference to it.
Not the view model class specifically, but to something that conforms to
the protocol. A way to show the scores as a sheet over the list will also be
needed.
  
Select SchoolEntry in the project navigator
 
Below the school property, add these properties:
 
let delegate: HandlesSchoolButtons
 
let scores: Scores?
 
let showCard: (Scores) -> Void
 
The scores property is optional because not all schools will have scores.

--- Page 595 ---
 
Replace the preview with the following:
 
#Preview {
 
  SchoolEntry(school: School.demoSchools[0], delegate:
SchoolListViewModel(), scores: Scores.mockScores[0]) { scores in
 
        // do nothing
 
  }
 
}
 
#Preview("Hide bottom") {
 
  SchoolEntry(school: School.demoSchools[1], delegate:
SchoolListViewModel(), scores: nil) { scores in
 
      // do nothing
 
  }
 
}

--- Page 596 ---
  
To address the compilation error, select SchoolList in the project navigator
and change the school entry line within the ForEach to:
 
SchoolEntry(school: school, delegate: SchoolListViewModel(), scores:
Scores.mockScores[0]) { scores in
 
  // do nothing
 
}
 
Select SchoolEntry in the project navigator. To make the buttons
operational, code for the tap gestures must be added. Follow these steps:
  
In the .onTapGesture modifier for the map image, replace // do tap gesture
with delegate.showMap(for: school)
 
In the .onTapGesture modifier for the phone image, replace // do tap
gesture with delegate.showMap(for: school)
 
In website button closure, add this code: delegate.showWebsite(for:
school)
 
The scores button needs to be wrapped in an if statement for the times
when there are no scores. Replace the button with this code:

--- Page 597 ---
 
if let scores {
 
  Button("Scores") {
 
      showCard(scores)
 
  }
 
}
  
With the scores button conditionally shown, the Hide button preview will
now hide that button. As the scores may not exist for a school, there are
also some school entries without map coordinates or some entries without
a website specified. To address this, change the map image to the
following:
 
if school.lat != nil && school.lon != nil {
 
  Image(systemName: "mappin.circle")
 
      .resizable()
 
      .frame(width: 35, height: 35)
 
      .foregroundColor(.blue)

--- Page 598 ---
 
      .padding(.bottom, 8)
 
      .onTapGesture() {
 
        delegate.showMap(for: school)
 
      }
 
}
 
Also, change the website button to this:
 
if school.website != nil {
 
  Button("Website") {
 
      delegate.showWebsite(for: school)
 
  }
 
}
 

--- Page 599 ---
It is possible for both the website and scores to be missing. Should that
happen, the display would look awkward because the divider would be
shown and nothing below it. To make this better, the divider and bottom
buttons can be put into a separate @ViewBuilder method and only used if
at least one is present. Try this on your own. The chapter’s code has this
done if some guidance is needed.
 
With the school entry complete, the use of it in the school list must also be
updated.
  
Select SchoolList in the project navigator
 
Below the viewModel property, add @State var scores: Scores? = nil
 
In the update the SchoolEntry to the following:
 
SchoolEntry(school: school, delegate: viewModel, scores:
viewModel.scores(for: school)) { scores in
 
  self.scores = scores
 
}
 
  .padding(.horizontal, 8)
 

--- Page 600 ---
Select SchoolListViewModel in the project navigator
 
Add this method below the showWebsite method:
 
func scores(for school: School) -> Scores? {
 
  scores[school.id]
 
}
  
A dictionary lookup is incredibly fast. If the scores were stored in an
array, the app would need to iterate over each entry to find a match. The
dictionary uses a hash and an internal structure to quickly find a match.
With these changes complete, running the app should provide a list of
three schools with buttons that show the school on a map and its website.
See Figure The call button, of course, will not work on the simulator and
the scores sheet has not yet been defined.
 

--- Page 601 ---
 
Figure Schools shown when running app
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 602 ---
 
Scores
 
Let us start with creating the SAT scorecard:
  
The scorecard will be shown as a sheet over the school list. Figure 9.9
shows the conceptual drawing:
 
 
Figure Scorecard
 
A pattern quickly asserts itself below the divider where a label is
shown followed by a value. This is the perfect place to use
composition. In the Scores group, add a SwiftUI view called
ScoreCardLineItem and import CommonUI. Then replace the struct
and preview with the following:
 
struct ScoreCardLineItem: View {

--- Page 603 ---
 
  let title: LocalizedStringKey
 
  let value: Int?
 
    var body: some View {
 
      HStack {
 
Text(title)
 
            .style(.paragraph)
 
          if let value{
 
            Text("\(value)")
 
                .style(.paragraph)
 
                .bold()
 
          } else {
 

--- Page 604 ---
            Text("NA")
 
                .style(.paragraph)
 
                .bold()
 
          }
 
      }
 
    }
 
}
 
#Preview {
 
    ScoreCardLineItem(title: "Line item title:", value: 203)
 
}
 
#Preview("No Value") {
 
    ScoreCardLineItem(title: "Line item title:", value: nil)

--- Page 605 ---
 
}
 
The two previews allow for a visual confirmation of how the view will
look when a value is provided and when it is nil. Next, create a new
SwiftUI view called ScoreCard in the Scores group. Again, import
CommonUI at the top and replace the rest with this:
 
struct ScoreCard: View {
 
  let scores: Scores
 
  var body: some View {
 
      Card {
 
        Text(scores.schoolName)
 
            .style(.h2)
 
            .padding(.top, 8)
 
            .fixedSize(horizontal: false, vertical: true)
 
        Divider()

--- Page 606 ---
 
        VStack {
 
            ScoreCardLineItem(title: "scoresView.takers", value:
scores.numTakers)
 
            ScoreCardLineItem(title: "scoresView.reading", value:
scores.readingAvgScore)
 
            ScoreCardLineItem(title: "scoresView.math", value:
scores.mathAvgScore)
 
            ScoreCardLineItem(title: "scoresView.reading", value:
scores.readingAvgScore)
 
            ScoreCardLineItem(title: "scoresView.writing", value:
scores.writingAvgScore)
 
        }
 
        .padding(.bottom, 4)
 
      }
 

--- Page 607 ---
  }
 
}
 
#Preview {
 
  ScoreCard(scores: Scores.mockScores[0])
 
}
  
With the scorecard complete, code must be added to show the sheet
over the school list. A sheet slides up from the bottom and is normally
dismissed by the user sliding it down or tapping the content it covers.
By using a state property to control whether it shows, it would look
like this:
 
.sheet(isPresented: $showSheet) {
 
  // content here
 
}
 
Code can also be run after the sheet is dismissed by using the
onDismiss parameter. Another way, that is useful here, is to use an

--- Page 608 ---
optional state property and show the sheet when a value is given. The
value is then available for the content. Follow these steps to show the
sheet over the school list:
  
Select the SchoolList file in the project navigator.
 
Below the scroll view, below the .navigatinTitle modifier, add this
sheet modifier:
 
.sheet(item: $scores) { scores in
 
  ScoreCard(scores: scores)
 
      .padding()
 
}
  
Run the app and tap the scores button for any of the schools where the
button is visible. A nearly-full screen sheet will show with the score
card. To modify the height of the sheet, a modifier called
presentationDetents can be applied to the score card. To see this in
action, in the SchoolList file, change the ScoreCard use to this:
 
ScoreCard(scores: scores)
 

--- Page 609 ---
  .padding()
 
  .presentationDetents([.height(210), .medium])
 
Now run the app and show the score card.
 
At first the content may not fully visible, however the sheet can be
expanded by sliding the top edge up. If the .medium detent is not
given, then the sheet is not expandable. While using dynamic text sizes
caution must be made on the size of the sheet. Content may need to be
wrapped in a scroll view or the height must be large enough to
accommodate all the content.
 
Another option is to set the height to the height of the content itself. By
using a view modifier, the height can be calculated and used in the
height parameter. Follow these steps:
  
Verify the SchoolList file in the project navigator is selected
 
Create a Double state property with a default value of zero: @State
private var sheetHeight: Double = .zero
 
In the NY City Schools group, create a new group called Extensions
 

--- Page 610 ---
In the Extensions group, add a new SwiftUI file called ViewHeight
 
Replace the struct and preview with the following:
 
struct ViewHeight: ViewModifier {
 
  @Binding var height: Double
 
  init(_ height: Binding) {
 
      self._height = height
 
  }
 
  func body(content: Content) -> some View {
 
      content.background(
 
        GeometryReader { geometry -> Color in
 
            height = geometry.size.height
 
            return Color.clear

--- Page 611 ---
 
        }
 
      )
 
  }
 
}
 
The GeometryReader passes size information to its closure so the
information can be used to size and position views within the
enclosing context. It can also be used to save the value for future
reference as shown here. With the modifier in-place, it can now be
used.
 
Select SchoolList in the project navigator
 
Below the ScoreCard’s padding modifier, and before the add:
 
Change the detents modifier to:
.presentationDetents([.height(sheetHeight), .medium])
  
Now when the sheet is shown, it will be the height of the scorecard and
its padding. See Figure

--- Page 612 ---
 
 
Figure 9.10 Sheet at height of content
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 613 ---
 
Search bar
 
The CommonUI library is the ideal place to put the search bar. If the
package is no longer stored locally, then it needs to be cloned. GitHub
has an open with Xcode option for projects, however no such option
exists for packages. GitHub has its own app that can clone a repository
and other Git clients, such as SourceTree or GitKraken, can do the
same. For those comfortable using the command line, git commands
can be directly used in the terminal.
 
The search bar is a bound text field. As it is edited, the enclosing view
will act on the changes. Around the text field, visual enhancements,
and buttons to make it more appealing and useful will be added.
 
Open the CommonUI package with Xcode. In the CommonUI folder,
create a new SwiftUI file called SearchBar.
 
The code is too long to put into the book directly so you can copy the
contents from the file of the same name in the chapter’s source code
and paste it into the SearchBar file. An error will appear as shown in
Figure
 


--- Page 614 ---
 
Figure Localized error
 
Fixing this error requires a few more steps:
  
Create a new Resources folder inside the CommonUI folder
 
Add a new string catalog inside the Resources folder and name it
Localizable
 
In the English list, add these key/value entries:
 
search.defaultText  Search Schools
 
search.cancel  Cancel
 
Add a Spanish localization and add these key/value entries:
 
search.defaultText  Buscar escuelas
 
Cancelar
 

--- Page 615 ---
Create an Extensions folder inside the CommonUI folder and add a
swift file called Similar to the file in the NY City Schools project, add
this code:
 
extension String {
 
  var localized: String {
 
      String(format: NSLocalizedString(self, bundle: Bundle.module,
comment: ""))
 
  }
 
}
 
The significant difference is the bundle parameter. By using the
package’s resources are used to get localization information.
 
Select the Package file in navigator.
 
In the package file, below the package name, add this single line to
specify the default localization to use when the desired language is not
available:
 

--- Page 616 ---
defaultLocalization: "en",
 
These changes do not alter the existing functionality, but instead adds
to it, the version can be a minor release. From the Integrate menu,
choose Stage All Changes then Specify a commit message of Add
Click the
 
To create a tag, select the Repositories tab in the Source Control
navigator. Right-click the main branch and select Tag Specify 1.1.0
and create the tag. Like before, select Push from the Integrate menu
and check the Include tags checkbox before pushing to the server.
 
In the NY City Schools project, select the project in the both the
project navigator and the right pane. Select the Package Dependencies
tab and change the version for CommonUI to 1.1.0 and press the return
key on the keyboard. After a few seconds, the entry under Package
Dependencies on the bottom of the project navigator should show the
version of 1.1.0.
 
With that complete, the search bar can be added to the school list.
Wrap the ScrollView with a VStack, then above the scroll view add
SearchBar(text:
 
Select SchoolListViewModel in the project navigator
 
Add the following properties:

--- Page 617 ---
 
var searchText: String = "" {
 
  didSet {
 
      if self.searchText.count < 2 {
 
        self.schools = self.allSchools
 
        return
 
      }
 
      DispatchQueue.main.async {
 
        self.schools = self.allSchools.filter({
 
            $0.schoolName.contains(self.searchText) ||
 
            $0.location.contains(self.searchText)
 
        })
 

--- Page 618 ---
      }
 
  }
 
}
 
private var allSchools = School.demoSchools
  
Now, when the app is run, the search bar will filter the schools based
on the name or location containing the text entered as shown in Figure
 

--- Page 619 ---
 
Figure App running with search bar
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 620 ---
 
Conclusion
 
This chapter focused on design and building of a single page app using
composition with a strong focus on hiding elements when they are not
needed. The ability to open telephonic and website URLs along with
showing a pin on a map was explored. The MVVM pattern used for
this app separates the business logic and delegate methods from the
view.
 
The next chapter will cover unit and UI testing, how to set and utilize
break points, logging, and debugger commands. These are essential to
verify the app works as designed and fix any issues that are found.
 
Join our book’s Discord space
 
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the
Authors:
 
https://discord.bpbonline.com

--- Page 621 ---
 
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 622 ---
 
C
HAPTER
10
Testing and Debugging
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 623 ---
 
Introduction
 
When an app is developed, enhanced, and altered, subtle bugs can
creep in making the app function in ways it was not designed to. Tests
provide a way of making sure elements are on the screen at the right
time or methods work as expected. Xcode provides several tools for
adding tests and searching for bugs.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 624 ---
 
Structure
 
This chapter includes the following topics:
  
UI tests
 
Unit tests
 
Breakpoints
 
Debugger commands
 
Logging
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 625 ---
 
Objectives
 
By the end of the chapter, the user should understand how to add UI
and unit tests, set breakpoints that can provide information, use the
debugger to show information and use the built-in logging features.
Combined, these tools make it easier to track a bug and reduce the
occurrences of future bugs.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 626 ---
 
Tests
 
There are a few ideologies regarding tests. The first is to manually test
each release. As new features are added to the product, each feature is
thoroughly tested, and the app as a whole is subjected to rudimentary
tests to prove the new features have not broken anything.
Unfortunately, this technique is difficult to use for the rare errors that
may occur while the app is used by the end-users and is time-
consuming. Many of these manual tests can be automated.
 
The second is to do test-driven development. This is the extreme
opposite of the first option. Tests that prove the method, struct, or class
perform as expected are created first with the expectation that all tests
will fail. A minimal amount of code is added to the method so the first
test passes. From there, the same technique is applied to each failing
test until all the tests succeed.
 
The last option is to create the feature, or app, then add the tests. This
usually requires refactoring so the tests can run properly. However, if
coding is done with testing in mind, adding appropriate tests can be
easy.
 

--- Page 627 ---
Tests are not only used to validate responses for all known scenarios,
but also to guard against changes that may accidentally cause a change
to the behavior of the app. As refactoring is done or features are added,
the tests add a level of protection to unwanted behavior. When new
issues are found, the fix should also include a new test to be sure the
new issue does not occur again.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 628 ---
 
UI tests
 
UI Tests are used to validate the flow of an app and that screen elements
are shown, or not, at the appropriate times.
  
When creating the NY City Schools app, the Include Tests checkbox was
supposed to be checked. If this did not happen, then new testing bundles
can be added by clicking the plus button as shown in Figure
 
 
Figure 10.1: Targets in project

--- Page 629 ---
 
For the test targets, use the filter text field on the upper-right and select the
appropriate target as shown in Figure
 
 
Figure New target template dialog
 
When creating the testing bundles, accept the default names for the
targets, NY_City_SchoolsTests for the Unit Testing Bundle and
NY_City_SchoolsUITests for the UI Testing Bundle and verify the
language is Swift.
 

--- Page 630 ---
Delete the NY_City_SchoolsUITestsLaunchTests file then select
NY_City_SchoolsUITests from the project navigator. The file has a setup
and teardown methods along with two sample tests. The setup and
teardown methods are executed before each test is run. Each test method
must start with To run all the tests, select Test from the Product menu. The
simulator selected in the tool bar will launch, possibly multiple copies,
and all the unit and UI tests will be performed.
 
To the left of the class and to the left of each testing method is a diamond.
It may be empty for a test not run, filled with a red x for a failed test or a
green checkmark to indicate success. To run all the tests for a class, click
the diamond to the left of the class. Similarly, the diamond for an
individual test can also be clicked to run the single test.
 
Clear out the default methods and create a new one: func
testShowScores() throws with an empty body. To get started quickly with
UI testing, Xcode provides a means to record the steps. Place the cursor,
or insertion point, in the method’s body and click the record button as
shown in Figure
 

--- Page 631 ---
 
Figure Record user interface steps
 
If it is not already running, the app will launch in the selected simulator. If
an alert is shown saying, Lost recording connection with device then click
the record button again. Click the scores button in the NY City Schools
app then stop the recording in Xcode. The function will be filled with a
multi-part operation that ends with By adding a return before each period,
the code will look like this:
 
XCUIApplication()
 
  .scrollViews
 
  .otherElements

--- Page 632 ---
 
  .containing(.staticText, identifier:"Clinton School Writers & Artists, M.S.
260")
 
  .children(matching: .button)
 
.matching(identifier: "Puntuaciones")
 
  .element(boundBy: 2)
 
  .tap()
 
The scroll view area’s otherElements container is searched for an element
containing the static text Clinton School Writers & Artists, M.S. 260 and
that element’s children is then searched for a button with the text
 
Why is “Puntuaciones” shown above and not In Figure the toolbar shows
the tests will run on the simulator setup for Spanish. If the simulator were
changed to another language or the text displayed in the element being
searched for is dynamic, the button may not be found. To solve this
problem, a unique identifier must be assigned to the button. In the
SchoolEntry file, add the following extension above the previews:
 
extension SchoolEntry {
 

--- Page 633 ---
  enum Identifier: String {
 
      case mapButton
 
      case phoneButton
 
      case websiteButton
 
      case scoresButton
 
  }
 
}
 
Then, below the scores button, in the same file add this modifier:
.accessibility(identifier: In Chapter Design the Household Chores App,
accessibility labels were introduced. The identifier is used in tests to
identify elements, regardless of the text displayed to the user. By using the
rawValue of the enum instead of a static value, memory is saved. Static
values take up memory once a module is loaded, regardless of use. Note
that string values are used, and the values used must be unique throughout
the entire app.
 
Select the NY_City_SchoolsUITests file again. In the test method, change
.matching(identifier: "Puntuaciones") to .matching(identifier:
Unfortunately, accessing the enum’s rawValue is not a valid option in the

--- Page 634 ---
test method so the string value must be used. An attempt to use the enum
itself will yield an undefined symbols compilation error when the tests are
run.
 
Run the test. The app loads and the test shows as successfully passed.
However, nothing has been tested yet. The test found the button and
tapped it. To validate the score sheet has been shown, add the following
extension to ScoreCard above the preview:
 
extension ScoreCard {
 
  enum Identifier: String {
 
      case schoolName
 
  }
 
}
 
After the fixedSize modifier on the school name text element, add this
modifier: .accessibility(identifier: With the card identified, the test can be
extended to find and validate the score card exists.
 
To accomplish this, remove the existing code from the body of the
method, position the insertion point inside the empty body and click the
record button. Position the simulator in such a way where interactions can

--- Page 635 ---
be made and the test method in Xcode can be viewed. Watch the code-
entry area while interacting with the app.
 
Click the scores button as before. The line of code added to the method is
like the one before. Now click the name of the school after the sheet
appears. The code inserted into the test method is adjusted to create a
variable for the app that is referred to. Click the sheet handle. By
interacting with the elements on-screen, ways of identifying and
manipulating them through code can be discovered. Swipe the sheet up
and down and dismiss it.
 
Stop recording then remove the lines regarding the sheet handle. Two of
the remaining commands are highlighted in blue and have a dropdown
menu indicator as shown in Figure
 
 
Figure Recorded user steps
 
Selecting the dropdown will show possible values that can be used for
identifying the screen element. By default, the accessibility identifier is
used. Click the middle of the highlighted region and press return to select
that option. The highlight will go away along with the dropdown menu.

--- Page 636 ---
 
Running the test now would yield the same result of a success without
actually testing anything. Using the new code entered, some clues are
given. Elements can be assigned to variables. Also, since there is a tap
method for the text and swipe methods for the sheet, several other
methods are probably available. The one of value here is the exists
method.
 
To perform an actual test, Xcode provides several assert commands. From
assertions on the equality of two values to whether a value is or is not nil.
The goal of this test is to determine if the school text element exists.
Change the last line to the following:
 
let schoolName = app.staticTexts["schoolName"]
 
XCTAssertTrue(schoolName.exists)
 
Before running the test, verify the command app.launch() exists in the test
method after the app variable is defined. The test code should now look
like this:
 
func testShowScores() throws {
 
  let app = XCUIApplication()
 
  app.launch()

--- Page 637 ---
 
  let scoresbuttonButton = app
 
      .scrollViews
 
      .otherElements
 
      .containing(.staticText, identifier:"Clinton School Writers & Artists,
M.S. 260")
 
      .children(matching: .button)
 
      .matching(identifier: "scoresButton").element(boundBy: 2)
 
  scoresbuttonButton.tap()
 
  let schoolName = app.staticTexts["schoolName"]
 
  XCTAssertTrue(schoolName.exists)
 
}
 
Any attempt to run the test without the launch command will result in the
test ending with an error saying the app is not running.

--- Page 638 ---
 
Run the test. The app will launch, and the sheet will be shown, after which
the app will quit with a successful test badge showing in Xcode. To verify
the test is not falsely showing a success, change the assertion to false:
XCTAssertFalse(schoolName.exists) and run the test again. The test will
fail, proving that the test is functioning properly. You can then change the
assertion back to true.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 639 ---
 
Unit tests
 
Unit tests are small and fast. Each test runs against a known context and
validates the results of the method or state of the context after the method
has returned. Like the previews of a SwiftUI view, there may be multiple
tests on a specific method for each possible context or set of parameters.
  
A good place to start is to validate the models will properly be decoded
from the JSON data. Delete the default NY_City_SchoolsTests file.
 
In the downloaded project code, look inside the End folder. From inside
the NY City Schools/NY City Schools/NY City SchoolsTests folder, drag
the files Schools.json and Scores.json to the NY City SchoolsTests group
of the project navigator. Verify the Copy items if needed checkbox is
checked then click the Finish button.
 
These files contain sample school and corresponding score data, because
not all schools have score data, the scores file is missing the scores for one
of the schools.
 
In the NY City Schools Tests group, create a new Unit Test Case Class file
called
  

--- Page 640 ---
Do this by right-clicking the group and selecting New File… from the
pop-up menu.
 
In the displayed dialog, select the Unit Test Case Class entry and click
 
Enter ModelTests as the class name and click
 
In the save dialog, the destination should be NY City SchoolsTests and the
target NY City SchoolsTests should be selected. Click
 
If a dialog is presented asking, would you like to configure an Objective-
C bridging header? click Don’t
  
At the top of the file, add NY_City_Schools
 
Importing the app target as testable allows the tests to include the access
of internal object types of the target for use in the tests themselves. The
default access scope of structs, classes, and other objects is internal. This
means the objects are accessible only within the module. By adding the
@testable attribute to the import, these objects can be accessed by the test
code as if they were made public.
 
Remove the default methods and add a new one:
 
func testSchoolModel() throws {

--- Page 641 ---
 
  guard let file = Bundle(for: type(of: self)).url(forResource: "Schools",
withExtension: "json") else {
 
      XCTFail("Cannot read json file")
 
      return
 
  }
 
  let data = try Data(contentsOf: file)
 
  let decoder = JSONDecoder()
 
  decoder.keyDecodingStrategy = .convertFromSnakeCase
 
let schools = try decoder.decode([School].self, from: data)
 
  XCTAssertEqual(schools.count, 6)
 
}
 
Here is a breakdown of what the code is doing:
  

--- Page 642 ---
In the first line, the testing bundle is searched for a file called Schools
with the json extension. If it is not found, then the test is abandoned with a
failure.
 
The data of the file is retrieved and assigned to the data variable.
 
The JSONDecoder is created and a decoding strategy is specified. Entries
in the file like school_name are called snake-case. These are translated
into the camel-case properties of the model.
 
After that, the decoder reads the JSON data and attempts to create the
objects, in this case an array of schools, using the decoding strategy.
 
An assertion, or actual test, is made. Here, the number of entries is
expected to equal six.
  
Run the test by clicking the diamond next to the class or the test method.
It will succeed.
 
To verify the test is valid, change the 6 to a different number and run the
test again. It will appropriately fail. Change the test value back to
 
Using the given test method as a template, make another one on your own
called The test will load from the scores file and creates an array with five
score entries. If you need guidance, look at the code for this chapter in the
GitHub repository.

--- Page 643 ---
  
Earlier, a UI test was used to verify the scores button showed the bottom
sheet. The response to the user tap was an immediate visual response in
the app. The other buttons make calls to delegate methods. The best
approach to verify if the buttons continue to work, during developmental
changes, is to create unit tests against the SwiftUI view. Follow these
steps:
  
In the NY City Schools project, import the library found at
https://github.com/nalexn/ViewInspector as a package dependency.
  
From the File menu select Add Package Dependencies…
   
Enter https://github.com/nalexn/ViewInspector as the package URL
 
Click Add Package
  
As you import the library, make sure the target is set to NY City
SchoolsTests as shown in Figure
 

--- Page 644 ---
 
Figure Add ViewInspector to test target
 
The library should only appear in the Frameworks and Libraries section of
the test target as shown in Figure If the library is used in any other target,
it must be removed:
 

--- Page 645 ---
 
Figure ViewInspector in test target
 
This library allows unit tests to be performed on SwiftUI views. In
preparation for the test, a test delegate needs to be created. In the NY City
SchoolsTests group, create a new swift file called
 
Add this import at the top @testable import
 
Add this code:
 

--- Page 646 ---
class SchoolTapTestDelegate: HandlesSchoolButtons {
 
  var mapShown = false
 
  var callMade = false
 
  var websiteShown = false
 
  func showMap(for school: NY_City_Schools.School) {
 
      mapShown = true
 
  } 
 
  func call(_ school: NY_City_Schools.School) {
 
      callMade = true
 
  }
 
  func showWebsite(for school: NY_City_Schools.School) {
 
      websiteShown = true
 
  }

--- Page 647 ---
 
}
 
Like the SchoolListViewModel extension, the class conforms to the
HandlesSchoolButtons protocol. Instead of performing the same
operations, each method sets a flag to indicate the method was called.
 
Create a new Unit Test Case Class file in the same group and call it
 
Add the following imports at the top:
 
import ViewInspector
 
@testable import NY_City_Schools
 
Inside the class, remove the default methods and add this property and test
method:
 
let delegate = SchoolTapTestDelegate()
 
func testMapButtonTap() throws {
 
  let schoolEntry = SchoolEntry(school: School.demoSchools[0],
 
                                delegate: delegate,

--- Page 648 ---
 
                                scores: nil) { _ in
 
  }
 
  let button = try
schoolEntry.inspect().find(viewWithAccessibilityIdentifier:
SchoolEntry.Identifier.mapButton.rawValue).button()
 
  try button.tap()
 
XCTAssertTrue(delegate.mapShown)
 
}
  
This test technique provides a way of testing a single view’s functionality.
The method creates a variable for the SchoolEntry view with an empty
body for the score button tap. Note that the test delegate is passed as the
delegate to use for the button taps. The next command attempts to find the
button matching the accessibility identifier. Once found, the tap is
invoked. If the button is working properly, then the delegate method will
be called, and the flag marked as The final assertion tests this set of events
happened.
 
The test, however, will fail. One could be led into thinking that the
accessibility identifier and onTapGesture modifiers need to be added.

--- Page 649 ---
While this is good thinking, the test code is attempting to find a button.
Should button() be changed to image() then try will fail to compile;
because of this, our images need to be changed to buttons:
  
Change the map image and modifiers to:
 
Button(action: {
 
  delegate.showMap(for: school)
 
}, label: {
 
  Image(systemName: "mappin.circle")
 
      .resizable()
 
      .frame(width: 35, height: 35)
 
      .foregroundColor(.blue)
 
      .padding(.bottom, 8)
 
})
 
.accessibility(identifier: Identifier.mapButton.rawValue)

--- Page 650 ---
 
Change the call image and modifiers to:
 
Button(action: {
 
  delegate.call(school)
 
}, label: {
 
  Image(systemName: "phone.circle")
 
      .resizable()
 
      .frame(width: 35, height: 35)
 
      .foregroundColor(.blue)
 
})
 
.accessibility(identifier: Identifier.phoneButton.rawValue)
 
After the images have been changed to buttons, run the new unit test and
see that it passes.
 
To verify the test validly passing, change the assertion to false and run
again. It will fail, proving the earlier success was valid. Change the

--- Page 651 ---
assertion back to true. On your own, use the technique used for testing the
map button to test the phone and website buttons.
 
After running the tests, select the report navigator from the navigator
toolbar. As the program goes through various operations such as
compiling, resolving dependencies, or testing, an entry is made in this
navigator. When tests are run, a coverage report is created. Click latest
entry’s Coverage line and a report similar to Figure show. While not
everything can be covered, a reasonable effort should be made to test most
of the code:
 
 
Figure Code coverage report
 
Open SchoolEntry and select Code Coverage from the Editor menu. On
the right side of the code a vertical bar will appear displaying the number

--- Page 652 ---
of times code has been recently tested. Hovering the mouse over sections
of the code coverage bar will highlight the appropriate block of code.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 653 ---
 
Breakpoints
 
Breakpoints are a great tool for validating that code has been reached, to
inspect the call stack when the source of how a method is reached is
unclear, to step through code and verify it is operating as expected, or to
see the values of properties or variables at a specific point. They can even
be used when running tests.
  
To illustrate, open To the left of the editor pane are line numbers. Click on
the 17 to the left of where the code says mapShown = A blue indicator
will Select Test from the Product menu to run all the tests or run the
specific test for the map button.
 
Figure 10.8 shows the code paused at the breakpoint. If the highlighted
line of code is not at the breakpoint, then click the stop button and select
Clean Build Folder from the Product menu and try again. Right-click the
breakpoint to see the available options:
 

--- Page 654 ---
 
Figure Code paused at a breakpoint
 
Below the source code is the Debug toolbar. See Figure
 
 
Figure Debug toolbar
  
Master breakpoint toggle. Selecting this will disable or enable all
breakpoints.
 
Pause and continue execution of code.
 
Step over the next line of code.

--- Page 655 ---
 
Step into the selected scope, such as a method call.
 
Exit the current scope.
  
Below the toolbar is the debug area with the variable and property values
on the left. The entire debug area can be hidden or shown along with the
variable and console panes. See Figure
 
 
Figure Debug area controls
  
Toggle the display of the debug area.
 
Toggle the display of the variable pane.
 
Toggle the display of the console pane.
  

--- Page 656 ---
Variables and their associated values appear when the code has been
paused at a breakpoint. When available, click the disclosure chevrons on
the left to see more details. See Figure Note that the value of a variable is
not defined until the code to set it is has executed. The object properties
are listed inside self.
 
 
Figure 10.11 Variables and associated values
 
When a breakpoint is hit, the debug navigator will show with the call
stack as shown in Figure The currently running thread is displayed with
the method highlighted. Click on entries to see the flow of code control
used to get to the current breakpoint:
 

--- Page 657 ---
 
Figure 10.12: Call stack at breakpoint
 
breakpoint breakpoint breakpoint breakpoint breakpoint breakpoint
breakpoint breakpoint breakpoint breakpoint breakpoint breakpoint
breakpoint breakpoint breakpoint breakpoint breakpoint breakpoint
breakpoint breakpoint breakpoint breakpoint breakpoint breakpoint
breakpoint breakpoint breakpoint breakpoint breakpoint breakpoint
breakpoint breakpoint breakpoint breakpoint breakpoint breakpoint
breakpoint breakpoint
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 658 ---
 
Debugger commands
 
On the bottom-right of the screen are two control that show or hide the
variables and console panes. The console prints logging information
and allows for the entry of debugging commands.
  
Verify a breakpoint is set in the showMap method of the
SchoolTapTestDelegate file.
 
If the code is not currently stopped at the breakpoint, run the test again
and let the code stop. Then click the step button so the highlighted
current line of code is the closing brace.
 
In the variables view, expand self. The properties are shown with
mapShown set to true.
 
In the console, on the bottom, to the right of where is shown, enter =
false and press return to make the entry move up into the console area.
 
The property is not updated in the variables pane however, if you click
the continue button the test will fail. Changing property and variable
values can be an important technique in debugging.

--- Page 659 ---
 
Run the test again and when execution stops at the breakpoint enter the
command, p In the console the current object will print information
about itself. It does not have to be Enter p websiteShown and see what
is printed.
 
Use these two commands to explore and change values are valuable in
identifying and fixing any issues that appear in code.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 660 ---
 
Logging
 
The console in Xcode shows information as the program runs. By
using log commands through the code, information on how the app is
operating can be quickly seen.
  
In the add import OSLog at the top. Below the allSchools property add
this new one: private let logger = Logger(subsystem: "Schools App",
category:
 
The subsystem is normally associated with the module. If this were in
a package, the package name would be appropriate. The category
narrows down the area within the subsystem, making it easy to filter
for the appropriate output in the console.
 
With the logger ready for use, update the call method to include
logging:
 
func call(_ school: School) {
 
  logger.info("Attempting to call school")
 

--- Page 661 ---
  guard let url = URL(string: "tel://\(school.phoneNumber)"),
UIApplication.shared.canOpenURL(url) else {
 
      logger.error("Cannot call school")
 
      return
 
  }
 
  UIApplication.shared.open(url, options: [:], completionHandler: nil)
 
  logger.notice("Call initiated")
 
}
 
Run the app and click on a school’s call button. The two log entries
will show. In this simple app, it is easy to see what pertains to the
school, however in a large app there could be literally thousands of
lines printed. By specifying the subsystem and category, the output can
be quickly filtered.
 
Verify the console is showing.
 

--- Page 662 ---
Click on the filter bar on the lower right of the console and enter A
popup menu, as shown in Figure will display some options to specify
what is desired. Right-click any entry in the output and the console can
also be further filtered or jump to the line of code that generated the
log entry:
 
 
Figure Filter menu
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 663 ---
 
Conclusion
 
The techniques shown in this chapter are critical in creating and
maintaining apps of all sizes. Neglecting to create tests may seem like
a time-saver until a change is made that unexpectedly breaks another
part of the app. It is best to be in the habit of either creating the tests
up-front or coding in such a way that adding tests becomes easier.
 
The next chapter will retrieve the school data directly from the
network and improve on decoding the data and the unit testing for the
school model.
 
Join our book’s Discord space
 
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the
Authors:
 
https://discord.bpbonline.com

--- Page 664 ---
 
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 665 ---
 
C
HAPTER
11
Networking
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 666 ---
 
Introduction
 
Data is often retrieved from the internet and used within the app. This
usually involves exchanging information with a known service, such
as a music library, or books, or even a service that shows random
animal images. To generate ideas, visit a collection of publicly
available APIs found at
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 667 ---
 
Structure
 
This chapter includes the following topics:
  
Codable models
 
Downloading data
 
Generics
 
Async / await
 
Error handling
 
Cleanup
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 668 ---
 
Objectives
 
By the end of the chapter, the reader will have a basic understanding of
how to do custom processing of data received to fit the needs of the
model. A basic, expandable networking structure will also be explored
with a means of retrieving the data in the background and handling any
errors that occur.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 669 ---
 
Codable models
 
The last chapter introduced some basic testing. Specifically, the model
tests only verified that the appropriate number of elements were
created for each type. While that is helpful, more tests are needed to
validate the properties are populated. Open “ModelTests” and add this
test to the bottom of the “testSchoolModel” method:
 
let firstSchool = try XCTUnwrap(schools.first)
 
XCTAssertNotNil(firstSchool.lat)
 
XCTAssertNotNil(firstSchool.lon)
 
The first property of a collection returns an optional because the
collection may be empty, so no value can be returned. To guarantee
that the firstSchool variable has a value, we attempt to unwrap the
result using the XCTUnwrap method. After that a test is made on the
lat and lon properties to verify they are not nil. Run the test and it will
fail. The try keyword means the XCTUnwrap method could throw an
error instead. Error handling will be covered more in a later section.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 670 ---
 
Decoding
 
The model does not have these properties populated form the
downloaded data. To achieve this, Swift has the Encodable and
Decodable protocols where compliant objects provide the appropriate
methods and enumerations that serialize or deserialize the data. If an
object expects to do both operations, it can adopt the Codable protocol.
 
This app specifically needs to decode text data. The technique was
briefly demonstrated in the last chapter. However, to customize the
deserialization, more changes need to be made. Follow these steps to
decode the school data and extract the necessary properties, including
lat and
  
Select the school model in the project navigator and add the following
code:
 
extension School {
 
  enum CodingKeys: String, CodingKey {
 
      case dbn
 

--- Page 671 ---
      case schoolName = "school_name"
 
      case location
 
case phoneNumber = "phone_number"
 
      case website
 
  }
 
  init(from decoder: Decoder) throws {
 
      let container = try decoder.container(keyedBy: CodingKeys.self)
 
      dbn = try container.decode(String.self, forKey: .dbn)
 
      schoolName = try container.decode(String.self, forKey:
.schoolName)
 
      let location = try container.decode(String.self, forKey: .location)
 
      // extract Lat and Lon
 

--- Page 672 ---
      let regex = "\\((.*?)\\)"
 
      var lat: Double?
 
      var lon: Double?
 
      if let latLonRange = location.range(of: regex, options:
.regularExpression) {
 
        let latLon = String(location[latLonRange])
 
            .replacingOccurrences(of: "(", with: "")
 
            .replacingOccurrences(of: ")", with: "")
 
            .replacingOccurrences(of: " ", with: "")
 
        let values = latLon.split(separator: ",")
 
        if values.count == 2 {
 
            lat = Double(values[0])
 

--- Page 673 ---
            lon = Double(values[1])
 
        }
 
      }
 
      self.lat = lat
 
      self.lon = lon
 
      self.location = location.stripParentheticalText()
 
      self.phoneNumber = try container.decode(String.self, forKey:
.phoneNumber)
 
      let website = try container.decodeIfPresent(String.self, forKey:
.website)
 
      if var website = website {
 
        if !website.starts(with: "https://") && !website.starts(with:
"http://") {
 
website = "https://\(website)"
 

--- Page 674 ---
        }
 
        self.website = website
 
      } else {
 
        self.website = nil
 
      }
 
  }
 
}
 
The CodingKeys enumeration gives a list of keys that match the keys
in the JSON literal. When the key name in the JSON is different than
the case name, the desired key name can be assigned to the case. This
allows short, meaningful, key names when the originating data key
may be much longer or when the names do not reflect the values well.
 
The init method takes a decoder object that has a container. From that
container, each property can be directly extracted, like the school
name, and assigned to the property. Others can be extracted only if
present in the container, like the website further down.

--- Page 675 ---
 
Decoding must specify the data type and the matching key. Like any
class or struct, all the properties must be initialized. Using a regular
expression, the lat and lon are extracted from the location.
 
To get the code to compile, select the String file in the Extensions
group and add this method to the extension:
 
func stripParentheticalText() -> String {
 
    var string = self
 
    if let leftIdx = string.firstIndex(of: "("), let rightIdx =
string.firstIndex(of: ")") {
 
        let sansParens = String(string.prefix(upTo: leftIdx) +
string.suffix(from: string.index(after: rightIdx)))
 
        string = sansParens
 
    }
 
    return string
 

--- Page 676 ---
}
 
Back in the ModelTests file, remove the line
decoder.keyDecodingStrategy = .convertFromSnakeCase from the
testSchoolModel method and run the school model test. It will now
pass.
 
Now add this code to the bottom of the testScoresModel method and
run the test:
 
let firstScore = try XCTUnwrap(scores.first)
 
XCTAssertEqual(firstScore.numTakers, 29)
  
Why is the test failing? There are two possible reasons:
  
The property names do not match the input, even with the snake case
key decoding strategy. The strategy removes the underscore and makes
the next letter an uppercase. That is school_name becomes The other
properties do not match this technique.
 
The value types do not match. All the desired properties in the file are
strings.
 

--- Page 677 ---
To make the scores model work, it needs to be altered and there are a
few ways to consider. An approach like the school model can be done
with the enum and Using this technique, the string values in the file
can be properly converted to integers.
 
However, do the values really need to be converted to integers? As no
calculations are being made and the values are just being displayed,
optional string types will work. By making this change, less work will
be needed to deserialize the data. Make the changes:
  
Change the equality test from the integer 29 to the string
 
Select Scores from the project navigator. Change the value types for
readingAvgScore, and writingAvgScore to Several errors will show
when an attempt is made to build the project.
 
In the mockScores property, where the errors are shown, add quotes
around the numeric values to make them strings.
 
In the ScoreCardLineItem file, for the value property, change the type
to In the first Preview, change the passed value to The remaining
places where the properties are referenced need to also be changed.
  
With those changes made, the value type has been addressed. The next
issue for proper deserializing is to match the property names. By right
clicking a property name, Rename can be chosen in the Refactor

--- Page 678 ---
submenu. Then each property can be renamed so the snake case key
strategy can be used.
 
However, there is an easier way, because there are no conversions
needed by the only a way to map the property name to the keys in the
file is needed. Add this extension to the Scores file:
 
extension Scores {
 
  enum CodingKeys: String, CodingKey {
 
      case dbn
 
      case schoolName = "school_name"
 
      case numTakers = "num_of_sat_test_takers"
 
case readingAvgScore = "sat_critical_reading_avg_score"
 
      case mathAvgScore = "sat_math_avg_score"
 
      case writingAvgScore = "sat_writing_avg_score"
 
  }

--- Page 679 ---
 
}
 
In the ModelTests file, remove the line decoder.keyDecodingStrategy
= .convertFromSnakeCase from the method, and run it. The test will
now pass.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 680 ---
 
Downloading data
 
Numerous ways have been devised to facilitate the management of
networking from an app. Apple has provided frameworks to make it
easier to communicate with other devices and services. When working
with web services, the common modes of interaction fall into these
methods: and The simple downloading of data is commonly done with
a get request.
 
Ideally, each area of an app will be responsible for providing its own
knowledge of the data required and how to manipulate it, while the
networking for the app is done through a common interface. In the
project navigator, create a new Swift file called DownloadManager
and add this code below the existing import Foundation:.
 
import OSLog
 
enum DownloadError: Error {
 
  case invalidUrl
 
  case download

--- Page 681 ---
 
  case parse
 
}
 
protocol ProvidesApiInfo {
 
  var baseUrl: String { get }
 
  var endPoint: String { get }
 
  var decoder: JSONDecoder { get }
 
}
 
The enum identifies specific errors that may be thrown. More on error
handling is discussed later in this chapter. The protocol defines items
needed by objects that will use the download manager. Add the
following code to complete the contents of this file:
 
class DownloadManager {
 
  static let shared = DownloadManager()

--- Page 682 ---
 
  static let subsystem = "Download Manager"
 
let executor = Executor()
 
  let logger = Logger(subsystem: DownloadManager.subsystem,
category: "Get")
 
  private init() {}
 
  func retrieveDataDecodable>(using apiInfo: ProvidesApiInfo) async
throws -> T {
 
      guard let base = URL(string: apiInfo.baseUrl) else {
 
        throw DownloadError.invalidUrl
 
      }
 
      let request = URLRequest(url:
base.appendingPathComponent(apiInfo.endPoint))
 
      let absoluteUrlString = request.url?.absoluteString ?? ""

--- Page 683 ---
 
      logger.info("URL: \(absoluteUrlString)")
 
      return try await executor.run(request, decoder: apiInfo.decoder)
 
  }
 
}
 
struct Executor {
 
  func runDecodable>(_ request: URLRequest, decoder:
JSONDecoder) async throws -> DataType {
 
      let (data, _) = try await URLSession.shared.data(for: request)
 
      do {
 
        return try decoder.decode(DataType.self, from: data)
 
      } catch {
 
        throw DownloadError.parse
 

--- Page 684 ---
      }
 
  }
 
}
 
The private init prevents the class from being instantiated elsewhere.
To use the class, the shared property must be used. You may recall
from Chapter Managing Data and Assets, this is called the Singleton
pattern. Observe the use of the ProvidesApiInfo protocol as a data type
in the retrieveData method. Any object that conforms to the protocol
can be used. This method creates a URLRequest with the provided
information and the attempts to return the data returned by the
executor’s run method. This run method attempts to use a shared
URLSession to get the data and then decode it based on the type
provided through the use of generics..
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 685 ---
 
Generics
 
Generics is a term given to the technique by which a method can be
created that takes a place-holder type so the method can be used across
multiple, compatible, types without unnecessarily adding the same
method for each class.
 
To better understand, suppose a simple function was implemented to
add two integers:
 
func addInt(item1: Int, item2: Int) -> Int {
 
  return item1 + item2
 
}
 
Later, it is realized that the addition of double values is also needed so
a new function is added:
 
func addDouble(item1: Double, item2: Double) -> Double {
 
  return item1 + item2

--- Page 686 ---
 
}
 
These functions are the same, except for the value type. Generics
allows the type to be abstracted and defined at the point of use. So
instead of having two functions, one can be used:
 
func addNumber(item1: T, item2: T) -> T {
 
  return item1 + item2
 
}
 
The T is a placeholder for the type. It does not need to be called It
could be called anything that makes the intent clear. In the run method
above, the placeholder is called Wherever the type is normally used,
the generic placeholder is used instead.
 
Generics can be very useful in simplifying code. In the above addition
examples, only types that are Numeric would be desired, otherwise the
compiler will not know how to add the elements. To limit types
allowed, the function can be altered to look like this:
 
func addNumberNumeric>(item1: T, item2: T) -> T {

--- Page 687 ---
 
  return item1 + item2
 
}
 
Numeric is a protocol identifying the type as a numeric value type.
Depending on the need of the function, many other type limiters can be
used such as or even a custom protocol.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 688 ---
 
Async / await
 
Both the retrieveData and run methods use the keyword This indicates
that the method is intended to be run in the background on a separate
thread. When the method is called, the current thread is suspended
until the asynchronous task is complete. To properly download the
school and score data, follow these steps:
  
In the Schools group, add a new Swift file called DownloadManager +
This is a common naming convention when extending an object to
indicate the object being extended and the nature of the extension. Add
this code:
 
import OSLog
 
extension DownloadManager {
 
  typealias SchoolDownloadResults = Result<[School],
DownloadError>
 
  func downloadSchools() async -> SchoolDownloadResults {
 

--- Page 689 ---
      let logger = Logger(subsystem: DownloadManager.subsystem,
category: "Schools")
 
      do {
 
        let schools: [School] = try await retrieveData(using:
SchoolApiData())
 
        logger.info("schools downloaded")
 
        return .success(schools)
 
      } catch DownloadError.invalidUrl {
 
        logger.error("Invalid URL")
 
        return .failure(.invalidUrl)
 
      } catch DownloadError.parse {
 
        logger.error("Error parsing")
 
        return .failure(.parse)

--- Page 690 ---
 
      } catch {
 
        logger.error("Cannot download")
 
        return .failure(.download)
 
      }
 
  }
 
}
 
struct SchoolApiData: ProvidesApiInfo {
 
  var baseUrl: String { "https://data.cityofnewyork.us/resource/" }
 
  var endPoint: String { "s3k6-pzi2.json" }
 
  var decoder: JSONDecoder { JSONDecoder() }
 
}
 

--- Page 691 ---
This adds a new method to the download manager called It, too, is an
asynchronous method and returns the custom type,
SchoolDownloadResults, that was defined by This return type is a
Result that also utilizes generics. It is an enum for a success or failure
with associated data for each enumeration. Note the line that calls the
retrieveData method of NetworkManager:
 
let schools: [School] = try await retrieveData(using: SchoolApiData())
 
It defines a variable, schools as an array. The keyword await indicates
the code should pause and wait for the data to be returned. Note the
SchoolApiData struct conforms to the ProvidesApiInfo protocol so an
instance of it can be used to retrieve data.
 
The download method is asynchronous, too. Asynchronous methods
call other asynchronous methods. At some point, however, the
asynchronous methods may need to be called from code that is
synchronous.
 
In add this code above the class definition:
 
enum LoadingStatus {
 
   case loading
 

--- Page 692 ---
   case complete
 
   case error
 
}
 
Then, below the logger property add the following:
 
private let downloadManager: DownloadManager
 
private(set) var loadingStatus: LoadingStatus = .loading
 
init(downloadManager: DownloadManager =
DownloadManager.shared) {
 
  self.downloadManager = downloadManager
 
}
 
@MainActor
 
func downloadData() async {
 

--- Page 693 ---
  let schoolResults = await downloadManager.downloadSchools()
 
  var downloadedSchools: [School] = []
 
  var downloadedScores: [SchoolId: Scores] = [:]
 
  var loadingStatus: LoadingStatus = .loading
 
  switch schoolResults {
 
  case .success(let schools):
 
      downloadedSchools = schools
 
      loadingStatus = .complete
 
case .failure(_):
 
      loadingStatus = .error
 
  }
 
  let scoreResults = await downloadManager.downloadScores()

--- Page 694 ---
 
  if case let .success(scores) = scoreResults {
 
      downloadedScores = convertScoresToDict(scores)
 
  }
 
  self.allSchools = downloadedSchools
 
  self.schools = downloadedSchools
 
  self.scores = downloadedScores
 
  self.loadingStatus = loadingStatus
 
}
 
private func convertScoresToDict(_ scores: [Scores]) -> [String:
Scores] {
 
  let scoresDict = scores.reduce(into: [String: Scores]()) {
 
      $0[$1.dbn] = $1
 

--- Page 695 ---
  }
 
  return scoresDict
 
}
 
Storing the download manager as a property, instead of simply using
DownloadManager.shared throughout the code is an example of
dependency injection. It allows for a different download manager
object to be used, especially for testing. Also, using the private(set)
property specifies the property can only be set from within the class,
but is still accessible according to the normal access control rules.
 
@MainActor indicates the method should use the main thread when
interacting with the class properties. Whenever working with
properties that are used in a view, they must be updated on the main
thread. Again, there are two places where await is used so the flow of
the asynchronous code is manageable.
 
In the SchoolList file, under the navigation title modifier, add this
code:
 
.onAppear
 
  Task {

--- Page 696 ---
 
      await viewModel.downloadData()
 
  }
 
}
 
Every time the navigation view appears, the code is executed. Task
creates an environment where asynchronous methods can be called.
 
Create a new Swift file in the Scores group called DownloadManager
+ Scores and add this code:
 
import OSLog
 
extension DownloadManager {
 
  typealias ScoreDownloadResults = Result<[Scores],
DownloadError>
 
  func downloadScores() async -> ScoreDownloadResults {
 
      let logger = Logger(subsystem: DownloadManager.subsystem,
category: "Scores")

--- Page 697 ---
 
      do {
 
        let scores: [Scores] = try await retrieveData(using:
ScoreCardApiData())
 
        logger.info("scores downloaded")
 
        return .success(scores)
 
      } catch DownloadError.invalidUrl {
 
        logger.error("Invalid URL")
 
        return .failure(.invalidUrl)
 
      } catch DownloadError.parse {
 
        logger.error("Error parsing")
 
        return .failure(.parse)
 
      } catch {

--- Page 698 ---
 
        logger.error("Cannot download")
 
        return .failure(.download)
 
      }
 
  }
 
}
 
struct ScoreCardApiData: ProvidesApiInfo {
 
  var baseUrl: String { "https://data.cityofnewyork.us/resource/" }
 
  var endPoint: String { "f9bf-2cp4.json" }
 
  var decoder: JSONDecoder { JSONDecoder() }
 
}
  
With these changes complete, the program should run as expected.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 699 ---
 
Error handling
 
Several times in the project the use of and throws has been used.
These, along with the Error protocol, are the basis for error handling in
Swift. If a method has throws in the definition, then the method should
either call another method using try or throw an error itself.
 
When trying to call a method that throws, there are a few options on
how to handle it:
  
You can choose to do nothing. If the calling method also throws, then
the error will be propagated up the call chain. The retrieveData
methods of the download manager exhibits this with the last return
statement. If the method throws an error, it will be passed to the
retrieveData caller.
 
Wrap the call and response in do…catch blocks and handle the error
locally. It would look like this:
 
do {
 
  // try something here

--- Page 700 ---
 
} catch {
 
  // handle error here
 
}
 
In the run method of the Executor struct, the try is attempted in the do
block. If an error is caught, the code in the catch block is executed.
With this technique, all errors are handled here, however a specific
error can be caught as shown with the downloading of the schools and
In these methods, specific catch Type> clauses are used to catch
specific types of errors.
 
If the method is returning a value, then use the try? syntax to make the
value optional. This would typically be done outside of blocks and
could look like this: let schools: [School] = try? await
retrieveData(using: SchoolApiData()) { ... the code to be executed is in
the curly braces when a value is successfully returned.
  
To throw errors, an enum is defined that conforms to the Error
protocol. The download manager has DownloadError defined, and the
class throws specific cases of this enum and passes the error in the

--- Page 701 ---
failure cases of the downloads. Like other enumerations, associated
data can also be attached to an enum case.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 702 ---
 
Cleanup
 
While downloading the data, a progress indicator should be shown.
Likewise, if an error occurs, it should be shown. The loading state will
be utilized to show the appropriate interface. To keep the code
readable, the SchoolList struct will be refactored. Select SchoolList
from the project navigator and follow these steps:
  
Create a new property below body:
 
var schoolList: some View {
 
}
 
Cut the VStack and the sheet modifier from the body and paste it into
the body of new schoolList property. Add these two properties below
 
var loading: some View {
 
  VStack {
 
      ProgressView()

--- Page 703 ---
 
          .progressViewStyle(.circular)
 
          .scaleEffect(2)
 
          .padding()
 
      Text("schoolListView.loading".localized)
 
          .style(.h2)
 
  }
 
}
 
@ViewBuilder
 
var error: some View {
 
  Image(systemName: "exclamationmark.triangle")
 
      .resizable()
 

--- Page 704 ---
      .renderingMode(.template)
 
      .foregroundColor(.red)
 
      .frame(width: 32, height: 32)
 
  Text("schoolListView.error".localized)
 
        .style(.h2)
 
}
 
In the body, above the navigationTitle modifier, add this
 
VStack {
 
    switch viewModel.loadingStatus {
 
    case .complete:
 
      schoolList
 
    case .loading:
 

--- Page 705 ---
      loading
 
    case .error:
 
      error
 
    }
 
}
 
Select Localizable from the Resources group.
 
Add schoolListView.loading as a key and Loading information as the
value for English.
 
Add schoolListView.error as a key and Error loading information as
the value for English.
 
Select the Spanish translation and add Cargando información and Error
al cargar información respectively for the new keys.
 
Run the app and a loading spinner will show while the data is loaded.
 

--- Page 706 ---
Disable the computer’s networking and run again to show an error.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 707 ---
 
Testing
 
With the networking calls in place, the UI tests are not running with a
known data set. It is possible to update the test for the downloaded
data, but what if the data changes or if the data cannot be downloaded?
Instead, the app can be updated to be aware of a testing status and load
the sample data.
 
In the NY_City_SchoolsApp file, add this extension:
 
extension UIApplication {
 
  public static var isRunningTest: Bool {
 
      @AppStorage("testMode") var runningTest: Bool = false
 
      return runningTest ||
ProcessInfo.processInfo.environment["XCTestConfigurationFilePath"]
!= nil
 
    }
 
}

--- Page 708 ---
 
The user default, testMode is not set any place in the app so it will
always be false when the app is normally run. The UI test will update
it on launch. The environment test can determine that unit tests are
running. Combined, this method will determine if any tests are
running.
 
To update the user default with the UI test:
  
Select NY_City_SchoolsUITests in the project navigator.
 
Add this line of code to the testShowScores method just above the
 
app.launchArguments = ["-testMode", "YES"]
 
By putting a dash at the beginning of the key, the appropriate user
default will be updated with the value that follows. Probably obvious,
YES indicates true and NO would be false. Other items can also be
passed in comma-separated pairs. Using this technique, tests can be
created for different scenarios.
  
Finally, to use the new app property:
  
Select SchoolListViewModel in the project navigator.

--- Page 709 ---
 
Add this code at the beginning of the downloadData method in the
view model:
 
if UIApplication.isRunningTest {
 
  logger.info("TESTING — USING MOCK DATA")
 
  self.schools = School.demoSchools
 
  self.scores = Scores.mockScoreDictionary
 
  self.loadingStatus = .complete
 
  return
 
}
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 710 ---
 
Conclusion
 
Networking is a big part of many programs and libraries. The solution
shown here can be easily adapted for more complex scenarios.
Deserializing can range from a simple decodable struct to providing
coding keys, or a more advanced option that utilizes a decoder
Serializing data complexity when posting to the internet can be the
same.
 
Generics can make code cleaner when used properly. Like and any
other topic it is a tool that should be considered for creating clean,
readable, and easily updated code.
 
Errors should be handled gracefully and not ignored. A simple icon or
message to indicate a problem occurred is usually best. Depending on
the type of application, it may be in a small part of the screen or front
and center when it stops the entire app from functioning.
 
The next chapter will look at running the app on a physical device and
giving it to testers and then making it available to the public.
 
Join our book’s Discord space
 

--- Page 711 ---
Join the book's Discord Workspace for Latest updates, Offers, Tech
happenings around the world, New Release and Sessions with the
Authors:
 
https://discord.bpbonline.com
 
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 712 ---
 
C
HAPTER
12
Make it Public
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 713 ---
 
Introduction
 
Most of the time an app is created to be sold or given away to the
public at large. The App Store is built-in to all iOS devices, so it is
easy for potential users to find and purchase your app. There is no need
for the developer to set up a merchant account or handle the purchases.
Apple has made the process of making an app available to test users
and releasing to the App Store simple.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 714 ---
 
Structure
 
This chapter includes the following topics:
  
App icon
 
Using physical devices
 
App Store Connect
 
Test users
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 715 ---
 
Objectives
 
By the end of the chapter, the reader will have a basic understanding of
how to use the phone for testing, how to upload to Apple’s website for
the app, set up testing groups and releasing builds to them, and how to
price and release an app to the public.
 
public. public. public. public. public. public. public. public. public.
public. public. public. public. public. public. public. public. public.
public. public. public. public. public. public. public. public. public.
public.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 716 ---
 
App icon
 
When designing an icon, remember that the image will be masked so the
corners are rounded. The icon should be visually distinct and scale easily
from the 1024 x 1024 points required size to the small app area on the
phone’s home screen.
 
In the chapter folder’s Start folder is a file called School Icon.png that can
be dragged onto the AppIcon asset as shown in Figure
 
 
Figure Adding app icon
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 717 ---
 
Using physical devices
 
When developing an app, testing on a physical device is critical. The
simulator meets most needs of testing on different size devices;
however, a real device gives a real sense of how the app will function.
This is true for transition and animation speeds, how memory is
handled, and how the views work with accessibility. Follow these steps
to deploy the app to a physical device:
  
Enter an Apple ID into Open Xcode and select Settings from the
Xcode menu. Select the Accounts tab at the top, the plus button on the
bottom, followed by the Apple ID and the appropriate password.
 
The phone itself must be enabled for development use. Unlock the
phone and plug it into the Mac. When prompted, specify the computer
can be trusted.
 
Open Xcode and select Devices and Simulators from the Window
menu. On the left pane a list of devices is shown with the connected
device listed at the top. Select the connected phone. An error may be
shown at the top on how to enable the developer mode on the phone.
In the Settings app of the phone, select Privacy & Scroll to the bottom,

--- Page 718 ---
select Developer and enable it. Restart the phone and unlock it again.
When prompted, turn on developer mode and enter your passcode.
 
With the Apple ID entered and the phone prepped, an app can now be
deployed to the phone. Open the NY City Schools app in Xcode and
select the project from the project navigator followed by the NY City
Schools target in the second panel. At the top select Signing & A team
must be selected. Depending on whether the Apple ID used is
associated with a developer account or not, the options and resulting
signing will vary. Figure 12.2 and Figure 12.3 show the primary
differences:
 
 
Figure Signing panel for Apple ID with no developer account
 

--- Page 719 ---
 
Figure Signing panel for Apple ID with associated developer account
 
When no developer account is created, the team selection includes and
the signing certificate in the iOS pane includes the Apple ID itself.
Whereas, the personal team reference is not included when a developer
account is used, and the signing certificate displays part of a certificate
number.
 
In the project window toolbar, select the physical phone as the target’s
destination. To launch the app, click on the run button in the toolbar, to
the left of the project name, or from the Product menu, select After the
app has compiled and been installed on the phone, what happens next
depends on whether a developer account is being used.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 720 ---
 
No developer accounts
 
It may be desirable to test or run an app on a single device without
creating a developer account. Perhaps the app is for personal use and
there is no plan to distribute it further.
  
When there is no developer account being used, Xcode will display an
alert, as shown in Figure saying the app could not be launched:
 
 
Figure Could not launch app error in Xcode
 
The phone will also show an alert. Dismiss the alert and open the
Settings app on the phone. Select General followed by VPN & Device
Tap on the app’s entry and see a screen like Figure Tap the Trust Apple
Development: … button to allow the app to be opened and debugged:
 

--- Page 721 ---
 
Figure Setting screen to trust the app developer
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 722 ---
 
With a developer account
 
When the Apple ID is associated with an active developer account, the
app is launched, and normal debugging can be done as it can in the
simulator. The certificate generated is stored in the computer keychain
and can be viewed by opening Keychain Access and selecting the My
Certificates tab.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 723 ---
 
App Store Connect
 
The App Store Connect website is used to manage apps. From
creation, to sending test users, to pricing of the app, to deployment and
updates. Using this website requires an annual fee. Visit
https://developer.apple.com/account and log in using your Apple ID.
Click the Enroll today button. Once payment has been made,
developers have access to do all the items mentioned above plus access
to beta software and operating system releases.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 724 ---
 
Preparing the app for upload
 
Like the tag version mentioned in Chapter the version of an app is
important. Once a version has been uploaded, subsequent uploads must
have a higher version for each class of minor or major version being
updated.
  
Select the project from the project navigator followed by the NY City
Schools target. When the General tab at the top is selected, the app
category, bundle identifier, and version information is shown in the
Identity group. See Figure
 

--- Page 725 ---
 
Figure App target selected with General tab displayed
 
Select an appropriate category for the app and verify the bundle identifier
is accurate. It must be globally unique across the entire array of available
apps for all the products that may run on Apple devices. If the identifier
needs to be changed, it can be altered on the Signing & Capabilities tab of
the project.
 
The Version field holds the major and minor version numbers, and the
build is comparable to the patch or point release in a package. This must
be set before each upload either manually or through automation so there

--- Page 726 ---
is not a conflict with what is already on Apple’s servers. For the initial
upload, version 1.0 with a build of 0 is fine.
 
In the Xcode toolbar, select Any iOS Device as the destination. From the
Product menu, select Archive. Most likely you will get errors and the
operation will fail. When archiving an app, certain parts of the code or
sample data that are accessible during testing and debugging are no longer
available, nor should they be included in the final build of the app. In the
SchoolListViewModel file, wrap the if line and conditional code with the
#if like this:
 
#if DEBUG
 
if UIApplication.isRunningTest {
 
  logger.info("TESTING — USING MOCK DATA")
 
  self.schools = School.demoSchools
 
  self.scores = Scores.mockScoreDictionary
 
  self.loadingStatus = .complete
 
  return
 

--- Page 727 ---
}
 
#endif
 
This prevents the code inside the macro from being compiled outside of
the debug configuration. Other macros, like #if os(iOS) or #if os(macOS)
to import libraries or execute code specific to an operating system, also
exist.
 
In the same file, change the allSchools property to private var allSchools:
[School] = After this change, find the previews where mock data is used
and wrap the previews with #if After these changes the archive will
succeed and display the window shown in Figure The window can also be
shown by selecting Organizer from the Window menu:
 
 

--- Page 728 ---
Figure Organizer window
 
Entries can be removed by pressing the delete key on the keyboard. This
is useful if an issue is found before the archive is uploaded or testing
versions have expired. When a version is in production, reports on the left
panel provide valuable information about the app.
 
Click the Distribute App button and accept the default values. After the
app has been uploaded, a success screen like Figure 12.8 will show:
 
 
Figure Upload successful
 

--- Page 729 ---
Click the arrow button or visit https://appstoreconnect.apple.com and log
in to see a screen like Figure
 
 
Figure App Store Connect screen
 
Besides the My Apps button, the top row of buttons is for reporting. Users
and Access allows multiple users to be created that can manage apps, run
reports, do internal testing, or more depending on the privileges assigned.
Agreements, Tax, and Banking is where various agreements are signed
and information on where payments from sales are to be placed. Take time
to review the last panel and provide all required information.
 
Click the My Apps button and see the app just uploaded. Initially it will
say When it is ready to work with, an email will be sent.
 

--- Page 730 ---
Click the app and information is shown for sending the app to the App
Store. Along the left side of the screen are various items that govern
attributes of the app, including pricing.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 731 ---
 
Test users
 
When possible, it is always best to have the app tested by other users.
People will often use an app in ways that were unanticipated revealing
bugs or behaviors that are not desirable. To create test users and give
the app out to them, follow these steps:
  
To give the app out for beta testing, select TestFlight on the top. When
a new app, or version, is uploaded, the compliance must be set.
 
Click the Manage button next to Missing Compliance and select the
appropriate encryption algorithm used in the app. In this case it is
None of the
 
The next step is to create a group of testers. Click the plus sign next to
Internal Testing and when prompted, name it Alpha and click The
status next to the app will change to Ready to Test and a new section
below will appear for internal testers. Only users that have been added
under Users and Access can be used for internal testing.
 
External testers can be anyone with a device. Click the plus sign next
to External Testing and create a Beta Testers group. Initially an error
will show under Group Management saying there are not any approved

--- Page 732 ---
builds for beta testing. Click the plus button next to Builds and add the
version that was just uploaded as shown in Figure
 
 
Figure Add build to test dialog
 
After clicking fill in the feedback email testers can use when testing
the app, contact information, and deselect the Sign-in required
checkbox. The contact information and sign-in information are needed
by the team at Apple when validating an app for testing that requires
the user to sign in.
 

--- Page 733 ---
The next screen is a message for testers when downloading this
version of the app on new or fixed items to test.
 
After submitting for review, the build will show with the message,
Waiting for Turnaround time from Apple can range from a couple of
hours to a couple of days, depending on the complexity of the build.
 
Meanwhile, click the plus button next to Testers and select Add New
Enter the email addresses of people to test the build. On subsequent
builds, existing testers can be added. To simplify the process, the email
should match the Apple ID used on the tester’s device. Once the build
is approved, invitations will be sent the registered email addresses.
  
Each tester must download a copy of the TestFlight app to the testing
device. Once installed, the tester can click on the View in TestFlight
button prominently shown in the email. The TestFlight app is
launched, and the user can accept the invitation and install the app.
Beta copies have a default expiration date, but a single build can also
be forcibly expired beforehand. To expire a build through the website,
click the build while on the TestFlight tab then click the Expire Build
button.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 734 ---
 
Submitting to the App Store
 
To submit to the App Store, follow the given steps:
  
After testing is complete, images and an optional video must be
prepared. Run the app in the iPhone 15 Pro Max simulator, or a
simulator device of the same size.
 
Save snapshots from the File menu by selecting Save When ready to
record a video, select Record Screen from the File menu. Perform the
activity to be emphasized then, at the top of the simulator, click the
stop button.
 
The video must run from fifteen to thirty seconds. Open the saved
video in the QuickTime app on the Mac and export to a 1080p file to
get a video at the proper resolution for submission.
 
On the App Store Connect website, select the Distribution tab. Verify
iOS or iPad is selected appropriately. Drag the saved snapshots and
video to the region below the iOS Previews and Screenshots heading.
 
Fill in the required fields and click the plus sign next to Builds and
select the tested build followed by the Done button. Again, uncheck

--- Page 735 ---
the Sign-in required checkbox. For timing, the app can be released
automatically once it is approved or set to be released manually or at a
specified date and time.
 
The Save button can be clicked at any time to save the progress and
returned to later. If the app is for sale, select Pricing and Availability
on the left side to set the price and availability worldwide. When all
the required fields are entered, and the snapshots are uploaded, save
again and then click the Add for Review button. Apple will review the
app to guarantee it matches their standards and, if set, release the app
to the App Store.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 736 ---
 
Conclusion
 
The App Store provides a secure way of downloading apps and, for
developers, an easy and safe way of delivering apps to users. Tools
provided by Apple allow for beta testing by ad hoc testers and a
smooth transition to the app store.
 
In the final chapter, we will learn of ways to create multiple apps that
function the same, but still allow for style and iconic customizations.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 737 ---
 
C
HAPTER
13
Make a Generic App
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 738 ---
 
Introduction
 
White label apps are a common way for an application to be used by
multiple organizations, each with specific branding options from
colors to iconography, or even features that can be enabled or disabled.
From airlines to banking apps to drone control, the possibilities for
generic apps are broad and varied. It is important to know how to
easily separate the branding from the app parts.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 739 ---
 
Structure
 
This chapter includes the following topics:
  
Designing the app
 
Create target applications
 
Defining the customizable options
 
Bundles
 
Create the common interface elements
 
Create the primary app
 
Running the app
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 740 ---
 
Objectives
 
By the end of the chapter the reader will understand how to
conceptualize and create a white label app with clear points of
branding defined. The reader will also use and refine skills gained in
previous chapters to deliver the product.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 741 ---
 
Designing the app
 
In this chapter a pizza app will be created for two pizzerias. Others can
be added on-demand. A pizza is a simple food with many options. The
crust can be thin, hand-tossed, or deep dish. Toppings can be generally
separated into meat, cheese, and vegetables or fruit. Often, an order
can include side items like breadsticks, cinnamon rolls, and salads, and
drinks. Like many fast-food restaurants, orders are queued, and a timer
may be applied to each order for tracking efficiency.
 
Because this is a generic app, the colors for certain areas of the app
will be defined by each branded target. The specific pizza sizes,
ingredients, and sides will also be defined by each target. The app
defined here will be simple: A list of active orders with an expected
completion timer and a way of adding new orders. Figure 13.1 shows
the first of the concept screens:
 

--- Page 742 ---
 
Figure 13.1 Order list
 
The Active Orders list provides a list of orders that have been placed
with a countdown progress bar on the bottom of each order. New
orders are added to the bottom of the list. When an order is complete, it
can be deleted. Another screen is used to enter new pizza orders.
Figure 13.2 shows the new order entry screen:
 

--- Page 743 ---
 
Figure 13.2 New pizza design
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 744 ---
 
App structure
 
The app will be broken into multiple bundles to make the process
manageable.
  
Two iOS application targets. More can be added as necessary. Each of
these must hold the customizable options directly.
 
An application library. This library will identify the various screens
and business logic necessary for the app to function.
 
A UI library to define custom elements used on-screen.
 
By breaking the app into in this fashion, new brands can be easily
added and work on different aspects of how the app functions and
interface libraries can be worked on simultaneously.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 745 ---
 
Create target application
 
To get started, follow these steps:
  
In Xcode, create a new project using the iOS App template. On the
options page, give it a name of verify the interface reads the language is
and choose None for the storage option. No tests will be created for this
app.
 
Select the project in the project navigator.
 
Click the plus button at the bottom of the window, below the list of
targets.
 
For the template, choose the iOS tab. Either manually or by using the
search field, select the App item and click
 
Set the Product Name to JoesPizza as shown in Figure
 

--- Page 746 ---
 
Figure New iOS target
 
Create another iOS target calling it
 
Remove the Pizza target along with the Pizza folder in the project
navigator.
  
When complete, the project should resemble Figure
 

--- Page 747 ---
 
Figure Project state after adding new targets
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 748 ---
 
Defining customizable options
 
A color theme is the first place to start when branding so certain
elements need to be customizable to allow a pizzeria to brand the app:
  
A gradient color for the background would give an immediate
presentation to the user. If the brand does not want a color, the
beginning and ending colors can be white or black for dark mode.
White or black is an oversimplification. Often, the colors used are off-
white and very dark grey. Even text in a professional app is rarely one
hundred percent black.
 
Card customizations were previously covered. For some dimension, a
shadow color could also be specified.
 
The colors used for the progress bar can give a sense of urgency as the
timer runs down.
 
Other areas of customization to consider:
  
Custom images that represent the ingredients.
 

--- Page 749 ---
The number of minutes given for new orders to be completed.
 
The font styles.
 
While most of these have been covered using enumerations and
delegation, this app will get the information directly from the app
bundles. This makes the task of adding a new pizzeria much simpler.
 
Colors should not be referred to by a color name, instead the color
definition should be appropriate to how it is to be used. For instance, if
a color is meant to be used for an error card’s background, then it
should be called Also, using a hierarchy of items in the asset catalog
can make it easier to use the same name in multiple places.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 750 ---
 
Card colors
 
Asset catalogs were previously covered in Chapter Managing Data and
Follow these steps to add colors to
  
Select the Assets catalog for JoesPizza in the project navigator.
 
Click the plus icon at the bottom and select Folder with
 
Name the folder A namespace allows a hierarchy of assets. If a folder’s
namespace option needs to be toggled, the option called Provides
Namespace exists in the Attributes inspector.
 
In the new folder, add a color set called Background by clicking on the
plus button at the bottom of the window below the given colors and
select Color Note the title in the edit panel says Set the hex of Any
Appearance to #FCFBF2 and for Dark to
 
Add another color set called Background-Error and set the hex color
value for Any Appearance to FFE5E6 and for Dark set the hex color
value to
  

--- Page 751 ---
To see how these can be referenced, select ContentView in the project
navigator under Make sure JoesPizza is also selected in the toolbar as
the app that would be run. Add this modifier to the VStack, after the
padding, and note how the dashes are ignored for the property name:
 
.background {
 
  Color.Card.backgroundError
 
}
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 752 ---
 
Countdown timer
  
In the same catalog, create a new name-spaced folder called If the new
folder appears as a subfolder in the Card folder, it can be manually moved.
Any easy way to avoid this situation is to click a blank area below the list
of colors before adding the new folder.
 
Inside the Timer folder, create these color sets:
 
Progress1 with hex colors #B51700 and #FFDDDD
 
Progress2 with hex colors #FF9800 and #FFD493
 
Progress3 with hex colors #FFF950 and #FFFED3
 
Progress4 with hex colors #6AD372 and #DCFFDE
  
To indicate how much time is expected to complete a pizza, a Data Set
will be used. Open the TextEdit app and create a new document. From the
Format menu, select Make Plain Text and enter this:
 
{ "seconds": 900 }
 

--- Page 753 ---
Save the file to the desktop with the name If an alert is shown about the
file extension, choose Use This file will establish how much time an order
should take.
 
To use the file, a data set must be created. In the Timer folder, add a data
set by clicking the plus button at the bottom or right-clicking the folder
and selecting New Data Give it the name, Drag the JSON file created
earlier onto the editor pane as shown in Figure
 
 
Figure Add file to data asset
  
The saved Time.json file can now be deleted. It has been copied into the
project.

--- Page 754 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 755 ---
 
Toppings
 
As shown in the above figure, also create a name-spaced Toppings
folder. Create two data sets called Meat and Create two JSON files as
follows and add them to the data sets:
 
Set the contents of Meat.json to:
 
[
 
  "Sausage",
 
  "Pepperoni",
 
  "Ham",
 
  "Anchovies"
 
]
 
Set the contents of Veggies.json to:
 

--- Page 756 ---
[
 
  "Green Pepper",
 
  "Onion",
 
  "Mushroom",
 
"Tomatoe",
 
  "Pineapple",
 
  "Spinach",
 
  "Black Olive"
 
]
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 757 ---
 
Crust
 
Each pizzeria can define the types and sizes of the crust. Create the
following two files and save them to an easily accessible location:
 
Set the contents of Sizes.json to:
 
[
 
  "6\"",
 
  "10\"",
 
  "14\""
 
]
 
Set the contents of Styles.json to:
 
[
 
  "Thin Crust",

--- Page 758 ---
 
  "Hand Tossed",
 
  "Deep Dish"
 
]
 
Note how the quotation mark is in the sizes file with a backslash in
front of it. The backslash is called an escape character and is placed
directly in front of the quote marks so they can be included in string
itself. In the asset catalog, create a new name-spaced folder called
Crust and drag the two files onto the folder. This is an easy way to
create data sets. Delete the two files.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 759 ---
 
Text
 
Follow these steps to create text styles that are used for styling the app,
but are also specific to the brand:
  
Create a new text file called This is a duplicate name, but with the
name-spaced folders, it is okay. A reminder, the list of built-in fonts
can be found at
 
Set the contents of the file to the following:
 
{
 
  "Title": {
 
    "font": "Avenir Light",
 
    "size": 36
 
  },
 
  "Headline": {

--- Page 760 ---
 
    "font": "Avenir Heavy",
 
    "size": 24
 
  },
 
  "Callout": {
 
    "size": 14,
 
    "font": "Hoefler Text Black"
 
  },
 
  "Caption": {
 
    "font": "Hoefler Text Italic",
 
    "size": 14
 
  },
 

--- Page 761 ---
  "Footnote": {
 
    "size": 10,
 
    "font": "Hoefler Text"
 
  },
 
  "Body": {
 
    "font": "Hoefler Text",
 
    "size": 16
 
  },
 
  "Subheadline": {
 
    "font": "Avenir Book",
 
    "size": 20
 
  }
 

--- Page 762 ---
}
 
In the asset catalog, create a new name-spaced folder called Text and
drag the newly created JSON file onto the folder. Because the folder is
name-spaced, there is no conflict between the two data sets called If a
data set file ever needs to be updated, right-click the data set entry and
select Show in The data set contains two files: The file added, and one
called
 
Inside the Text folder, create a normal folder, not name-spaced, called
Colors and add the following color sets:
 
Normal with hex colors #363C37 and #EBF0E9
 
Subtle with hex colors #B4B4A5 and #AAB2AD
   
This allows a visual organization of the color sets, but keeps the
namespace limited to For the normal color, at the point of use, it could
say
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 763 ---
 
Bundles
 
A bundle is executable code with any required resources the code depends
on such as assets. Applications, libraries, and packages are examples of
bundles. When working with a project, it is possible to include a file in
multiple bundles.
 
Open the two new folders in the project navigator and select Reveal the
inspectors panel on the right side. In the Target Membership section of the
panel, note how the selected file is included in MamasPizzaApp is
included in the MamasPizza target. See Figure
 
 

--- Page 764 ---
Figure Target membership of file
 
There are times it is convenient to include a file, such as a common class
or asset file, in multiple targets because it is meant to be used in all the
targets. However, there is a danger of sharing too many files across
multiple targets making it difficult to work with code in isolation. To
avoid this, the bulk of this app will be in libraries that are imported into
each app. Follow these steps to create the application and UI libraries:
  
Select the project in the project navigator.
 
Click the plus button below the list of targets and search for See Figure
 


--- Page 765 ---
 
Figure Create framework target
 
Click
 
Give the name PizzaApp and, at the bottom of the dialog, leave the default
for Embed in Application to
 
A new folder called PizzaApp is included in the project navigator and
when the target JoesPizza is selected, the new library is shown in the
Frameworks, Libraries, and Embedded Content section.
 
Select the MamasPizza target and add the new framework to the selected
target.
 
Create a new iOS Framework called PizzaUI and select None for the
Embed in Application option.
  
The PizzaApp framework will handle the app flow and logic. The PizzaUI
framework will provide the common components that is styled by each
app target.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 766 ---
 
Create the common interface elements
 
Some of the same elements used for Household Chores app will be
repurposed for this app, but without using enums or delegates. Instead,
the needed information will be drawn from the asset catalog in the
pizza app’s bundle. This technique makes it much easier to add
additional brands.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 767 ---
 
Card
 
To create the popular card element, follow these steps:
  
In the PizzaUI group of the project navigator, add a new SwiftUI file
called When creating the file, verify it is being placed in the proper
target as shown in Figure
 
 

--- Page 768 ---
Figure Target membership of new file
 
Below the import statement, set the content to the following:
 
public struct CardView>: View {
 
  private let content: Content
 
  private let inError: Bool
 
  public init(inError: Bool = false, @ViewBuilder content: () ->
Content) {
 
      self.content = content()
 
      self.inError = inError
 
  }
 
  public var body: some View {
 
      VStack(alignment: .center, spacing: 0) {
 

--- Page 769 ---
        content
 
            .padding(8)
 
      }
 
.frame(maxWidth: .infinity)
 
      .background(
 
        RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius: 8)
 
            .stroke(Color.black,
 
                    lineWidth: 1)
 
            .background(backgroundColor)
 
            .clipShape(RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius: 8))
 
            .shadow(color: .gray, radius: 2, x: 0.5, y: 1)
 
      )

--- Page 770 ---
 
  }
 
  var backgroundColor: Color {
 
      if inError {
 
        return Color("Card/Background-Error")
 
      } else {
 
        return Color("Card/Background")
 
      }
 
  }
 
}
 
#Preview("Normal") {
 
  ZStack {
 
      Card() {

--- Page 771 ---
 
        HStack {
 
            Image(systemName: "figure.run")
 
              .foregroundColor(.black)
 
            Text("Body of the card")
 
              .foregroundColor(Color("Text/Normal"))
 
        }
 
      }
 
      .padding()
 
  }
 
}
 
#Preview("Error") {
 

--- Page 772 ---
  ZStack {
 
      Card(inError: true) {
 
HStack {
 
            Image(systemName: "figure.run")
 
              .foregroundColor(.black)
 
            Text("Body of the card")
 
              .foregroundColor(Color("Text/Normal"))
 
        }
 
      }
 
      .padding()
 
  }
 
}

--- Page 773 ---
  
This mostly mimics what was done with the CommonUI card, but
items like corner radius, or line thickness and color are static. These
can easily be added as part of a data set in the target app’s asset file.
Also note the color is a string, because the asset is not a part of the
library, hence the name must be specified as a case-sensitive string. A
shadow was also added for additional styling.
 
If you see this error on the preview canvas: Active scheme does not
build this file then change the current scheme in the toolbar to PizzaUI
as shown in Figure
 
 
Figure 13.9 Select PizzaUI scheme

--- Page 774 ---
 
As the initializer can have multiple values passed, multiple previews
are provided to show each possible state. The preview can also be
shown with multiple text sizes and color schemes for additional quality
checks. Note, the error condition will not show colors specified in the
asset catalog. This will be illustrated later.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 775 ---
 
Progress bars
 
As a way of providing a visual on timing, follow these steps to create a
custom progress bar:
  
Still working with the PizzaUI group, add a new SwiftUI file called
Like the card, this will mostly use work done previously with some
changes. Here is the code to use:
 
public struct ProgressBars: View {
 
  private let progress: Double
 
  private var percent: Int {
 
      Int(progress * 100.0)
 
  }
 
  public init(progress: Double) {
 
      self.progress = progress

--- Page 776 ---
 
  }
 
  public var body: some View {
 
      HStack(spacing: 0) {
 
        ForEach(1...4, id: \.self) { index in
 
            Rectangle()
 
              .fill(segmentColor(segment: index))
 
        }
 
      }
 
      .frame(maxWidth: .infinity)
 
      .padding(4)
 
      .background {
 

--- Page 777 ---
          RoundedRectangle(cornerRadius: 4)
 
            .stroke(.gray, lineWidth: 1)
 
            .fill(Color.clear)
 
      }
 
    }
 
  private func segmentColor(segment: Int) -> Color {
 
      switch segment {
 
      case 1:
 
        return percent > 0 ? fillColor : .white
 
      case 2:
 
return percent > 25 ? fillColor : .white
 
      case 3:
 

--- Page 778 ---
        return percent > 50 ? fillColor : .white
 
      case 4:
 
        return percent > 75 ? fillColor : .white
 
      default:
 
        return .white
 
      }
 
  }
 
  private var fillColor: Color {
 
      switch percent {
 
      case 0...25:
 
        return Color("Timer/Progress1")
 
      case 26...50:

--- Page 779 ---
 
        return Color("Timer/Progress2")
 
      case 51...75:
 
        return Color("Timer/Progress3")
 
      case 76...100:
 
        return Color("Timer/Progress4")
 
      default:
 
        return .white
 
      }
 
  }
 
}
 
#Preview("1 bar") {
 

--- Page 780 ---
  ProgressBars(progress: 0.24)
 
      .frame(height: 20)
 
        .padding()
 
}
 
#Preview("2 bars") {
 
  ProgressBars(progress: 0.35)
 
      .frame(height: 20)
 
      .padding()
 
}
 
#Preview("3 bars") {
 
  ProgressBars(progress: 0.53)
 
      .frame(height: 20)
 

--- Page 781 ---
      .padding()
 
}
 
#Preview("4 bars") {
 
  ProgressBars(progress: 0.80)
 
      .frame(height: 20)
 
      .padding()
 
}
 
This control has no intrinsic content size and will fill into the available
space. As mentioned before, do not add padding around items that will
be inside a parent view. Let the parent view handle padding.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 782 ---
 
Add button
 
To create this custom button, add a new SwiftUI file called AddButton
and set the content to the following:
 
public struct AddButton: View {
 
  let accessibilityText: LocalizedStringKey
 
  let action: () -> Void
 
  public init(_ accessibilityText: LocalizedStringKey, action:
@escaping () -> Void) {
 
    self.accessibilityText = accessibilityText
 
    self.action = action
 
  }
 
  public var body: some View {
 

--- Page 783 ---
    Button {
 
      action()
 
    } label: {
 
      Image(systemName: "plus.circle.fill")
 
        .resizable()
 
        .tint(Color.green)
 
        .frame(width: 25, height: 25)
 
        .accessibility(label: Text(accessibilityText))
 
}
 
  }
 
}
 
#Preview {

--- Page 784 ---
 
  AddButton("Add Order") {}
 
}
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 785 ---
 
Text style
 
To add a list of styles available in the interface, add a new Swift file
called TextStyle and set the content as follows:
 
import SwiftUI
 
extension Text {
 
  public func style(_ style: TextStyle, color: TextColor = .normal) ->
Text {
 
      font(style.font)
 
        .foregroundStyle(FontUtility.shared.colorDefinition(for: color))
 
  }
 
}
 
public enum TextColor: String {
 

--- Page 786 ---
  case normal, subtle
 
}
 
public enum TextStyle: String, CaseIterable {
 
  case title, headline, subheadline, body, callout, caption, footnote
 
  var font: Font {
 
      return Font.custom(
 
        FontUtility.shared.fontInfo(for: self).font,
 
        size: FontUtility.shared.fontInfo(for: self).size,
 
        relativeTo: relativeStyle
 
      )
 
  }
 
  // so the text will grow as defined in accessibility

--- Page 787 ---
 
  var relativeStyle: Font.TextStyle {
 
      switch self {
 
      case .title:
 
        return Font.TextStyle.title
 
      case .headline:
 
return Font.TextStyle.headline
 
      case .subheadline:
 
        return Font.TextStyle.subheadline
 
      case .body:
 
        return Font.TextStyle.body
 
      case .callout:
 
        return Font.TextStyle.callout

--- Page 788 ---
 
      case .caption:
 
        return Font.TextStyle.caption
 
      case .footnote:
 
        return Font.TextStyle.footnote
 
      }
 
  }
 
}
 
#Preview {
 
  VStack {
 
      Text("Title")
 
        .style(.title)
 

--- Page 789 ---
      Text("Headline")
 
        .style(.headline, color: .subtle)
 
      Text("Subheadline")
 
        .style(.subheadline)
 
      Text("Body")
 
        .style(.body)
 
      Text("Callout")
 
        .style(.callout)
 
      Text("Caption")
 
        .style(.caption)
 
      Text("Footnote")
 
        .style(.footnote)

--- Page 790 ---
 
  }
 
}
 
This simplified file relies on a new FontUtility class to extract
information from the data set created earlier. Note how the asset
variable is of type Add a new Swift file, name it FontUtility and set the
contents to this:
 
import UIKit
 
import SwiftUI
 
public class FontUtility {
 
  public static let shared = FontUtility()
 
  private let fontInfo: [String: FontInfo]
 
  struct FontInfo: Codable {
 
      let font: String
 
      let size: Double

--- Page 791 ---
 
  }
 
  private init() {
 
      guard let asset = NSDataAsset(name: "Text/Styles") else {
 
        fontInfo = [:]
 
        return
 
      }
 
      do {
 
        fontInfo = try JSONDecoder().decode([String: FontInfo].self,
from: asset.data)
 
      } catch {
 
        fontInfo = [:]
 
      }

--- Page 792 ---
 
  }
 
  func fontInfo(for style: TextStyle) -> FontInfo {
 
      let info = fontInfo[style.rawValue.capitalized] ?? FontInfo(font:
"Avenir Light", size: 36)
 
      return info
 
  }
 
  public func colorDefinition(for textColor: TextColor) -> Color {
 
      return Color("Text/\(textColor.rawValue.capitalized)")
 
  }
 
}
 
The FontUtility class is a singleton that gathers the font information
from the main bundle and caches it for use. Note the private init forces
the use of the shared property. When instantiated, the first line in the
init attempts to read from the data asset called Text/Styles from the

--- Page 793 ---
main bundle. If successful, then the font information is decoded and
locally stored. When using the NSDataAsset class, UIKit must be
imported.
 
The fontInfo method takes a text style and searches for its name in the
fontInfo dictionary and returns the corresponding struct. If it is not
found, a default struct is returned.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 794 ---
 
Create the primary app
 
The screens presented to the user and the app logic will be placed in
the PizzaApp library. If desired, this could also be broken into
additional libraries to provide ownership to teams, separation of
concerns, and better organization.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 795 ---
 
Data model
 
In the PizzaApp group, add a new group called Inside this new group,
add a new Swift file called Verify the PizzaApp target is selected
before clicking the Create button. Set the content to the following:
 
import Foundation
 
import Observation
 
public enum Cheese: String, CaseIterable {
 
  case none = "No cheese"
 
  case light = "Light cheese"
 
  case normal = "Normal cheese"
 
  case extra = "Extra cheese"
 
}
 

--- Page 796 ---
@Observable
 
public class Order: Identifiable {
 
  public let id = UUID()
 
  var entryTime: Date
 
  var crustStyle: String
 
  var crustSize: String
 
  var cheese: Cheese
 
  var meat: [String]
 
  var veggies: [String]
 
  public init(entryTime: Date = .now, crustStyle: String = "", crustSize:
String = "", cheese: Cheese = .normal, meat: [String] = [], veggies:
[String] = []) {
 
self.entryTime = entryTime

--- Page 797 ---
 
      self.crustStyle = crustStyle
 
      self.crustSize = crustSize
 
      self.cheese = cheese
 
      self.meat = meat
 
      self.veggies = veggies
 
  }
 
  var toppings: String {
 
      let toppings: [String] = meat + veggies
 
      return toppings.joined(separator: ", ")
 
  }
 
}
 
#if DEBUG

--- Page 798 ---
 
extension Order {
 
  static var mock: [Order] {
 
      let order1 = Order(entryTime: Date.now, crustStyle: "Hand
Tossed", crustSize: "12\"", cheese: .normal, meat: ["Ham"], veggies:
["Onion", "Pineapple"])
 
      let order2 = Order(entryTime: Date.now, crustStyle: "Deep Dish",
crustSize: "16\"", cheese: .light, meat: ["Pepperoni", "Sausage"],
veggies: ["Onion", "Mushroom", "Green Pepper", "Black Olive"])
 
      let order3 = Order(entryTime: .now, crustStyle: "Hand Tossed",
crustSize:"18\"", cheese: .extra, meat: [], veggies: [])
 
      return [order1, order2, order3]
 
  }
 
}
 
#endif
 

--- Page 799 ---
The Order class represents a single pizza to be made. Some items of
note:
  
The Cheese enum is utilizing the CaseIterable protocol. This protocol
provides an allCases property to the enum that returns an array of all
the cases. A very handy feature when showing enumerations to the
user in a list, tab bar, and so on.
 
The toppings property uses the array joined method to take the
elements of the array and combine them into a String with the
provided separator.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 800 ---
 
Order view
 
The order view shows the specifics of an order and animates the timer.
Note how a common timer is used to determine the remaining time.
The onReceive modifier to the card is called when a published item’s
value changes. Follow these steps to implement the order view:
  
Add a new SwiftUI file into the Orders group and call it At the top,
below the import SwiftUI statement, add import Almost immediately
an error will be shown saying PizzaUI is not known or other
compilation errors if an attempt to build is made. To fix this, select the
project in the project navigator followed by selecting PizzaApp in the
list of targets. In the Frameworks and Libraries section, add the
PizzaUI framework.
 
Select OrderView in the project navigator and set the rest of the
content to the following:
 
struct OrderView: View {
 
  let order: Order
 
  @State var percentRemaining: Double

--- Page 801 ---
 
  init(order: Order) {
 
      self.order = order
 
      self._percentRemaining = .init(initialValue: 100.0)
 
  }
 
    var body: some View {
 
      Card(inError: percentRemaining < 0.25) {
 
          HStack(spacing: 0) {
 
            HStack(alignment: .top, spacing: 0) {
 
                Text(order.crustSize)
 
                  .style(.headline)
 
                VStack(alignment: .leading, spacing: 4) {
 

--- Page 802 ---
                  Text(order.crustStyle)
 
                      .style(.headline)
 
                  Text(order.toppings)
 
                      .style(.body, color: .subtle)
 
                  Text(order.cheese.rawValue.localized)
 
                      .style(.body, color: .subtle)
 
                  ProgressBars(progress: percentRemaining)
 
                      .frame(height: 20)
 
}
 
                .padding(.leading, 16)
 
            }
 
            Spacer()
 

--- Page 803 ---
          }
 
      }
 
      .onReceive(AppUtility.shared.timer) { currentTime in
 
          let elapsed = currentTime.timeIntervalSince(order.entryTime)
 
          let percentRemaining = 1 - elapsed /
AppUtility.shared.orderTime
 
          self.percentRemaining = percentRemaining
 
      }
 
    }
 
}
 
#Preview {
 
  OrderView(order: Order.mock[1])
 

--- Page 804 ---
}
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 805 ---
 
App utility
 
Several errors will show because the AppUtility class has yet to be
defined. In the PizzaApp group, create a new swift file and call it
Again, make sure the target is set to Set the content to match the
following:
 
import UIKit
 
typealias Seconds = Double
 
class AppUtility {
 
  static let shared = AppUtility()
 
      let crustSizes: [String]
 
  let crustStyles: [String]
 
  let meat: [String]
 
  let veggies: [String]

--- Page 806 ---
 
  let orderTime: Seconds
 
  let timer = Timer.publish(every: 1, on: .main, in:
.common).autoconnect()
 
  init() {
 
if let crustSizesAsset = NSDataAsset(name: "Crust/Sizes") {
 
        do {
 
            crustSizes = try JSONDecoder().decode([String].self, from:
crustSizesAsset.data)
 
        } catch {
 
            crustSizes = []
 
        }
 
      } else {
 

--- Page 807 ---
        crustSizes = []
 
      }
 
      if let crustStylesAsset = NSDataAsset(name: "Crust/Styles") {
 
        do {
 
            crustStyles = try JSONDecoder().decode([String].self, from:
crustStylesAsset.data)
 
        } catch {
 
            crustStyles = []
 
        }
 
      } else {
 
        crustStyles = []
 
      }
 
      if let meatAsset = NSDataAsset(name: "Toppings/Meat") {

--- Page 808 ---
 
        do {
 
            meat = try JSONDecoder().decode([String].self, from:
meatAsset.data)
 
        } catch {
 
            meat = []
 
        }
 
      } else {
 
        meat = []
 
      }
 
      if let veggiesAsset = NSDataAsset(name: "Toppings/Veggies") {
 
        do {
 

--- Page 809 ---
            veggies = try JSONDecoder().decode([String].self, from:
veggiesAsset.data)
 
        } catch {
 
veggies = []
 
        }
 
      } else {
 
        veggies = []
 
      }
 
      if let timeAsset = NSDataAsset(name: "Timer/Time") {
 
        do {
 
            let time = try JSONDecoder().decode([String: Seconds].self,
from: timeAsset.data)
 
            orderTime = time["seconds"] ?? 900

--- Page 810 ---
 
        } catch {
 
            orderTime = 900
 
        }
 
      } else {
 
        orderTime = 900
 
      }
 
  }
 
}
 
The property orderTime is the amount of time, in seconds, an order
should be completed in. It could have been defined as a Double type,
however by using the the meaning of the value is clearer. This class
gets crust and topping information from the asset catalog for use
within the library by utilizing the the NSDataAsset class.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 811 ---
 
Order list
 
To show the list of orders, add a new SwiftUI file into the Orders
group, call it and set the content to this:
 
import SwiftUI
 
import PizzaUI
 
protocol AddsOrders {
 
  func addOrder(_ order: Order)
 
}
 
public struct OrderList: View {
 
  @State var orders: [Order]
 
  @State var showSheet: Bool = false
 
  public init(orders: [Order] = []) {

--- Page 812 ---
 
self._orders = .init(initialValue: orders)
 
  }
 
    public var body: some View {
 
      NavigationView {
 
          List {
 
            ForEach(orders) { order in
 
                OrderView(order: order)
 
                  .listRowSeparator(.hidden)
 
                  .listRowBackground(Color.clear)
 
            }
 
            .onDelete { indexSet in
 

--- Page 813 ---
                orders.remove(atOffsets: indexSet)
 
            }
 
          }
 
          .padding(.horizontal, -16)
 
          .toolbar {
 
            AddButton("Add Order") {
 
                showSheet = true
 
            }
 
          }
 
          .navigationTitle("Orders".localized)
 
      }
 
      .sheet(isPresented: $showSheet) {
 

--- Page 814 ---
          AddOrder(showingSheet: $showSheet, addOrderDelegate: self)
 
            .interactiveDismissDisabled(true)
 
      }
 
    }
 
}
 
extension OrderList: AddsOrders {
 
  func addOrder(_ order: Order) {
 
      print("adding order")
 
      orders.append(order)
 
  }
 
}
 
#Preview {

--- Page 815 ---
 
  OrderList(orders: Order.mock)
 
}
 
This View shows a list of orders as declared in the orders property,
allowing them to be deleted. The sheet is shown when the showSheet
property is set to true so an order can be added.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 816 ---
 
Foundation extensions
 
As illustrated in other chapters, it is a common practice to extend the
built-in frameworks to enhance functionality. In the PizzaApp group,
create a new group called Foundation Add the following Swift files
with the defined content:
 
 
extension String {
 
  var localized: String {
 
      Bundle.main.localizedString(forKey: self, value: nil, table: nil)
 
  }
 
  func localized(using values: CVarArg...) -> String {
 
      return String.localizedStringWithFormat(self.localized, values)
 
  }
 

--- Page 817 ---
}
 
 
extension Collection {
 
  var isNotEmpty: Bool {
 
      return !self.isEmpty
 
  }
 
}
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 818 ---
 
Add order sheet
 
A sheet is used to add orders. In the Orders group, add a new SwiftUI
file called AddOrder and add this code:
 
import PizzaUI
 
struct AddOrder: View {
 
  @Binding var showingSheet: Bool
 
  var addOrderDelegate: AddsOrders
 
@State var order = Order(
 
      crustStyle: AppUtility.shared.crustStyles[0],
 
      crustSize: AppUtility.shared.crustSizes[0],
 
      cheese: .normal
 
  )

--- Page 819 ---
 
  @State var addingMeat = false
 
  @State var addingVeggie = false
 
  var body: some View {
 
      Card {
 
        header
 
        divider
 
            .padding(.top, -8)
 
        VStack(alignment: .leading, spacing: 0) {
 
            crust
 
            cheese
 
            meat
 

--- Page 820 ---
            vegetables
 
        }
 
        .frame(maxWidth: .infinity)
 
      }
 
      .padding()
 
  }
 
}
 
This will not compile as the elements shown have yet to be defined.
However, it gives a quick visual on the layout. The Card has a header
with a divider underneath. Referring back to Figure it is apparent that
the elements in the VStack will be used to select the pizza options.
 
Defining these is a lot of code so do this instead. In the code folder for
this chapter, open the Pizza/PizzaApp/Orders folder. Inside, open the
AddOrder.swift file. Copy the contents of the entire file and replace the
contents of your file. The preview should now resemble Figure
 

--- Page 821 ---
 
Figure Add order preview
 
The Crust and Cheese pickers are examples of how the enumerations
can be presented to the user for easy selection. Because multiple meat
and vegetable items can be added, in-line lists are used to present the
selected options. Also note, instead of just leaving an empty space
when no additional toppings are added, a message is given.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 822 ---
 
Localization
 
Like colors, data sets, or icons, each target application must supply its
own localization files. In the JoesPizza app, add a new string catalog.
Manually add items as shown in Figure
 
 
Figure Default localizations
 

--- Page 823 ---
When the key can be used for the translation, then nothing specific
needs to be entered as the translation. It is a common practice to use
the default language text as the key and only fill in areas where it
should be something different.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 824 ---
 
Running the app
 
Inside the JoesPizzaApp file, two changes need to be made to use the
new libraries.
  
Add import PizzaApp at the top
 
Replace
  
With these two changes made, it is safe to delete the SwiftUI file,
ContentView and run the JoesPizzaApp scheme.
 
Click the add button at the top and add an order, optionally specifying
any meat and vegetable toppings. Any toppings added accidentally can
be deleted by swiping. Added orders will slowly change the progress
bar until it goes blank. The order card will change the background
once the time left is less than twenty-five percent. Orders can be
deleted by swiping.
 
Waiting 15 minutes can be a long time to test the the order entry
countdown. In the AppUtility class, wrap the timeAsset code with #if
DEBUG and set a default time like this:

--- Page 825 ---
 
#if DEBUG
 
orderTime = 15
 
#else
 
if let timeAsset = NSDataAsset(name: "Timer/Time") {
 
  do {
 
      let time = try JSONDecoder().decode([String: Seconds].self, from:
timeAsset.data)
 
      orderTime = time["seconds"] ?? 900
 
  } catch {
 
      orderTime = 900
 
  }
 
} else {

--- Page 826 ---
 
  orderTime = 900
 
}
 
#endif
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 827 ---
 
The other app
 
If an attempt were made to run the MamasPizza app, it would fail. The
assets have not been defined, nor has the ContentView() call been
swapped out with Remove the assets catalog from MamasPizza by
selecting it and pressing the delete key on the keyboard. Select Move
to Trash from the dialog. Copy the assets catalog from JoesPizza into
MamasPizza by holding down the option key and dragging the catalog
onto the MamasPizza group. Verify the copied file has MamasPizza as
the target membership. Do the same for the Localizable string catalog.
 
Change the font styles and toppings. When editing a file, such as
OrderView or what is shown in the preview reflects the currently
selected scheme in the toolbar. Using this technique, it is easy to verify
the view being worked on displays properly for the different target
apps. It should also be noted that the previews in the PizzaUI
framework will also reflect the colors of the target app.
 
Any new pizzerias can be easily added using the technique used to add
  
Create the new iOS app target.
 
Add the PizzaApp and PizzaUI libraries to the new app.

--- Page 828 ---
 
Copy the asset catalog and localizable string catalog.
 
Replace ContentView with OrderList in the SwiftUI App file.
 
Delete the SwiftUI ContentView file.
 
Customize the assets and localizations as needed.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 829 ---
 
Conclusion
 
Making a white label app is about providing a common functionality
with targeted areas where branding can be applied. Logos, fonts,
colors, and icons are common elements that are used to identify a
specific brand.
 
The example pizza app shows the technique of creating a white label
app, providing a separation of the primary app into a library, and
separating the app-defined user interface elements into another library.
This technique provides a separation of concern for easier
maintenance.
 
This book just scratches the surface of creating an iOS app. The
frameworks and techniques covered, while targeted specifically toward
iOS, can also be used for all of Apple’s platforms. What comes next is
up to you.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Page 830 ---
Index
 
A
 
AddButton 277
 
App icon 252
 
App Store
 
connecting 255
 
data, submitting 260
 
subsequent, preparing
 
Asset Catalog
 
about 137
 
built-in colors, using 139
 

--- Page 831 ---
image, customizing 140
 
asynchronous, retrieving
 
B
 
Breakpoints
 
bundle 271
 
C
 
Cards
 
CardStyle 128
 
Cards, types
 
disclosure card
 
plain card
 
CaseIterable 282
 

--- Page 832 ---
ChoreList 102
 
CleanUp
 
data, testing 250
 
utilizing
 
Codable models
 
about 236
 
data, decoding
 
collection
 
about
 
optional 10
 
CommonUI 81
 
D

--- Page 833 ---
 
data modeling
 
about 114
 
concepts 115
 
errors, utilizing
 
FamilyMember class, using 116
 
Hashable object 119
 
data network, downloading 241
 
debugging, commands 232
 
delegate 205
 
Delegation frameworks, analyzing
 
data structs, creating
 
protocol, creating 127

--- Page 834 ---
 
singleton, creating 128
 
Design Patterns 119
 
Design Patterns, types
 
builder
 
Delegation 123
 
factory 122
 
memory management 128
 
singleton 122
 
E
 
error, handling 246
 
F
 

--- Page 835 ---
FontUtility 280
 
ForEach 49
 
functional programming 24
 
G
 
Generics 242
 
GitHub, concepts
 
CommonUI, pushing 149
 
SSH Key, creating 148
 
token, creating 148
 
Xcode, adding 148
 
H
 
hash 118
 

--- Page 836 ---
I
 
imageNames 45
 
imageScale 40
 
interface
 
CommonUI, updating steps
 
concept, analyzing 207
 
designing 194
 
illustrating, steps 194
 
isFavorite 94
 
J
 
JSONDecoder 225
 
L
 

--- Page 837 ---
LocalizationStringKey 160
 
M
 
manipulation, task
 
Classes
 
enumerate
 
protocol
 
struct
 
map function 52
 
memory management, complexity
 
CommonUI, adjust
 
Household Chores, delegate
 
Model Design 197
 

--- Page 838 ---
N
 
NavigationLink 158
 
NavigationView 202
 
O
 
Object-oriented programming 24
 
P
 
physical devices
 
account, creating 254
 
account, debugging 255
 
data, testing
 
pizza app
 
bundle 271
 

--- Page 839 ---
designing 262
 
structure 263
 
target, analyzing 264
 
pizza app, customizing options
 
Card colors 266
 
countdown, timming 267
 
crust 268
 
text, styles
 
topping 267
 
pizza app, interface elements
 
bars, progressing
 
button, adding 277

--- Page 840 ---
 
Card
 
text style
 
pizza app, running 292
 
pizza primary, app
 
app, utility
 
data model 282
 
extensions, illustrating 288
 
localization 290
 
order, list
 
order sheet, adding
 
order, view 283
 
Playground 3

--- Page 841 ---
 
Puntuaciones 221
 
S
 
SAT Scorecard, creating
 
SchoolListViewModel 204
 
Schools.json 224
 
ScrollView
 
Search Bar
 
about 212
 
errors, fixing steps 214
 
source control
 
about 142
 

--- Page 842 ---
benefits 143
 
branches, analyzing steps
 
GitHub 147
 
local repository, creating 144
 
strategy, utilizing
 
tag 147
 
String 13
 
Swift Charts
 
about 174
 
Bar charts, utilizing
 
data, visualizing
 
line graphs, analyzing
 

--- Page 843 ---
proportional charts, analyzing
 
Swift chores app, integrating
 
SwiftData
 
about 154
 
chores, assigning
 
chores mechanism, analyzing
 
data, storing steps 156
 
errors, corresponding 156
 
file, utilizing
 
layers, analyzing 155
 
onDelete, modifier 159
 
previews, fixing 163
 

--- Page 844 ---
source, utilizing 154
 
visual, cleanup 162
 
SwiftData, preferences
 
SwiftData preferences, integrating
 
Swift Package Manager
 
about 150
 
local packages 152
 
remote packages
 
SwiftUI
 
button, customizing
 
content, extending 48
 
project, developing step 35

--- Page 845 ---
 
ScrollView 49
 
SF Symbols, using
 
text, localizing
 
Xcode, accessibility
 
SwiftUI, concepts
 
contentView 39
 
controls 42
 
layout 40
 
modifiers
 
slider 43
 
SwiftUI, drawing
 
Capsule 58

--- Page 846 ---
 
Circle 56
 
Effects
 
Ellipse 58
 
Rectangle 56
 
RoundeRectangle 57
 
RoundeRectangle, uneven 58
 
shape, simplifying 59
 
SwiftUI, interface
 
app, running 38
 
canvas 37
 
editing 36
 

--- Page 847 ---
navigator 36
 
project structure 37
 
SwiftUI ScrollView, ways
 
ForEach
 
List
 
SwiftUI, slider toolbar
 
date picker 47
 
picker
 
stepper 44
 
TextField 45
 
toggle 44
 
SwiftUI, text styles
 

--- Page 848 ---
T
 
tag 147
 
Tests 218
 
Test users, revealling
 
TextField 44
 
U
 
UI, testing
 
Unit, testing
 
about
 
technique, utilizing 229
 
User Interface
 
about 93
 

--- Page 849 ---
designing, steps 94
 
item, compositioning
 
model class, utilizing
 
source, utilizing steps
 
V
 
Variables
 
VStack 39
 
X
 
Xcode
 
Closures, functions
 
flow, controlling
 
installing 2
 

--- Page 850 ---
operation, analyzing 29
 
Xcode, consoling 233
 
XCTUnwrap 236
OceanofPDF.com